 
 
23  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA  
 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
  
 DEMAND AND AVAILABILITY OF PETROCHEMICALS 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2006-07) on ‘Demand and Availability of Petrochemicals’] 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 


 -:2:- 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 DEMAND AND AVAILABILITY OF PETROCHEMICALS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2006-07) on ‘Demand and Availability of Petrochemicals’] 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.11.2007 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.11.2007 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka) 


 -:3:- 
CONTENTS 
 
               PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-08) ……………………………….. 
 
4 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………… 
 
5 
CHAPTER I Report ……………………………………………………………... 
 
6 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been accepted 
by the Government ……………………………………..……… 
 
 
14 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies………… 
 
 
21 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 
22 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited …………………… 
 
 
23 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Third sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2007-08) held on 31st October, 2007….….  
 
 
25 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (14 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2006-07) on ‘Demand and Availability of Petrochemicals’ ………… 
 
 
 
27 
 

 -:4:- 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
  1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair - Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  3. Shri A.S. Chera  - Director 
  4. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Deputy Secretary-II 
  5. Smt. Balwant Kaur Saimbhi - Under Secretary 
  6. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Senior Executive Assistant 
  
* Consequent upon nomination to the Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and  Public Distribution, Shri Suresh Angadi, MP (LS) ceased to 
be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 30.08.2007. 
# Nominated w.e.f. 06.09.2007 vice Shri Devdas Apte, MP (RS). 
$ nominated w.e.f. 05.10.2007  
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  -  Chairman 
  
Members  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ajit Singh 
3. Shri Afzal Ansari  
4. Shri Jaiprakash (Mohanlal Ganj) 
5. Shri Sunil Khan 
6. Shri Shrichand Kripalani 
7. Shri Subhash Maharia 
8. Shri Punnu Lal Mohale 
9. Shri A. Narendra 
10. Shri Prasanta Pradhan  
11. Shri Ramswaroop Prasad 
12. Shri P. Chalapathi Rao 
   13. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  
14. Shri Anantha  Venkata Rami Reddy  
15. Shri Devwrat Singh 
$16. Shri Subhash Sureshchandra Deshmukh 
17. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
18. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
19. Shri D. Venugopal 
 20. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
*21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
 23. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
24. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
#25. Shri Surendra Lath 
 26. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
 27. Shri Mahendra Sahni 
28. Shri Dilip Singh Judev 
29. Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
30. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
31. Shri T.R. Zeliang 

 -:5:- 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Ch emicals and Fertilizers   (2007 -
08) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twenty Third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok S abha) of 
the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2006 -07) on ‘Demand and 
Availability of Petrochemicals’.  
 
2. The Eighteenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 
17th May, 2007.  The replies of Government to all the recommend ations contained 
in the Eighteenth Report were received on 16 th August, 2007.  The Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2007 -08) considered the Action Taken 
Replies received from the Government and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report 
at their sitting held on 31st October, 2007. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenie nce, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI          ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,   
November  7, 2007                      Chairman, 
Kartika 16, 1929 (Saka)                 Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers. 

 -:6:- 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Eighteenth 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Stand ing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2006-07) on ‘ Demand and Availability of Petrochemicals’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals), which was presented to Lok Sabha on 17th May, 2007.  
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish replies to the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the 
Committee within three months from the presentation of  the Report i.e. by  17th 
August, 2007.  The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 
10 recommendations/observations contained in the Report were received on 16th 
August, 2007. These have been categorised as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
  Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9 and 10     Total - 8 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
        Nil  
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
        Nil 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 5 and 7      Total-2  
 

 -:7:- 
 3. The Committee hope that utmost importance would be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted by the 
Government.  In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement 
the recommendations/observations in their letter and spirit f or any reason, 
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation. The Committee further desire that the Action Taken Notes 
on the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report 
and the final replies in r espect of the recommendations for which only 
interim replies have been furnished by the Government should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations in the ensuing paragraphs: 
 
  
 A. Implementation of the Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
Investment Regions (PCPIR) Policy 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.3) 
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that a Task Force on Petroleum, Chemicals  
and Petro chemicals Investment R egions (PCPIR) was constituted in the 
Prime Minister’s Office on 20 th January, 2006, in order to enable quick and 
coordinated decision with an appropriate policy framework for the 
development of investment regions of requisite scale a nd level of facilities, 
with the involvement of world class developers and investors in the 
petroleum, chemicals and petrochemicals. While appreciating the fact that 
the PCPIR Policy has been launched, the Committee hope that the 
Government would strive to  implement the PCPIR Policy to achieve the 
desired objectives . The Committee also recommend  that State 
Governments should be impressed upon for facilitating land transfer and 
providing other infrastructural facilities so as to make the PCPIR Policy a 
big success.”  
 

 -:8:- 
 6. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
 “As per the policy, the initiatives to be taken by the State 
Government as well as by the Central Government have been clearly 
elaborated. Also the details of the process of project formulation (including 
acquisition of land), appraisal and approval have been spelt out. Further, to 
impress upon the States, at the level of Secretary letters have been written 
to all Chief Secretaries informing them of the Policy.  Also during  the launch 
of the policy by the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers and Steel, where 
all State Governments were invited, some of the States like Andhra 
Pradesh, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Orissa made presentations about their 
preparedness for hosting a PCPIR.  Applications are expected from some 
states in the format prescribed in the Policy for setting up PCPIRs.” 
 
  
7. The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemic als has stated 
that as per the Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment 
Regions (PCPIR) Po licy, the initiatives to be taken by the State 
Government as well as by the Central Government have been clearly 
elaborated and the details of the process of project formulation 
(including acquisition of land), appraisal and approval have been spelt 
out.  Also during the launch of the policy by the Minister of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers and steel, where all state Governments were invited, 
some of the states like Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Orissa 
made presentations about their preparedness for hosti ng a PCPIR.  As 
evident from the reply furnished by the Department that applications 
are expected from some States for setting up PCPIRs in their States, 
the Committee desire that all -out efforts should be made to impress 
upon all the States so that they c ome forward for setting up PCPIRs in 
their States and accordingly furnish applications in the prescribed 
format without any delay.  The Committee  would also like to be 
apprised about the latest developments in this regard.  
 
 

 -:9:- 
B. Allocation of requisite natural gas supply to petrochemicals sector 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.5) 
 
8.  The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee note that Naphtha and Natural Gas are the main 
feedstocks for the Petrochemical Industry.  The Committee were informed 
that there is surplus availability of Naphtha in the country, However, 
availability of Natural Gas is not sufficient to meet the demand of 
Petrochemical Industry whereas power and fertilizer sector s receive priority 
in terms of gas supply.  Besides, even withi n the available gas the 
obtainable fractions for use in petrochemicals are low.  At the same time, 
production of petrochemicals from Natural gas is cheaper in comparison to 
Naphtha.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should 
take adequate  steps to allocate requisite gas supply to petrochemicals 
sector.”   
 
9. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
  
 “A Standing Committee on Feedstock as env isaged in the National 
Policy on  Petrochemicals is being constituted wi th representatives from 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas, Ministry of Power, Department of Fertilizers and Ministry of 
Textiles to suggest a policy framework for full utilization of available 
feedstock  at inter nationally competitive prices, to suggest measures for 
expanding the availability of feedstock, ensuring availability to different 
consuming sectors and future cracker complexes and t o suggest a 
petrochemical sector specific feedstock policy initiatives wi th a long term 
perspective for promotion of investment in Petrochemicals sector.”  
 
 
10. The Committee have been informed that a Standing Committee 
on Feedstock as envisaged in the National Policy on Petrochemicals is 
being constituted with representatives from concerned Departments to 
suggest  a policy framework for full utilization of available feedstock at 
internationally competitive prices, to suggest measures for expanding 
the availability of feedstock, ensuring availability to different 
consuming sect ors and future cracker complexes and to suggest a 
petrochemical sector specific feedstock policy initiatives with a long 

 -:10:- 
term  perspective for promotion of investment in Petrochemicals 
sector.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Standing Committee 
on feedstock as envisaged in the National Policy on Petrochemical s be 
constituted as early as possible to avoid uncertainty  and streamline 
the availability and utilization of feedstock .  The Committee also 
reiterate that the Department should take steps to augment the gas 
supply to petrochemicals sector  in view of the lower obtainable 
fractions used in the petrochemicals from the available gas. 
 
C. Rationalisation of the duty and tax structure in the Indian 
Petrochemical Industry 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.7) 
 
11.   The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee have been informed that the Indian Petrochemical 
Industry has been witnessing continuous reduction in the level of protection 
due to accelerated customs duty reduction.  The Committee note tha t there 
are also anomalies in the duty structure across the value addition chain 
resulting in instances of inverted duty structure.  The petrochemical industry 
is also seriously affected by the levy of high rates of Sales Tax on both 
inputs and products an d this problem is further compounded by wide 
variations from State to State and a host of State levies like turnover tax, 
entry tax, etc.  Considering these aspects, the Committee desire that the 
Union Government should take necessary steps to rationalize the duty and 
tax structure.”   
 
12. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
  
 “The National Policy on Petrochemical s envisages the need to 
remove anomalies in duty structure all across the value addition  chain.  
Subject to macr o economic consideration and overall revenue targets, the 
Government would strive to rationalize the duty and tax structure and 
remove the duty inversions in the petrochemical value addition chain to 
promote growth and development in the sector.  Departmen t of Chemicals 
& Petrochemicals through a consultation process with the stakeholder 
industry association recommends corrections in the duty/tax structure to 
Ministry of Finance during the pre -budget/post-budget exercise on an 
annual basis.”     

 -:11:- 
13. The De partment of Chemicals and Petrochemicals  has stated 
that the National Policy on Petrochemicals envisages the need to 
remove anomalies in duty structure all across the value addition chain.  
The Department through a consultation process with the stakeholder  
industry association recommends corrections in the duty/ tax 
structure to Ministry of Finance during the pre -budget/ post -budget 
exercise on an annual basis.  However, no details have been given 
about the steps taken to rationalize the duty and tax struct ure in 
petrochemical industry.  The Committee would, therefore, like to be 
apprised of the specific action taken by the Government in this regard.  
 
D. Strengthening of the Institutions like CIPET, IITs, ITI s, Indian Institute 
of Chemical Technology, Natio nal Chemical Laboratory, Regional 
Research Laboratories etc., and setting up a new scheme of 
Petrochemical Research and Development Fund (PRDF)  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.8) 
 
14.  The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee are of the opinion t hat trained manpower and 
advanced technology are essential for any industry to grow.  The 
Committee were informed that Petrochemicals Industry in India has been 
set up based on the imported technical know -how.  While appreciating the 
fact that several Institutions like CIPET, IITs, ITIs, Engineering Colleges etc. 
are providing training and skill and institutions like Indian Institute of 
Chemical Technology (IICT), Hyderabad, National Chemical Laboratory, 
Pune, Regional Research Laboratories etc.  are conduc ting R&D activities 
in the petrochemicals sector, the Committee desire that these institutions 
should be strengthened to ensure that skill and trained manpower 
availability should not be constraints to the petrochemicals sector.  The 
Committee also recomme nd that the proposal of the Government to set up 
a new scheme of Petrochemical Research and Development Fund should 
be finalized to cater to the requirements of petrochemicals sector.” 
 
 

 -:12:- 
15. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
    
“The National Policy on Petrochemicals envisages the setting up of 
Centres of Excellence in existing educational and research institutions 
working in the field of polymers like National Chemical Laboratory, Indian 
Institute of Chemical Technology, Indian Institutes of Technology, National 
Institutes of Technology and others. It also envisages formulation of a new 
scheme of Petrochemical Research and Development Fund (PRDF) which 
would cater to the projects of R&D, in the field of polymers/plastics.” 
 
16. The Committee have been informed that the National Policy on 
Petrochemicals envisages the setting up of Centres of Excellence in 
existing educational and research institutions working in the field of 
polymers like National Chemical Laboratory, Indian  Institutes of 
Chemical Technology, Indian Institutes of Technology, National 
Institutes of Technology and others.  It also envisages formulation of a 
new scheme of Petrochemical Research and Development Fund 
(PRDF) which would cater to the projects of R&D , in the field of 
polymers/ plastics.  However, the Committee note that no details have 
been given about the steps taken to strengthen these institutions and 
set up a new scheme of Petrochemical Research and Development 
Fund.  The Committee, therefore, wou ld like to be  apprised of the 
concrete action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
E. Setting up a Recycling Waste Management Centre in Guwahati and 
Promotion of R&D activities for production of cost effective bio -
degradable plastics 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.10) 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee were informed that plastic per -se is not hazardous.  
It is non -management or mismanagement of the waste which is creating 
problems.  Also, production level of bio-degradable plastics is 50 KTA vis-à-
vis 160 MMT total plastics production (less than 0.1 per cent).  The 
Committee were also informed that the Planning Commission has recently 
sanctioned a project worth Rs. 750 lakhs for setting up a Recycling Waste 

 -:13:- 
Management Centre in Guwaha ti.  Considering these aspects, the 
Committee hope that Recycling Waste Management Centre in Guwahati 
would be set up at the earliest .  The Committee also recommend  that 
efforts should be made by the Department to promote research and 
development activitie s for production of cost effective bio -degradable 
plastics.”   
 
18. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
  
 “The estimated cost of the Plastic Recycling and Waste Management 
Centre at Guwahati is Rs.7.95 crores.  Land from th e State Government is 
awaited. The National Policy on Petrochemicals envisages that to address 
the growing environmental concerns arising due to the non -degradability of 
plastics, particularly carry bags, there is a need to reuse and recycle the 
plastics a s also to develop biodegradable polymers.   Biodegradable 
polymers have also been identified as one of the core research areas under 
the New Millennium Initiative Technology Leadership India (NMITLI), in the 
Ministry of Science and Technology.”  
 
19. The  Committee have been informed that the estimated cost of 
the Plastic Recycling and Waste Management Centre at Guwahati is 
Rs.7.95 crores.  Acquisition of l and from the State Government is 
awaited.  The Committee, therefore, desire that Government should 
take up the issue with the state Government at the highest level to 
impress upon the state of Assam to provide land at the earliest in view 
of the utmost need of plastic waste management for conservation of 
the eco-system.   
 
 In case of promotion of R&D acti vities for production of cost 
effective bio -degradable plastics, the Department  has merely stated 
that bio-degradable polymers have also been identified as one of the 
core research areas under the New Millennium Initiative Technology 
Leadership India (NMIT LI), in the Ministry of Science and Technology.  
The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate that efforts should be 
made to promote R&D activities for production of cost effective bio -
degradable plastics. 

 -:14:- 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
  
 The Committee note that the Indian Petrochemicals Industry registered 
rapid growth in the 1980s and 1990s, however, between 2000 -2006, the growth 
had virtually stagnated. The Committ ee also note that the Indian Petrochemicals 
Industry is small by international standards with only 2 -3 % of the global ethylene 
capacity. The Committe e therefore, strongly recommend  that the Government 
should create conducive environment for rapid growth o f the Indian 
Petrochemicals Industry so that it can reap the optimum benefit offered by the 
present global scenario. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 Petrochemicals Industry is delicensed and deregulated. The role of the 
Government is as a facilitator. To creat e conducive environment for achieving 
rapid growth and new investments, Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals 
has formulated a National Policy on Petrochemicals.  Further to enable the country 
to be a global hub in chemicals/petrochemicals a Petroleum, Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Investment Region Policy has been formulated.  
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 40014/2/2007-PC-II dated 14.08.2007] 
 

 -:15:- 
(Recommendation Sl. No 2)  
 
 The Committee note that the Go vernment of India constituted a Task Force 
on Petrochemicals in order to strengthen the petrochemicals industry and the Task 
Force had submitted its Report. In order to give concrete shape to the 
recommendations of the Task Force, a draft National Policy o n Petrochemicals 
has been evolved which was considered by the Committee of secretaries on 29 th 
November, 2006. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all necessary 
formalities should be completed as early as possible so that National Policy on 
Petrochemicals is finalized at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The National Policy on Petrochemicals was approved by the Cabinet on its 
meeting held on 12.4.2007.  The Policy Resolution for Petrochemicals has been 
published in the Gazette of India (Extraordi nary) Part – I – Section –I dated 30 th 
April, 2007 vide No 116. (Copy enclosed). 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 40014/2/2007-PC-II dated 14.08.2007] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No 3)  
 
 The Committee note that a Task Force on Petroleum, Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Investment R egions (PCPIR) was constituted in the Prime 
Minister’s Office on 20 th January, 2006, in order to enable quick and coordinated 
decision with an appropriate policy framework for the developmen t of investment 
regions of requisite scale and level of facilities, with the involvement of world class 
developers and investors in the petroleum, chemicals and petrochemicals. While 
appreciating the fact that the PCPIR Policy has been launched, the Commit tee 
hope that the Government would strive to implement the PCPIR Policy to achieve 
the desired objectives . The Committee also recommend  that State Governments 
should be impressed upon for facilitating land transfer and providing other 
infrastructural facilities so as to make the PCPIR Policy a big success.  

 -:16:- 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As per the policy, the initiatives to be taken by the State Government as 
well as by the Central Government have been clearly elaborated. Also the details 
of the process of proj ect formulation (including acquisition of land), appraisal and 
approval have been spelt out. Further, to impress upon the States, at the level of 
Secretary letters have been written to all Chief Secretaries informing them of the 
Policy.  Also during the la unch of the policy by the Minister of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers and Steel, where all State Governments were invited, some of the 
States like Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Orissa made presentations 
about their preparedness for hosting a PCPIR. Applic ations are expected from 
some states in the format prescribed in the Policy for setting up PCPIRs. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 40014/2/2007-PC-II dated 14.08.2007] 
 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No 4)  
 
 The Committee have been informed that the Gas Authority of India Limited 
(GAIL) has been identified as lead promoter with 70% equity participation to 
implement the Assam Gas Cracker Project with Oil India Limited, Numaligarh 
Refinery Limited and  Assam Industrial Development Corporation each having 10 
per cent equity participation in the project.  Subsequently, Monitoring Committee 
and Project Steering Committee have been constituted a nd a Joint Venture 
Company, namely, ‘M/s. Brahmaputra Crackers and Polymers Limited (BCPL)’ 
has been formed and registered for implementing this project.  The Committee 
express their satisfaction that foundation stone laying ceremony of the 
Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited has been held on 9 th April, 2007.  The 
Committee now desire that all out efforts should be made to make the project 

 -:17:- 
complete and functional within the stipulated time period as it would lead to setting 
up of about 500  plastic processing industries and yield socio-economic benefits to 
the North-Eastern Region especially the State of Assam.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 A Monitoring Committee has been constituted in the Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemical s to monitor the progress o f implementation of Assam 
Gas Cracker Project. This Committee monitors and reviews the progress regularly.  
All necessary steps are being undertaken by the Joint Venture Company, i.e. M/s 
Brahmaputra Crackers and Polymers Limited, to implement the project in the 
stipulated time-frame.    
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 40014/2/2007-PC-II dated 14.08.2007] 
   
(Recommendation Sl. No 6) 
  
 The Committee observe that infrastructure facilities like ports, roads p ower, 
water, telecommunication, storage and transportation etc. are inadequate to meet 
the growing demand of the petrochemical s industry.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that necessary steps should be taken by the Department to provide 
these infrastructure facilities to petrochemical sector.   
Reply of the Government 
 Petroleum, Chemical s and Petrochemical s Investment Regions (PCPIR) 
Policy has been approved for promoting investment in this sector to make the 
country an important hub for both domestic and international markets. Government 
of India will ensure the availability of external physical infrastructure linkages to the 
PCPIR including Rail, Road (National Highways), Ports, Airports, and Telecom, in 
a time bound manner.  This infrastructure will be created/upgraded through Public 
Private Partnerships to the extent possible.  Wherever necessary, requisite 
budgetary provisions for creation of these linkages through the public sector will 
also be made. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 40014/2/2007-PC-II dated 14.08.2007] 

 -:18:- 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
  The Committee are of the opinion that trained manpower and advanced 
technology are essential for any industry to grow.  The Committee were informed 
that P etrochemicals Industry in India has been set up based on the imported 
technical know -how.  While appreciating the fact that several Institutions like 
CIPET, IITs, ITIs, Engineering Colleges etc. are providing training and skill and 
institutions like Indian  Institute of Chemical Technology (IICT), Hyderabad, 
National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, Regional Research Laboratories etc.  are 
conducting R&D activities in the petrochemicals sector, the Committee desire that 
these institutions should be strengthened to  ensure that skill and trained 
manpower availability should not be constraints to the petrochemicals sector.  The 
Committee also recommend that the proposal of the Government to set up a new 
scheme of Petrochemical Research and Development Fund should be f inalized to 
cater to the requirements of petrochemicals sector.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The National Policy on Petrochemicals envisages the setting up of Centres 
of Excellence in existing educational and research institutions working in the field 
of p olymers like National Chemical Laboratory, Indian Institute of Chemical 
Technology, Indian Institutes of Technology, National Institutes of Technology and 
others. It also envisages formulation of a new scheme of Petrochemical Research 
and Development Fund (PRDF) which would cater to the projects of R&D, in the 
field of polymers/plastics. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 40014/2/2007-PC-II dated 14.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 -:19:- 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
  
 The Committee have been informed that per capita consumption of 
Polymers in India is 4.0 kg s. as against the global average of about 25 kgs.  The 
Committee have been further informed that Department  of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals is considering to set up an Inter Ministerial Expert Committee to 
look into the requirement of making the use of plastics in the thrust areas like 
plastics in agriculture, water management like plastic pipes, construction 
applications like door/window frame and insulation panels, electronics, electrical 
and telecommunication, consumer durable and non durable products and 
automobile.  Considering the cost effectiveness and more energy efficiency of 
plastic products, the Commi ttee desire that all formalities regarding setting up of 
an Inter -Ministerial Expert Committee to look into the requirement of making the 
use of plastics in thrust areas be completed expeditiously and steps should be 
taken to increase the consumption of pl astics in order to save other vital 
resources.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The National Policy on Petrochemicals envisages setting up of an Inter -
Ministerial Expert Committee under the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals, which will look into the r equirement of making the use of plastics in 
thrust areas and make recommendations to the concerned Ministries. The 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has constituted an Inter Ministerial 
Expert Committee for Development of Plastics Application in T hrust Areas. This will 
comprise of representatives from concerned Ministries/departments (copy enclosed)  
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 40014/2/2007-PC-II dated 14.08.2007] 

 -:20:- 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
 The Committee were informed that plastic per -se is not hazardous.  It is 
non-management or mismanagement of the waste which is creating problems.  
Also, production level of bio-degradable plastics is 50 KTA vis-à-vis 160 MMT total 
plastics production (less  than 0.1 per cent).  The Committee were also informed 
that the Planning Commission has recently sanctioned a project worth Rs. 750 
lakhs for setting up a Recycling Waste Management Centre in Guwahati.  
Considering these aspects, the Committee hope that Re cycling Waste 
Management Centre in Guwahati would be set up at the earliest .  The Committee 
also recommend  that efforts should be made by the Department to promote 
research and development activities for production of cost effective bio-degradable 
plastics.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The estimated cost of the Plastic Recycling and Waste Management Centre 
at Guwahati is Rs.7.95 crores.  Land from the State Government is awaited. The 
National Policy on Petrochemicals envisages that to address the growing 
environmental concerns arising due to the non -degradability of plastics, 
particularly carry bags, there is a need to reuse and recycle the plastics as also to 
develop biodegradable polymers.   Biodegradable polymers have also been 
identified as one of the co re research areas under the New Millennium Initiative 
Technology Leadership India (NMITLI), in the Ministry of Science and Technology.  
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 40014/2/2007-PC-II dated 14.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 -:21:- 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT  
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________   NIL ________________________ 

 -:22:- 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
__________________________   NIL ________________________ 

 -:23:- 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No 5) 
 
 The Committee note that Naphtha and Natural Gas are the main feedstocks 
for the Petrochemical s Industry.  The Committee were informed that there is 
surplus availability of Naphtha in the country, However, availability of Natural Gas 
is not sufficient to meet the demand of Petrochemical s Industry whereas power 
and fertilizer sector s receive priority in terms of gas supply.  Besides, even within 
the available gas the obtainable fractions for use in petrochemicals are low.  At the 
same time, production of petrochemicals from Natural gas is cheaper in 
comparison to Naphtha.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department 
should take adequate steps to allocate requisit e gas supply to petrochemicals 
sector.   
Reply of the Government 
 
 A Standing Committee on Feedstock as envisaged in the National Policy on 
Petrochemicals is being constituted with representatives from Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Ministry of 
Power, Department of Fertilizers and Ministry of Textiles to suggest a policy 
framework for full utilization of available feedstock  at internationally competitive 
prices, to suggest measures for expanding the availabil ity of feedstock, ensuring 
availability to different consuming sectors and future cracker complexes and t o 
suggest a petrochemical sector specific feedstock policy initiatives with a long term 
perspective for promotion of investment in Petrochemicals sector.  
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 40014/2/2007-PC-II dated 14.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 -:24:- 
(Recommendation Sl. No 7) 
  
 The Committee have been informed that the Indian Petrochemical Industry 
has been witnessing continuous reduction in the level of protection due to 
accelerated customs duty reduction.  The Committee note that there are also 
anomalies in the duty structure across the value addition  chain resulting in 
instances of inverted duty structure.  The petrochemical industry is also seriously 
affected by the levy of high rates of Sales Tax on both inputs and products and 
this problem is further compounded by wide variations from State to Stat e and a 
host of State levies like turnover tax, entry tax, etc.  Considering these aspects, 
the Committee desire that the Union Government should take necessary steps to 
rationalize the duty and tax structure.   
Reply of the Government 
 The National Policy  on Petrochemical s envisages the need to remove 
anomalies in duty structure all across the value addition  chain.  Subject to macro 
economic consideration and overall revenue targets, the Government would strive 
to rationalize the duty and tax structure and  remove the duty inversions in the 
petrochemical value addition chain to promote growth and development in the 
sector.  Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals through a consultation 
process with the stakeholder industry association recommends corrections  in the 
duty/tax structure to Ministry of Finance during the pre -budget/post-budget 
exercise on an annual basis.     
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 40014/2/2007-PC-II dated 14.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI          ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,   
November 7, 2007                    Chairman, 
Kartika 16, 1929 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers. 

 -:25:- 
Appendix-I 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
THIRD SITTING 
(31.10.2007) 
 
 
  The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1500 hrs. 
Present 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  - Chairman  
 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sunil Khan 
3. Shri Shrichand Kripalani 
4. Shri Ramswaroop Prasad 
5. Shri P. Chalapathi Rao 
6. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
7. Shri Devwrat Singh 
8. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi  
9. Shri D. Venugopal 
10. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
12. Shri Mahendra Sahni 
13. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
 
Secretariat 
  
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Deputy Secretary-II 
 3. Smt. Balwant Kaur Saimbhi- Under Secretary  
  
 

 -:26:- 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of 
the Committee on ‘Demand and Availability of Petrochemicals’.  The draft Report 
was adopted by the Committee with slight modifications. 
  
4.  ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** **
 ** 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes, if 
any, arising out of the factual verification of the Reports by the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Departmen t of Chemicals & Petrochemicals and **
 ** ** **) and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament in 
the next Session. 
 
6.  ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** **
 ** 
 
  
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
  
 
 
 
** Matters not related to this Report 

 -:27:- 
Appendix – II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
contained in the Eighteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2006 -07) on ‘Demand and 
Availability of Petrochemicals’.  
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 10 
 
II Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 
and 10) 
 
8 
 Percentage to Total 80% 
 
III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s Replies  
 
Nil 
 Percentage of Total Nil 
 
IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
 
Nil 
 Percentage of Total Nil 
 
V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 5 and 7) 
  
2 
 Percentage of Total 20% 
 
 
 
 
 