  
 
 
 
 
24  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
  PRODUCTION, PROCUREMENT  
AND  
MOVEMENT OF FERTILIZERS 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on t he recommendations contained in the 
Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2006 -07) on ‘Production, Procurement and Movement 
of Fertilizers’] 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 2 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 PRODUCTION, PROCUREMENT  
AND MOVEMENT OF FERTILIZERS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2006 -07) on ‘Production, Procurement and Movement of 
Fertilizers’] 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.11.2007 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.11.2007 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka) 


 3 
CONTENTS 
 
               PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-08) ……………………………….. 
 
4 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………… 
 
5 
CHAPTER I Report ……………………………………………………………... 
 
6 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been accepted 
by the Government ……………………………………..……… 
 
 
19 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies………… 
 
 
31 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 
32 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited …………………… 
 
 
33 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Third sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2007-08) held on 31st October, 2007….….  
 
 
36 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (14 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2006-07) on ‘Production, Procurement and Movement of 
Fertilizers’……………………………………………………… ………… 
 
 
 
38 
 

 4 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
  1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair - Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary 
  3. Shri A.S. Chera   - Director 
  4. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Deputy Secretary-II 
  5. Smt. Balwant Kaur Saimbhi - Under Secretary 
  6. Smt. Mahdu Bhutani  - Senior Executive Assistant 
  
* Consequent upon nomination to the Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution, Shri Suresh Angadi, MP (LS) ceased to 
be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 30.08.2007. 
# Nominated w.e.f. 06.09.2007 vice Shri Devdas Apte, MP (RS). 
$ nominated w.e.f. 05.10.2007  
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  -  Chairman 
  
Members  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ajit Singh 
3. Shri Afzal Ansari  
4. Shri Jaiprakash (Mohanlal Ganj) 
5. Shri Sunil Khan 
6. Shri Shrichand Kripalani 
7. Shri Subhash Maharia 
8. Shri Punnu Lal Mohale 
9. Shri A. Narendra 
10. Shri Prasanta Pradhan  
11. Shri Ramswaroop Prasad 
12. Shri P. Chalapathi Rao 
   13. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  
14. Shri Anantha  Venkata Rami Reddy  
15. Shri Devwrat Singh 
$16. Shri Subhash Sureshchandra Deshmukh 
17. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
18. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
19. Shri D. Venugopal 
 20. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
*21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
 23. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
24. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
#25. Shri Surendra Lath 
 26. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
 27. Shri Mahendra Sahni 
28. Shri Dilip Singh Judev 
29. Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
30. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
31. Shri T.R. Zeliang 

 5 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers   (2007 -
08) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twenty Fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2006 -07) on ‘Production, 
Procurement and Movement of Fertilizers’.  
 
2. The Nineteenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on  
17th May, 2007.  The replies of Government to all the recommendations contained 
in the Nineteenth Report were received on 16 th August, 2007.  The Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2007 -08) considered the Action Taken 
Replies received from the Government and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report 
at their sitting held on 31st October, 2007. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI          ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,   
November 7, 2007              Chairman, 
Kartika 16, 1929 (Saka)                 Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers. 

 6 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Nineteenth 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2006 -07) on Production, Procurement and Movement of Fertilizers 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 17th May, 2007.  
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertiliz ers (Department of Fertilizers) were 
requested to furnish replies to the recommendations/observations contained in the 
Nineteenth Report of the Committee within three months from the presentation of 
the Report i.e. by 16th August, 2007.  The Action Taken Replies of the Government 
in respect of all the 14 recommendations/observations contained in the Report 
were received on 16th August, 2007. These have been categorised as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6,7,8,10,11,13 and 14 
        Total - 11 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
        Nil  
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Sl. No. 9 
        Total - 1 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
Sl. Nos. 2 and 12 
        Total - 2 
 

 7 
3. The Committee hope that utmost importa nce would be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement 
the recommendations/observations in their letter and spirit for any reason, 
the matter  should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation. The Committee further desire that the Action Taken Notes 
on the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report 
and the final replies in respect of the recommendat ions for which only 
interim replies have been furnished by the Government should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
  
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations in the ensuing paragraphs: 
 
A. Capacity build up and production of Urea   
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.1) 
 
5. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note with concern that only one fertilizer plant has come up 
in 2005 and that too with 2.4 lakh  million tonne capacity.  Further, the 
capacity addition and production target has not been fully achieved in the 
Tenth Five Year Plan.  The reasons given by the Department viz. (i) Late 
Commissioning of BVFCL Namrup II (ii) Non revamping of Namrup plant of 
HFC and Sindri Plant of FCI (iii) Les s progress in RCF – Thal expansion 
project and (iv) non -availability of gas to fertilizer units.  The Committee are 
of the view that while fixing the target, Government should have made 
proper planning and provide requisite infrastructure in order to achie ve 
target and augment capacity building.  The Committee also express its 

 8 
displeasure over the closure of nine urea plants in the country on account of 
technological obsolescence, feedback limitation, non -viability of units and 
heavy financial losses.  The Committee, therefore, recommend to revive the 
closed units by providing them managerial and technical support, feedstock 
and adequate infrastructure.” 
 
6. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
 
“Based on the recommendations of  the Board for Reconstruction of Public 
Sector Enterprises (BRPSE)  the Government have decided, inter -alia, to 
examine the feasibility of reviving the closed units of FCIL and HFCL subject 
to the confirmed availability of gas.  The Government’s decision h as been 
conveyed to the FCIL/HFCL for implementation.  Fertilizer 
PSUs/Cooperatives – RCF, NFL and KRIBHCO have shown their intention 
to participate in the revival process and accordingly process of preparing 
Techno-Economic Feasibility Report has been initiated. “ 
 
7. The Committee are happy to note that based on the recommendations 
of the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) 
Government have decided to examine the feasibility of reviving the closed 
units of Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer 
Corporation Limited (HFCL) subject to the confirmed availability of gas.  
Decision has been conveyed to both of them for implementation.  While 
appreciating the measures taken by the Government for revival of  closed 
fertilizer units, the  Committee recommend that immediate efforts should be 
made by the Department for availability of gas in consultation with the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas at the highest level and the outcome 
of the decision  should b e conveyed to the Committee within three months  
of the presentation of the Report. 

 9 
 
 
B. Availability of Di -Ammonium Phosphate (DAP) and Single Super 
Phosphate (SSP) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.2) 
 
8. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“Regarding the a vailability of Di -Ammonium Phosphate (DAP) and Single 
Super Phosphate (SSP), the Committee have been informed that these are 
imported because of limited sources in the country.  Manufacturers are free 
to import the fertilizer, raw material/intermediates re quired for 
manufacturing of these fertilizers directly.  Similarly, production of SSP 
depends on the availability of Rock Phosphate to the manufacturers and to 
enhance the production and sale of SSP, Department of Fertilizers had laid 
down the guidelines d ated 05.08.2002 to grant marketing arrangements to 
the manufacturers for selling their product through other manufacturers 
having larger dealer network. The Committee are happy to note that the 
Government have enhanced the amount of subsidy of SSP from Rs. 650/- 
per MT to Rs.975 per MT w.e.f 01.09.2005. However, the Committee desire 
that in order to reduce the dependence on import of DAP and SSP, 
Government should make arrangements for procuring raw materials and 
intermediates in time.  The Committee also re commend for periodic and 
timely revision on concession rate of SSP so as to make SSP units viable 
and fully productive.” 
 
9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
  
“SSP and DAP are the decontrolled fertilizers. Accordingly, th e raw 
materials/intermediates for the manufacture of these fertilizers are procured 
by the manufacturers/importers. The revision of the rate of concession of 
the SSP is under consideration with Department of Fertilizers.”  
 
 

 10 
10. Di-Ammonium Phosphate (DAP ) and Single Super Phosphate (SSP) 
are the decontrolled fertilizers.  The raw material/ intermediates for the 
manufacture of these fertilizers are procured by the manufacturers/ 
importers due to limited sources in the country.  The Committee note with 
concern that the matter regarding revision of the rate of concession of the 
SSP is still under consideration with the Department  of Fertilizers.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that Department should not take much time in 
resolving the issue.  Simultaneousl y, efforts should also be made by the 
Department to make  the SSP units viable and fully productive.  
 
C. Investment in Fertilizer Sector 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.5) 
 
11. The Committee  had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee were informed by the Fertili zer Association of India that 
due to lack of investment friendly scenario in the fertilizer sector, no new 
industry has been set up during the last decade.  The Committee note that 
the Government have formulated a pricing policy for investment in new and 
expansion projects of urea.  The Committee also note that with a view to 
exploit the chief sources of feedstock abroad, the Department is making 
arrangements with those countries were cheap gases are available.  While 
appreciating the efforts being made by the Government, the Committee 
recommend that Government should frame such policies in consultation 
with industries so as to attract investment in this core industry.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that in this regard public – private partnership 
can play a crucial role which can also revive defunct units or increase their 
capacity.”   
 

 11 
12. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as follows:- 
 
 
“The Department has noted the recommendation of the Standing 
Committee. It is taking further steps  for review of the existing policy for 
investment in new and expansion projects of urea.  Detailed consultations 
are being held with the fertilizer industry in order to finalise the revised draft 
policy for new investment in this sector.”   
 
13. The Commit tee are not convinced with the reply given by the 
Department that they are taking further steps to review  the existing policy 
for investment in new and expansion projects of urea.  Even Department has 
not elaborated their role in public – private partners hip, which can play a 
crucial role to attract the investment in fertilizer industry for increasing the 
capacity of urea units.  The Committee, therefore, desire that Government 
should take initiatives to frame such policies in consultation with fertilizer 
industries which attract investment in fertilizer sector and inform the 
Committee accordingly . 
 
D. New Pricing Scheme (NPS) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.6) 
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee observe that a New Pricing Scheme (NPS) fo r urea units 
has been enforced w.e.f. 01.04.2003 replacing the erstwhile Retention Price 
Scheme (RPS) Stage -I of NPS which was of one year duration and 
completed on 31.03.2004.  Stage-II of NPS has commenced on 01.04.2004 
and ended on 31.03.2006.  Stage -III was likely to be implemented from 
01.04.2006 after review of the implementation of Stage-I and Stage-II. 
 
However, the Committee were informed during the course of evidence in 
December, 2006 by Secretary, Department of Fertilizers that NPS was at a 
very advanced stage and they had proposed to extend the NPS -II till 

 12 
September, 2006.  Further the Committee were informed by the 
Department of Fertilizers that the policy for NPS Stage -III has been made 
effective from 1.10.2006 to 31.3.2010.  Stage -II policy ha d been extended 
upto 30.9.2006.  The Committee hope that the Government would 
implement Stage -III of NPS in letter and spirit so that fertilizer industry 
becomes an industry friendly sector and much needed investment is put in 
the growth of the fertilizer sector.  The Committee also desire the 
Government to constantly review the progress in regard to implementation 
of Stage-III of NPS by taking corrective measures wherever necessary.”   
 
15. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as follows:- 
 
“The New Pricing Scheme has been notified on 8 th March, 2007 and is 
being implemented w.e.f. 1.10.2006 to 31.3.2010.  The policy is being 
implemented in letter and spirit.  The Department is also reviewing the 
progress of the implementation on a monthly b asis to ensure effective 
implementation of the policy. “  
 
16. The Committee note that the New Pricing Scheme (NPS) has been 
notified on 8 th  March, 2007 and is being implemented w.e.f.  01.10.2006  to 
31.03.2010.  The Committee are anguished to note that one year has been 
lapsed after implementation of NPS and Department has given a very casual 
reply that they are implementing the policy in letter and spirit.  The 
Committee would like to know the impact of this scheme in the growth of 
fertilizer industry.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that Government 
should prepare a time bound programme for reviewing  the success of this 
policy and make all out efforts for effective implementation of this policy. 
 

 13 
E. Quality of Fertilizers 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.9) 
 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee were informed that the Department of Fertilizers has an 
elaborate and meticulous system of supply of urea under the Essential 
Commodities Act (ECA) and other decontrolled fertilizers to vario us states 
and UTs for maintenance of uninterrupted flow of fertilizers to farmers at 
reasonable prices throughout the country.  The demand and availability 
position is also being monitored regularly in consultation with state 
governments and other leading fertilizer companies.  Besides, drawing up a 
supply plan in respect of decontrolled fertilizers i.e., DAP and MOP, 
introducing the web -based Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) and 
functioning of a Grievance Cell under the Department of Fertilizers are the 
efforts made by the Department for proper movement of fertilizers and 
identifying the shortage areas.  The Committee appreciate  that these are 
very good steps taken by the Department of Fertilizers in the interest of 
Indian Farmers all over the country and hope that this exercise will continue 
in future as well.  The Committee also recommend that  Centre should 
devise a foolproof mechanism to contain the adulteration of fertilizers so 
that farmers obtain unadultered supply of fertilizers.” 
 
18. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as follows:- 
 
 
“A system of drawing samples from the imported and indigenous fertilizers 
and its testing in the Central Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories is in 
existence under the Department of Agriculture an d Cooperation.  The state 
governments are empowered under Fertilizer (Control) Order to check  the 
quality of fertilizers and  initiate legal action against the culprits involved in 
the adulteration of fertilizers etc.”   

 14 
 
19. The Committee are happy to n ote that State Governments are 
empowered under Fertilizer (control) order to check the quality of fertilizers 
and initiate legal action against the culprits involved  in the adulteration of 
fertilizers.  The Committee, however, desire that besides empoweri ng state 
Governments, Union Governments should also be empowered to check the 
quality and quantity of fertilizers at various transit points and responsibility 
be fixed in case of any adulteration.  Various fertilizer companies in which 
Union Government hav e its stake should also ensure that adulterated 
fertilizers are not sold at their outlets.  
 
F. Distribution of Fertilizers 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.11) 
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers ha s been entrusted 
the responsibility of ensuring movement, distribution and allocation of 
controlled fertilizer i.e. Urea from various fertilizer plants and ports in 
accordance with the state -wise assessment made by the Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperati on (DAC).  The distribution of imported Urea is 
made keeping in view the requirement of each of the States.  Approximately 
75% of Urea is transported from the factory to the rail heads near the 
destinations by rail.  The committee recommend that the Depart ment of 
Fertilizers should take necessary steps in collaboration with other agencies 
like Ministry of Railways for timely distribution and movement of fertilizers to 
different parts of the country.  The Committee desire that the corrective 
measures should be taken by the Government to ensure efficient and timely 
evacuation of fertilizers from ports.” 
 

 15 
21. The Ministry in their  Action Taken Reply have stated as follows: 
 
“Recommendation of the Committee has been noted and all out efforts are 
being made for timely movement of fertilizers from Plants and the Ports.  As 
a result of joint efforts and coordination between the Ministry of Railways 
and Ministry of Shipping,  the Department has succeeded in movement of  
about 106.03 LMT of indigenous Urea from the plants and about 30.28 LMT 
of imported urea from ports to states during Rabi     2006-07.”  
 
22. The Committee note that all out efforts are being made  by the 
Department of Fertilizers for timely distribution and movement of fertilizers 
from plants and ports as a result of which the Department has succeeded in 
movement of large quantity of indigenous and imported urea from ports to 
states during Rabi 2006 -07.  While appreciating the efforts made by 
Department of Fertilizers  in coordination with the Minis try of Railways and 
Ministry of Shipping for enhancing the distribution and movement of 
fertilizers to different parts of the country, the Committee desire that Ministry 
of Railways should ensure that no pilferage or adulteration take place during 
the  mov ement of fertilizers.  The Committee hope that Department should 
continue this practice in future also.   
 
G. Supply of fertilizers to distant areas 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
23. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee observe that  in  case of Urea the primary freight which 
primarily consists of rail movement is fully compensated under the subsidy 
regime.  The Committee also note that Department of Fertilizers proposes 
to link the escalation in road freight rates to increase in the whol e sale price 
indices of all commodities, motor tyres, truck body in addition to increase in 
the price of diesel oil.  While appreciating  the proposal of the Department in 
this regard, the Committee hope that the proposal to include all the 

 16 
variables espec ially in case of road transport would be considered by the 
Department soon and the committee be apprised accordingly.  In so far as 
de-controlled fertilizers are concerned , the Committee note that 
compensation in respect of freight is fixed on the basis o f the 
recommendations of Tariff Commission which inter -alia make it obligatory 
on the part of the industry to supply fertilizers to distant areas.  The 
Committee were informed that there is reluctance on the part of the 
suppliers to supply fertilizer to di stant locations where cost of movement is 
not fully reimbursed.  As the proposal for rationalization of freight 
component is under consideration, the Committee recommend that 
Government should chalk out a feasible formula in consultation with  
Association of Fertilizer Industries so that Fertilizer Industry do not hesitate 
to supply fertilizer in distant and remote places.” 
 
24. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under:- 
 
“Under NPS III, fertilizer units are eligible to claim the actual  freight to the 
declared Primary Stock Point (PSP) in the district and secondary freight 
from PSP to the supply points within the districts. In so far as decontrolled 
fertilizers are concerned, a proposal for rationalization of the freight element 
in the c oncession scheme is being submitted for consideration of CCEA 
shortly. “  
 
25. The Committee note that under NPS -III Fertilizer Units are eligible to 
claim the actual freight to  the declared Primary Stock Point (PSP) in the 
district and secondary freight from PSP to the supply points within the 
districts. While appreciating the initiative taken by the Government for 
rationalization of freight in case of controlled fertilizers under NPS -III, the 
Committee are failed to understand as to why  the proposal for  
rationalization of the freight element in respect of decontrolled fertilizers is 
still under consideration of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA)  
even after five months from the presentation  of Nineteenth Report of the 

 17 
Committee.  The proposal should, therefore,  be finalized at the earliest.  
After finalisation, Department of Fertilizers should ensure its proper 
implementation.  This may also encourage fertilizer industry to supply 
fertilizers in distant and remote areas.   
 
H. Distribution and Availability of Fertilizers  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.14) 
 
26. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that 50% production of Urea is under price and partial 
distribution control of Government under the Essential Commodities Act 
and 50% is decontrolled.  The Committee also note that a Working Group 
headed by Dr. Y.K. Alagh is exploring the possibility of decontrolling Urea.  
It has also been submitted by the Department in their written reply that a 
sub-committee on movement and distrib ution of fertilizers has given its 
findings.  The Committee recommend that the findings of the working group 
be implemented at the earliest.  The Committee hope that with the increase 
of production, de-bottlenecking and appropriate import policy, the urea may 
be de -controlled fully.  As regards the supply of fertilizers in the different 
parts of the States/UTs, the Union Government cannot wash off their hands 
by simply passing the buck to State / UT Governments.  The Committee 
understand that the distributi on of fertilizers within the state is the concern 
of the State Government but at the same time the Government should 
formulate a policy so as to monitor the distribution of fertilizers in all the 
districts of the state of the country especially in backward  and remote 
districts.  As submitted by the Secretary, Department of Fertilizers that they 
are planning to introduce an on -line monitoring system, the Committee 
appreciate this initiative of the Government and would like to be informed 
about the progress made in this regard.” 
 

 18 
27. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply had stated as under:- 
 
 
“An on-line Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) has become operational and 
may be accessed by the Public for information relating to availability of 
fertilizers in the district and its sales.” 
 
28. The Committee are happy to note that an on -line Fertilizer Monitoring 
System (FMS) has become operational for monitoring the distribution of 
fertilizers in all the districts of the country.  The Committee desire that 
Government should continue their sincere efforts at this stage so as to 
create awareness in general public.  The Committee also desire that 
Government should evaluate the success of this system on regular basis.  
However, Department has not commented upon decont rolling the urea.   
They, therefore, recommend that until complete de -bottlenecking is done, 
production of urea is increased and appropriate import policy is undertaken, 
the existing policy regarding controlling of urea should continue. 
 

 19 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
  
 The Committee note with concern that only one fertilizer plant has come up 
in 2005 and that too with 2.4 lakh m million tonne capacity.  Further, the capaci ty 
addition and production target has not been fully achieved in the Tenth Five Year 
Plan.  The reasons given by the Department viz. (i) Late Commissioning of BVFCL 
Namrup II (ii) Non revamping of Namrup plant of HFC and Sindri Plant of FCI (iii) 
Less progress in RCF – Thal expansion project and (iv) non -availability of gas to 
fertilizer units.  The Committee are of the view that while fixing the target, 
Government should have made proper planning and provide requisite 
infrastructure in order to achieve tar get and augment capacity building.  The 
Committee also express its displeasure over the closure of nine urea plants in the 
country on account of technological obsolescence, feedback limitation, non -
viability of units and heavy financial losses.  The Commit tee, therefore, 
recommend to revive the closed units by providing them managerial and technical 
support, feedstock and adequate infrastructure. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  Based on the recommendations of the Board for Reconstruction of Public 
Sector Enterprises (BRPSE), the Government have decided, inter -alia, to examine 
the feasibility of reviving the closed units of FCIL and HFCL subject to the 
confirmed availability of gas.  The Government’s decision has been conveyed to 
the FCIL/HFCL for implementation.  Fertilizer PSUs/Cooperatives – RCF, NFL and 
KRIBHCO have shown their intention to participate in the revival process and 
accordingly process of preparing Techno -Economic Feasibility Report has been 
initiated.  
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 16060/3/2006-P&I dated 16.08.2007] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)

 20 
(Recommendation Sl. No 3 ) 
 
 
 The Committee note that proposals for debottlenecking/expansion of 
various urea plants were received by the Department of Fertilizers but these are 
either pending or under consideration of the Government.  The Department of 
Fertilizers had also notified the policy for debottlenecking of capacity vide circular 
dated 29.01.2004.  However, the Deptt. of Fertilizers also imposed additional 
conditions to the fertilizer units vide their letter dated 21.12.2005. But FAI 
submitted that due to imposition of fresh restrictions, the proposals for 
debottlenecking would become unviable.  The Committee, th erefore, recommend 
that the Department should help these units in their revamping by modifying the 
fresh restrictions.  The Committee also reiterate their earlier recommendation 
made in their 12 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) and strongly recommend that the 
process of seeking the approval of Government/Cabinet decision regarding 
debottlenecking and expansion of fertilizer units should be completed well in time.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Under NPS -III, no Fertilizer company would need approval from 
Government of India for debottlenecking/revamping etc.  The companies are free 
to take their commercial decision on their own for debottlenecking of fertilizer 
plants.  Further under NPS-IIII additional production of urea has been incentivised  
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 16060/3/2006-P&I dated 16.08.2007] 
 
  
 

 21 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No 4) 
 
 The Committee note that gas is a preferred feedstock for production of 
nitrogenous fertilizers and raw materials are required for production of phosphatic 
fertilizers.  Due to less availability of rock phosphate, our country is dependent on 
imported raw material for production of phosphatic fertilizers.  The Committee is 
happy to note that Government has been encouraging Indian companies to 
establish joint venture production facilities with buy back agreement in other 
countries.  The Committee was informed by the Department that at present 
Department of Fertilizes have four joint ventures.  First is OMIFCO, from which 
Department is getting urea from 16 lakh to 17 lakh tones at a very reasonable 
price.  The remaining three units are producing raw material.  The Government are 
also exploring possibilities of joint ventures in other countries like UAE, Iran, 
Egypt, Tunisia, Kuwait and Nigeria.  The Committee recommends that during the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan Government should encourage more Indian companies 
for setting up joint ventures abroad to fulfil our future requirement.       
 
Reply of the Government 
 Under the New Pricing Scheme Stage -III, Go vernment has committed to 
long-term offtake of urea for encouraging joint ventures abroad.  Further, it has 
been decided to set up a special purpose vehicle for coordinating investments in 
resource rich countries abroad.  The Department has also proposed a n allocation 
of Rs.2000 crores from Government budgetary support under 11 th Five Year Plan 
towards setting up of joint ventures abroad. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 16060/3/2006-P&I dated 16.08.2007] 
  
 
 
  
 

 22 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
 The Committee were informed by the Fertilizer Association of India that due 
to lack of investment friendly scenario in the fertilizer sector, no new industry has 
been set up during the last decade.  The Committee note that the Governme nt5 
has formulated a pricing policy for investment in new and expansion projects of 
urea.  The Committee also note that with a view to exploit the chief sources of 
feedstock abroad, the Department is making arrangements with those countries 
were cheap gases are available.  While appreciating the efforts being made by the 
Government, the Committee recommend that Government should frame such 
policies in consultation with industries so as to attract investment in this core 
industry.  The Committee are of the o pinion that in this regard public – private 
partnership can play a crucial role which can also revive defunct units or increase 
their capacity.   
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 The Department has noted the recommendation of the Standing 
Committee. It is taking further steps for review of the existing policy for investment 
in new and expansion projects of urea.  Detailed consultations are being held with 
the fertilizer industry in order to finalise the revised draft policy for new investment 
in this sector.   
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 16060/3/2006-P&I dated 16.08.2007] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  

 23 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
 The Committee observe that a New Pricin g Scheme (NPS) for urea units 
has been enforced w.e.f. 01.04.2003 replacing the erstwhile Retention Price 
Scheme (RPS) Stage-I of NPS which was of one year duration and completed on 
31.03.2004.  Stage -II of NPS has commenced on 01.04.2004 and ended on 
31.03.2006.  Stage -III was likely to be implemented from 01.04.2006 after review 
of the implementation of Stage-I and Stage-II. 
 
 However, the Committee were informed during the course of evidence in 
December, 2006 by Secretary, Department of Fertilizers that NPS was at a very 
advanced stage and they had proposed to extend the NPS -II till September, 2006.  
Further the Committee were informed by the Department of Fertilizers that the 
policy for NPS Stage -III has been made effective from 1.10.2006 to 31.3.2010.  
Stage-II policy had been extended upto 30.9.2006.  The Committee hope that the 
Government would implement Stage -III of NPS in letter and spirit so that fertilizer 
industry becomes an industry friendly sector and much needed investment is put 
in the growth of the fertilizer sector.  The Committee also desire the Government 
to constantly review the progress in regard to implementation of Stage -III of NPS 
by taking corrective measures wherever necessary.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The New Pricing Scheme has been notified on 8th March, 2007 and is being 
implemented w.e.f. 1.10.2006 to 31.3.2010.  The policy is being implemented in 
letter and spirit.  The Department is also reviewing the progress of the 
implementation on a monthly basis to ensure effective imp lementation of the 
policy.   
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 16060/3/2006-P&I dated 16.08.2007] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 24 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
 The Committe e were informed that natural gas is the preferred feedstock 
for production of urea in comparison to other feedstocks as it is more efficient and 
clean source of energy, cheaper and more cost effective in terms of manufacturing 
cost of urea.  But due to dwi ndling supplies of Administered Price Mechanism 
(APM) gas, gas based units have been facing shortage of natural gas.  The 
Committee were also informed by the Fertilizer Association of India (FAI) during 
the evidence that in the year 2005 -06 the total requi rement of gas was 35.05 
MMSCMD, therefore, actual gas supply was only 28.09 MMSCMD and shortfall in 
supply was 7.41 MMSCMD. It was also informed to the Committee by Secretary, 
Department of Fertilizers during the evidence that they would try to make gas 
available by 2008 -09 and they are asking all the fertilizer units in the country to 
enter into specific agreements with GAIL or Reliance in the next six months.  While 
appreciating the various measures taken by the Department, the Committee hope 
that Government would have no stone unturned for making the availability of gas 
to the fertilizer sector by 2008-09. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A Committee has been constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary 
(Petroleum) with Secretary (Fertilizers), Secretary (Ex penditure) and Member, 
Planning Commission as its Member to review the availability, connectivity and 
pricing of gas for fertilizer sector.  The Committee held its first meeting on 9 th April, 
2007, wherein and it has been ascertained that all fertilizers p lants, both existing 
and closed, will have pipeline connectivity by 2010 -2011 and there would be 
adequate availability of gas from 2008 -2009 onwards, for meeting the requirement 
of the fertilizer sector.    
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 16060/3/2006-P&I dated 16.08.2007] 
 

 25 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
Bio-fertilizers is useful in promoting agricultural production as they are eco -
friendly and cost effective fertilizers.  The Committee are happy to note that the 
overall p roduction of bio -fertilizers has increased during the year 2005 -06 as 
compared to 2004-05.  The production of bio-fertilizers was 10594.90 tonnes in the 
year 2004-05 and 10764.42 tonnes in 2005 -06.  However, the Committee express 
their displeasure that the  zone wise production has declined as some States in 
each zone have nil production of bio-fertilizers during the years 2004-05 and 2005-
06.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that Government should take 
adequate steps to raise the production of Bio -fertilizers zone -wise and educate 
farmers about the advantages of bio-fertilizers and thereby encourage them to use 
it.  The Committee also recommend that Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of 
finance so as to provide incentive to farmers and others producing  bio-fertilizers.  
The Committee feel that such a step would encourage the use of bio-fertilizers.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Some of the UTs and small States do not produce bio -fertilizers, they meet 
their requirement of bio -fertilizers from their neighbou ring States. In order to raise 
the production of bio -fertilizers, the Ministry of Agriculture is providing financial 
assistance upto 25% of total project cost upto a maximum of Rs.20.00 lakh per 
unit as credit -linked and back -ended subsidy through the Nati onal Bank for 
Agriculture & Rural Development (NABARD)/National Cooperative Development 
Corporation (NCDC) for setting up bio-fertilizer production units under the National 
Project on Organic Farming (NPOF).  So far 24 bio -fertilizer units with a total 
subsidy of Rs.480.00 lakh have been sanctioned under NPOF since its inception 
in October 2004.  Financial assistance is being provided for trainings of farmers 
and demonstrations on use of organic inputs including bio -fertilizers under NPOF 
to educate farmers about their advantages. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 16060/3/2006-P&I dated 16.08.2007] 
 
   

 26 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
 The Committee observe that there is not much difference in availability and 
consumption of fertilizers in South, West, North and East Zone for the year 2005 -
06 and 2006-07.  However, the Committee note that North East is low consuming 
zone of fertilizer as compared to other Zones.  The Committee agree with the 
reasons given by the Department of F ertilizers for low consumption of fertilizers in 
North East Zone.  The committee also note with concern that even after lapse of 
sixteen years, State/UT Governments have not considered the advice given by the 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation regardi ng exemption of small dealers 
having fertilizers up to 2 tonnes at the time of requirement of dealership 
registration certificate.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that State/ UT 
Governments should consider the advice of Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation and implement the same to make fertilizer available in hilly and 
remote area.  The Committee also recommend for preferring organic farming in 
most of the North Eastern States.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 For expanding the Dealers Network in the co untry, provisions of Fertilizer 
(Control) Order have been simplified for Dealers by way of dispensing with 
Dealers Registration Certificate requirement.  Now the dealers are required to give 
only a memorandum of Intimation to the notified authority in form  A I of the 
Fertilizer (Control) Order and acknowledgement of receipt in form A 2 of the 
Fertilizer (Control) Order shall be deemed to be an authorization letter and the 
concerned person shall be the authorized Dealer for carrying on the Business of 
fertilizers.  This has resulted in to increase of dealers network in the country. 
 
The North -Eastern Region has been identified as thrust area for 
development of organic farming.  The State Governments of Sikkim and Mizoram 
have declared their States as Organic States.  Under the National Project on 
Organic Farming (NPOF) funds amounting to Rs.8.69 crores were sanctioned 

 27 
during 2004 -05 to 2006 -07 for taking up various activities for development of 
organic farming in the North Eastern States. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 16060/3/2006-P&I dated 16.08.2007] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
 The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers has been entrusted 
the responsibility of ensuring movement, distribution and allocation  of controlled 
fertilizer i.e. Urea from various fertilizer plants and ports in accordance with the 
state-wise assessment made by the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation 
(DAC).  The distribution of imported Urea is made keeping in view the requirement 
of each of the States.  Approximately 75% of Urea is transported from the fractory 
to the rail heads near the destinations by rail.  The committee recommend that the 
Department of Fertilizers should take necessary steps in collaboraton with other 
agencies like Railways for timely distribution and movement of fertilizers to 
different parts of the country.  The Committee desires that the corrective measures 
should be taken by the Government to ensure efficient and timely evacuation of 
fertilizers from ports. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 Recommendation of the Committee has been noted and all out efforts are 
being made for timely movement of fertilizers from Plants and the Ports.  As a 
result of joint efforts and coordination between the Ministry of Rail ways and 
Ministry of Shipping, the Department has succeeded in movement of  about 
106.03 LMT of indigenous Urea from the plants and about 30.28 LMT of imported 
urea from ports to states during Rabi 2006-07. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 16060/3/2006-P&I dated 16.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)   
 

 28 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
 The Committee note that 75% of Urea is transported from the factory to the 
railheads by rail and  25% of Urea is transported by road.  The average cost of 
transportation by Railways is  approximately  Rs. 1.50 per  tonne per k.m.  On the 
issue of increase in the Railway freight, the Committee were informed by the 
Fertilizer Association of India tha t the cost of delivery of Urea has been increased  
by 33% and in the case of other fertilizers, it has gone up by 27% due to increase 
in railway freight in the last fourteen months.  The Committee find that  the fertilzer 
subsidy has increased substantially  due to higher freight cost.    In the year 2005 -
06,  32 million tones of fertilizers were moved by rail and the transportation cost 
has increased by 30% since April, 2005.  The Committee are failed to understand 
that  despite constant  increase in fertili zer subsidy, no steps have been taken by 
the Department to contain the railway freight.  The Committee recommend that the 
Department of Fertilizers  should take up the issue of increase in Railway freight 
with the Ministry of Railways and also find out to minimize the burden of higher 
fertilizers subsidy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 This issue was taken up with the Ministry of Railways. Their reply is given 
below:- 
 
“Ministry of Railways has been rationalizing the tariff structure since 
2002-03 to remove suc h anomalies gradually. Revision of he tariff rate for 
transport of urea and phosphatic fertilizers is a part of this process with the 
objective of progressive reduction of cross -subsidies within the freight 
business and evolving a more transparent and cost  based rating regime. 
The process necessarily requires increase in freight rates for commodities 
being transported below cost and lowering the freight charges for 
commodities being moved at an abnormally high rates. Rates for transport 
of urea have thus been suitably revised. 
 
The Classification of urea was rationalized to Class -110 and Class -
120 with effect from 1.12.2005 and 1.6.2006 respectively. However, with 
effect from 1.4.2007, freight incentives like 35% concession for loading of 
urea/ fertilizers i n open wagons are being made available. In addition, a 
terminal charge of Rs. 10/ - per tonne, which was levied on other 

 29 
commodities w.e.f. 1.7.2007, has not been levied on fertilizers thus giving a 
substantial relief for transportation of this particular commodity. “ 
 
 Since most of the fertilizer movement taken place by rail, increased rail 
freight has made it difficult for the Department of Fertilizers to reduce the incidence 
of freight subsidy on fertilizers  
 [M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 16060/3/2006-P&I dated 16.08.2007] 
 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
 The Committee note that 50% production of Urea is under price and partial 
distribution control of Government under the Essential Commodities Act and 50% 
is decontr olled.  The Committee also note that a Working Group headed by Dr. 
Y.K. Alagh is exploring the possibility of decontrolling Urea.  It has also been 
submitted by the Department in their written reply that a sub -committee on 
movement and distribution of fert ilizers has given its findings.  The Committee 
recommend that the findings of the working group be implemented at the earliest.  
The Committee hope that with the increase of production, de -bottlenecking and 
appropriate import policy, the urea may be de -controlled fully.  As regards the 
supply of fertilizers in the different parts of the States/UTs, the Union Government 
cannot wash off their hands by simply passing the buck to State / UT 
Governments.  The Committee understand that the distribution of fertili zers within 
the state is the concern of the State Government but at the same time the 
Government should formulate a policy so as to monitor the distribution of fertilizers 
in all the districts of the state of the country especially in backward and remote 
districts.  As submitted by the Secretary, Department of Fertilizers that they are 
planning to introduce an on -line monitoring system, the Committee appreciate this 
initiative of the Government and would like to be informed about the progress 
made in this regard. 
 

 30 
Reply of the Government  
  
 An on-line Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) has become operational and 
may be accessed by the Public for information relating to availability of fertilizers in 
the district and its sales. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 16060/3/2006-P&I dated 16.08.2007] 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 31 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT  
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------   NIL --------------------- 
 

 32 
 
 CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
 The Committee were informed that the Department of Fertilizers has an 
elaborate and meticulous system of supply of urea under the Essential 
Commodities Act (ECA) and other decontrolled fertilizers to various states and 
UTs for maintenance of uninterrupted flow  of fertilizers to farmers at reasonable 
prices throughout the country.  The demand and availability position is also being 
monitored regularly in consultation with state governments and other leading 
fertilizer companies.  Besides, drawing up a supply pla n in respect of decontrolled 
fertilizers i.e., DAP and MOP, introducing the web -based Fertilizer Monitoring 
System (FMS) and functioning of a Grievance Cell under the Department of 
Fertilizers are the efforts made by the Department for proper movement of 
fertilizers and identifying the shortage areas.  The Committee appreciate  that 
these are very good steps taken by the Department of Fertilizers in the interest of 
Indian Farmers all over the country and hope that this exercise will continue in 
future as we ll.  The Committee also recommend that  Centre should devise a 
foolproof mechanism to contain the adulteration of fertilizers so that farmers obtain 
unadultered supply of fertilizers. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A system of drawing samples from the imported and indigenous fertilizers 
and its testing in the Central Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories is in existence 
under the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation.  The state governments are 
empowered under Fertilizer (Control) Order to check  the quali ty of fertilizers and  
initiate legal action against the culprits involved in the adulteration of fertilizers etc.   
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 16060/3/2006-P&I dated 16.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 

 33 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
 Regarding the availability of Di -Ammonium Phosphate (DAP) and Singl e 
Super Phosphate (SSP), the Committee have been informed that these are 
imported because of limited sources in the country.  Manufacturers are free to 
import the fertilizer, raw material/intermediates required for manufacturing of these 
fertilizers directly.  Similarly, production of SSP depends on the availability of Rock 
Phosphate to the manufacturers and to enhance the production and sale of SSP, 
Department of Fertilizers had laid down the guidelines dated 05.08.2002 to grant 
marketing arrangements to t he manufacturers for selling their product through 
other manufacturers having larger dealer network. The Committee are happy to 
note that the Government has enhanced the amount of subsidy of SSP from 
Rs.650/- per MT to Rs.975 per MT w.e.f 01.09.2005. Howev er, the Committee 
desire that in order to reduce the dependence on import of DAP and SSP, 
Government should make arrangements for procuring raw materials and 
intermediates in time.  The Committee also recommend for periodic and timely 
revision on concessio n rate of SSP so as to make SSP units viable and fully 
productive. 
Reply of the Government 
 SSP and DAP are the decontrolled fertilizers. Accordingly, the raw 
materials/intermediates for the manufacture of these fertilizers are procured by the 
manufacturers/importers. The revision of the rate of concession of the SSP is 
under consideration with Department of Fertilizers.  
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 16060/3/2006-P&I dated 16.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 34 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
 The Committee observe that in case of Urea the primary freight which 
primarily consists of rail movement is fully compensated under the subsidy regime.  
The Committee also note t hat Department of Fertilizers proposes to link the 
escalation in road freight rates to increase in the whole sale price indices of all 
commodities, motor tyres, truck body in addition to increase in the price of diesel 
oil.  While appreciating  the proposa l of the Department in this regard, the 
Committee hope that the proposal to include all the variables especially in case of 
road transport would be considered by the Department soon and the committee be 
apprised accordingly.  In so far as de -controlled fer tilizers are concerned , the 
Committee note thatcompensation in respect of freight is fixed on the basis of the 
recommendations of Tariff Commission which inter -alia make it obligatory on the 
part of the industry to supply fertilizers to distant areas.  Th e Committee were 
informed that there is reluctance on the part of the suppliers to supply fertilizer to 
distant locations where cost of movement is not fully reimbursed.  As the proposal 
for rationalization of freight component is under consideration, the Committee 
recommend that Government should chalk out a feasible formula in consultation 
with  Association of Fertilizer Industries so that Fertilizer Industry do not hesitate to 
supply fertilizer in distant and remote places. 
 

 35 
Reply of the Government  
 
 Under NPS III, fertilizer units are eligible to claim the actual freight to the 
declared Primary Stock Point (PSP) in the district and secondary freight from PSP 
to the supply points within the districts. In so far as decontrolled fertilizers are 
concerned, a proposal for rationalization of the freight element in the concession 
scheme is being submitted for consideration of CCEA shortly.   
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 16060/3/2006-P&I dated 16.08.2007] 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI          ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,   
November 7, 2007              Chairman, 
Kartika 16, 1929 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers. 

 36 
Appendix-I 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
THIRD SITTING 
(31.10.2007) 
 
 
  The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1500 hrs. 
Present 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  - Chairman  
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Sunil Khan 
3. Shri Shrichand Kripalani 
4. Shri Ramswaroop Prasad 
5. Shri P. Chalapathi Rao 
6. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
7. Shri Devwrat Singh 
8. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi  
9. Shri D. Venugopal 
10. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
12. Shri Mahendra Sahni 
13. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
 
Secretariat   
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Deputy Secretary-II 
 3. Smt. Balwant Kaur Saimbhi- Under Secretary  
  
 

 37 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   
 
3.  ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** **
 ** 
  
4. The Committee then took up for consideration another draft Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Nineteenth Report of the Committee on ‘Production, Procurement and Movement 
of Fertilizers’, which was also adopted by the Committee with slight modications. 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes, if 
any, arising out of the factual verification of the Reports by the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (** ** ** ** and Department of Fertilizers) 
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the next Session. 
 
6.  ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** **
 ** 
 
  
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
  
 
 
 
** Matters not related to this Report 

 38 
Appendix – II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
contained in the Nineteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2006 -07) on ‘Production, 
Procurement and Movement of Fertilizers’.  
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 14 
 
II Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 
11, 13 and 14) 
 
11 
 Percentage to Total 78.57% 
 
III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s Replies  
 
Nil 
 Percentage of Total Nil 
 
IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 9) 
 
1 
 Percentage of Total 7.14%  
 
V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2 and 12) 
  
2 
 Percentage of Total 14.29% 
 
 