 
14 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2006-07) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
  
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2006-07) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertiliz ers (2005-06) on De mands for Grants (2006-07) of the 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertiliz ers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals)] 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 
 
 
 

 -:2:-
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2006-07) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2006-07) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on th e recommendations contained in the 
Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sab ha) of the Standing Committee on  
Chemicals & Fertiliz ers (2005- 06) on De mands for Grants (2006-07) of the 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertiliz ers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals] 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2006 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2006 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) 

 -:3:-
CONTENTS 
 
               PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2006-07) ……………………………….. 
 
4 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………… 
 
5 
CHAPTER I Report ……………………………………………………………...
 
6 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been accepted 
by the Government ……………………………………..……… 
 
 
18 
CHAPTER III Recommendation/observation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply. ………… 
 
 
35 
CHAPTER IV Recommendation/observation in respect of which reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee…. 
 
 
36 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited …………………… 
 
 
38 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2006-07) held on 29th November, 2006….. 
 
 
46 
  
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (14
th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committ ee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2005-06) on Demands for Grants ( 2006-07) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) …. ……………………………………………………...
 
  
 
 
 
 
48 
 
 
 
  

 -:4:-
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2006-07) 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  -  Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ajit Singh 
3. Shri Suresh Angadi 
4. Shri Afzal Ansari  
5. Shri Jaiprakash (Mohanlal Ganj) 
6. Shri Prahlad Joshi 
7. Shri Sunil Khan 
*8. Shri Shrichand Kripalani 
9. Shri Subhash Maharia 
10. Shri Punnu Lal Mohale 
$11. Shri A. Narendra 
12. Shri Prasanta Pradhan  
13. Shri P. Chalapathi Rao 
14. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  
15. Shri Anantha  Venkata Rami Reddy  
16. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
17. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
18. Shri D. Venugopal 
19. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Devdas Apte 
23. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan   
24. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
25. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
@26. Shri Mahendra Sahni 
27. Shri Dilip Singh Judev 
28. Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
29. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
30. Shri T.R. Zeliang 
31. Vacant 
Secretariat 
 1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair   - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri P. Sreedharan   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Brahm Dutt     -   Director 
 4. Shri S.C. Kaliraman   - Under Secretary 
 5. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Senior Executive Assistant  
 
     * Nominated w.e.f. 31.08.2006. 
     $ Nominated w.e.f. 25.09.2006  
    @ Nominated w.e.f. 04.10.2006 
 
 

 -:5:-
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2006-07) 
having been authorised by the Committee to  submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Fourteenth Report on Acti on Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fert ilizers (2005-06) on Demands for Grants 
(2006-07) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals).  
 
2. The Eleventh Report of the Commi ttee was presented to Lok Sabha on 19 th 
May, 2006.  The replies of Government to  all the recommendations contained in 
the Eleventh Report were received on 29 th September, 2006.  The Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2006-07) considered the Action Taken 
Replies received from the Government and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report 
at their sitting held on 29th November, 2006. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI            ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,   
December 05, 2006           Chairman, 
Agrahayana 14, 1928 (Saka)        Standing Committee on  
Chemicals & Fertilizers. 
 

 -:6:-
 
R E P O R T 
 
CHAPTER- I 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing  Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2005-06) on Demands for Grants (2006-07) re lating to the Ministry of Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals), which was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 19th May, 2006. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fe rtilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furn ish replies to the recommendations 
contained in the Eleventh Report within thre e months from the presentation of the 
Report i.e. by 19 th August, 2006.  The action taken replies of the Government in 
respect of all the 21 recommendations cont ained in the Report were received on 
29th September, 2006.  These have been categorised as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/ observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
 
Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15 and 17 to 20 
 
(ii) Recommendation/ observation wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
 
Sl. No. Nil 
 
(iii) Recommendation/observation in respect of which reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee:- 
 
Sl. No. 16 
 
(iv) Recommendations/ observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited:- 
 
Sl. Nos. 1, 8, 10, 14 and 21  
 

 -:7:-
3. The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
recommendations for which only interim replies have been furnished 
by the Government should be furnished expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
  
A. FOLLOW-UP ACTION ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED 
IN FIFTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
5. The Committee had analysed the follow-up action by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Fifth Report 
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals.  The Committee had 
noted that certain recommendations were at the various stages of 
implementation by the Government.  The Committee have further 
reviewed the progress of implementation (in the matters dealt with 
by the Committee in their Fifth Report) in their Eighth and Eleventh 
Reports and also the action taken replies furnished by the 
Government now.  The Committee note that some of the 
recommendations of the Committee like approval of revival plans of 
Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) under the administrative control of 
the Department, implementation of approved revival plans, 
finalisation of national policy on petrochemicals, establishment of 
Assam Gas Cracker Project, etc. are yet to be fully implemented.  
This has been reflected by the Committee in their various Reports.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Govt. should take 
time bound conclusive action on the recommendations of the 
Committee. 

 -:8:-
B. DISBURSEMENT OF CLAIMS TO BHOPAL GAS VICTIMS 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.6) 
 
6. In the context of Supreme Court or ders in regard to providing relief to 
Bhopal gas victims the Committee had desir ed that all cases relating to the 
disbursement of pro-rata compensation of Rs. 1503 crore should be disposed of 
by 30th April, 2006.   
 
7. In their reply, the Department have stated that the work for distribution of 
pro-rata compensation to the victims of  the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster which was 
to be completed by 30 th April, 2006 as per directions  of the Supreme Court has 
almost been completed by that date by  the Office of the Welfare Commissioner, 
Bhopal Gas Victims.  However, an applic ation in respect of  the nearly 31,000 
absentee claimants has been made by the Office of the Welfare Commissioner in 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court on 15 th February, 2006 for treating all such cases as 
closed.  The matter has not been heard by  the Court yet.  The process of 
distribution of pro-rata compensation is still going on.  As on 16 th June 2006, a 
sum of Rs.1485.48 crore has been distributed among 5,54,580 claimants. 
 
 
8. The Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals have stated 
that pro-rata compensation to the victims, as per the directions of 
the Supreme Court, has almost been completed by 30 th April, 2006.  
The Department have further stated that distribution of pro-rata 
compensation is still going on.  Clearly, the process of payment of 
compensation is yet to be concluded.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the disbursement claims should be completed at the 
earliest.  The Committee would like to be informed of the latest 
position in the matter. 

 -:9:-
C. DISPOSAL OF TOXIC WASTE FROM BHOPAL 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
9. The Committee were informed that on the directions of High Court of 
Madhya Pradesh, a Task Force under the C hairmanship of Secretary (C&PC) was 
monitoring the removal/disposal of about  47 MT of toxic wa stes from Union 
Carbide Plant site at Bhopal.  The Prin cipal Secretary, Bhopal Gas Tragedy, 
Department of Relief and Rehab ilitation, Government of Madhya Pradesh is the 
coordinator of the Task Force and Madhy a Pradesh Pollution Cont rol Board is the 
executive agency.  The Committee were al so apprised that the State Government 
of Madhya Pradesh had not ye t prepared the project propos al for removal of the 
toxic wastes.  NEERI and IICT had taken sample s to assess the level of toxicity in 
the toxic wastes.  Further, about 20 MT of  toxic waste, which cannot be put in 
landfill, was to be taken to Ankleshwar in  Gujarat for incineration.  The Committee 
had recommended that after obtaining test result of samples from NEERI and 
IICT, the toxic wastes from Bhopal pl ant site should be removed without any 
further delay. 
 
10. In their reply the Department have in formed that for the removal of stored 
hazardous/toxic wastes, the Madhya Pr adesh Pollution Control Board has 
prepared a plan in two phases.  The first phase which inter-alia included collection 
of samples, analysis of samples thr ough in-house and outsi de laboratories has 
been completed.   Under the Phase-II, ac tivities comprising of selection of 
expert/consultant, construction of the Se cured Land Fill (SLF), Rapid Environment 
Impact Analysis (EIA) study and public  hearing have been completed.  The 
remaining work under Phase-II is to start shortly. 
 
11. Since the toxic waste is lying over two decades at the factory 
site, the Committee expect the Government to prepare a time 
schedule for the purpose and to implement it expeditiously. 
 

 -:10:-
D. IMPLEMENTATION OF ASSAM GAS CRACKER PROJECT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.8) 
 
12. Considering the fact that Assam Gas Cracker Project was part of Assam 
Accord signed as far back as 1985, the Committee had recommended that 
necessary steps should be taken by the De partment for early approval of Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) and  the Project should be commissioned 
as early as possible. 
 
13. In their reply, the Department have stated that the project has been 
approved by the CCEA on 18 April, 2006.  T he cost of the project is Rs. 5460.61 
crore.   GAIL (India) Ltd. will be the main promoter under an equity arrangement of 
GAIL:  70%, OIL: 10%, NRL: 10% and Assam Industrial Development Corporation 
(Govt. of Assam): 10%.  The project would also be given subsidy by the 
Government in terms of feed stock subsidy and capital subsidy. 
 
14. The Committee are happy to note that the Government have 
approved the Assam Gas Cracker Project which was under planning 
for the last about two decades.  They also note that GAIL will be the 
main promoter.  The Committee hope that the project should now 
become a reality and strive to meet the aspirations of the people.   
They desire that all out efforts should be made by the Government/ 
Promoter to complete the project within the stipulated cost and time 
schedule.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
completion schedule and status of the project. 
 

 -:11:-
E. R&D PROGRAMMES AT NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF  
    PHARMACEUTICAL EDUCATION & RESEARCH (NIPER) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
  
15. In the context of health care needs of the country, the Committee had 
asked the Government/NIPER to complete  the programmes/ projects in a time 
bound manner so that the desired objective s of the planned f unds which have 
been raised from Rs. 5 crore in 2005-06 to  Rs. 18 crore in 2006-07 are achieved 
fully. 
 
16. In their reply the Department hav e stated that NIPER  has plan budget for 
Rs. 18 crore for the year 2006-07.  Against this, a sum of Rs.4.93 crore has been 
released for which the activities have al ready been initiated by NIPER.  For the 
release of the balance amount, approval of Planning Commission is awaited. 
 
17. The Committee regret to note that even after half the financial 
year is over, approval of the Planning Commission for release of a 
major part of the approved budget of NIPER is still awaited.  The 
Committee, once again, reiterate that the Department should take 
effective steps and approach the Planning Commission to give its 
approval for the NIPER projects and release of the balance amount of 
the budget at the earliest. 
 
F. IMPLEMENTATION OF HEALTH INSURANCE SCHEME 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 
18. In the context of non-av ailability of essential drugs at reasonable prices, the 
Committee were informed that the Go vt. had mooted a polic y called ‘Health 
Insurance Scheme’ for providing medicines free of cost to the people living below 
the poverty line.  For lower middle cl ass families also, the Government was 
considering a scheme on the lines of Rajasthan model where hospitals have their 

 -:12:-
own societies which are buying medicines in  bulk and selling th em to the patients 
at 50% of the cost.  The Committee had recommended that these schemes should 
be considered for implementation expeditiousl y across the country for the benefit 
of the masses. 
 
19. In their reply, the Department have stated that ‘Health  Insurance Scheme’ 
has been transferred to the Ministry of H ealth & Family Welfare.  The issue of 
Rajasthan model on medical re lief societies has been considered and included in 
the draft Cabinet note on ‘National Pharma ceuticals Policy, 2006’, which has been 
circulated amongst various Departments concerned for their comments/ views. 
 
20. The Committee are happy to note that there has been some 
progress in regard to providing medicines to the people below the 
poverty line and lower middle class population and the matter is 
being pursued by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals in the form of ‘Health 
Insurance Scheme’ and ‘National Pharmaceutical Policy 2006’ 
respectively.  The Committee trust that these measures will be taken 
to their logical end. 
 
G. PROJECT PLANNING IN HINDUSTAN ORGANIC CHEMICALS LTD. (HOCL) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
 
21. The Committee’s examination had re vealed that faulty assessment and 
planning process in HOCL for setting up a tank farm at JNPT Terminal resulted in 
avoidable losses in the company.  In this context, the Committee had asked the 
Department to make proper analysis and evaluation before going for such projects 
to avoid recurrence of unnecessary losses to the exchequer. 

 -:13:-
 
22. In their reply, the Department have  stated that due to cheaper imports and 
adverse value addition in ex ports, the performance of  chemical industry as a 
whole suffered a set back particularly dur ing 1994-1998 period.   Due to slow 
development of infrastructure in the JNPT  area, the import/expor t activities from 
JNPT did not seem to be commercially attr active.  Therefore, the company took a 
decision to stop the construction of parti ally created tank farm facilities and 
disposing them of.  During 2005-06 the company got techno commercial 
assessment of JNPT proj ect prepared by the consultant.  Based on the 
recommendations of the consultant, the company is considering reviving the JNPT 
project again by handing over the facilitie s to a strategic partner on BOT basis.  
With this the company expect to unlock the partial value of the investment already 
made and retain ownership of facility and explore possibility of negotiating an 
upfront payment from the BOT contractor. 
 
23. While the Committee would like the Department/ HOCL to 
ensure that the losses made in the project are made up by reviving 
the project, they regret to note that the Department have not given 
any explanation about the steps taken to avoid recurrence of such 
losses in future.  The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised 
of the concrete action taken by the Government in this regard. 
 
H. REHABILITATION SCHEME OF HINDUSTAN ORGANIC CHEMICALS 
 LIMITED (HOCL)  AND HINDUSTAN ANTIBIOTICS LTD. (HAL) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
 
24. The Committee had noted that the rehabilitation schemes of HOCL and 
HAL had been approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs.  The 
Committee had asked the Govt. for taking nec essary steps for implementation of 
rehabilitation schemes for these PSUs within a time bound manner. 

 -:14:-
  
25. In their reply, the Department ha ve stated that the Government approved 
scheme for rehabilitation of HAL at an estimated cost of Rs.508.50 crore.  The 
Government has also released Rs. 57.90 crore for settlement of statutory dues, 
working capital and VRS schemes.  The ba lance amount of Rs. 79.69 crore would 
be released as soon as the rehabilitati on scheme is sanctioned by BIFR. In regard 
to revival package of HOCL the Department  have stated that proposal for release 
of funds to the tune of Rs. 250 crore from the first batch of supplementary 
Demands for Grants for 2006-07 is under process. 
 
26. The Committee desire that the Govt. should take up with BIFR 
in getting concurrence for rehabilitation scheme of HAL.  They would 
like to be apprised of the time schedule by which the company 
expects to reach at a break-even point.  The Committee are dismayed 
to learn that the Department had not planned funds for HOCL for 
which the revival package was approved by the Government in 
March, 2006.  At this stage, the Committee can only express the 
hope that this would be followed up now for early implementation of 
the revival package of HOCL. 
 
I. REVIVAL PACKAGE OF HINDUSTAN INSECTICIDES LTD. (HIL) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
 
27. The Committee had asked the Governm ent that the Reha bilitation Scheme 
of HIL should be got approved by the CCEA  and implemented in  stipulated time 
frame. 
 
28. In their reply, the Department have st ated that revival proposal in respect of 
HIL has been approved by t he CCEA in its meeting held  on 27 July, 2006.  The 
revival proposal is under implementation. 

 -:15:-
29. The Committee are not happy with the very brief reply of the 
Government.   No details have been given either about the quantum 
of funds and time span for implementation of the package or the 
extent to which it would enable the company’s revival, etc.  The 
Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised about such details 
and also the latest position about the implementation of the revival 
package. 
 
J. REVIVAL OF INDIAN DRUGS & PHARMACEUTICALS LTD. (IDPL) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
 
30. The Committee had taken note of t he fact that the IDPL was formally 
declared sick by BIFR in 1992 and since then there have been efforts to revive this 
PSU. By introducing VRS scheme in IDPL, the staff strength of 6592 as on 31 
December, 2002 has been r educed to 413 as on 1 st October, 2005.  The revival 
proposal was pending with the Department. 
 
31. In their reply, the Department hav e stated that IDPL submitted draft 
Rehabilitation Scheme in May, 2006.  ID PL has been asked to modify the scheme 
particularly with reference to not selling the land for financing its revival, scheme to 
be financed by sale of scraps, unservi ceable equipment, etc., banks/financial 
institutions should accord in-principle approval for one time settlement and amount 
of loan should be verified with the PAO of the Department and reflected in the 
Rehabilitation Scheme.  The modified rehabilitation scheme from IDPL is awaited. 
 
32. Considering the fact that the revival process of IDPL has been 
delayed inordinately, the Committee feel that the Department should 
assist the IDPL in finalising the revival package particularly when a 
sizeable portion of its manpower has taken VRS and there may not be 

 -:16:-
much qualified personnel left in the Technical/Financial Wings.  
Needless to emphasise, the Government should show urgency in 
processing and approval of the revival plan and its implementation.  
The Committee should be informed about the precise action taken in 
the matter. 
 
K. REVIVAL PLAN OF BENGAL CHEMICALS 
            AND PHARMACEUTICALS LIMITED (BCPL) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
 
33. The Committee had desired that De partment should vigorously pursue the 
matter for early approval of revival package  of BCPL at every stage so that the 
revival process of BCPL could be initiated without further loss of time. 
 
34. In their reply, the Department have stated that the modified Rehabilitation 
Scheme of the company duly vetted by CRI SIL was re-submitted to the Board for 
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprise (BRPSE) for its recommendations.  
BRPSE at its meeting held on 25 Au gust, 2006 approved the Rehabilitation 
scheme.  Draft note for Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs has since been 
sent to Ministries/ Departments for eliciting their comments/ views on the proposal.  
Excepting the Ministry of Finance,  comments of other  Departments have been 
received.  On receipt of comments of the Ministry of Finance, the revival scheme 
would be placed before the CCEA for final decision. 
 
35. The Committee once again emphasise that the Department 
should help BCPL to have the process of revival package expedited so 
that it is initiated at the earliest. 
 

 -:17:-
L. REVIVAL OF BENGAL IMMUNITY LIMITED  (BIL) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
  
36. The Committee had recommended that serious efforts should be made by 
the Government for revival of all PSUs  under the Department  of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals. 
 
37. In their reply, the Department have stated that the Government is making 
efforts to revive sick pharma PSUs.  In regard to BIL, it has been stated that an 
official Liquidator was appointed.  However, employees Union of the company filed 
an appeal in the Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction 
(AAIFR) against the winding up order of BI L.  AAIFR sought the comments/ views 
of the Department in the matter.  High Court of Calcutta has stayed the 
appointment of the Liquidator.  The D epartment has appointed a Committee to 
explore the possibility of revival of  the company.  The Committee had since 
submitted its report on 7.9.2006 to the Department.  T he Department is examining 
the report for taking a view in the matter. 
 
38. As detailed in preceding paragraphs, the Department is in the 
process of reviving PSUs under its administrative control including 
IDPL which had almost closed its operations.  Considering the 
interest of the employees, the Committee trust that a positive view 
would be taken by the Government at the earliest for revival of BIL 
also.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
thereon. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 -:18:-
CHAPTER- II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
 ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
 
The Committee note that under the Re venue Head during 2005-06, there 
was provision of Rs. 62.00 crore (Plan)  and Rs. 686.78 crore (Non-Plan), which 
was revised to a level of Rs. 23.88 crore (Plan) and Rs. 720.83 crore (Non-Plan) 
respectively. The Budget Estimates during 2006-07 for this head has been kept at 
Rs. 57.85 crore (Plan) and Rs. 35.35 cror e (Non-Plan). The main allocation during 
2005-06 was meant for settling claims of  Bhopal Gas Leak victims as per the 
directions of the Supreme Court. As per  information furnished by the Department 
of Chemicals & Petrochemicals(C&PC), mo st of the claims have been settled by 
now. Under the Capital Head, during 2005-06,  there was a provision of Rs. 21.00 
crore (Plan) and Rs. 143.47 crore(Non-Plan), which was revised to Rs. 31.12 crore 
(Plan) and Rs. 29.05 crore (Non-Plan). The Budget Estimate s for 2006-07 have 
been kept at Rs. 73.15 crore (Plan) and Rs. 3.05 crore (Non-Plan). Thus, the total 
Plan expenditure which was reduced from Rs. 83.00 crore to Rs. 55.00 crore in 
RE(2005-06) has been increased to Rs. 131. 00 crore in 2006-07. Since this year 
although the Demands for Grants (2006-07) have already been passed by 
Parliament, the Committee’s recommendat ions as detailed in the succeeding 
paragraphs relate to implementation of t he plans/projects of the Department and 
PSUs/organizations under t heir administrative control. The Department should 
examine the adequacy of the allotted funds and if necessary, more funds should 
be sought at the supplementary stage. 
 

 -:19:-
Reply of the Government 
 
 
A sum of Rs.655 crore was provided for meeting the requirement of 
difference in exchange rate variation in the budget for the year 2005-2006.  Since 
the amount available under this head got ex hausted in the m onth of February 
2006, the Office of the Welfare Commi ssioner, Bhopal Gas Victims, Bhopal 
requested for additional Rs.35 crore under this Head.  
 
  Rs.33.03 crore was provided by reappr opriation.  Finally Rs. 688.03 crore 
was available under this head.  During the year 2005- 2006, a sum of Rs.667.15 
crore was booked under this head by the Reserve Bank of India, surrendering a 
balance of Rs.20.87 crore at the end of the financial year 2005-2006. 
 
 The Department has requested the Mini stry of Finance, to provide Rs.50 
crore for meeting the shortfall in disbursal of pro-rata compensation to the Bhopal 
Gas Victims, during 2006-07. 
           
Department has initiated action for additional plan allocation for the 
upgradation /modernization/exp ansion of capacity of Karnataka Antibiotics & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited, a Joint Ventur e of Hindustan Antibiotics Limited and 
State Government of Kar nataka and Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited, 
another Joint Venture of Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited and State 
Government of` Rajasthan. Government has since released Rs. 57.90 crore to 
HAL for the  following  purposes: 
(i) Settlement of statutory  dues    Rs. 13.90 crore 
(ii) Working Capital & Schedule   Rs. 10.00 crore 
M requirements 
      (iii)     VRS     Rs. 34.00 crore 
 ____________ 
 Rs. 57.90 crore 
 

 -:20:-
 The balance amount of Rs .79.69 crore would be released  as soon as the 
Rehabilitation Scheme is sanctioned by BIFR.  The proposal  to write off/ waiver of 
Plan & Non-Plan loan with interest/ final  interest  of Rs. 259.43 crore would be 
placed before  the Parliament soon.  
 
 For implementation of the revival proposal in respect of HOCL an amount of 
Rs.250 crore, which has been approved by the CCEA, has been allocated by the 
Ministry of Finance in the First Supple mentary Demand for Grants for the year 
2006-07.  The fund is being released to the company. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
The Committee note that Plan outlay for the 10 th Five Year Plan (2002-
2007) was revised as Rs. 612.42 crore,  with Rs. 418.42 cror e as Budgetary 
support and Rs. 194.00 crore as IEBR from PSUs.  Out of this Rs. 418.42 crore, 
only Rs. 141.93 crore have been spent duri ng the first three years of the 10 th Plan 
which comes to about 33 per cent only.  Even  if RE of Rs. 55.00 crore for the year 
2005-06 and BE for the terminal year i.e.  2006-07 (terminal year of the 10 th Plan) 
is utilised fully, the total utilization would be around Rs. 327.93 crore only, which is 
much less than the approved plan of Rs. 418. 42 crore.  Thus, the targeted plan 
performance in this sector stand distor ted.  Explaining the reasons for this 
unsatisfactory plan performance, the Depar tment of Chemicals & Petrochemicals 
stated that, out of Rs. 194.00 crore of IEBR, the share of PSUs was Rs. 174.00 
crore in respect of Hindustan Insect icides Limited (HIL), Hindustan Organic 
Chemicals Limited (HOCL), Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) and Bengal 
Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) .  According to them, since all these 
PSUs are sick and referred to BIFR, they could not generate IEBR during the first 
three years of the Plan period.  The Committee are not satisfied with the argument 
of the Department as the financial posit ion of these PSUs was known to the 
Department.  They trust that the shortcomi ngs on this score would be taken note 
of by the Department for corrective measures in future. 

 -:21:-
Reply of the Government 
 
           The observation of t he Committee has been noted for compliance in 
respect of PSUs under the control of this Department. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
 
Recommendation  (Sl. No. 4) 
 
The Committee note that under the Se cretariat Economic Services, the 
Plan provision during 2006-07 has been increased to Rs. 1.50 crore from a level of 
Rs. 5.00 lakh during 2005-06.  The actual  expenditure for Plan during 2004-05 
was only about Rs. 83000. As per the information made available by the 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals,  a provision of Rs. 2.80 crore has 
been made for office expend iture during 2006-07.  Out of that, an amount of Rs. 
1.50 crore is for Plan and Rs. 1.30 crore is for Non-Plan budget.  Provision of 
Rs.1.00 crore has been made for new  schemes to be introduced by the 
Department and a sum of Rs. 0.50 crore has been provided for implementation of 
Information & Technology (IT) Plan of the Department.  Cons idering the higher 
level of allocation of f unds made under this head, the Committee desire that the 
proposed new schemes be finalized with a view  to implementing them in a time-
bound manner and achieving the underlying objectives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Department has procur ed 15 Nos. of Personal Computers, 5 lap tops 
(partly delivered), one projector and other accessories  like printers, UPS etc. 
 
 The expenditure of around Rs. 18 lakh  is expected to have been incurred 
on IT and the rest of the plan activi ties will be undertak en to procure other 
approved items in phased manner and it is expected that the budget allotted will 
be utilized by the end of the financial year. 
 
 

 -:22:-
A token provision of Rs. 1.00 cror e has been made for new schemes. The 
Department is considering the following proposals: 
(i) Karnataka Antibiotics & P harmaceuticals Limited (KAPL).  The proposal 
for providing additi onal equity support of Rs.7.10 crore to KAPL for technological 
upgradation/modernization of the manufacturing facilities was sent to the Planning 
Commission for its “in-principle” approval .  Planning Commissi on accorded  in –
principle  approval to the undertaking of the project by KAPL at an estimated cost 
of Rs 22.45 crore provided the expenditure is  met by the company out of  its 
Internal Extra Budgetary  Resources(I EBR) .  The Standing Finance Committee 
under the chairpersonship of  Secretary (C&PC) however felt that the equity 
support should be provided by promoters of the company  considering that the 
company has small equity base.  The Planning Commission has since sought 
further information in this regard.  The Department would furnish  information  to 
the Planning  Commission soon.  
 
(ii) Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL) . The proposal for 
additional equity of Rs. 2.00 crores for undertaking modernizat ion/expansion of 
capacity of the Plant and also to obt ain WHO-GMP certification is under 
examination in the Department . It is likely to be sent to the Planning Commission 
soon. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
The Committee note that the Plan budget of CI PET has been increased 
from Rs.23.00 crore in RE (2005-06) to Rs.50.00 crore in BE (2006-07). The 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemic als had informed that out of this, an 
amount of Rs.15.00 crore is for establishment of new centres at Panipat, Jaipur 
and Aurangabad, Rs.2.00 crore for CIPET  schemes; Rs.30.00 crore as OPEC 
loan and Rs.3.00 crore as government of India’s counterpart funding. The 
Committee’s examination revealed that th ere has already been much delay in 

 -:23:-
getting OPEC loan. The Committee, theref ore, recommend that establishment of 
new centres of CIPET at Panipat, Jaipur and Aurangabad should be expedited. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Based on past experience and the projec t report for the three new Centres, 
the project period is three years for establishment of a new CIPET Centre from the 
date of Government’s approval. The Govern ment’s approval in  the instant case 
was conveyed to CIPET on 31 st March, 2006. Government will make all efforts to 
ensure that these Centres are fully set up within the stipulated period of three 
years i.e. by March, 2009.  
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
 The Supreme Court in July,2004 di rected the Welfare Commissioner for 
Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster to disburse the remaining amount of Rs.1503 crore 
accrued as exchange rate variation to the di saster victims on pro-rata basis.  The 
disbursement of compensat ion started on 15.11. 2004.  About 5,72,378 claimants 
were given compensation as on 31.01.2006 .  The Department has informed that 
297 appeals and 32 Review Peti tions are lying with the Welfare Commissioner.  
Besides, 3275 applications are pending fo r scrutiny and motion hearing.  The 
Supreme Court had directed t hat disbursement of pro -rata compensation should 
be completed by 30.4.2005.  However Su preme Court has extended the date of 
disbursal of pro-rata compensation from  30.4.2005 to 30.4.200 6.  The Committee 
trust that all cases relating to the disbursement of pro-rata compensation would be 
disposed of by 30.4.2006. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The work for distribution of pro-rata  compensation to t he victims of the 
Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster which was to be completed by 30th April,2006 as per 
directions of the Supreme Court has almost been completed by that date by the 

 -:24:-
Office of the Welfare Commissioner, Bhopal Gas Victims.  However, an application 
in respect of the nearly 31,000 absentee claimants has been made by the Office of 
the Welfare Commissioner in the Honble  Supreme Court on 15th February, 2006 
for treating all such cases as closed.  Th e matter has not been heard by the Court 
yet.  The process of distribution of pro-rata  compensation is stil l going on.  As on 
16.6.2006, a sum of Rs.1485.48 crore has been distributed among 5,54,580 
claimants. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
 The Committee have been informed that on the directions of High Court of 
Madhya Pradesh, a Task Force under the C hairmanship of Secretary(C&PC) is 
monitoring the removal/disposal of about  47 MT of toxic wa stes from Union 
Carbide Plant site at Bhopal.  The Prin cipal Secretary, Bhopal Gas Tragedy, 
Department of Relief and Rehab ilitation, Government of Madhya Pradesh is the 
coordinator of the Task Force and Madhy a Pradesh Pollution Control Board is the 
executive agency.  The Committee have been informed that the State Government 
of Madhya Pradesh has not yet prepared the project proposal for removal of the 
toxic wastes.  The Secretary(C&PC) during oral evidence stated before the 
Committee that NEERI and IICT have taken samples to assess the level of toxicity 
in the toxic wastes. Further, about 20 MT of  toxic waste, which cannot be put in 
landfill, is to be taken to Ankleshwar in  Gujarat for incineration.  The Committee 
desire that after obtaining test result of samples from NEERI & IICT, the toxic 
wastes from Bhopal plant site be removed without any further delay. 
 
 

 -:25:-
Reply of the Government 
  
 For the removal of stored hazardous /toxic wastes, the Madhya Pradesh 
Pollution Control Board has  prepared a plan and has also started work  on a 
roadmap.  
 
  For Coordinating the overall envir onmental remediation a Task Force has 
been constituted under the Chairpersons hip of Secretary (C&PC), on the 
directions of the High C ourt of Madhya Pradesh, which is monitoring the 
removal/disposal of the toxic wastes in the Writ Pe tition No. 2802 of 2004(Alok 
Pratap Singh Vs. Union of I ndia and others).  The first m eeting of the Task Force 
was held on 31 st May,2005, at New Delhi followed by  review meetings on 4 th 
July,2005, 3 rd August,.2005, 9 th September,2005(at Bhopal), 18 th October,2005, 
17th November,2005 and 9 th January,2006 and 18t h April,2006 (at Bhopal).  The 
Government of M.P. and M. P. Pollution Control Board have informed that Phase I 
of the roadmap has been completed and the wo rk on Phase II would start shortly.  
The activities covered under the Phase I included:- 
 
(i) collection of soil, water and residue samples placed in bags; 
(ii) placing of all the material lying in bags in sheds in new bags, containers 
etc.; 
(iii) keeping the repacked material and covering with tarpaulin and placing it 
in a shed under security; 
(iv) preliminary analysis of these samp les with available facilities and also 
through other labs. 
 
Under the phase II  the following activities will be covered: 
1.(a) Identification of SLF site in the premises to be based on 
Geomorphological, Geohydr ological, Edaphic a nd other Ecological 
evaluations to be done by an expert agency. 
   (b)   Selection of the expert consultant/agency, which can undertake 
stabilization, encapsulation, etc. studies along with construction of the SLF 
based on CPCB/EP guidelines. 
   (c)  Rapid EIA study and a public  hearing to be conducted by the same 
agency identified in (b) or other agency. 

 -:26:-
 
2.(a) Construction of the  SLF. 
   (b)     Initiation of Monitoring in peizometric holes. 
   (c)     Capping of the SLF. 
 
The reports of the NEERI and IICT on the samples taken to assess the 
level of toxicity in the toxic wastes have been received in this Department and 
have been forwarded to t he Chairman of the M.P. Po llution Control Board as 
directed by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh vide their Orders dated 22nd 
February,2006.  The Technical Sub Committee of the Task Force would meet 
shortly to discuss these reports and gi ve a clear recommendation on the method 
and protocol to be adopted for   the remova l of toxic wastes ly ing in and around 
the UCIL plant at Bhopal. * 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that the Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology 
(IPFT) is getting Departmental grant for meeting day-to-day expenditure as well as 
capital support.  The Committee find that a sum of Rs.3.33 crores could not be 
released in the first half of 2005-06 for w ant of utilization certificates for earlier 
releases.  The Committee have also been informed that the reason for delay in 
utilization of grant is lack of scientific staff in IPFT.   The Committee have further 
learnt that the cadre restructuring ex ercise has been comp leted and amendments 
to the Recruitment Rules for appointment  on contract basis has been approved by 
the Department.  The recruitment process has already being started and is likely to 
be completed by 30.06.2006.  The Committ ee earnestly hope that the recruitment 
process would be completed in time, so that  the funds earmarked for IPFT are 
utilized fully with a view to achieving the objective of the Institute. 
 
 
* At the time of factual verification, the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals 
informed (November, 2006) that under the Phase-II, activities comprising of 
selection of expert/consultant, constructi on of the Secured Land  Fill (SLF), Rapid 
Environment Impact Anal ysis (EIA) study and public hearing have been 
completed.  The remaining work under Phase-II is to start shortly. 

 -:27:-
Reply of the Government 
 
 IPFT has already initiated necessary acti on for filling up of various posts in 
terms of the cadre restructuring exercise and the amended recruitment rules.  The 
Institute has filled up four posts throug h internal promoti ons where internal 
candidates were available.  For other posts, the process of recruitment has begun.  
Advertisements through DAVP for filling up various vacant posts have been 
released in May 2006.  
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 
The Committee note that the Government  is providing grants for promotion 
of export of pharmaceuticals. However, only a meager amount of Rs. 5.00 lakh 
has been provided during 2005-06 and 2006-07.  The Committee find that as per 
their earlier recommendations, the Non- Plan Budget for the year 2006-07 for 
Pharmaceutical Export Promotion Scheme (PEPS) was proposed to be raised 
from Rs. 5.00 lakh to Rs. 40.00 lakh, which has not been sanctioned in the 
Demands. The Committee feel that an amount of Rs. 5 lakh is too meager for a 
project like promotion of export of pha rmaceuticals and accordingly recommend 
that allocation should be raised substantially for the purpose. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Department has noted the desir e of the Committee and the matter will 
again be taken up for increase in Revised Estimates. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
 
  

 -:28:-
Recommendation (Sl. No.12) 
 
 The Committee expresses their concer n about non-availability of essential 
drugs at reasonable prices.  The Secret ary (C&PC), sharing the concern of the 
Committee, submitted during ev idence that a very large section of our population, 
about 26 percent, live below the poverty line and they cannot afford to buy even 
low priced medicines.  The De partment has, therefore, mooted a policy called the 
‘Health Insurance Scheme’ for providing medicines free of cost to the people living 
below the poverty line.  For lower middle class families too, the Government is 
considering a scheme on the lines of t he Rajasthan model where hospitals, etc. 
have their own societies and are buying medicines in bulk from the manufacturers 
and selling them to the pati ents at 50 percent of the cost.  The Committee desires 
that these schemes be considered for implementation expeditiously across the 
country for the benefit of the masses. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The issue of ‘Health Insurance Schem e’ was discussed in the meeting of 
Committee of Secretaries (COS) wherein it  was decided that this matter may be 
transferred to the Ministry of Heath and Fam ily Welfare.  The Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare has been informed acco rdingly.  The issue of ‘Rajasthan 
Model of Medicare Relief Societies’ has been considered and included in the Draft 
Cabinet Note on National Pharmaceutic al Policy-2006, which has since been 
circulated amongst various Departments concerned for their comments/views. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 

 -:29:-
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
 
The Committee find that an amount of  Rs. 1.00 crore has been made for 
new schemes like assistance to small and medium sector units of pharmaceuticals 
for Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) compliance, public awareness on drugs 
and strengthening of Research and Deve lopment in pharmaceuticals. These 
schemes are yet to be approved. The Comm ittee recommend that the Department 
of Chemicals & Petrochemicals should expedite the process of approval and 
implementation of these schemes to achieve the desired objectives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The reply to this para has been given at Recommendation No.4. The same 
is being reproduced here under.    
    
  A token provision of Rs. 1.00 cr ore has been made for new schemes. The 
Department is considering the following proposals: 
 
(i) Karnataka Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL).  The proposal for 
providing additional equity support of Rs. 7.10 cror es to KAPL for technological 
upgradation/modernization of the manufacturing facilities was sent to the Planning 
Commission for its “in-principle” approv al.  Planning Commission accorded in –
principle  approval to the undertaking of the project by KAPL at an estimated cost 
of Rs 22.45 crores provided the expenditure is  met by the company out of  its 
Internal Extra Budgetary  Resources(I EBR) .  The Standing Finance Committee 
under the chairpersonship of  Secretary (C&PC) however felt that the equity 
support should be provided by promoters of the company  considering that the 
company has small equity base.  The Planning Commission has since sought 
further information in this regard.  The Department would furnish information to the 
Planning Commission soon.  
 

 -:30:-
(ii) Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceutical s Limited (RDPL). The proposal for 
additional equity of Rs. 2.00 crores fo r undertaking moderniza tion/expansion of 
capacity of the Plant and also to obt ain WHO-GMP certification is under 
examination in the Department . It is likely to be sent to the Planning Commission 
soon. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 
The Committee note that as per mandat ory allocation and utilization of 10 
per cent of plan outlays for North Eastern Region on Annual Plan basis, an 
amount of Rs. 15.71 crore out of total Plan expenditure of Rs. 141.93 crore during 
2002-2005, has been released for non-lapsable pool for North-Eastern Region. 
The Committee have been informed that an am ount of Rs. 5.50 crore i.e., 10 per 
cent of RE of 2005-06 is also to be released to North-Eastern Region during 2005-
06. The Department has furt her informed that an amount of Rs. 56.37 crore was 
made for setting up of Assam Gas Cracker Project, which could not be 
implemented till now. In add ition, an amount of Rs. 30  crore was also earmarked 
for development of North-Eastern Regi on. Moreover, the funds earmarked for 
special projects of CIPET-Guwahati too could only be utilized partially. Besides 
this, a special project for training, education, skill development and refresher 
courses for pharmaceutical personnel in public and private sector by NIPER, out of 
10 percent allocation, was not approved by the Planning Commission as the 
assistance for such activities is availa ble from non-lapsable poo l of North-Eastern 
Region. The Committee find t hat neither the fund out of 10 per cent allocation nor 
out of non-lapsable pool for North-Easter n Region is being fully utilized. The 
Committee, are dismayed over the under  –utilization trend of expenditure 
regarding the allocation made for North- Eastern Region and strongly recommend 
that the allotted funds for the purpose be utilized within the financial year and in 
rare cases funds should be allowed to go to the non-lapsable pool.   
 
 

 -:31:-
Reply of the Government 
 
The department has sent a proposal for setting up of a Plastic waste 
management Centre in North- Eastern Region by CIPET at  a cost of Rs.12 crore 
for approval of the Government of Assa m and Ministry for Development of North 
Eastern Region (DONER) for recommendi ng to the Planning Commission. Once 
the Planning commission conveys its appr oval, the funds can be earmarked for 
this project out of 10% budget allocation of the department. State Govt. of Assam 
has since recommended the proposal to Planning Commission. 
 As the Assam Gas Cracker project has  since been approved and during its 
first year of construction, a requirement of Rs. 84.52 crore has been projected as 
plan budget support.  Even if only the Rs. 56.37 crore allocated for 10 th plan are 
spent in 2006-07, it sh all be more than the 10% stipulated.  It is, therefore, felt that 
in future the 10% funds earmarked for NE region shall not be required to be 
surrendered to non-lapsable pool. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
 
The Committee note that the rehabi litation schemes of HOCL and HAL 
have been approved by the Cabinet Co mmittee on Economic Affairs.  The 
Committee desire that all necessary steps should be taken for implementation of 
the scheme for these PSUs within a time-bound manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) HAL- On 9.3.2006, Government approved scheme for rehabilitation of HAL. The 
rehabilitation package is estimated to co st Rs.508.50 crores.  Of this, there would 
be cash infusion to the extent of Rs .137.59 crores. Government has since 
released Rs.57.90 crores to HAL for the following purposes:- 
(i)   Settlement of Statutory dues       -    Rs.13.90 crore 
(ii)  Working Capital & Schedule M requirements -    Rs.10.00 crore  
(iii)  VRS     -  -  -    Rs.34.00 crore  
    Total          - Rs.57.90 crore  
 

 -:32:-
 The balance amount of Rs .79.69 crore would be released as soon as the 
Rehabilitation Scheme is sanc tioned by BIFR.  The proposal to write off/waiver of 
Plan & Non-Plan loan with interest/penal interest of  Rs.259.43 crores would be 
placed before the Parliament soon. 
 
(ii) HOCL- Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs approved the revival package 
of HOCL on 9.3.2006. A proposal for release of funds to the tune of Rs.250.00 
crores from the first batch  of Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2006-07 is 
under process.  
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.18) 
 
 The Committee have also been informed that the revival proposal in respect 
of Hindustan Insecticides Ltd. (HIL) has  been approved by BRPSE.  A draft Note 
for CCEA has been circulated to the conc erned Ministries/Departments for their 
comments.  Thereafter, the rehabilitati on scheme will be placed before CCEA.  
The Committee desire that the rehabilitat ion scheme of HIL be got approved by 
CCEA and implemented in a stipulated time span. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The revival proposal in respect of HIL has been approv ed by the CCEA in 
its meeting held on 27.7.2006.  The revival proposal is under implementation. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 -:33:-
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
 
The Committee have also learnt that the Board of Directors of Indian Drugs 
& Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL) has approved the rehabilitat ion scheme of the 
company on 22.03.2006.  The proposal is now lying with the Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals.  Similarly, re vival proposal of Hindustan Insecticides 
Limited (HIL) is to be placed before CCEA for approval.  The Committee desire 
that all necessary efforts should be made fo r revival of IDPL and HIL in a time-
bound manner. 
 Reply of the Government 
 
(i) Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited- IDPL submitted Draft 
Rehabilitation Scheme in May, 2006. ID PL has been asked to modify the scheme 
in respect of the following matters:- 
(a) The land of the company should not be sold for financing its revival; 
(b) The scheme should be financed by  sale of scraps, unserviceable 
equipments etc. 
(c) Banks, Financial Inst itutions, PSUs etc should  agree in-principle for 
one time settlement. 
(d) The amount of loan – plan and n on-plan including interest and penal 
interest thereon should be duly verified with the PAO of the 
Department and reflected in the Rehabilitation Scheme. * 
 
 Department has released Rs. 6 crores as non-plan loan for commencing 
the work of making the units of IDPL Schedule ‘M’ compliant and upgrading the 
facilities at Muzaffarpur & Hyderabad. 
 
(ii) Hindustan Insecticides Limited – The revival propos al in respect of HIL has 
been approved by the Cabinet Committ ee on Economic Affairs(CCEA) on 27 th 
July, 2006. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 32 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
* At the time of factual verification, the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals 
informed (November, 2006) that the modifi ed rehabilitation scheme from IDPL is 
awaited. 

 -:34:-
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
 
The Committee note that BIFR sanctioned a Modified Revised 
Rehabilitation Scheme on 14 January, 2004 for the reviva l of Bengal Chemicals & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited(BCPL). This envisages a number of relieves and 
concessions from the Government and othe r agencies. The Committee learnt that 
the matter of relief and concessions for BC PL; have already been placed before 
the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE). The matter 
will, then, be placed before the Committee of Secret aries and thereafter for final 
approval of CCEA. The Committee recomm end that the Department of Chemicals 
and Petro-Chemicals should vigorously pursue the matter for its early approval at 
every stage so that the reviva l process of BCPL could be  initiated without further 
loss of time. 
Reply of the Government 
 
                The Modified Rehabilitation Scheme of the company duly vetted by 
CRISIL was resubmitted to Board for Recons truction of Public Sector Enterprises 
(BRPSE) for its recommendations. BRPSE at its meeting held on 25.8.2006  
approved the rehabilitation scheme.  Draft note for the Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs has since been sent to Ministries/Departments for eliciting their 
comments/ views on the proposal. * 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 35 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
* At the time of factual verification, the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals 
informed (November, 2006) that excepting the Ministry of finance, comments of 
other Departments have been received.  On receipt of comments of Ministry of 
Finance, the revival scheme would be placed before the CCEA for final decision. 

 -:35:-
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
----------------------------               NIL            ---------------------------------------- 

 -:36:-
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY  
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.16) 
 
 The Committee note that the Hindust an Organic Chemicals Ltd. (HOCL) 
failed to assess the market potential before taking up the construction of a storage 
tank terminal facility at JN Port ar ea and subsequently abandoned the project 
midway resulting in blockage of Rs. 23.49  crore.  A loss of Rs. 13.38 crore too 
occurred towards annual lease rent and wharfage charges.  The Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals has cited the reason that while the project was partly 
completed, the economic scenario changed with cheaper imports which restricted 
production at Rasayani unit of HOCL.  Subsequently, also due to changed 
circumstances, the rent of the storage te rminal came down dramatically and the 
project became unattractive.  The Commi ttee are dismayed that the faulty 
assessment and planning process of HOCL as well Department led to the 
avoidable loss.  They feel  that the company as well  as the Department should 
make proper analysis and evaluation before going for such projects to avoid 
recurrence of unnecessary loss to the exchequer. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The company had decided to set up a tank farm at JNPT Terminal as a part 
of diversification strategy following Gov t. initiatives towards liberalization of the 
economy.  It was expected t hat liberalization would op en up vast potential for the 
import/export activities.  Accordingly t he company acquired the two hectares of 
land from JNPT on lease.  The pl anned facility was for 43,000 KL to be 
implemented in two phases vi z. 15,000 KL initia lly and balance to be installed as 
Phase II.  By the time the project was under implementation and while around 
15,000 KL storage tanks were in place, the economic scenario with respect to 
import/export became unstable.  This was mainly because of the cheaper imports 

 -:37:-
and adverse value addition in exports.  It is a well known fact that during the period 
1994 till 1998 the performance of chemical industry as a whole suffered a set 
back.  This was true for HOCL also. 
 
    Due to slow development of in frastructure in the JNPT area the 
import/export activities from JNPT did no t seem to be commercially attractive.  
Therefore, the company took a decision to stop the construction of partially 
created tank farm facilities and dispos e them of. The company attempted to 
dispose the facilities twice by fixing re serve price of Rs 24 crores. At both the 
instances the successful bidders backed out by forfeiting the respective EMDs.  
 
  During 2005-06 the company got techno commercial assessment of JNPT 
project made by M/s Dalal Mott MacDonal ds.  Based on their recommendations 
the company is considering to revive the JNPT project again by handing over the 
facilities to a strategic par tner on BOT basis.  The Boar d of Directors in the 302 nd 
meeting dated 26/5/2006 approv ed the appointment of M/ s SBI Capital Markets 
Ltd. for the bid process management for trans ferring the HOCL’s JNPT facilities to 
a strategic partner on BOT basis.  With this the company expects (1) to unlock the 
partial value of the investment already made without diverting its own scarce funds 
(2) retain ownership of the facility that c an yield rich benefits on expiry of the BOT 
contract, having gained sufficient insight into the tank terminal business which 
HOCL does not have at the moment (3)explore possibility of negotiating an up-
front payment from the BOT contractor whic h can be used to either retire some of 
the high interest debts or fund more remunerative projects. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 -:38:-
CHAPTER - V  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
The Committee have analyzed the im plementation of recommendations/ 
observations contained in their fifth R eport on Demands for Grants (2005-06), as 
detailed in the Annexure. The analyses shows that out  of 22 recommendations 
contained in the Report, Government have implemented only 5 recommendations 
viz. at Sl. Nos. 2, 6, 8, 17 and 19 so far. The recommendations regarding revival of 
sick/closed PSUs (Rec. No. 20) and increas ing export of drugs & pharmaceuticals 
(Rec. No. 14) have been partially implem ented. The recommendations regarding 
utilization of funds earmarked for Nort h-eastern region (Rec. No. 18) and 
establishment of centre for design and development, Hazipur (Rec. No. 4) have 
not been implemented. The other recommendat ions, as per latest information 
submitted to the Committee, are at the various stages of implementation. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should implement the remaining 
recommendations expeditiously. They woul d also like to be apprised of the 
conclusive action in regard to such recommendations 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The updated status on the rehabilitation of sick PSUs are: 
 
(I) Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL )- On 9.3.2006, Government approved 
scheme for rehabilitation of HA L. The rehabilitation pack age is estimated to cost 
Rs. 508.50 crore.  Of this, there would be cash infusion to the extent of Rs. 137.59 
crores .Government has since released Rs . 13.90 crore to HAL  for the following 
purposes: 
(i) Settlement of statutory dues       Rs. 13.90 crore 
(ii) working capital & Schedule M requirements Rs. 10.00 crore. 
(iii)  VRS           Rs. 34.00 crore 
 ----------- ----------- 
 Rs. 57.90 crores 

 -:39:-
 
  The balance amount of Rs. 79.69 crore  would be released as soon as the 
Rehabilitation Scheme is sanctioned by BIFR. The write off/waiver of Plan & Non-
Plan loan with interest/penal interest of  Rs.259.43 crores w ould be placed before 
the Parliament soon. 
 
(II) Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Li mited (IDPL)- IDPL submitted Draft 
Rehabilitation Scheme in May 2006. The company has been asked to modify the 
scheme in respect of the following matters: - 
(a) The land of the company should not be sold for financing its revival. 
(b) The scheme should be financed by sale of scraps, unserviceable 
equipments etc. 
(c) Banks, financial institutions, PSU s etc should agree in principle for one 
time settlement, 
(d) The amount of loan-plan & non-plan, including interest & penal interest 
thereon should be duly verified wit h the PAO of the Department and 
reflected in the rehabilitation scheme. 
 
The Department, however released Rs .6 crores as non-plan loan for 
commencing the work of making the unit s of IDPL Schedule ‘ M ‘ compliant and 
upgrading the facilities at Muzaffarpur & Hyderabad. 
 
(III) Bengal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL). The Modified 
Rehabilitation Scheme of t he company duly vetted by CRI SIL was resubmitted to 
Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) for its 
recommendations. BRPSE at its meet ing held on 25.8. 2006, approved the 
rehabilitation scheme. Draft note for t he Cabinet Committee on  Economic Affairs 
has since been sent to Ministries/Departments for eliciting their comments/views 
on the proposal. 
 
(IV) Bengal Immunity Limited (BIL) - An o fficial Liquidator was appointed in case 
of BIL. However, employees Union of  the company filed an appeal in AAIFR 
against the winding up order of BIFR. AAI FR sought the comm ents/views of the 
Department in the matter. High Court of Calcutta has stayed the appointment of 
the Liquidator. Department has appointed a Committee to explore the possibility of 

 -:40:-
revival of the company. The Committee has since submitted the report on 
7.9.2006 to the Department. The Department is examining the report for taking a 
view in the matter. 
 
(V) Hindustan Organics Chemicals Limite d (HOCL)– The revival proposal in 
respect of HOCL has been approved by the CCEA in its meeting held on 9th March 
2006. The revival proposal is under implementation 
 
(VI) Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL)- Th e revival proposal of Hindustan      
Insecticides Limited has been approval by CCEA in its meeting held on 27.7.2006. 
The revival proposal is under implementation. 
 
(VII) CIPET Centre- Setting up a Design a nd Tool Room Cent er of CIPET at 
Hajipur was not an approved scheme in the Tenth Five year Plan and the Planning 
commission did not approve this scheme for inclusion in the Tenth Plan at the time 
of mid-term appraisal. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 5 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 
 The Committee have been informed that the Gas Authority of India Ltd; 
(GAIL) has been identified as lead promoter with 70 percent equity participation to 
implement the Assam Gas Cracker Projec t with Oil India Limited, Numaligarh 
Refinery Limited and Assam Industrial De velopment Corporation each having 10 
percent equity participation in the project.   The Committee find that the Public 
Investment Board (PIB) has approved the project and the comments of various 
Ministries/Departments have also been received in this regard.  After incorporating 
these views/comments, the final Draft Cabinet Note would be sent to the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). The Committee desire that necessary 

 -:41:-
steps should be taken for obtaining early  approval of CCEA and the Assam Gas 
Cracker Project be commissioned as early as possible, particularly when the 
project is a part of Assam Accord signed as far back as 1985.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
 The Assam Gas Cracker Project has been approved by the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on the 18 th April, 2006.  The cost of the 
project is Rs.5460.61 Crores (fixed cost).  GAIL (Ind ia) Ltd. will be the main 
promoter, under an equity arrangement of GAIL: 70%, OIL: 10%, NRL: 10% and 
Assam Industrial Development  Corporation (Government  of Assam): 10%.  A 
Capital Subsidy for Rs.2138 Crores for the project on fixed cost basis (phased 
during construction period of 5 years at constant prices) and a Feedstock subsidy 
for Rs.908.91 Crores for the project spread over 15 years operation period 
(beginning from 6th year and continuing up to 20 th year) at constant prices shall be 
provided by Government of India.  
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.10) 
 
The Committee note that the Nation al Institute of Pharmaceuticals 
Education & Research(NIPER) is engaged in providing research and development 
in pharmaceutical area and setting higher  standards in pharmace utical education.  
To achieve its objective, NIPER organi zes post graduate/Ph.D. programme and 
also carries out research in selected areas .  Keeping in view the importance of its 
objective, the plan budget of the Institut e has been raised from Rs.5.00 crore in 
the 2005-06 to Rs.18.00 crore in the year 2006-07, particularly to meet the specific 
health care needs of the country as in some of prevalent diseases in the country, 
multinational pharmaceutical companies ha ve limited interest.  The Committee 

 -:42:-
would like the Government /NIPER to comp lete the programmes/projects in a time 
bound manner so that desired objectives of the plan funds are achieved fully. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
National Institute of Pharmaceuticals Education & Research (NIPER) has a 
plan budget of Rs.18.00 crores for the year 2006-07.Against this a sum of Rs.4.93 
crores has been released for which the activities have already been initiated by the 
NIPER. For the release of balance amoun t, the approval of Planning Commission 
is awaited. On release of the funds, the target  of the NIPE R will be achieved 
accordingly. 
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.14) 
 
 The Committee note that at times t he drug companies overcharge the price 
of their drugs and till the matter come to t he notice of NPPA, substantial amount is 
already overcharged from t he consumers/patients.  W hen the demand notice for 
the recovery of overcharged amount is se nt, the companies prefer to go to the 
court and obtain the stay order s thereon.  In this way, a large amount of money 
overcharged from the consumers remain with the drug manufacturers for years.  
The Committee find that under the Drugs (Pri ces Control) Order 1979, out of 345 
bulk drugs, the Department have computed tentative liabilities in respect of 47 bulk 
drugs only, which amounts to Rs.326.00 crore.  The Committee feel that there may 
be a large number of liability cases in re spect of the remaining 298 bulk drugs 
where the liability could not be quantified due to court stay orders.  The Committee 
are seriously concerned about th is unsatisfactory state of a ffairs.  They, therefore, 
recommend that vigorous efforts should be made to get su ch stay orders vacated 

 -:43:-
and recover the over-charged amounts.  The Committee also desire that liabilities 
be fixed in respect of the remaining 298 bulk drugs expeditiously.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Vigorous efforts are being made by the Department for the vacation of the 
Interim Stay Order granted by  Hon’ble Bombay High Cour t in the Writ Petition 
No.2368/1996 filed by Indi an Drug Manufacturers Association (IDMA) and 
Organisation of Pharmaceutical Producer s of India (OPPI), restraining the 
Department and its committees etc., from issuing fresh notices to the drug 
companies calling for information required for determining liabilities.  A Transfer 
Petition has also bee n filed in the Hon’ble Suprem e Court of India under Article 
139 (A) of the Constitution of India for tr ansferring all the cases pending in the 
various High Courts to the Supreme Court of India.  Out of the 345 bulk drugs 
under price control in DPCO, 1979, the Department has co mputed the liabilities on 
tentative / suo-moto basis in respect of 47 bulk drugs.  In respect of remaining 298 
bulk drugs, the Department is not in a positi on to quantity the liabilities as no fresh 
notices to the drug companies  can be issued for calling information, required for 
determining the liabilities in view of Interim Stay Order dated 30.6.97 granted by 
Hon’ble Bombay High Court.  
In connection with overcharging cases pertaining to DPCO,87 and 
DPCO,95, the court cases are regularly  monitored and vigorously pursued by 
NPPA with the SGI, ASG and concerned Couns els and Branch Secretariat of the 
Department of Legal Affairs for early dispos al of the cases.  As and when it is 
observed that hearing in any court case is delayed, NPPA takes steps to file 
urgent applications for early hearing the matter by the concerned courts.   
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 

 -:44:-
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
 
Having gone through the facts in r egard to working of PSUs under the 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemic als, the Committee find that their 
performance has not at all been satisfacto ry.  Petrofils Cooper ative Limited (PCL) 
and SSPL have been wound up and are under liq uidation.  All the employees of 
BIL too, have been relieved under VSS and the company has been wound up as 
per decision of BIFR.  The ex-employees of the company have approached AAIFR 
against the recommendation of BIFR for winding up of the company.  The hearings 
are in process.  The other PSUs i.e. HOCL, HAL, BCPL, HIL, IDPL except in a few 
cases, have been continuously making losses.   The revival schemes for HAL and 
HOCL have been approved by the Governm ent.  However, the revival schemes in 
the cases of IDPL, BCPL and HIL are under process.  Revival scheme of IDPL has 
not yet been received by the Government.  The Committee feel that in the 
prevailing scenario of PSUs in the country, there is need for their revival in public 
interest and to meet contingencies like outbr eak of diseases like cholera, plague, 
etc.  The Committee, theref ore, recommend that serious  efforts should be made 
for revival of all PSUs under the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
             The Gove rnment is making efforts to re vive sick Pharma PSUs. In the 
case of BIL, an official Liquidator was appointed. However, Employees Union of 
the company filed an appeal in  AAIFR against the winding up order of BIL. AAIFR 
sought the comments/views of the Depart ment in the matte r. High Court of 
Calcutta has stayed the appointment of the Liquidator. Department has appointed 

 -:45:-
a Committee to explore the possibility of  revival of the company. The Committee 
has since submitted its report on 7.9.2006 to the Department.  The Department is 
examining the report for taking a view in the matter. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (4)/2006-Fin dated 29.09.2006] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 38 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
December 05, 2006                                        ANANT  GANGARAM GEETE 
Agarhayana 14, 1928 (Saka)                                       Chairman, 
         Standing Committee on 
           Chemicals & Fertilizers. 

 -:46:-
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2006-07) 
 
FOURTH SITTING 
(29.11.2006) 
 
 
  The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi -  In the Chair  
 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Sunil Khan 
3. Shri Prasanta Pradhan 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
5. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
6. Shri Devdas Apte 
7. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
8. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
9. Shri Mahendra Sahni 
10. Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
 
Secretariat   
 1. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Director 
 2. Shri S.C. Kaliraman  - Under Secretary  

 -:47:-
  
2. At the outset, in the absence of Chairman of the Committee, the Committee 
chose Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi, MP (LS) and a Member of the Committee 
to act as Chairman under rule 258 (3) of  the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha.  The Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting.  
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered t he Draft Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the recommendations cont ained in the Eleventh Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petr ochemicals).  After a brief discussion, 
the draft Report was adopted by the Committee. 
 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes, if 
any, arising out of the factual verificati on of the Report by the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Pe trochemicals) and present 
the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
    
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
  

 -:48:-
Appendix – II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
contained in the Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2005-06) on Demands for Grants 
(2006-07) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals).  
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 21 
 
II Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 
12, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19 and 20) 
 
15 
 Percentage to Total 71.43% 
 
III Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s Reply  
 
Nil 
 Percentage of Total Nil 
 
IV Recommendation in respec t of which reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No. 16)  
 
1 
 Percentage of Total 4.76%  
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos.1, 8, 10, 14 and 21) 
5 
  
Percentage of Total 
 
23.81% 
 