NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2005-06) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2005-2006) 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on th e recommendations contained in the 
Sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabh a) of the  Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertiliz ers (2004-05) on De mands for Grants (2 005-2006) of the 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.12.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.12.2005. 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

CONTENTS 
 
              
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2005-06)  
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 
CHAPTER I Report  
 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendation in respect of which reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of  which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2005-06) held on 30th November, 2005…. 
 
 
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (14
th Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Chemical s & Fertilizers (2004-05) on 
Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)…………… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2005-06) 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete -  Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2 Shri Afzal Ansari     
3 Shri Prahlad Joshi   
4 Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
5 Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
6 Shri Punnu Lal Mohale   
7 Shri A.K. Moorthy 
8 Shri P. Rajendran   
9 Shri Anantha Venkata Rami Reddy 
10 Shri T. Madhusudhan Reddy 
11 Shri Akshyay Pratap Singh  
12 Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
13 Shri V.K. Thummar 
14 Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma   
15 Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava  
16 Shri A.K.S.Vijayan  
17 Shri Bhal Chandra Yadav 
18 Vacant 
19 Vacant 
20 Vacant 
21      Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 22. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
23 Shri Raju Parmar 
24. Shri B.S.Gnanadesikan 
25. Shri Ajay Maroo 
26. Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha 
27. Shri Vasant Chavan 
28. Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
29. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
30. Shri T.R. Zeliang 
31. Vacant 
Secretariat 
1. Shri John Joseph  - Secretary 
2. Shri P. Sreedharan  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Director 
4. Shri S.C. Kaliraman  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Senior Executive Assistant 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2005-06) 
having been authorised by the Committee to  submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Ninth Report on Acti on Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fert ilizers (2004-05) on Demands for Grants 
(2005-2006) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
 
2. The Sixth Report of the Committ ee was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 st 
April, 2005.  The replies of Government to all the recommendations contained in 
the Sixth Report were received on 1 st August, 2005.  The Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2005-06) consider ed the Action Taken Replies received 
from the Government and adopt ed the Draft Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 30th November, 2005. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI          ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,    
December 6,  2005           Chairman, 
Agrahayana 15,  1927 (Saka)        Standing Committee on  
Chemicals & Fertilizers. 
 

CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contai ned in the Sixth Report (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2004-05) on 
Demands for Grants (2005-06) relating to the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers), which was presented to Lok Sabha on 21
st April, 2005.  
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertiliz ers (Department of Fertilizers) were 
requested to furnish replies to the reco mmendations contained in the Sixth Report 
within three months from the presentation of the Report i.e. by 21 st July, 2005.  
The action taken replies of the Government in respect of all the 16 
recommendations contained in t he Report were received on 1 st August, 2005.  
These have been categorised as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 14 and 15.  
 
(ii) Recommendation/observation whic h the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
Sl. No. 9 
 
(iii) Recommendation/observation in respect of which reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. No. 13  
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
Sl. No. 12 and 16. 
 
3. The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
recommendations for which only interim replies have been furnished by the 
Government should be furnished expeditiously.  

 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations in the ensuing paragraphs: 
 
A. Production performance of Nitrogenous and Phosphatic fertilizers 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
5. While examining the Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of 
Fertilizers, the Committee had noted that  the indigenous annual capacity of 
nitrogenous fertilizer units had marginally  declined to 119.98 lakh metric tonnes 
(LMT) at the end of 3 rd year of 10 th Five Year Plan (20 04-2005) from 120.58 LMT 
at the end of 9 th Five Year Plan (2001-02).  The Committee also noted that there 
had been slippages in the producti on targets continuously for the last five years in 
respect of Nitrogenous fertilizers and four years in respect of Phosphatic fertilizers. 
As against the targets set, the percentage of actual production of Nitrogenous 
fertilizers declined from 99.96 in 2000-01 to  95.73 in 2004-05 (estimated). In case 
of Phosphatic fertilizers, the percentage of actual production which was 101.20% 
in 2000-01 fell steadily and reached 84.13% in 2004-05.  Against the installed 
capacity of 119.98 lakh MT of nitrogen, the actual production during 2003-04 was 
only to the level of 106.34 lakh MT neces sitating the Government to import 1.32 
lakh MT of nitrogen. Similarly, as against the installed capacity of 54.20 lakh MT, 
the actual production of phosphatic nutri ents during 2003-04 wa s to the tune of 
36.30 lakh MT, necessitating import of 3.38 lakh MT of phosphate fertilizers.   In 
this context, the Committee had recomme nded that immediate necessary steps 
should be taken by the Department of Fe rtilizers to ensure adequate and timely 

availability of raw materials and also to remove other bottlenecks so that the actual 
production of fertilizers m eet the targets set and also  that all the fertilizer 
companies - Public, Private and Cooperative, operate at an optimum level of the 
installed capacity and that  the dependence on imported fert ilizers is kept to the 
bare minimum possible. 
 
 
6. The Ministry, while giving the product- wise capacity utilization have stated 
as under:- 
“Percentage of ‘N’ contributed by ur ea is  78.6%, and by DAP  is 
10.8%. Contribution of  ‘P’ from D AP is 61.1% and from SSP is 17.4% and 
Complex fertilizers contribute 21.5% ‘P’ of total phosphotic capacity. During 
2004-05 production of nitrogen (113.39 lakh MT) and phosphate (40.64 lakh 
MT )  was highest so far. Produc tion of urea and complexes has been 
highest.  Out of the total urea capacity of 205.12 LMT only 194.60 LMT is in 
operation (Trombay-V of RCF have 3.30 LMT and DIL-Kanpur have 7.22 
LMT are under unscheduled  shutdown) . Urea capacity utilization during 
2004-05 was 104.2% of the operative capacity. 
 
Main problem in production of ni trogenous fertilizers is the limited 
availability of gas. Agains t the total requirement of gas of 33.32 MMSCMD 
of gas by the existing gas based unit s, on average, actual supply during 
2004-0-5 was 23.79 MMSCMD only. The Department of Fertilizers is asking 
for preferential allocation of domestic natural gas to fertilizer sector and 
making available LNG to fertilizer sector at reasonable rates. It is in this 
context that an Inter-Ministerial Group has been constituted under the 
Chairmanship of Finance Minister to   ex amine   issues related to supply of 
natural   gas and LNG to fertilizers industry.  
 
         Problem in production of phosphatic fertilizers and steps taken: 
  
Major portion of basic raw materi al for production of phosphatic 
fertilizer are rock phosphate or phosphoric acid i.e.P 2O5 are imported 
because of limited sources in the country. Due to tight availability in the 
international market, the availabili ty of these raw materials has been 
constrained leading to lower than t he targeted production However, all 
efforts are being made to improve t he situation including encouraging 
Indian companies to enter into Joint Ventures with foreign suppliers of raw 
materials to ensure smooth flow of raw materials into the country. 

  
 All the phosphatic & potassic fertilizers are decontrolled. 
Manufacturers are now free to import the fertilizer, raw 
material/intermediates required for manufacturing these fertilizers directly.” 
 
 
7. The Committee have been informed that to examine the issues related 
to supply of natural gas and LNG to fert ilizer industry, an Inter-Ministerial 
Group has been constituted under the Chairmanship of the Finance Minister.  
The Committee hope that the matter would be examined by this Group at the 
earliest so that follow-up action on the recommendations of this Group 
could be initiated. 
 
 
B. Proper and timely movement and availability of fertilizers to  
farmers in adequate quantity 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
8. The Department of Fertilizers had in formed that the availability of urea 
under the New Pricing Scheme (NPS), during Kharif 2 004 was satisfactory in all 
the States/UTs and there were no repor ts of shortage from any State/UT.  
However, on having drawn attention of  the Department to the reported non-
availability of fertilizers in certain parts  of the country, particularly in Punjab, 
Haryana and Western UP, the Secretary, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers) in his deposit ion before the Committee had stated that 
the Department was fully aware of the problem and would endeavour to make 
available all types of fertilizers during t he ensuing/current Kharif season beginning 

in April, wherever they were required and would also ensure that there was no 
repetition of the crisis t hat occurred during the Rabi season.  The Committee had 
recommended that the Department of Fertilizers should take all necessary steps in 
co-ordination with respective State Gove rnment for proper and timely movement 
and availability of fertilizers to farmers in adequate quantity during the 
ensuing/current Rabi season so that the farmers were not put to inconvenience 
and distress.  The Committee had also  recommended that the DOF should 
constitute monitoring Committees in co-o peration with Fertilizers Industry Co-
ordination Committee (FICC) in each State to periodically monitor the movement 
and availability of fertilizers to the farmers.   
 
9. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have submitted as follows:- 
  
“The requirement of Urea, DAP and MOP is assessed for each 
State/UTs for each crop season for Kharif and Ra bi before the 
commencement of the season in t he Zonal Conference wherein the 
representatives of the Department  of Agriculture & Cooperation, 
Department of Fertilizer s, State Government and Manufacturers are 
present.  The State Governments also project their monthly requirement.  
The Department of Fertilizers ensures av ailability of urea to each State on 
aggregate basis as per this requirement  by way of making ECA allocations 
from 50% of production.  Remaining 50% is moved as per the choice of the 
manufacturers.  On the basis of the projected monthly requirement of each 
State/UT as above, the pattern of evolution of demand in different parts of 
the country, a monthly movement order for regulated urea is prepared and 
sent to States to apprise them about the likely movement of urea (both from 
regulated and deregul ated quantity) against their projected requirement for 
the month. 
 
In the case of DAP and MOP whic h are decontrolled fertilizers, no 
allocation is made by the Central Go vernment.  The demand and supply of 
decontrolled fertilizers is decided by  the market forces.  Further, 
Department through its Buffer stocking agent M/s. IPL, also maintains buffer 
stock of DAP and MOP at strategic lo cations in certain States to meet 
exigent situations when market forces fail to attract requisite quantities of 

these decontrolled fertilizers.  However, in the last season, necessary 
interventions were made by coordi nating with suppliers, States and 
Railways to make available these fertilizers as per assessed requirement. 
 
Since Department or Fertilizer Industry Coordination Committee 
(FICC) do not have any es tablishments in different  States, the Department 
of Fertilizers monitors the dispatches of major fertilizers, namely, Urea, DAP 
and MOP to different States through its Movement Control Cell regularly.  
The supplies of fertilizers to different  districts/areas withi n the State are to 
be coordinated by the State Government.  
 
To further strengthen and improve monitoring, the Department has 
constituted a Grievance Cell under directions of Hon’ble Minister 
(Chemicals & Fertilizers)  with a Toll Free No.1600114400 to receive 
complaints & suggestions pertaining to availability & quality of fertilizers.  
Based on these reports Department  is taking expeditious action for 
resolving any problem of availability expeditiously.  The recommendation of 
the Committee periodically monitor the movement and availability of 
fertilizers to the farmers will be im plemented by the above mentioned 
arrangements.” 
 
10. The Committee have been informe d that a Grievance Cell has been 
constituted in the Ministry to receive complaints and suggestions pertaining 
to availability and quality of fertilizers.   As per the press reports, there are 
cases of shortages of fertilizers in some  of the States like Tamil Nadu.  The 
Committee trust that this Cell would opera te efficiently to take care of such 
shortages/complaints. 
 
  

C. Working Group to review New Pricing Scheme (NPS) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
11. Under the New Pricing Scheme (NPS) for urea units, introduced with effect 
from 01.04.2003, the Retenti on Prices cum Subsidy Scheme (RPS) which was in 
vogue since November, 1977 came to an  end and a group based New Pricing 
Scheme took its place.  NP S is being implemented in St ages.  Stage-I was of one 
year duration from 01.04.2003 to 31.03.2004 and Stage-II of two years duration 
from 01.04.2004 to 31.03.2006.  The Committee had noted that t he Department of 
Fertilizers had constituted a Working Gr oup under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y.K. 
Alagh to review the effectiveness of Stage-I and II of New Pr icing Scheme (NPS) 
and for formulating policy for urea units  beyond Stage-II i.e. from 1.4.2006 
onwards.  The Working Group would also examine issues pertaining to formulation 
of feedstock policy especially  with regard to the nature,  pricing and availability, 
demand and supply of ur ea upto the end of 11 th Five Year Plan, fixing milestones 
for conversion of existing naphtha and F O/LSHS based units to NG/LNG, mode of 
determination and methodology of payment of concession to urea units, de-control 
of movement and distributi on of urea, balanced fertili zation through urea pricing 
etc.  The Committee had desired that the Working Group should give its report at 
the earliest and they be informed of the latest developments in this regard.   
 

12. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have submitted as follows:- 
        
“The first meeting of the Worki ng Group was held on 4.2.2005. 
Pursuant to decisions taken in the 1 st meeting of the Working Group, 
following six sub committees have been  constituted to deliberate and 
recommend on various important componen ts of the urea pricing policy for 
the Working Group: 
  
a) Sub-Committee on ‘Dem and and Supply of urea’ 
b) Sub-Committee on ‘Future Vision of urea pricing policy in a time 
frame of 3, 5 and 10 years’  
c) Sub-Committee on ‘Costs and Supplies’  
d) Sub-Committee on ‘Movement  and Distribution of urea’ 
e) Sub-Committee on ‘Pricing and Availability of feedstock’ 
f) Sub-Committee on ‘Practices of subsidizing production, distribution 
and consumption of fertilizers in other countries’.  
 
 The Department of Fertilizers is regularly monitoring the progress 
made by the Sub-Committees and has al so urged them to submit their 
reports at the earliest. Convenors of  all the Sub-Committees have been 
invited to make presentations bef ore the Working Group during its 2 nd 
meeting to be held on 29.6.2005.” * 
 
* At the time of factual verification, the Department of Fertilizers informed 
(November 2005) that two more meetings of the Working Group have also 
been held, one on 29.06.2005 and the other one on 24.08.2005.  4 th 
meeting of the Working Group is scheduled to be held on 21 st and 22 nd 
November, 2005 to discuss the draft report. 
 
 
 
 

13. The Committee have been informed that the Working Group has 
constituted 6 Sub-Committees on various  important issues relating to the 
fertilizers.  The Committee would like to reiterate that the Report of the 
Working Group should be expedited to formulate the new/modified/revised 
long term fertilizer pricing policy much before the end of the second stage of 
the New Pricing Scheme (NPS) which is presently upto 31
st March, 2006. 
 
D. Revival of the sick fertilizer PSUs 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
14. Out of the 10 Public Se ctor Undertakings (PSUs) under the administrative 
control of the Department of  Fertilizers, viz. FACT, FCI, NFL, RCF, PPCL, MFL, 
PDIL, HFC, BVFCL and FAGMIL, the Co mmittee had found that during the last 
four years i.e., from 2 001-02 to 2004-05 (upto Decem ber, 2004) only four PSUs, 
namely, RCF, NFL, PDIL and FAGMIL were profit-making and t he rest of them 
were either chronically sick or loss-ma king.  The Committee had noted that in 
accordance with the agenda of the Govern ment as outlined in the National 
Common Minimum Programme, t he revival of the sick, loss making and closed 
fertilizer PSUs had been entrusted by the Department of Fertilizers to the Projects 
and Development India Ltd. (PDIL).  PDIL had since submitted their reports with 
respect to fertilizer PSUs to the Departm ent of Fertilizers and the same were 
currently under examination of  the Department of Fertiliz ers in consultation with 
the respective PSUs. The Department  of Fertilizers had informed that the 

proposals for revival of these units bas ed on their techno-economic viability would 
be sent to the Board for Reconstruction of  Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) for 
their consideration.  The Committee had recommended that the Department 
should expedite the process of examinati on of reports submitted by PDIL in 
consultation with respective fertilizer PSUs and submit their proposals for revival of 
PSUs to Board for Reconstruction of Pub lic Sector Enterpri ses (BRPSE) at the 
earliest. 
 
15. The Ministry, in their Action Ta ken Reply, have stated as under:- 
 
“The proposals for revival of Bar auni & Durgapur units of HFC and 
Gorakhpur & Sindri unit of FCI based on the report prepared by PDIL have 
been received from the respective co mpanies duly approved by their 
Boards.  These proposals are under examination in the Department of 
Fertilizers.  If these proposals are f ound techno-economically viable, the 
same will be submitted for considerati on of the newly constituted Board for 
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterp rises (BRPSE) and further action to 
obtain approval of the co mpetent authority in the Government will be taken 
based on the recommendations of the Board.” 
 
 
16. The Committee are unhappy to note th at the reply of the Ministry is 
not comprehensive stating the factual position in r espect of all sick PSUs 
clearly.  They would await detailed factua l position in regard to revival of 
each of the sick PSUs under the admini strative control of the Ministry.  
Needless to emphasise that the Depart ment of Fertilizers would expedite 
finalisation/approval of revival packages of all sick fertilizer units. 
 

 
E. Recovery of the legitimate dues from Karsan Limited, Turkey. 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
 
17. The Committee had observed that an am ount of $ 56.45 million plus EURO 
13411.019 equivalent to Rs. 24 6.47 crore was recoverabl e from Karsan Limited, 
Turkey, on account of termination of contract  by National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) 
due to non-performance and breach of trus t by Karsan Limited in supply of 
200,000 tonnes of urea.  The Committee, however, had noted wit h concern that 
out of the same, only a sum of Rs. 1.02c rore (US $  225,940) could be recovered 
so far from the account of Karsan Ltd. in Geneva, the only known assets identified 
in their name.  The Department of Fertilizers had stated that the cases for recovery 
of the balance amount were in progress and were at different stages in various 
countries, and in some places the cases had reached final stage.  According to the 
Department, the total identified assets in the name of various individuals including 
executives of Karsan, their relatives and associates in different countries was 
about US $ 25 million which was equivalent  to Rs. 108 crore approximately in 
Indian currency.  The Committee had recommended that t he Department of 
Fertilizers should pursue the matter vigorous ly with all concerned so that the 
legitimate dues were recovered expeditiously.  
 

18. The Ministry, in their reply to the above recommendation, have stated as 
under:- 
 
“Department of Fertilizers agree s with the recommendation of the 
Standing Committee.  Subsequent to the reply by DOF to Standing 
Committee the US District Court has delivered a judgement  on 23.6.2005 in 
favour of NFL awarding damages of US $ 2 million plus interest as per US 
law against the beneficiaries of M/S Ka rsan.  The matter is being pursued 
by NFL for executing said judgemen t/decree against the assets of 
defendants to affect recoveries.  The other recovery matters in Geneva, 
Monaco and Turkey are being pursued vigorously by NFL and the cases 
are at advanced stage. “ 
 
 
19. The Committee have been informed that the US District Court has 
delivered a judgement on 23.06.2005 in f avour of National Fertilizers Limited 
(NFL) awarding damages of US$2 million plus interest as per US law against 
the beneficiaries of M/s Karsan.  The Committee would await conclusive 
action taken in regard to recovery of the entire money involved in NFL urea 
import episode. 

CHAPTER – II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
 The Committee find that the budgetary provisions of the Department of 
Fertilizers for the year 2005-06 are Rs. 171 67.07 crore and the net estimates after 
adjusting the recoveries are Rs. 16398.82 cr ore.  Out of the above, the Non-Plan 
component is Rs. 16287.00 crore and the Plan component is Rs. 111.82 crore.  In the 
Revised Estimates of 2004-05, the total Non-Plan expenditure was pegged at Rs. 
15698.00 crore.  This shows an enhancement of Rs. 589.00 crore in 2005-06 in Non-
Plan Budget. In the current year, the to tal subsidy outlay for indigenous, imported 
fertilizers and concessional sale of decontroll ed fertilizers together is estimated at 
Rs.16253.90 crore which is about  99% of the total net Non- Plan budget provisions of 
the Department of Fertilizers.   
 
                 The Committee also find that the N on-Plan loans to PSUs have been kept 
at Rs. 25.18 crore in the BE 2005-06, whereas  it was Rs. 28.15 crore in the RE of 
2004-05.  Provision u nder Plan schemes to PSUs ha s been increased to Rs. 93.78 
crore in BE 2005-06 from Rs . 74.55 crore in the RE for 2004-05.  The Committee’s 
scrutiny has revealed that while the expenditure incurred during the year 2004-05 
under the Non-Plan heads  more or less conformed to  budgetary allocation (with the 
exception of Brahmaputra Vall ey Fertilizer Corporation Ltd. (BVFCL), the funds 
allotted under the Plan-heads largely rema ined unutilized.  The Committee note that 

during 2004-05 the expenditure on various  Plan schemes under the Department of 
Fertilizers upto February, 2005 was only Rs. 39.35 crore which constitutes 30.23 per 
cent of the total Plan Budget Estimates of  Rs. 130.17 crore.  From the information 
made available to the Committee, it appears that the reasons for non-utilisation of 
funds were mainly owing to  the, procedural delays. T he Committee desire that the 
non-utilisation of budgetary allocations should be thoroughly looked into and 
corrective action taken not only from  the point of assessing the budgetary 
requirements accurately, but also for ensuring that the targets laid down in the Plan 
are met effectively.  The Committee also ex pect  the  Department of Fertilizers to 
contain the expenditure fo r this year within the s anctioned Budget and follow the 
instructions of Ministry of Finance to observe austerity.  With this, the Committee 
endorse Demands for Grants of the Department of Fertilizers for the year 2005-06. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Observations/Recommendations made in Para 1 (Recommendation No.1) 
are factual & advisory in nature. The Non-utilisation of Plan Fund during year 2004-05 
was mainly due to procedural delays in ob taining the approval of CCEA for the 2
nd 
Revised Cost Estimates for Namrup Revamped  Project of M/s. Brahmaputra Valley 
Fertilizers Corporation Ltd. Efforts will, however, be made for ensuring that the targets 
laid down in Plan Budget for  2005-06 are met effectively and to keep the expenditure 
within the sanctioned budget. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 
 

(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
  
 
 The Committee are concerned to note that the indigen ous annual capacity 
of nitrogenous fertilizer units had marginally  declined to 119.98 lakh metric tonnes 
(LMT) at the end of 3 rd year of 10 th Five Year Plan (20 04-2005) from 120.58 LMT 
at the end of 9th Five Year Plan (2001-02). What is disturbing the Committee is the 
fact that there have been s lippages in the production targets continuously for the 
last five years in respect of Nitrogenous fertilizers and four years in respect of 
Phosphatic fertilizers. As against the ta rgets set, the perc entage of actual 
production of Nitrogenous fert ilizers declined from 99.96 in 2000-01 to 95.73 in 
2004-05 (estimated). In case of Phosphatic  fertilizers, the percentage of actual 
production which was 101.20% in 2000-01 fell steadily and reached 84.13 in 2004-
05 (estimated). Against the installed capac ity of 119.98 lakh MT of nitrogen, the 
actual production during 2003-04 was only to the level of 106.34 lakh MT 
necessitating the Government to import 1. 32 lakh MT of nitrogen. Similarly, as 
against the installed capacity of 54.20 lakh MT, the actual production of phosphatic 
nutrients during 2003-04 was to the tune of 36.30 lakh MT, necessitating import of 
3.38 lakh MT of phosphate fertilizers. Th e shortfall in production of Nitrogenous 
and Phosphatic fertilizers duri ng Kharif 2004 has been attr ibuted to constraints in 
supply and quality of natural gas, equipm ent breakdown, delay in commissioning 
of Namrup-II and unscheduled sh ut down of RCF-Trombay-V  and DIL Kanpur. In 
case of Complex fertilizers, low producti on was further attributed to shortage of 
phosphoric acid and imported /i ndigenous   ammonia. From these facts, it is 

abundantly clear that ther e is an urgent need to improve the production 
performance of both nitrogenous and phosphatic fertilizers. 
In view of the above, the Committee recommend that immediate necessary 
steps should be taken by the Department  of Fertilizers to ensure adequate and 
timely availability of raw materials and also to remove other bottlenecks so that the 
actual production of fertilizers meet the ta rgets set and also that all the fertilizer 
companies. Public, Private and Cooperative, operate at an optimum level of the 
installed capacity and that  the dependence on imported fert ilizers is kept to the 
bare minimum possible. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The annual installed c apacity of each product and  their %age share in 
nutrients terms during 2003-04 & 2004-05 was as under: - 
Annual Installed  capacity (‘000’ 
MT % age share  Name 
of the product Qty N P Qty N P 
Urea 20512.4 9435.7 0.0 50.7 78.6 0.0
A/S 671.5 141.0 0.0 1.7 1.2 0.0
CAN 942.5 235.6 0.0 2.3 2.0 0.0
A/C 128.0 32.0 0.0 0.3 0.3 0.0
DAP 7199.1 1295.8 3311.6 17.8 10.8 61.1
SSP 5899.8 0.0 944.0 14.6 0.0 17.4
COMPLEXES: 5098.0 857.9 1162.4 12.6 7.2 21.5
TOTAL: 40451.3 11998.1 5417.9 100.0 100.0 100.0
 On seeing the table, perc entage of ‘N’ contributed by urea is  78.6%, and by 
DAP  is 10.8%. Contribution of  ‘P’ fr om DAP is 61.1% and fr om SSP is 17.4% and 
Complex fertilizers contribute 21.5% ‘P’ of total phosphotic capacity. During 2004-05 
production of nitrogen (113.39 lakh MT) and phosphate (40.64 lakh MT )  was highest 
so far. Production of urea and complexes has been highest.  Out of the total urea 

capacity of 205.12 LMT only 194.60 LMT is in operation (Trombay-V of RCF have 
3.30 LMT and DIL-Kanpur have 7.22 LMT are under unschedule d  shutdown) . Urea 
capacity utilization during 2004-05 was 104.2% of the operative capacity. 
Main problem in production of nitrogenous fertilizers is the limited 
availability of gas. Against the total r equirement of gas of 33.32 MMSCMD of gas 
by the existing gas based units, on aver age, actual supply during 2004-0-5 was 
23.79 MMSCMD only. The Department of Fertilizers is asking for preferential 
allocation of domestic natural gas to fert ilizer sector and making available LNG to 
fertilizer sector at reasonable rates. It is in this context that an Inter-Ministerial 
Group has been constituted under the Chairm anship of Finance Minister to   
examine   issues related to supply of natural   gas and LNG to fertilizers industry.  
  
          Problem in production of phosphatic fertilizers and steps taken: 
 
Major portion of basic raw material for production of phosphatic fertilizer are 
rock phosphate or phosphoric ac id i.e.P2 05 are imported because of limited 
sources in the country. Due to tight availability in the international market, the 
availability of these raw materials has been  constrained leading to lower than the 
targeted production However, all efforts ar e being made to improve the situation 
including encouraging Indian companies to enter into Joint Ventures with foreign 
suppliers of raw materials to ensure smooth flow of raw materials into the country. 
  
 All the phosphatic & potassic fertilizers are decontrolled. Manufacturers are 
now free to import the fertilizer, ra w material/intermediates required for 
manufacturing these fertilizers directly. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)

(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
  
The Department of Fertilizers have info rmed that the availability of urea 
under the New Pricing Scheme (NPS), during Kh arif 2004 was satisfactory in all 
the States/UTs and there were no repor ts of shortage from any State/UT.  
However, on having drawn attention of the Department to the reported non-
availability of fertilizers in certain parts  of the country, particularly in Punjab, 
Haryana and Western UP, the Secretary, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers) in his depositio n before the Committee stated that the 
Department was fully aware of the pr oblem and would endeavour to make 
available all types of fertilizers during t he ensuing/current Kharif season beginning 
in April, wherever they ar e required and will also ensure  that there is no repetition 
of the crisis that occurred during the Rabi season.  The Committee recommend 
that the Department of Fert ilizers should take all necessary steps in co-ordination 
with respective State Government for prop er and timely movement and availability 
of fertilizers to farmers in adequate qua ntity during the ensuing/current Rabi 
season so that the farmers are not put to inconvenience and distress.  The 
Committee also recommend that the DO F should constitute monitoring 
Committees in co-operation with Fertilizers Industry Co-ordination Committee 
(FICC) in each State to periodically m onitor the movement and availability of 
fertilizers to the farmers.   
 

Reply of the Government 
 
The requirement of Urea, DAP and MOP is assessed for each State/UTs for 
each crop season for Kharif  and Rabi before the comm encement of the season in 
the Zonal Conference wherein the representatives of the Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation, Department of  Fertilizers, State Government and 
Manufacturers are present.  The State Governments also project their monthly 
requirement.  The Department of Fertilizers ensures availability of urea to each 
State on aggregate basis as per this requirement by way of making ECA 
allocations from 50% of production.  Remaining 50% is moved as per the choice of 
the manufacturers.  On the basis of the projected monthly requirement of each 
State/UT as above, the pattern of evolut ion of demand in different parts of the 
country, a monthly movement order for regulated urea is prepared and sent to 
States to apprise them about the likely movement of urea (both from regulated and 
deregulated quantity) against their projected requirement for the month. 
 
         In the case of DAP and MOP which are decontrolled fertilizers, no allocation 
is made by the Central Government.  The demand and supply of decontrolled 
fertilizers is decided by the market forc es.  Further, Department through its Buffer 
stocking agent M/s. IPL, also maintains buffer stock of DAP and MOP at strategic 
locations in certain States to meet exigent  situations when market forces fail to 
attract requisite quantities of these decontr olled fertilizers.  However, in the last 
season, necessary interventions were made by coordinating with suppliers, States 
and Railways to make available these fertilizers as per assessed requirement. 
 

Since Department or Fertilizer Industry Coordination Committee (FICC) do 
not have any establishments in different States, the Departm ent of Fertilizers 
monitors the dispatches of major fert ilizers, namely, Urea, DAP and MOP to 
different States through its Movement Control Cell regularly.  The supplies of 
fertilizers to different districts/areas wit hin the State are to be coordinated by the 
State Government.  
 
 To further strengthen and improve monitoring, the Department has 
constituted a Grievance Cell under direct ions of Hon’ble Minister (Chemicals & 
Fertilizers) with a Toll Fr ee No.1600114400 to receive complaints & suggestions 
pertaining to availability & quality of fertilizers.  Based on these reports Department 
is taking expeditious action for resolving any problem of availabi lity expeditiously.  
The recommendation of the Committee pe riodically monitor the movement and 
availability of fertilizers to the farmers will be implemented by the above mentioned 
arrangements. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
The Committee observe that during 1999-2000, due to favorable conditions, 
the fertilizer consumption in  the country increased to a level of 181 lakh tonnes. 
Thereafter, the fertilizer consumption in  the succeeding years declined and stood 
at 167.0, 173.6, 160.9 and 168.0 lakh metric tonnes in 2000-01, 2001-02, 2002-03 
and 2003-04 respectively. Besides poor  monsoon and floods, other reasons 
attributed by the Department of Fertilizers for low cons umption of fertilizers are 
high cost of Potassic and Phosphatic fertiliz ers, diversification of agriculture, 
increase in cultivation of oilseeds and pulses crops. The Committee are of the 
opinion that apart from the reasons cited by the Department of Fertilizers for low 
consumption of fertilizers, low purchasing power of small and marginal farmer has 
contributed to variation in consumption of  fertilizers in different States. While the 
consumption level was as low as 40. 5 kg/hectare in Rajasthan and 41.4 
kg/hectare in Orissa during the year 2003-04, the consumption level was high at 
184.1 kg/hectare for Punjab,  167.1 Kg/hectare for Haryana, 136.8 Kg/hectare for 
Andhra Pradesh, 126.7 kg/hectare for Uttar Pradesh for the year 2003-04. Though 
the benefits of Green Revolution have be en harvested by Punj ab, Haryana and 
Uttar Pradesh, these benefits are required to be extended to other States too. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Government should take urgent corrective 
steps to remove regional imbalances in fertilizer consumption and to increase 
consumption in regions/States, where there is low consumption by making 
fertilizers (particularly Phosphatic and Po tassic) available at reasonable rates. If 
required, the Department of  Fertilizers might undertake a study in this regard 
during the ensuing Kharif and Rabi seasons. 

Reply of the Government 
 
The role of fertilizer in agriculture is well known and more than 50% growth 
in agricultural production is mainly due to use of fertilizers, introduction of high 
yielding varieties of seeds  and pragmatic policies ad opted by the Government. 
There was a spectacular growth in fertilizer consumption and agriculture 
productions. However, decontrol of Phospha tic and Potassic fertilizers in 1992 led 
to a sharp increase in their prices and resulted in decline in  consumption (from 
33.21 and 13.61 lakh tonnes in  1991-92 to 28.44 and 8.84 Lakh tones in 1992-93 
for P & K fertilizers respectively). Despite introduction of concessional price 
scheme on Phosphatic and Potassic fertiliz ers, there was a slow growth in 
consumption of P&K fertilizers up to 1996-97.  But during the next period of 1999-
2000 and 2002-03, the consum ption of P&K was reasonably good (at 40.19 and 
16.01 lakh tones of P&K fertilizers respectively in 2002-03). 
 
The consumption level of fertilizer s depends on a number  of factors like 
irrigation, monsoon, soil structure and texture, economic st atus of farmers in the 
region etc. However, Department of Fertilizers in acceptance of the suggestion for 
carrying out study on region-wise fertilizer consumption imbalance is examining in 
consultation with Department of Agricult ure & Cooperation, the basic approach 
and thrust areas before embarking on the study.  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 
 
 

(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
The Committee are disturbed to note t hat consumption of Single Super 
Phosphate (SSP) which is  considered as common m an's fertilizer has been 
gradually declining over the years in the country.  The Committee in their Second 
Report on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (Department of Fert ilizers) while taking note of the neglect by the 
Governments in relation to the cost of production of SSP, both in terms of fixing 
MRPs and calculating the ad- hoc concession, had strongly felt that in the larger 
interest of the Indian agriculture se ctor, the importance of SSP needs to be 
recognized.  They, therefore, had desired  that certain recommendations of the 
Cost Accounts Branch (CAB) of the Ministry of Finance for extending some 
concessions be implemented at the earlies t so that the industry is saved and 
quality SSP is made available to the farm ers at reasonable prices throughout the 
country.  In their Action Taken Replies to the recommendations contained in the 
Second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2004-05), the 
Department of Fertilizers had informed t he Committee that they have examined 
the recommendations of CAB and methodology for working out a package for SSP 
is under finalization.  The Committ ee recommend that the Department of 
Fertilizers should finalize SSP package expeditiously and grant suitable 
concessions with a view to making the SSP  industry economically viable so that 
the fertilizer is available to the farmers at an affordable price.   In the opinion of the 
Committee, this will undoubtedly result in enhancing the consumption of SSP.     

Reply of the Government 
 
 
Department of Fertilizers has already  examined the recommendations of 
Cost Accounts Branch (CAB) and formulated a proposal of working out concession 
on SSP linking with indigenous  DAP.  An Expert Group se t up by Department of 
Fertilizers under the Chairmanship of Pr of. Abhijit Sen, Member, Planning 
Commission has also considered this issue. * 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
The Committee find that the ideal NPK ra tio of 4:2:1 is not being followed in 
the use of fertilizers in different parts of the country. There is a disproportionate 
use of NPK amongst different States ranging from high NPK ratio of 108:49:1 in 
Delhi and low NPK ratio of 1. 3:0:6:1 in Kerala during 2003.04. This indicates that 
farmers at large are quite unaware of t he benefits of balanced use of fertilizers. 
The Committee desire that with a view to re moving distortions in use of NPK, the 
Department of Fertilizers should launc h a nation-wide fertilizer education 
programme in cooperation with the Ministry of Agriculture & Cooperation for 
creating awareness amongst the farmers about the benefits of balanced use of 
fertilizers.   
 
*  At the time of factual verification, the Department of Fertilizers informed 
(November 2005) that the Government after examination of CAB report and the 
interim recommendations of the Expert Group, has decided to increase the ad-hoc 
concession on SSP from Rs. 650 per MT to Rs. 975 per MT w.e.f. 01.09.2005.  
State Governments have also been requested to maintain the MRP of the SSP at 
the present level in their States. 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
For balanced use of fertilizers, Department  of Agriculture & Cooperation is 
promoting Integrated Nutri ent Management (INM) which includes soil test based 
and judicious use of chemicals fertilizers in conjuntion Farm Yard Manure (FYM), 
compost vermin-compost, bio-fertilizers etc. A centrally sponsored scheme 
“Balanced and Integrated Us e of Fertilizers”(now s ubsumed under the Marco 
Management of Agriculture Scheme) is  being implemented with the components 
on setting up/strengthening of Soil Testing Laboratories, organizing training for soil 
testing staff and national/regional seminars/ workshops on soil te sting. At present 
there are 547 soil-testing laboratories in the country (417 static+130 mobile) under 
the State Governments and fertilizer in dustry with annual analyzing capacity of 
about 7 million soil samples. The Depart ment of Agricultur e & Cooperation has 
also constituted a Task Force on Balanc ed Use of Fertilizers to determined future 
fertilizer needs of the country and to s uggest appropriate pricing policy for the 
fertilizers. The Task Force had several rou nds of deliberation and discussions and 
the final report is under the process of finalization. Apart from the above, ICAR has 
taken up the following activities to promote balanced use of fertilizers. 
1. Develop ready reckoners for soil test based fertilizer recommendations 
to achieve the desired yield target. 
2. Prepare soil fertility maps at nati onal (Secondary and Micronutrient) and 
state (Nitrogen, Phosphorous, Potassium) levels. 
3. Develop INM packages for different crops under various agro-ecological 
regions of the country. 
4. Generate information for correcting micro and secondary nutrient related 
problems in soil plant system under Al l India Coordinat ed Projects and 
Micro and Secondary nutrients. 
5. Organize training programme and Front Line Demonstrations (FLDs) to 
promote Integrated Plant Nutrient Supply in deficient areas. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 
 

(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
The Committee note that the country is totally dependent on imports in case 
of Potassic fertilizer and a quantit y of 15.48 lakh MT of it was imported in the year 
2003-04 and 12.39 lakh MT ti ll 30.11.2004 in t he year 2004-05.  In their Action 
Taken Replies to the recommendations c ontained in the Second Report of the 
Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (14 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers), the Ministry had informed the Committee that Phosphatic and Potassic 
industry is already decontro lled and the decision of Join t ventures is being taken 
based on the commercial viability assessed by the company.  In this respect, three 
joint ventures have already been establis hed at Senegal, Morocco and Jordan by 
IFFCO, Chambal Fertilizers and SPIC respectively.  As regards Potassic fertilizers, 
the Department of Fertilizers,  in a written reply stated that there was no proposal 
to float joint venture for production of pot assic fertilizers with the countries from 
which it is being imported.  The Committee feel that there is a dire need to provide 
Potash at reasonable rates in time to Indian farmers.  They, therefore, recommend 
that the Government should actively explore the possibilities for setting up joint 
ventures with potential countries where the raw material is available for production 
of Potassic fertilizers so that the total dependence on its import could be avoided.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department of Fertilizers has already stated that there is no proposal at 
present to float a joint venture for pr oduction of potassic fertilizers with the 
countries from which it is being imported.  However Department agrees with the 

recommendations of Standing Committee.  A communication is being sent to 
Fertilizer Association of I ndia (FAI) and M/S Indian Potash Limited with a request 
to explore the possibilities  for joint ventures abroad for production of Potassic 
fertilizers. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
A Joint Venture Project (OMIFCO) between Oman Oil Company and Indian 
Sponsors KRIBHCO and IFFCO is under construction at Sur in Oman for 
production of urea/ammonia.  As per information furnished by the Department of 
Fertilizers, as on 03.02.2005, the overal l progress made by the project was 
97.26% in relation to construction, commissioning and supervision activities 
against the original target of 99.73%.  Despite the slippage in the construction 
schedule, the OMIFCO Management is stated to be optimistic of commencing 
commercial production by 15.7.2005.  T he Committee note that as per Urea Off-
Take Agreement (UOTA) entered into by Government of India with OMIFCO, the 
entire quantity of 16.52 LM T of urea produced by OM IFCO will be lifted by 
Government and accordingly higher allo cation has been made in BE 2005-06 for 
subsidy on the imported fertilizers.  Sinc e the Budget Estimates for import of 
fertilizers are prepared on the assumpti on that the OMIFCO  project will be 
commissioned as per the schedule, any del ay in commissioning of the project 
would have an adverse impact not only on  the budgetary front but also on the 
overall planning on the availa bility of fertilizers for domestic consumption during 

the year.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizers 
should take all possible steps to ensure that the OMIFCO project will go on stream 
as per the schedule and that there are no cost and time overruns in the 
commissioning of the project. 
Reply of the Government 
 
As on 14th May, 2005, the project has achi eved overall cumulative progress 
of 99.58%.  The first trial run of ammonia was produced on 14.5.2005, the first trial 
run of urea was produced on 28.5.2005.  The first ship ment carrying trial run 
production arrived at Vizag on 16.5.2005.  The second and third shipment had 
arrived in Chennai and Kandla Port on 17.6.2005 and 19.5.2005.  All possible 
steps would be taken by Department of Fe rtilizers to let OMIFCO project go on 
stream as per the schedule and that there ar e no cost and time overrun in the 
commissioning of the project.   
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
 Under the New Pricing Scheme (NPS) for urea units, introduced with effect 
from 01.04.2003, the Retenti on Prices cum Subsidy Scheme (RPS) which was in 
vogue since November, 1977 came to an  end and a group based New Pricing 
Scheme took its place.  NP S is being implemented in St ages.  Stage-I was of one 
year duration from 01.04.2003 to 31.03.2004 and Stage-II of two years duration 
from 01.04.2004 to 31.03.2006.  The Commi ttee note that th e Department of 

Fertilizers has constituted a Working Grou p under the chairmanship of Dr. Y.K. 
Alagh to review the effectiveness of Stage-I and II of New Pr icing Scheme (NPS) 
and for formulating policy for urea units  beyond Stage-II i.e. from 1.4.2006 
onwards.  The Working Group would also examine issue pertaining to formulation 
of feedstock policy especially  with regard to the nature,  pricing and availability, 
demand and supply of ur ea upto the end of 11 th Five Year Plan, fixing milestones 
for conversion of existing naphtha and FO/L SHS based units to NG/LNG, mode of 
determination and methodology of payment of concession to urea units, de-control 
of movement and distributi on of urea, balanced fertili zation through urea pricing 
etc.  The Committee hope that the Working Group would give its report at the 
earliest and they be informed of the latest developments in this regard.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The first meeting of the Working Gr oup was held on 4.2.2005. Pursuant to 
decisions taken in the 1 st meeting of the Worki ng Group, following six sub 
committees have been constituted to deliberate and recommend on various 
important components of the urea pricing policy for the Working Group: 
  
(a) Sub-Committee on ‘Demand and Supply of urea’  
(b) Sub-Committee on ‘Future Vision of urea pricing policy in a time frame 
of 3, 5 and 10 years’  
(c) Sub-Committee on ‘Costs and Supplies’  
(d) Sub-Committee on ‘Movement and Distribution of urea’ 
(e) Sub-Committee on ‘Pricing and Availability of feedstock’ 
(f) Sub-Committee on ‘Practices of subs idizing production, distribution and 
consumption of fertilizers in other countries’.  

 The Department of Fertilizers is regul arly monitoring the progress made by 
the Sub-Committees and has also urged them to subm it their reports at the 
earliest. Convenors of all the Sub-Committees have been invited to make 
presentations before the Working Group during its 2 nd meeting to be held on 
29.6.2005. * 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
 The Committee note that Natural Gas/ LNG is the preferred feedstock for 
the manufacture of urea over other feedstocks viz. naphtha and FO/LSHS as it is a 
clean and efficient source of en ergy and cost effective.  It is also internationally 
competitive in terms of the manufacturing cost of urea, as feedstock accounts for 
60 per cent of cost of production in res pect of gas based units whereas for others 
it is 75 per cent.  Against the total requirement of 33.32 MMSCMD, the average 
actual supply of domestic natural gas during 2003-04 wa s only 22.13 MMSCMD, 
thus creating a shortfall of  11.19 MMSCMD i.e. 33.6 per c ent of total requirement.  
Due to this, even the gas based units ar e forced to partially use naphtha as 
feedstock.  In the wake of the  recently  formulated  policy  for  setting  up new and 
  
* At the time of factual verification, the Department of Fertilizers informed 
(November 2005) that two more meetings of the Working Group have also been 
held, one on 29.06.2005 and the other one on 24.08.2005.  4 th meeting of the 
Working Group is scheduled to be held on 21 st and 22 nd November, 2005 to 
discuss the draft report. 

                                                                                                                                                                        
expansion of urea units and switchover of non-gas based units to NG/LNG, the 
fertilizer industry has estimated that the total requirement of NG/LNG will increase 
to 55 MMSCMD.  The Committee note that  an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) had 
been constituted to examine the issue relating to ensuring preferential allocation of 
domestic natural gas to the fertilizer Industry and making available imported LNG 
to fertilizer units, its pricing and related ta xation issues.  The first meeting of IMG 
was held on 21.7.2004, in which it was decided to refer the ma tter to the Tariff 
Commission.  The Tariff Co mmission has since submitt ed an interim report and 
the final report would be submi tted by it after joining of the full time Chairman.  In 
this context, the Committee have also been informed that the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas’s pr oposals on Revision of nat ural gas allocation and 
prices’ have been referred to the Group of Mi nisters for examination in the first 
instance.  The Committee feel that the iss ue relating to prefer ential allocation of 
domestic natural gas and making available imported LNG to fertilizer units at 
reasonable prices requires an expeditiou s examination and an early decision in 
the overall interests of the fertilizer industry.   
 
(Reply of the Government) 
 
 2 nd meeting of the Inter-Ministerial Group has not been held so far as the 
Tariff Commission is yet to submit its final report on the study entrusted to it. The 
Department of Fertilizers has requested the Tariff Commission to submit the final 
report expeditiously as full time Chairman has also been appointed now.  

 The issue of priority allocation of APM  gas to fertilizer sector was under the 
consideration of the Gove rnment and now the Government has decided that all 
available APM gas would be supplied to only the power  and fertilizer sectors 
against their existing allocations after m eeting the requirements of specific end 
users committed under court orders.   
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
The Committee note that while on t he one hand, the financial health of 
several fertilizer PSUs remained critical, on the other hand, some of the Public 
Sector Undertakings, particularly MFL and NFL were not able to utilize their funds 
properly during the year 2004-05.  In the ca se of MFL, non-utilisation of funds has 
been attributed to dropping of the project for replacement/ refurnishment of burner 
management sheme due to its obsolete desi gn on the basis of observation by 
BHEL and swepping of this schemes with another schemes  viz. “Repairs to the 
10000 MT capacity phosphoric Acid  Storage Tank ‘A’ at C hennai Port Trust” As 
regards NFL, the IEBR pr ovision of Rs. 69 crore made in BE (2004-05) went 
unutilized as several schemes for moderniza tion/renovation of its units for which 
the funds were meant, could not be completed.  In the opinion of the Committee, 
this is indicative of lack of proper management and requires suitable 
corrective/remedial action. 
 

Reply of the Government 
 
Department of Fertilizers nominates its representatives  on the Board of 
Directors of PSUs under the administrative control of this Department.  
Department regularly monitors follow up action with regard to activities of the major 
projects/schemes which Government emphasis from time to time by way of taking 
regular meetings with the N odal Officers responsible for timely implementation of 
projects. Department has a technical divi sion which is consulted while taking 
decision on implementation of projects so that deficiencies should not recur.    
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
The Committee note that Namrup-II uni t of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer 
Corporation Limited (BVFCL) which was originally scheduled to be commissioned 
by 1.2.2002 was delayed and underwent Revis ed Cost Estimates (RCE) twice.  
The first RCE was approved by the Gove rnment with the revised cost of Rs. 
509.40 crore (on constant price basis) and a completion cost of Rs. 525.47 crore.  
Due to further delay in impl ementation of the project t he Project Investment Board 
(PIB) had approved the second revised cost es timate for the proj ect at a revised 
cost of Rs. 610.24 crore and the date of completion of the projec t as 31.12.2004.  
However, owing to delay in completion of work in Effluent  Treatment Package, 
commissioning of Process Air Compressor and instrumentation jobs in Urea-II 
plant etc., the date of co mmissioning of the revamp project overshot beyond 

31.12.2004.  The Ministry have informed t hat Namrup II revamp project is now 
expected to be completed by 30.4.2005.  The Committee expr ess their serious 
concern over the inordinate delay in the commissioning of the project due to which 
its cost has escalated The Committee expect  that there would not be further time 
and cost overruns and the unit will go on stream as per the scheduled date of 
completion i.e. 30.04.2005.  The Committ ee also note that since none of the 
Banks/Fis came forward to provide loans to the Namrup-II unit and as a result the 
entire funding of the project has been provided by the Government of India, it is 
imperative for the Government to undertake  a thorough re-apprai sal of the project 
from all angles, so that, the unit wo uld not subsequently be confronted with 
operational difficulties. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Earlier the revamp project was expec ted to be commissioned by April, 
2005.  But on account of inadequate synch ronisation of equipments like Process 
Air Compressor by original equipment manuf acturers as well leakage detected in 
Boiler Feed Water Heater, the commissioni ng of the project is now expected by 
June, 2005. The suggestion of the comm ittee for undertaking a through re-
appraisal of the project from all angles have been taken note of.  
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 

 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE  
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
 As per the extant arrangement, the difference between the maximum retail 
price/indicative price and the actual cost of production of Fertilizers is reimbursed 
to the fertilizers companies as subsidy.  In the current financial year 2005-06, the 
total outlay for fertilizer subsidy has been estimated at Rs. 16253.90 crore which is 
about 99% of the total net  non-plan budget provision of the Department of 
Fertilizers.  The Committee not e that the main purpose of fertilizer subsidy is to 
provide fertilizers to farmers at an affor dable price.  However, the Committee note 
that farmers are still unable to reap the ben efits of subsidy in a large measure due 
to various reasons including non-avail ability of fertilizers on account of 
hoarding/black marketing.  Such problem s can be overcome through adopting 
better techniques for management of subsidies.   One such measure is to resort to 
direct payment of subsidy to the farme rs.  Unfortunately, the recommendation 
made by the Committee in their Sec ond Report on Demands for Grants (2004-
2005) for giving direct subsidies to t he farmers did not find favour with the 
Department of Fertilizers.  The Committee, therefore, would once again urge the 
Government to give a serious thought to this suggestion so that the underlying 
objective behind payment of subsidies become more meaningful.  Steps should 
also be taken in consultation with the State Governments to contain 

hoarding/black marketing with a view to ensuring availability of fertilizers to the 
farmers.   
Reply of the Government 
 
With the objective of making available fertilizers to farmers at a affordable 
price, urea, being the only controlled fert ilizer, is sold at statutorily notified 
maximum retail price (MRP), and the decontrolled phosphatic and potassic 
fertilizers, such as DAP, MOP and NPK complexes are sold  at indicative MRPs.   
MRP of single super phosphate is indicated by the respective State Governments.  
As the cost of production of fertilizers is  generally more than the MRP/indicative 
MRPs, the benefit of subsidy/concession on fertilizers is passed on to the farmers 
in the form of making them available fertilizers at subsidized selling prices. As for 
giving direct subsidies to farmers, it is stated that payment of subsidy to farmers 
directly is a gigantic ta sk and would involve huge administrative  expenditure and 
logistics. In the present circumstances, the suggested proposal of direct subsidy to 
farmers is not logistically and adminis tratively practical to implement and 
administer.  
 
As for the steps taken in consultation with the States to contain 
hoarding/black marketing with a view to ensuring availability of fertilizers to the 
farmers, it is stated that the Department of Fertilizers has wr itten to the State 
Governments to ensure equitable distribu tion within the States . Every month, a 
copy of movement order of urea is iss ued indicating supplier-wise details for the 
State to keep track of supplies and to ensure that no hoarding takes place. The 
Department of Fertilizers also monitors movement of major fe rtilizers State-wise 
and unit-wise continuously.   
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 

CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF  
THE GOVERNMENTHAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
 Out of the 10 PSUs coming under t he purview of the Department of 
Fertilizers, viz. FACT, FCI, NFL, RCF, PPCL, MFL, PDIL, HFC, BVFCL and 
FAGMIL, the Committee find that during the last four years i.e., from 2001-02 to 
2004-05 (upto December, 2004) only four PSUs, namely, RCF, NFL, PDIL and 
FAGMIL were profit-making and the rest of them are either chronically sick or loss-
making.  The Committee note that in  accordance with the agenda of the 
Government as outlined in the National Common Minimum Programme, the revival 
of the sick, loss making and closed fe rtilizer PSUs has been entrusted by the 
Department of Fertilizers to the Projects and Development of India Ltd. (PDIL).  
PDIL has since submitted their reports with respect to fertilizer PSUs to the 
Department of Fertilizers and the same ar e currently under ex amination of the 
Department of Fertlizers in consultation with the respective PSUs. The Department 
of Fertilizers has informed that the proposals for revival of these units based on 
their techno-economic viability will be sent  to the Board for Reconstruction of 
Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) for their consideration.  The Committee 
recommend that the Department should expe dite the process of examination of 
reports submitted by PDIL in consulta tion with respective fertilizer PSUs and 
submit their proposals for revival of PSUs to BRPSE at the earliest. 
  

Reply of the Government 
 
The proposals for revival of Bar auni & Durgapur units of HFC and 
Gorakhpur & Sindri unit of  FCI based on the report prepared by PDIL have been 
received from the respective companies du ly approved by their Boards.  These 
proposals are under exam ination in the Department of  Fertilizers.  If these 
proposals are found techno-eco nomically viable, the same will be submitted for 
consideration of the newly c onstituted Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector 
Enterprises (BRPSE) and further action to obtain approval of the competent 
authority in the Government  will be taken based on th e recommendations of the 
Board. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES  
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
 
 On 29.01.2004 the Department of Fe rtilizers announced a new policy for 
de-bottlenecking/revamp/modernization of existing urea units.  Among others, the 
salient features of the new policy are as follows: 
 
(a) The de-bottlenecking/revamp/moder nization of the plant should 
result in not less than 10% increa se in the existi ng urea production 
capacity. 
  
(b) The company will be required to obtain prior permission of the 
Department of Fertilizers (D OF) before embarking upon any de-
bottlenecking/revamp/modernization of its urea plant(s). 
 
(c) The de-bottlenecking/revamp/moderni zation should lead to increase 
in production entirely based on Natural Gas (NG)/Liquefied Natural 
Gas (LNG) only as fuel and feedsto ck and no increase in production 
capacity based on any other costlier feedstock/fuel will be allowed.  
 
(d) The additional urea c apacity, created by de-
bottlenecking/revamp/modernization shall be used for sale for 
agricultural purposes within the count ry.  The units may also export 
or sell to complex manufacturers or  for any other industrial use with 
the prior permission of DoF.  However, concession will be admissible 
only for direct sale of urea for agricultural purposes.  
 
(e) The Government reserves the right to mop up this additional 
 production under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (ECA) 
 allocation, where exigencies on t he demand and supply  situation so 
 warrant. 
 
The Committee have been informed that no fertilizer unit has undergone 
do-bottlenecking/revamp/modernization during the last three y ears.  However, 
revamp of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer  Corporation Limited (BVFCL) which 

commenced on 02.11.1998, much before the new policy cam into effect is still 
under implementation.  The Committee are constrained to note that even after 
lapse of more than a year since the notification of the new policy by the 
Department of Fertilizers , there appears to be a lukewarm response by the 
fertilizer industry to revamp their exis ting units.  Only three proposals for de-
bottlenecking in respect of IGFL, Jagdish pur, TCL, Babrala and IFFCO, Aonla and 
Phulpur have been received by the Department of Fertilizers, which are under their 
consideration.  The Committee recomme nd that the Departm ent of Fertilizers 
should process the proposals for debottlenecking pending before them 
expeditiously so that it would lead to enhancement in t he installed capacity of 
these untis.  The Committee also recommend  that if necessary, the guidelines laid 
under the new policy may be reviewed with a view to making them industry friendly 
so that more fertilizer units would come forward for debottlenecking/revamp, which 
in turn may go a long way in augumentat ion of the capacity of the indigenous 
industry and thereby improve self-sufficiency of the country in fertilizer production. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted.  However, 
proposals for de-bottlenecking from fertiliz er units continue to be received by 
Department, the latest one being from M/ s Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals 
Limited and are under the consideration of the Government.  
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 
 
 

(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
The Committee observe that an amount  of $ 56.45 million plus EURO 
13411.019 equivalent to Rs. 24 6.47 crore was recoverabl e from Karsan Limited, 
Turkey, on account of termination of contract  by National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) 
due to non-performance and breach of trus t by Karsan Limited in supply of 
200,000 tonnes of urea.  The Committee, however, note wit h concern that out of 
the same, only a sum of Rs. 1.02crore (U S $  225,940) could be recovered so far 
from the account of Karsan Ltd. in Geneva, the only known assets identified in 
their name.  The Department of Fertilizers have stated that the cases for recovery 
of the balance amount are in progress and are at diffe rent stages in various 
countries, and in some places the cases ha ve reached final stage.  According to 
the Department, the total identified assets  in the name of various individuals 
including executives of Karsan, their rela tives and associates in different countries 
is about US $ 25 million which is equivale nt to Rs. 108 cror e approximately in 
Indian currency.  The Committee recommend that the Department of Fertilizers 
should pursue the matter vigorously with al l concerned so that the legitimate dues 
are recovered expeditiously.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department of Fertilizer s agrees with the recomm endation of the Standing 
Committee.  Subsequent to the reply by DOF to Standing Committee the US 
District Court has delivered a judgement on 23.6.2005 in favour of NFL awarding 
damages of US $ 2 million plus interest as  per US law against the beneficiaries of 

M/S Karsan.  The matter is being pur sued by NFL for executing said 
judgement/decree against the assets of defendants to affect recoveries.  The other 
recovery matters in Geneva, Monaco and Turkey are being pursued vigorously by 
NFL and the cases are at advanced stage.  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
O.M. No. 5 (1)/2005-Fin.II (Part-I) dated 29.07.2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI            ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,    
December 6,    2005                     Chairman, 
Agrahayana 15, 1927 (Saka)        Standing Committee on  
Chemicals & Fertilizers. 

Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2005-06) 
 
FOURTH SITTING 
(30.11.2005) 
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete - Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
3. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
4. Shri T. Madhusudhan Reddy 
5. Shri V.K. Thummar 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
6. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
7. Shri Ajay Maroo 
8. Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha 
9. Shri Vasant Chavan 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri P. Sreedharan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Director 
3. Shri S.C. Kaliraman  - Under Secretary 
 

2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the Draft Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the recommendations c ontained in the Sixt h Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (Department of Fert ilizers).  After a brief di scussion, the draft Report 
was adopted by the Committee without any amendment. 
 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes, if 
any, arising out of the factual verificati on of the Report by the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (Depar tment of Fertilizers) and pr esent the same to both 
the Houses of Parliament in the current session. 
   
The Committee then adjourned. 

Appendix – II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Go vernment on the recommendations  
contained in the Sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2004-05) on Demands for Grants 
(2005-06) of the Ministry of Chem icals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers). 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 16 
 
II Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 
10, 11, 14 and 15) 
 
12 
 Percentage to Total 75%  
 
III Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s Reply  
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 9) 
 
1 
 Percentage of Total 6.25%  
 
IV Recommendation in respec t of which reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee  
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 13) 
 
1 
 Percentage of Total 6.25% 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos.12 and 16) 
 
2 
 Percentage of Total 12.5% 
 