EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2005-06) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2005-2006) 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on th e recommendations contained in the 
Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabh a) of the Standing Committe e on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2004- 05) on ‘Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertiliz ers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals)’] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.12.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.12.2005 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2005/Kartika, 1927 (Saka)

 2
CONTENTS 
 
                
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2005-06) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
CHAPTER I Report. 
 
 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  
 
 
CHAPTER III Recommendation which the Committ ee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replie 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendation in respect of whic h reply of the Government has 
not been accepted by the Committee…….. 
 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited …………………………………… 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Third sitting of t he Standing Committ ee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2005-06) held on 19th October, 2005 ……. 
 
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
contained in the Fifth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2004-05) on ‘Demands for Grants (2005-2006) 
of Ministry of Chemicals & Fert ilisers, Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals’…………… 
 
 

 3
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2005-06) 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete -  Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2 Shri Afzal Ansari     
3 Shri Prahlad Joshi   
4 Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
5 Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
6 Shri Punnu Lal Mohale   
7 Shri A.K. Moorthy 
8 Shri P. Rajendran   
9 Shri Anantha Venkata Rami Reddy 
10 Shri Madhusudan Takkala Reddy 
11 Shri Akshyay Pratap Singh  
12 Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
13 Shri V.K. Thummar 
14 Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma   
15 Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava  
16 Shri A.K.S.Vijayan  
17 Shri Bhal Chandra Yadav 
18 Vacant 
19 Vacant 
20 Vacant 
21      Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 22. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
23 Shri Raju Parmar 
24. Shri B.S.Gnanadesikan 
25. Shri Ajay Maroo 
26. Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha 
27. Shri Vasant Chavan 
28. Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
29. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
30. Shri T.R. Zeliang 
31. Vacant 
Secretariat 
1. Shri John Joseph  - Secretary 
2. Shri P. Sreedharan  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Director 
4. Shri S.C. Kaliraman  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Santosh Kumar  - Committee Officer 

 4
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2005-06) 
having been authorised by the Committee to  submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in  the Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fert ilizers (2004-05) on Demands for Grants 
(2005-2006) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilisers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals). 
 
2. The Fifth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 st 
April, 2005.  The replies of Government to all the recommendations contained in 
the Fifth Report were received on 21 st July, 2005.  The Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2005-06) consider ed the Action Taken Replies received 
from the Government and adopt ed the Draft Action Taken Report at their sitting 
held on 19th October, 2005. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in  the Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been pr inted in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI          ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,    
November 17, 2005           Chairman, 
Kartika 26, 1927 (Saka)      Standing Committee on  
Chemicals & Fertilizers.

 5
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contai ned in the Fifth Report (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2004-05) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2005-06) relating to the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemical s’, which was presented to Lok Sabha 
on 21
st April, 2005.  
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fe rtilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furn ish replies to the recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report within three months from the presentation of the 
Report i.e. by 21 st July, 2005.  The action taken replies of the Government in 
respect of all the 22 recommendations cont ained in the Report were received on 
21st July, 2005.  These have been categorised as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations  that have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 6, 7, 8,9, 10, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21  
 
(ii) Recommendation/observation whic h the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
Sl. No. 16  
 
(iii) Recommendation/observation in respect of which reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee. 
Sl. No. 1  
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 4, 5, 11, 12, 13,15 and 22 
 

 6
3. The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
recommendations for which only interim replies have been furnished by the 
Government should be furnished expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations in the ensuing paragraphs: 
 
A. Under-utilisation of Budgetary Resources 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
5. The Committee had observ ed that there was less ut ilisation of funds in 
2004-05 under the ‘Heads’/schem es of relief to Bhopal Gas victims, Hindustan 
Antibiotics Ltd. (HAL), Central Instit ute of Plastic Engi neering & Technology 
(CIPET), Institute for Pesticides Formulation Technology (IPFT), Chemicals 
Promotion & Development Scheme (CPDS) , National Pharmaceutical Pricing 
Authority (NPPA) an d Hindustan Organic Chemicals Lt d. (HOCL).  The reasons 
furnished by the Department in case of  IPFT, was unavailability of required 
specialised manpower; in case of CPDS, the amount of Rs. 3. 40 crore allocated 
for the expenditure towards conduct of feasibility study of setting up of Mega 
Chemical Project was saved as there was delay in appointment of a consultant for 
the project; in case of OPEC, they stated that agreement for loan was not 
finalised.  In the first three years of 10
th Five Year Plan, too, there was less 
utilisation in schemes of IP FT, CWC, CPDS.  In the c ontext of unsatisfactory 
utilisation of budgetary res ources and slippages in achieving the targets, the 
Committee had desired that the reason s for under-utilisation of budgetary 
allocation be thoroughly analysed.  The Committee had also asked the 
Department to gear up their machinery to  realise the intend ed purposes and to 
achieve the targets in the remaining two years of the Plan. 

 7
6. The Ministry, in their Action Ta ken Reply, have stated as under:- 
 
“Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster. 
 
The actual disbursement  of the claims settled by the Office of the 
Welfare Commissioner is carried out by Judi cial Officers of the Office of the 
Welfare Commissioner. The Welfare Commi ssioner is also a sitting Judge 
of the Madhya Pradesh High Court.  It may be noted t hat the Supreme 
Court is monitoring the disbursem ent process and the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has no co ntrol on the actual process of 
disbursement. 
 
The entire provision of Rs.300 crore made in R.E. 2004-05 for 
meeting the Exchange Rate Variation, could not be utilized as the Welfare 
Commissioner’s office was not able to settle the pro-rata claims quickly 
because of procedural problems.  Howeve r, it may be point ed out that the 
unutilized amount of Rs .93 crore is neither a savi ng nor lapsed amount.  
The exchange rate variation amount is linked to the amount that is 
disinvested from time to time by the Reserve Bank of India and since pro-
rata compensation has to be complet ed by 30.4.2006, the total amount of 
exchange rate variation required will have to be paid. 
 
PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS 
 
Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) 
 
During 2004-05, an allocation of  Rs. 6.66 crore was made to 
Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL ) under Non-Plan and Rs. 2.77 crore 
under Plan. So far as the Plan allocati on is concerned, the entire amount 
was released and the same has been utilised by the company. The Non- 
Plan budget provision wa s made for paying terminal benefits to the 
employees of the Maharashtra Antibi otics & Pharmaceuticals Limited, a 
Joint Venture of HAL, who have underta ken VSS. This amount was to be 
released subject to the decision of the Supreme Court. Since the final 
judgement was not pronounced by 31.3. 2005, this amount could not be 
released to HAL. However an amount of Rs. 4.50 crore has been 
appropriated from this money for payment  of salaries & statutory dues of 
the employees of HAL. 
 
Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited (HOCL) 
 
In case of Hindustan Organic Chem icals Limited (HOCL), an amount 
of Rs. 7.19 crore was earmarked under the Plan Loan. HOCL was to create 
charge in favour of the Government of India for releasing the amount. An 
amount of Rs. 1.60 crore was surrender ed due to non-compliance of this 
condition. 

 8
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS 
 
Central Institute of Plastic Engineering & Technology (CIPET) 
 
The Loan Agreement between O PEC Fund authorities and 
Government of India has since been signed on 1 st June, 2005 and as such 
the amount provided under Externally Aided Project is likely to be utilized by 
CIPET in the next three years which include the re maining  2 years of the 
10th Plan. 
 
Institute for Pesticides Formulation Technology(IPFT) 
 
It is a fact that against the budget ary allocation of Rs. 1281 lakh in 
the first three years of 10 th Plan Period, actual ex penditure has been to the 
extent of Rs. 681.15 lakh .  The main reasons for under utilization of the 
Budgetary allocation are as under:- 
 
i)   Recovery of Rs. 27 lakh during 2003-04 for the grant released 
in the earlier years to IPFT for creation of corpus fund. 
 
ii)   Recovery of Rs. 66.60 lakh  released to IPFT for capital 
support in earlier years. 
 
iii)   Deferment of schemes for creation of OPCW facilities, library 
& data acquisition facilities due to the absence of qualified 
manpower. 
 
A cadre restructuring exercise has been initiated so t hat the Institute 
has the manpower available, comm ensurate with the needs. Regular 
monitoring of the progress of various programs and the expenditure thereon 
is being done. 
 
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) 
 
The main reason for slow pace of ex penditure was the fact that the 
Chemical Weapons Convention Act 2000, which had been passed by the 
Parliament in August,2000, is yet to come into force. Now a decision has 
been taken to bring this Act into force w.e.f. 1 st July,2005. Necessary Rules 
to facilitate its implementation have been framed  and action has been 
initiated to notify the same. Funds as allocated will be utilized for the 
awareness generation programs which are being undertaken to educate the 
industry and the other st akeholders about their obligations under the 
Convention. 
 

 9
Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS) 
 
The allocation for CPDS during 2004-05 was Rs.340 lakh which 
included Rs.300 lakh for the feasibi lity study on Mega Chemical Industrial 
Estate (MCIE) and Rs.40 lakh for other  promotional activities for the 
chemical industry. It may be stated here that origin ally the consultancy was 
estimated to cost at leas t US$ 1 million (about Rs.5 crore) and provision of 
funds had been sought on that basis. However act ual cost of consultancy 
based on competitive biddi ng process came to Rs. 57.84 lakh only.   The 
study has since commenced and is progressing well. 
 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA). 
 
Salary 
 
An amount of Rs. 116.00 lakh was provided under BE/RE during 
2004-05.  Actual Expenditure incurred in  2004-2005 was Rs. 105.35 lakh.  
The balance amount Rs. 10.65 lakh had been surrendered due to the fact 
that some of the vacant posts could not be filled. 
 
Medical Treatment 
 
An amount of Rs. 10.00 lakh wa s provided under BE/RE during 
2004-05 and Actual Expenditure incurred was Rs. 0.72 lakh.   
 
The balance amount of Rs. 9.28 lakh had been surrendered as funds 
could not be utilized under this head. 
 
Wages 
 
The budget provision of Rs. 6.50 lakh was made in  BE/RE during 
2004-2005.  The Actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 4.61 lakh. The 
balance amount of  Rs. 1.89 lakh had been surrendered, as funds could not 
be utilized under this head. 
 
Office Expenses 
 
The budget provision of Rs. 50.00  lakh was made in BE/RE during 
2004-2005.  The actual expenditure was Rs. 49.94 lakh.  A nominal amount 
of Rs. 0.06 lakh had been surrendered under this head. 
 
Rent, Rates and Taxes 
 
An amount of Rs. 85.00 lakh was allocated in BE 2004-05.   Rs. 87 
lakh was allocated in RE  2004-05 under this head.  The actual expenditure 
incurred was Rs. 86.99 lakh. 

 10
Professional Services 
 
An amount of Rs. 30.00 lakh was allocated under BE/RE 2004-05.  
The actual expenditure incurred was Rs . 29.99 lakh.  The expenditure in 
this head is payment to Data Entry Operators, Young Professionals, fees to 
lawyers, ORG IMS , consultancy fees to NIPER etc.  T he nominal amount 
of Rs. 0.01 lakh was surrendered under this head. 
 
OTA 
 
The provision of Rs. 1.50 lakh was made in BE/RE 2004-05.  The 
actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 0.74 lakh. The balance amount Rs 
0.76 lakh has been surrendered due to non-engagement of staff to do the 
work in late hours. 
 
OAE 
 
The provision of Rs. 5.00 lakh was made in BE 20 04-05 and in RE 
budget was reduced and allocated Rs. 3.00 lakh.  The actual expenditure 
incurred was Rs. 2.45 lakh.  The amount of Rs. 0.55 lakh has been 
surrendered.  The saving was on account meeting with All India State Drug 
Controller could not be organized during 2004-05. 
 
TA (Domestic) 
 
An amount of Rs. 12.00 lakh was allocated under BE/RE during 
2004-05. The actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 9.86 lakh.   
 
The balance amount Rs. 2.14 lakh  had been surrendered under this 
head.  Due to some of the proposed bulk drug studies not being undertaken 
resulting in saving in Domestic Travel. 
 
TA (Foreign) 
 
An amount of Rs. 7.00 lakh is allocated under BE/ RE during 2004-
05. The actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 3.05 lakh.  The balance 
amount Rs. 3.95 lakh has been surrendered under this head as funds could 
not be utilized under this head.” 
 

 11
7. The Committee are not fully satisfied  with the reply of the Ministry of 
the Department of Chemicals & Petr ochemicals.  Though, the Ministry have 
explained head-wise reasons for non-ut ilisation of funds during the year 
2004-05, they have not explained as to  whether any detailed analysis was 
done to know the reasons for less than full utilisation of Plan funds during 
the first three years of the 10 th Five Year Plan and re medial measures taken 
or proposed to be taken to gainfully utilise the un-spent funds during the 
remaining two years of the 10
th Plan.  For instance, as against the budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 1281 lakh for Institute of Pesticides Formulation and 
Technology (IPFT)  in the first three years of the 10
th Plan, actual expenditure 
has been to the extent of Rs. 681.15 lakh only.  Similarly, for, feasibility study 
on Mega Chemical Industrial Estate (MCIE) an amount of Rs. 300 lakh was 
allocated during 2004-05.  However, the actual cost of the consultancy based 
on the competitive bidding came to Rs. 57.84 lakh only.  This clearly shows 
lack of planning and monitoring system  in the Ministry/bodies under its 
administrative control.  The Commi ttee, therefore,  would like the 
Government to examine the whole structure of the budgetary process, 
project planning and implementation st ages in the Department and their 
Subordinate offices/PSUs under its administrative control, so that, the plan 
funds allocated are utilised evenly on regular basis with a view to achieving 
the objectives set for the various schemes .   Needless to emphasise that the 
Ministry should take nece ssary steps to improve/strengthen financial 
management and project planning based on such a study. 

 12
B. Framing of National Policy on Petrochemicals 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
 
8. In the context of several problems like low capacity utilisation, investment 
restriction of Rs. 1 cror e in plant and machinery d ue to continuation of SSI 
reservation and restriction on use of plas tic packing of foodgrains and sugar in 
compliance with Jute Packaging Materials Ac t (JPMA) being face d by the plastic 
industry, the Committee had recommended to frame a National Policy on 
Petrochemicals urgently for addressing these issues. 
9. The Ministry, in their Action Ta ken Reply, have stated as under:- 
 
 “All the issues highlighted by th e Committee have been adequately 
addressed in the draft National Policy on Petrochemicals, which has been 
approved by the Hon’ble Mini ster (C&F).  The Department is in the process 
of circulating the draft Policy along with the dra ft Cabinet Note to the 
Ministries/Departments concerned fo r their comments.  After the 
incorporation of their comments in the Cabinet Note, it will be submitted for 
the approval of the Cabinet.” 
 
 
10. The Committee are happy to note that all issues highlighted by the 
Committee have been adequately addressed  in the draft ‘National Policy on 
Petrochemicals’.  The Committee, however, would like the Ministry to 
process and finalise the draft ‘Nationa l Policy on Petrochemicals’ at the 
earliest. 
 

 13
C. Centre for Design & Development, Hazipur 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
11. It came out during the course of examination that dies, moulds and tools 
costing about Rs. 3000 crore are being imported from Taiw an, Korea, Japan, etc. 
and that there is no facility for design, dev elopment and fabrication of mould, dies 
and tools in Bihar, UP, Jharkhand, Ori ssa and West Bengal, the Committee had 
desired that the Government should take  up the matter expeditiously with the 
Planning Commission for the proposed Centre at Hazipur. 
 
12. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have furnished as follows:- 
 
“Planning Commission has not prov ided any amount for setting up a 
centre for design and development of tools at Hazipur (Bihar) during the 
current financial year 2005-06.  Howe ver, the Government intends to 
pursue the matter with the Planning Co mmission at the time when the 
proposals for the Revised Estimates are considered by the Planning 
Commission.” 
 
 
 
13. The Committee regret to note that  the Government has not provided 
any amount for setting up a Centre for Design and Development of tools at 
Hazipur though about Rs. 3000 crore are being spent annually on imports of  
dies, moulds and tools.   Consider ing the huge outgo of foreign exchange 
and to make the eastern region self-re liant in design, development and 
fabrication of moulds, dies and tools, the Committee, once again, strongly 
recommend that the Government should find necessary ways and means for 
establishment of this Centre in a time bound manner. 

 14
D. Assam Gas Cracker Project 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
14. Assam Gas Cracker Project was proposed as early as in 1984 for utilisation 
of petroleum fraction of natural gas.  T he project is pending for a long time.  The 
main delay in setting up of the projec t is due to shortage of gas required for 
production of 2 lakh TPA of ethylene.  The Ministry of  Petroleum & Natural Gas 
agreed to supply LPG to make up the shortage but decided to implement the 
project through some PSUs as large amount of subsidy was involved.  For this 
purpose, GAIL was identifie d which have prepared a detai led feasibility report.  
The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas sent the proposal to the Ministry of 
Finance for clearance of the project by PIB.  In view of considerable time already 
taken, the Committee desired that the requisite procedures may expeditiously be 
completed so that the project can take off without further delay. 
 
15. The Ministry, in their Action Ta ken Reply, have stated as under:- 
 
“The PIB Note was sent to the Mini stry of Finance on 11.02.2005 by 
the Ministry of Petroleum & Natura l Gas, which was considered in the 
meeting of PIB held on 15. 04.2005.  Certain issues  regarding clarity on the 
feedstock prices and the subsidy involv ed, IRR calculated in the Note of 
GAIL, clarity on OIDB loan, funding by  all partners of the project, 
environmental clearance, plan budget support etc. were raised by the 
representative of this Department and Ministry of Finance and the Planning 
Commission.  After discussions, it was decided that Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas would submit a Supplement ary Note for the consideration of 
PIB covering all the points raised in the meeting.  Financial Adviser, Ministry 
of Petroleum & Natural Gas took meetings on 21.04. 2005 and 04.05.2005 
to finalise the Supplementary Note.  GA IL has been advised to prepare the 
Supplementary Note quickly.” 
 
 

 15
16. The Committee (including the erstwhile Standing Committee on 
Petroleum & Chemicals) for the last  decade have been recommending early 
implementation of the Assam Gas Cracker project.  The project is yet to be 
cleared by the Cabinet as PIB at their meeting held on 15 th April, 2005 had 
asked for some more inputs.  The Committee once again reiterate that for 
the development of North- Eastern area s, the project should be cleared and 
taken up for implementation at the ea rliest.  The Commi ttee would await 
conclusive action in the matter. 
 
E. Disbursement of compensation to Bhopal Gas Leak victims 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
17. On account of variations in the exchange rate, the Supreme Court ordered 
disbursement of compensation to the Bhopal Gas Leak victims on pro-rata basis. 
As per Supreme Court direction, the Welf are Commissioner had to complete this 
task by 30
th April, 2005.  They had also as ked for extension of time beyond 30 th 
April, 2005.  In this regard, the Committee had desired to be apprised of the status 
of the disbursement. 
 
18. The Ministry, in their Action Take n Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 
“Till 7th May, 2005, claims of 1,75,620 persons have been settled and 
they have been paid a total pro-rata co mpensation of Rs. 506.63 crore.  On 
the request of the Welfare Commission er, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has 
extended the time limit for submitting t he Final Report regarding completion 
of pro-rata disbursement upto 30 th April, 2006, vide its orders dated 25 th 
April, 2005.” 
  

 16
19. The Committee note that on the request of the Welfare Commissioner, 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court has extended the time-limit for submitting the 
final report regarding completion of pro-rata disbursement upto 30 th April, 
2006.  The Committee trust that the Go vernment/Welfare Commissioner will 
take all necessary steps to disburse the relief/compensation by April, 2006 in 
terms of Supreme Court orders. 
 
F. Requisition of in-house expertise in IPFT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
20. The Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology (IPFT), a registered 
society under the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemic als, is engaged in the 
development and production of pesticide formulation tec hnologies.  The Ministry 
had informed that a provision of Rs. 255 la kh for setting up of the organisation for 
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)  facility and Rs. 50 lakh for creating 
library and data acquisition could not be util ized due to absence of qualified 
manpower.  Having known that IPFT is la cking in-house expertise and several 
important positions are laying vacant, the Committ ee had recommended that 
effective steps should be taken for provisio n of the requisite in-house expertise in 
order to enable the institute to undertake their assigned activities. 
 
21. The Ministry, in their Action Ta ken Reply, have furnished as under:- 
 
“During the year 2004-05 a provis ion of Rs. 573 lakh was made 
towards grant in aid to IPFT as agains t which the actual expenditure has 
been Rs. 273.65 lakh.  The main reasons  for under utilization of budgetary 
allocation was deferment of schemes for creation of OPCW facilities, library 
and data acquisition facilities due to  the absence of qualified manpower.  

 17
Regarding the steps taken in this r egard, it may be mentioned that the 
Governing Body of IPFT in its Meeting held on 11 th January, 2005, 
approved the amending the Recruitment Ru les for various posts in IPFT in 
order to incorporate provision for c ontractual appointment.  The Governing 
Body also directed to ex amine in detail the manpower structure of IPFT 
including the existing vacant posts and the posts which needs to be created 
either by surrender of existing vacant  post or otherwise.  Necessary action 
in this regard has already been initiated by IPFT.” 
 
 
22. The Committee have been informed that IPFT in its meeting held on 
11th January, 2005 has taken decision to amend recruitment rules for various 
posts in IPFT for making contractual ap pointments.  The Governing body is 
also reported to be examining in deta il the manpower structure of IPFT.  The 
Committee once again would like to emph asise an early action in the matter 
so as to make sincere efforts to deploy requisite manpower and utilize funds 
allotted to IPFT to carry out the responsibilities assigned to it efficiently.  
 
G. Effective monitoring of non-Scheduled Drugs – Ceiling on trade margin 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
23. The National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) is entrusted with the 
task of price fixation/revision of Scheduled drugs and monitoring of non-Scheduled 
drugs on the basis of price list submi tted by manufacturers, ORG-MARG/IMS 
report and complaint received from official and non-official source s.  However, the 
instances of shortages and c harging of high prices on  drugs and formulation are 
rampant in the country, particularly in ru ral areas.  The Commi ttee had, therefore, 
recommended that an effective monitoring  of prices be done for non-Scheduled 
drugs and if possible, a ceiling on trade margin of drugs may also be fixed. 

 18
24. The Ministry, in their Action Ta ken Reply, have stated as under:- 
“NPPA is already having an effective system of monitoring the 
movement of prices of non-Schedul ed medicines of mass consumption 
marketed through trade channel and inte rvenes whenever instances of 
unreasonable increase in prices affect ing public interest adversely are 
noticed.  This is an ongoing process.  Due to the efforts made by NPPA.  15 
companies have reduced the price volunt arily in respect of 25 formulation 
packs ranging between 2.14% to 34.62%. 
A Committee under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (PI) was 
constituted to examine the span of pr ice control (includi ng trade margin) in 
the light of National Common Minimum Programme and the observations of 
the Supreme Court in SLP No. 3668/2003 and to suggest measures for 
fulfilling the objective of National Common Minimum Programme to ensure 
the availability of life saving drugs at reasonable prices.  This Committee 
has submitted its interim report to the Government.  The Committee has 
recommended, inter-alia, intensive monitoring on the prices of all those 
drugs out of the selected basket (Nat ional List of Essential Medicines, 
2003) which are not under price control,  ceilings on trade margins of drugs, 
a system of price negotiations for t he new patented drugs, special schemes 
for people below poverty line, introduction of Rajasthan Model  of Life Line 
Fluid Stores (hospital pharmacy stores run by Medicare Societies) for bulk 
purchase of drugs directly from manuf acturer and selling them at reduced 
prices, compounding of offences under the Essential Commodities Act, 
establishment of DPCO cell in all St ates on the model of  Karnataka etc., 
efforts to increase public awareness, wide publicity to policies and decisions 
of the Government and NPPA etc. 
 
A Task Force has also been constituted under the Chairmanship of 
the Principal Adviser (PP), Planning Co mmission to explore various options 
other than price control for achieving the objective of ma king available life 
saving drugs at reasonable prices.” 
 
 
25. The Committee have dealt with in  detail the issues relating to the 
pricing and availability of dr ugs/pharmaceuticals in their 7 th Report which 
has already been sent to  the Ministry for necessar y action.  The Committee 
trust that the Government woul d take note of the Committee’s 
recommendations relating to effect ive monitoring of  non-Scheduled 
drugs/ceiling on trade margin also.  

 19
H. Widespread use of banned drugs 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
26. In the context of widespread usa ge of drugs banned by the World Health 
Oranisation and similar other organisati ons in the country, the Committee had 
desired that this menace r equired to be met effectively with by the authorities 
concerned. 
 
27. The Ministry, in their Action Ta ken Reply, have stated as under:- 
 
“The subject of banned drugs is look ed after by Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare.  The reply from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
is awaited.” 
 
 
 28.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the conclusive action 
taken by the concerned Department/Ministry in the matter at the earliest. 
 
I. Export of Drugs 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
29. The export of drugs, pharmaceuticals and chemicals was to the tune of Rs. 
14321.1 crore in 2003-04 from a level of Rs. 8757.5 crore in 2000-01.  
Appreciating this increase, the Commi ttee had desired that in post WTO era, 
consistent efforts should be made for increasing the exports of drugs and 
pharmaceuticals and to establish India as global leader in pharma sector for which 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals may also consider increase in 
budgetary allocation. 

 20
30. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have furnished as under:-  
 
“The Department has noted t he desire of the Committee and 
proposes to work out an action plan in this regard.  The budgetary provision 
has been raised from Rs. 3 lakhs to Rs. 5 lakhs in BE  2005-06 for Pharma 
Export Promotion Scheme.  However, fu rther increase due to the action 
plan would be sought in Revised Estimates.” 
 
 
31. The Committee have been informed that the budgetary provision for 
export promotion scheme has been raised from Rs. 3 lakh to Rs. 5 lakh in 
2005-06.  The Committee feel  that this amount is too meagre and it is 
doubtful whether this can achieve any c oncrete objective.  The Committee, 
therefore, would like the Governmen t to take the matter seriously and 
provide reasonable funds for the purpose. 
 
J. Recovery from the Drug Companies 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
32. The Drug Prices Liabilities Review Commi ttee (DPLRC) has been 
constituted to assist in determining/quant ifying the liability of each of the drug 
companies arising on account of implementation of provisions of the Drugs (Prices 
Control) Order, 1979.  The Committee no ted that 32 cases are pending with 
DPLRC including 22 cases he ld up due to stays grant ed by the High Court of 
Mumbai involving a total of Rs. 142 crore.  In all, there are also 24 cases pending 
in the Supreme Court and in various High Courts involving approximately Rs. 101 
crore.  A transfer petition was filed in the Supreme C ourt for transferring all the 
cases pending in various High Courts to  the Supreme Court of India.  While 

 21
expressing their concern over the extent of dues locked up, the Committee had 
desired that the matter be pursued vigorously for early realization of the legitimate 
dues to the Government. 
 
33. The Ministry, in their Action Ta ken Reply, have furnished as under:- 
 
“All possible efforts are being made by the Government for early 
recovery of DPEA liabilit ies.  As regards the latest position including the 
details of recovery and the extent of pending liabilities, it is stated that under 
the Drugs (Prices Contro l) Order, 1979, there were 345 bulk drugs under 
price control.  The Department has com puted tentative liabilities in respect 
of 47 bulk drugs only whic h amounts to Rs. 326 crore approx. covering 172 
cases till the Interim Stay dated 30.06.1997 granted by the Hon’ble Bombay 
High Court in the writ petition filed by the I ndian Drugs Manufacturers 
Association (IDMA) restraining t he Department and its Committees from 
determining fresh liabilities.  Out of  these 172 cases where the liabilities 
have already been determined tentat ively and communicated to the 
companies, the Department had referred 72 assessment cases during the 
period 1995-1997 to the DPLR Committee for its review/recommendations.  
Out of these 72 cases, the Committee gave its recommendations in 50 
cases giving its views on various issues  involved in these cases but did not 
quantify the liability in these cases.  In view of the stay granted by the 
Bombay High Court, the Committee has not taken up the remaining 22 
cases nor any fresh case.  On the basis of the views of the DPLRC, 
Department computed the liabilities in respect of 16 companies amounting 
to Rs. 29.42 crore and the demand notices were issued to them.  Most of 
these companies filed writ petition in  different High Courts.  The revised 
terms of reference were issued on 10.10. 2002.  After the issue of revised 
terms of reference of the Committee, 33 cases, where the liability was still 
to be quantified, were referred back to the DPLRC for quantification of the 
liability.  Out of these 33 cases, the Committee has so far given its report in 
30 cases.  The DPLRC has quantifie d the liability in 26 cases (25 
companies – one case linked with another).   
 
The total amount of liability quantif ied by the DPLRC in respect of 
these cases is to the tune of Rs. 135. 10 crore as per two Members and as 
Rs. 114.07 crore as per the recommendation of the Chairman, DPLRC.  In 
4 cases, DPLRC has stated that the Co mmittee was not in  a position to 
quantify the liability because of the above said stay order.  Thus, at present, 
there are 29 cases pending wi th the DPLRC (for qu antification of DPEA 
liability : 3 because of High Court stay  : 26 where no quantification could be 
done till the vacation of the stay).  The tentative amou nt of liability involved 

 22
in these 29 cases pending with the DPLRC is approx. Rs. 136,00 crore.  In 
addition to these 29 cases pending with  the DPLRC, there may be a large 
number of liability cases in respect of  the remaining 298 bulk drugs where 
the liability is still to be quantified.  The am ount of liability, in such cases, to 
be quantified after the stay is vacated may be very large.” 
 
 
34. The Committee note that there were 345 bulk drugs under price 
control under the Drugs (Price Control) Order, 1979.  The Department could 
compute tentative liabilities in r espect of 47 bulk drugs only and got 
restrained in fixing liabilities in the remaining cases due to intervention of 
High Courts.  The matter is pending since long and huge amounts of money 
due to the Government are lying with drug manufacturers.  Even though the 
Ministry informed the Committee in April, 2005 that they had approached the 
Supreme Court for transferring all pend ing cases in the High Courts in the 
matter, the instant reply of the Minist ry is silent about the present position 
about this appeal in the Supreme Cour t.  The Committee feel that the matter 
requires to be pursued promptly.  The Committee, therefore, would like to be 
apprised about the outcome of this and also specific steps taken for early 
hearings in the Supreme Court and to settle the legal hurdles. 
 
K. Setting up of Mega Chemical Industrial Estate 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
35. With a view to increasing produc tion and export earnings in chemical 
sector, the Government have decided to se t up a Mega Chemical Industrial Estate 
(MCIE).  A provision of Rs. 340 lakh was made in BE (2004-05) for this and for 
promotional activities of  Chemical Promotion and De velopment Scheme (CPDS), 

 23
out of which an expenditure of Rs. 56 la kh was incurred.  A consultant was 
appointed for the study who has submitted Concept Paper, Inception Report and 
Market Study Report.  The Committee had des ired that they may be kept apprised 
of the further development in the matter. 
 
36. The Ministry, in their Action Take n Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 
“The recommendation of the Committ ee that it should be kept 
apprised of the further developments in the progress of the feasibility study 
has been noted.  It may be stated here that in the meanwhile, the 
Consultants have submitted the Location Study report.” 
 
 
37. The Committee would like the Government to take necessary action in 
regard to setting up the proposed Industrial Estate in a time bound manner 
to avoid time and cost over-runs.  
 
L. Revival of si ck/closed PSUs. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. Nos. 20 and 21) 
 
 
38. The Committee had observed that Hindus tan Insecticides Limited (HIL), 
Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), Hindustan Antibiotics Limited 
(HAL), Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited (HOCL) and Bengal Chemicals & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) under  the Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals are declared sick and were referred to BIFR.  Their rehabilitation 
programmes were either under considerati on of the Government or before the 
Board for Reconstruction of Public Se ctor Enterprises (BRPSE).  Finding 
considerable delay in revival of these co mpanies resulting in huge financial outgo 

 24
towards establishment cost and ot her expenditure, the Committee had 
recommended that revival of all the sick/closed PSUs pot entially fit for revival be 
taken up seriously and promptly and a decision in this regard be taken urgently. 
 
39. The Ministry, in their Action Take n Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 
“The revival of companies is a ve ry complex and time consuming 
process particularly in case of thos e companies which are before the BIFR.  
According to the instructions dat ed 6.12.2004 issued by the Government, 
such proposals are now also required to  be submitted for the consideration 
of the Board for Reconstruction of Publ ic Sector Enterprises, before these 
are submitted to Cabinet. 
 
So far as information relating to i ndividual companies is concerned, 
HAL is a BIFR company since 1997. Its rehabilitation proposal was referred 
to BRPSE for its consideration on 14.03.2005.  One meeting of BRPSE was 
held on 18.04.2005. The second meeting is expected to be held in July, 
2005.  The HOCL and HIL have been refe rred to BIFR in February, 2005 
and March, 2004 respectively.  Their Rehabilitation Plans have been 
submitted to BRPSE recently.  The ID PL was referred to BIFR in May, 
1992.  BIFR issued windi ng up orders for IDPL on 04.12.2003.  However, 
the Government has filed an appeal in the AAIFR against the winding up 
orders.  The Government also set up an Expert Committee to conduct 
techno economic feasibility of rehabilitating IDPL.  In  case of BCPL, BIFR  
has sanctioned a Modified Rehabil itation Scheme which is under 
consideration of the Government.” 
 
 
  
40. From the details given by the De partment in respect of revival of 
Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL), Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals 
Limited (IDPL), Hindustan Antibioti cs Limited (HAL), Hindustan Organic 
Chemicals Limited (HOCL) and Be ngal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals 
Limited (BCPL), the Committee note that these are at various stages of 
revival.  Since the revival progra mmes/rehabilitation schemes/modified 
plans in respect of these companies have been moving from one 

 25
Department to another for the last so  many years, the Committee would like 
the Government to sincerely prepare a time schedule for the revival of each 
of these units and they be apprised about the follow up action taken in this 
regard. 
 
M. Upgradation in plant and machinery of RDPL 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 22) 
 
41. During an on-the-spot study  visit of the Committee to Jaipur, the matter that 
the Rajasthan Drugs & Pharma ceuticals Limited (RDPL) had sent a proposal of 
financial support to the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals) for upgradat ion of its plants and machinery, was 
brought to the notice of t he Committee.  The Committee,  therefore, recommended 
that the Government should consider the proposal of RDPL expeditiously and 
come forward for assisting them. 
 
42. The Ministry, in their Action Take n Reply, have submitted as under:- 
 
“A proposal was received from RDPL to help them in arranging inter-
corporate loan to upgrade its plants and machinery.  The proposal has been 
sent to the Department of Fertilizers for necessary action.” 
  
 
43. The Committee note that the Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals 
Limited (RDPL) is a Joint Sector U ndertaking promoted by the Rajasthan 
Industrial Investment Corporation (RIICO) and the Indian Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL) which comes under the Department of 

 26
Chemicals & Petrochemicals.  Thi s fact was mentioned in the 
recommendation of the Committee.   However, the proposal of financial 
support to RDPL has been sent to the Department of Fertilizers.  The 
Committee are not very clear as to why the proposal for Rajasthan Drugs 
and Pharmaceuticals Limited has been sen t to the Department of Fertilizers 
for necessary action.  The y would like to be appr ised of the specific 
conclusive action taken by the Department, if necessary in coordination with 
the Department of Fertilizers. 

 27
CHAPTER – II 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
Central Institute of Pl astics Engineering & Technology (CIPET) is an 
autonomous institution,  under the administrative cont rol of the Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals. The Institute is expected to help in strengthening its 
facilities and expertise for providing technical services to the plastics industry.  The 
Committee have been informed that thr ee new CIPET centres in Rajasthan, 
Haryana and Maharashtra are to be estab lished during the remaining period of 
10th Five Year Plan with financial assi stance of Government of India and 
respective State Governments. T hese centres will create employment 
opportunities for youth and facilitate tech nology upgradation of existing plastic 
industry. This will also invite new ent repreneurs in these States and boost their 
economy.  The Committee note that tho ugh the officials of CIPET and State 
Government of Rajasthan have inspected four/five sites in Jaipur, the same 
exercise is yet to be completed in case of Haryana and Maharashtra.  The 
Committee are happy that the CIPET network  is sought to be extended to wider 
areas. They hope that this would result in the overall promotion of the plastic 
industry in the country.  The Committee, ther efore, desire that the work in regard 
to establishment of new CIPET centres be done expedi tiously so that these 
centres may be established withi n the target in the remaining period of 10thFive 
Year Plan itself. 

 28
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Govt. is making all efforts to ensure t hat the three new c entres of CIPET in 
the States of Rajasthan, Haryana and Maharashtra are established within the 
remaining period of the Tenth Five Year Plan.   
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 
 
 Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
 
The Committee note that presently plas tic industry is engulfed with many 
problems. In this connection, the Committee note that according to the Task Force 
on Petrochemicals, the capacity utilizati on of the industry is low around 60% and 
continuation of SSI reservation after remo val of Quantitative Restrictions and the 
provisions of the Jute Packaging Material s Act (JPMA) are stated to be coming in 
the way of the development of this industry. There is investment restriction of Rs.1 
crore in plant & machinery due to SSI rese rvation which reportedly restricts them 
to become techno-commercially competitive in global market to sustain 
competition from China, Korea, Taiwan etc. The JP MA Act, 1987 does not leave 
scope for use of plastic for packaging of foodgr ains and sugar as it stipulates that 
entire quantities of foodgrains and sugar have to be compulsorily packed in Jute 
sacks. Since plastic is going to play a major role in the coming future, the 
Committee recommends that the problems of this industry be addressed urgently 
and for this a National Policy on Petrochemicals be framed at the earliest. 

 29
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 All the issues highlighted by the Committee have been adequately 
addressed in the draft National Poli cy on Petrochemicals, which has been 
approved by the Hon’ble Minister (C&F). The Department is in the process of 
circulating the draft Policy along wi th the draft Cabi net Note to the 
Ministries/Departments concerned for their comments. After the incorporation of 
their comments in the Cabinet Note, it will be submitted for the approval of the 
Cabinet.  
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
 The Committee note that out of a total budget allocation of Rs.748.78 crore 
under Revenue Section in 200 5-06, Rs.663.71 crore has been earmarked for 
Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster which is about 88 % of total Revenue allocation.  This 
has been necessitated owing to the orders of the Supreme Court for disbursement 
of the compensation to the victims on account  of variations in the exchange rate.  
The Ministry have informed that till 23 March,2005, pro-rata compensation 
amounting to Rs.368.99 cror e has been disbursed in 1,25,657 cases and 8674 
revision petitions and about 4.44 lakh pr o-rata compensation cases are pending 
before the Welfare Commissioner who as per Supreme Court direction, has to 

 30
complete this task by 30 th April,2005.  It has also  be en informed that the Welfare 
Commissioner has sought for ex tension of time beyond 30 th April,2005.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the status of the disbursement. 
 
Reply of the Governemnt 
 
 
  Till 7 th May, 2005, claims of 1,75,620 pers ons have been settled and they 
have been paid a total pro-rata compensati on of Rs.506.63 crores. On the request 
of the Welfare Commissioner, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has extended the time 
limit for submitting the Final  Report regarding completion of  pro-rata disbursement 
upto 30th April,2006, vide its orders dated 25th April,2005. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
The Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology (IPFT)  is a registered 
society under the Departm ent of Chemicals and Petrochemicals engaged in the 
development and production of pestici de formulation technologies.  The 
Committee noted that out of total allocation  of Rs.1281 lakh for IPFT in  the first 
three years of the 10th Five Year Plan, the actual expenditure has been Rs.681.15 
lakh which includes an allocation of Rs.573 lakh during 2004-05 wherein the actual 
expenditure was only Rs.273. 65 lakh.  The Ministry have informed that the 
provision of Rs.255 lakh for setting up of Organization for Prohibition of Chemical 

 31
Weapons (OPCW) facility and Rs.50 lakh for creating library and data acquisition 
could not be utilized due to absence of qualified manpow er.  IPFT is lacking in-
house expertise and several important positions are lying vacant.  The Committee, 
therefore recommended that e ffective steps should be taken for provision of the 
requisite in-house expertise in order to  enable the Institut e to undertake their 
assigned activities. 
Reply of the Government  
 
 
During the year 2004-05 a provision of Rs.573 lakhs was made towards 
grant in aid to IPFT as against which t he actual expenditure has been Rs. 273.65 
lakhs.  The main reasons for under utilization of budgetary allocation was 
deferment of schemes for creation of OPCW  facilities, library and data acquisition 
facilities due to the absence of qualifi ed manpower.  Regarding the steps taken in 
this regard, it may be ment ioned that the Governing Body  of IPFT in its Meeting 
held on 11 th January, 2005, approved the amendi ng the Recruitment Rules for 
various posts in IPFT in order to incorporate provision for contractual appointment.  
The Governing Body also di rected to examine in detail the manpower structure of 
IPFT including the existing vacant posts and the posts which needs to be created 
either by surrender of existing vacant post or otherwise.  Necessary action in this 
regard has already been initiated by IPFT. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 32
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
 
 The National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research (NIPER) 
had been conceived as a mother  Institution to set standards of excellence for 
pharmaceutical scenario and for research and development in the field of 
pharmaceuticals.  The Committee note t hat besides the budgetary allocation, 
funds are being made available to NIPER from pharmaceutical Research and 
Development  Programme (PRDP) to  undertake R&D  in drugs and 
pharmaceuticals.  Though NIPER has made  progress, no new drug in regard to 
Tuberculosis, Malaria, Leishmania and  Diabetes has been discovered as yet.  
The Committee feel that research in all t hese areas is extremely relevant for the 
health care need in the country where mu ltinational pharmaceuticals companies 
/other companies have limited interest.   This also has become necessary in the 
light of the statement of the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals that the 
R&D for discovery of new medicines in Tuberculosis, Malaria, Leishmania has 
become quite important  as multi drug resistance has developed in these 
diseases.  The Committee, therefore, re commend that concert ed efforts be made 
to develop and discover new drugs in Tuberculosis, Malaria, Leishmainia, etc.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 All out efforts are being made by NIPER to develop and discover new drugs 
in Tuberculosis, Malaria, Leishmania, etc.  The discovery and development of new 

 33
drug in any area involves pre-clinical and clinical tests for its efficacy and safety 
which requires adequate period of about 12-15 years. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that after amendm ent in the Patent Act of 1970 under 
obligation of WTO and TRIP S, the product patent regime  would be introduced in 
pharmaceutical sector and this may alter the prices of drugs in the country. At this 
crucial time, there is a pronounced need for t he Government to keep the prices of 
drugs within the reach of common man. The Committee,  therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers in co-ordination with other concerned 
Ministries should set up a mechanism wh ich will closely monitor the price 
behaviour in the wake of the amendments in the Patents Law and take appropriate 
corrective measures for enforcing proper moderations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Through amendment in the Patents Act, 1970,  product patent regime has 
been introduced for drugs(medicines).   T he existing patent law in the country 
provides for a strong and comprehensive se t of safeguards, and inter-alia, has 
effective provisions to ensure availability of pharmaceutical products at reasonable 
price through compulsory licensing.   Many  of the drugs already in the Indian 
market, including those in the National List  of Essential Medicines 2003, are off-

 34
patent and their prices would not get affect ed by the new patent regime. This also 
would not have an immediate impact on the availability and prices of medicines.   
 
The National Pharmaceutic al Pricing Authority moni tors the prices of all 
formulations including impor ted Scheduled formulations under price control.  
Under the DPCO, no person can sell any formulation (medicine) of price controlled 
category to a consumer at a price exce eding the price notified/approved by the 
NPPA/Government.     As part of its m onitoring activity, NPPA regularly examines 
the movement in prices of non-Scheduled formulations.  NPPA would be advised 
to undertake a special watch on the prices  of medicines keeping in view the 
introduction of product patent for medici nes and keep the Government informed.  
Wherever required, remedial   action  would be taken in consultation with the 
Department of Health,  Industrial Policy & Promotion etc.,  on case to case basis. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl.  No. 10)  
 
 In the opinion of the Committee, in the wake of the amendments to the 
Patents Act, there is an imperative need to give more thrust on Research & 
Development. The Committee th erefore, trust that the Department will extend all 
necessary support in the overall interests of both the drugs  and pharmaceutical 
sector as  also the  common man at  large. 
 

 35
Reply of the Government 
 
Indian drug companies have been carryin g out research programmes for 
development of processes for manufacture of a number  of  drugs  required for 
various diseases, as well as developm ent of new molecules of pharmaceutical 
value,  for treatment  of such diseases. 
 
The Department of Science and Technology (DST) has mounted 
“Pharmaceutical Research and De velopmental Support Fund (PRDSF)” 
programme (formerly this activity was dealt under “ Drugs and Pharmaceutical 
Research Programme” (DPRP)  on Drug Development for promoting collaborative 
Research and Development  (R &D)with the specific objec tive to synergise  the 
strengths of publicly funded R&D institutions and Indian Pharmaceutical Industry in 
all systems of medicines.  
 
Under this programme  15 projects have been on herbal drugs covering the 
areas of Ayurveda and Sidha  Systems of  Medicines for diseases like 
Rheumatism, Diarrhoea, Pancre atitis, Gastritis, ischaemic heart diseases, skin, 
cardiac disorders, cancer, eye diseases, AI DS, Malaria,    rheumatoid Arthritis, 
Leucoderma, Respiratory disorders etc. 
 
Separately, in order to augment the  traditional systems of medicine, the 
Government of India put in place a National Policy  on  Indian Systems  of 
Medicine & Homeopathy in the year 2002. The major objectives of the policy are to 
promote good health and expa nd the outreach of health care to the people, 
particularly those not provided with t he health cover, through preventive, 

 36
promotive, mitigating and curative interv ention of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, 
Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy ( AYUSH).  It also aims to ensure affordable  
AYUSH services and drugs which are sa fe  and efficacious. Four Research 
Councils have been established under the Department of AYUSH for research and 
development work including the drug research . Apart from the intramural research 
conducted by the Research Councils, the Government has initiated a scheme 
called “Golden Triangle   Partnership”  for  the de velopment of  new Ayurveda 
drugs  in addition to valid ating the existing formulations. Department of AYUSH, 
CSIR and ICMR will work  together to vali date classical Ayurvedic formulations for 
treatment of diseases  of national as well as global interest . R&D based safe, 
effective and standardized Ayurvedic and natural medicines with IPR potentials for 
identified disease  conditions  are intended to be devel oped utilizing appropriate 
technologies & research methodologies. 
 
 Separately, in the Budget speech of the Finance Minister there was a 
special mention regarding stable policy environment and creat ion of necessary 
incentives to help the Pharma and Bi otechnology Industries to become world 
leaders.  In pursuance of this a meeting was held with the Department of Science 
and Technology, Department of  Biot echnology and Department of AYUSH . 
Based on this the following proposals have been conveyed to the Ministry of 
Finance:- 
 
(a) As informed by DST it has been decided  at the level of Planning 
Commission to provide an  annual pl an grant of Rs. 150.00 crores for 
R&D fund instead of the Corpus Fund. 
 

 37
(b) The Department of Biotechnology is in the process of formulation a 
scheme for R&D support to Biotech industry through public/private  
partnership. They have assessed an annual requirement of Rs. 100 
crores for this scheme. It has been mentioned that   they would be 
finalizing the scheme within a period of three months. 
 
(c) A Golden Triangle Partnership  Scheme for Ayurvedic products 
between AYUSH, CSIR  and ICMR is  being considered involving a 
one time fund of Rs. 100 crores. The scheme is under finalisation. 
 
(d) Four new Pharma HRD cum R&D In stitutes on the pa ttern of NIPER 
at a total cost of Rs. 400 crores(excluding land) to be set up in various  
parts of the country in the next five years. 
 
(e) As regards fiscal incentives, the terminal duties for income tax 
exemption under Section 35(2AB) and 801 A (8A) should be 
extended upto 31.3.2015. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
 The Committee note that Pharmaceut ical Export Promotion Cell (PEPC) 
has been set up to give a boost to export by domestic pharmaceutical industry and 
production of quality drugs.  Export of drugs, pharmaceuticals and chemicals have 
been made to the tune of Rs.14321.1 crore in 2003-04 fr om a level of Rs.8757.5 
crore in 2000-01.  The Committee are happy to find that export of drugs and 
pharmaceuticals has since increased in rupee terms from 2000-01 to 2003-04.  
The Committee, therefore, des ire that in the Post WTO era, consistent efforts 
should be made for increasing export  of drugs and pharmaceuticals and to 
establish India a global leader in pha rma sector.  For achieving this, the 
Department may also consider increase in budgetary allocation. 
 

 38
Reply of the Government  
 
 The Department has noted the desire of the Commi ttee and proposes to 
work out an action plan in this regard.  The budgetary provis ion has been raised 
from Rs.3 lakhs to Rs.5 lakhs in BE 2005-06 for Pharma Export Promotion 
Scheme.  However, further increase due to the action plan would be sought in 
Revised Estimates. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
 
 The Committee note that the Government  have taken a decision to set up a 
Mega Chemical Industrial Estate (MCIE ) with a view to enabling increase in 
production and export earnings in Chemical Se ctor.  A provision of Rs.340 lakh 
was made in BE (2004-05) for this purpo se and for promotional activities of 
(CPDS), out of which an expenditure of  Rs.56 lakh has been incurred.  The 
Ministry, have informed that the study ahs been entrusted to the Consultant who 
has submitted Concept Paper, Inception Report and Market Study Report.  The 
Committee desire that they may be kept apprised of the further development in the 
matter.  
  
 

 39
Reply of the Government  
 
 
The recommendation of the Committee that  it should be ke pt apprised of 
the further developments in the progress of the feasibi lity study has been noted. It 
may be stated here that in the meanwhile , the Consultants have submitted the 
Location Study report. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 37 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
 The Government have made it mandat ory for each Ministry/Department to 
provide for 10% of the total planned budget  for each year as contribution towards 
Non-lapsable Central Pool of resources for funding specific programmes in the 
North Eastern States and Sikkim.  The Committee note with concern that the pace 
of utilisation of amount for No rth Eastern areas is not up to the mark.  An amount 
of Rs. 9.21 crore has been transferred in th is regard to Non-laps able Pool during 
the last five years due to non-realisation of targets.  Assam Gas Cracker Project 
has not been initiated and no expenditu re has been made for creation of 
infrastructure facilities of CIPET cent re of Imphal under DONER programme.  The 
Committee desire that in keeping tune with the pronounced Government Policy, 
North Eastern Region should be given priority in bri nging them in the national 
mainstream.  They, therefore, desire that  the amount allocated for North Eastern 

 40
Region be utilized fully within the stipulated time period and more schemes be also 
considered for the all round development of the area. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Department has initiated a dialogue wi th State Government of Assam for 
identifying projects for funding under the scheme.  National Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER) has also been asked to 
undertake some project of pharmaceutical education/training in the North – East.  
A project of Rs.40 lakhs for plastic re cycling plant at Guwahati has been prepared 
for CIPET.  Matter is also being taken up with Department of North Eastern Region 
(DONER) and other States in North-East for suggesting projects to be taken up in 
the area.  It is hoped to utilize the maximum possible amount of budget allocated 
to this Department during the year 2005-06. 
 
 As regards the Assam Gas Cracker Project a detailed project report has 
been prepared by GAIL and this is being discussed by the Project Investment 
Board (PIB). Already two meetings of PIB have been held in this regard on 15 th 
April and 8 th July, 2005.  Some more details  have been sought from GAIL with 
regard to the project. After the project is cleared by PIB, it would be put up to 
Cabinet for approval. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 

 41
(Recommendation Sl. No.19) 
 Hindustan Insecticides Limited (H IL) is engaged in the production of 
insecticides.  The Committee note that heavy damage has been caused in 
Endosulfan Technical Plant of Udyogman dal unit of HIL due to a major fire 
accident in July, 2004.  The assessm ent of damage has been done by Civil 
Engineering Department, Cochin University.  The company had sought for an 
additional amount of Rs.7.11 crore in view of the fire  accident in the Udyogmandal 
unit of the plant.  The Ministry have informed that this amount was not made 
available to them at RE stage as ther e was a plan cut of Rs.15 crore.  The 
Committee find that Endosulfan Formulati on Plant would be redundant without 
availability of technical mate rial from technical unit and hence it is im perative that 
the plant be urgently rehabilitated and it st arted production.  Fu rther, there is a 
heavy wage and salary bill amounting to Rs.5.30 crore for under-utilised/idle 
workforce.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Endosulfan Technical 
Plant be urgently reconstr ucted and put back into pr oduction at the earliest 
possible time.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The revamping of Endos ulfan Plant has been tak en up on warfooting by 
HIL.  The Company has placed purchase orders for most of the equipment.  
According to the guidelines of the Kerala Pollution Control Board, an Incinerator is 
required to be installed simu ltaneously for which purchase order is being placed.  
The work on Plant recosntruction is likely to be completed by September,2005. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 

 42
 
(Recommendations Sl. Nos. 20 and 21)  
 
 
The Committee find that Hindustan Insectic ides Limited (HIL), Indian Drugs 
& Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL), Hindustan 
Organic Chemicals Limited (HOCL), Bengal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals Limited 
(BCPL) have been declared sick and referred to the Board for Industrial and 
Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) from one point of time or another.  HIL has 
submitted a modified capital-restructuring proposal duly approved by their Board of 
Directors.  The proposal is under consider ation of the Governm ent.  In regard to 
IDPL, a revival package was approved by BIFR on 10.02.1994.  At present, the 
Department has appointed an Expert Co mmittee to study the techno-financial 
feasibility for rehabilitating IDPL and its report is expect ed in the near future.  A 
draft rehabilitation scheme is before the consideration of  Board of Reconstruction 
of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) in case of HAL.   So far BCPL is concerned, 
the BIFR has sanctioned a Modified Rehabilitation Scheme for it.  The Ministry 
have informed that it has been examin ed and was in the process of being 
circulated to the Ministries/Departments c oncerned for their comments.  In regard 
to HOCL, revival by way of infusion of funds etc. or otherwise would depend on the 
outcome of the proceedings before BIFR.  The Committee feel that the problems 
of sick PSUs under the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals are not being 
dealt with promptly and there is considerable delay in revival of the companies 
resulting in huge financial outgo towa rds establishment cost and other 
expenditure.  Majority of the workforce remain unutilized and idle wages are being 

 43
paid.  In view of the abov e, the Committee desire that re vival of all the sick/closed 
companies potentially fit for revival be taken up seriously and promptly and a 
decision in this regard be taken urgently. 
 
As regards IDPL, the company had been established with the primary 
objective of creating self- sufficiency in essential life saving drugs and medicines.  
However, it became sick lo ng back in 1992 and it seem s that no serious efforts 
have been made for revival of IDPL till date.  The Committee feel that much delay 
has already been caused and there should be no  further time lost in revival of 
IDPL.  They strongly recommend that all out efforts be made for rehabilitation of 
IDPL just after techno-economic feasibilit y report is received so that the company 
can strive again to achieve its objectiv es and thereby the common man may get 
life saving drugs at affordable prices in time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The revival of companies is a very  complex and time consuming process 
particularly in case of those companies which are before the BIFR. According to 
the instructions dated  6.12.2004 issued by the Gove rnment, such proposals are 
now also required to be submitted for the consideration of the Board for 
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterp rises, before these are submitted to 
Cabinet.  
 
So far as information relating to indivi dual companies is c oncerned, HAL is 
a BIFR company since 1997.  Its rehabilitation proposal was referred to BRPSE for 
its consideration on 14.3.05.  One meet ing of BRPSE was held on 18.4.2005. The 

 44
second meeting is expected to be held in  July, 2005.  The HOCL and HIL have 
been referred to BIFR in February, 2005 and March, 2004 respectively.  Their 
Rehabilitation Plans have been submitted to BRPSE recently. The IDPL was 
referred to BIFR in May, 1992.  BIFR  issued winding up orders for IDPL on 
4.12.2003.  However, the  Government has  filed an appeal in the AAIFR against 
the winding up orders.  The Government also set up an Expert Committee to 
conduct techno economic feasibility of rehabilitating IDPL. The report of the 
Committee has been received recently and is  under consideration.  In case of 
BCPL, BIFR has sanctioned a Modified Rehabilitation Scheme which is under 
consideration of the Government. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 40 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 

 45
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE  
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No 16) 
 
 The Committee have been informed by the Government that it would not be 
legally tenable to either amend the DP CO,1970 or the Essential Commodities 
Act,1955 to overcome the drug companies approach of delaying the matter by 
moving to the courts, as it could amount to taking away the power of judicial 
review of the High Courts. The Committee find that there was no provision in the 
DPCO, 1979 for appeal against the demand notic es/orders issued by Government 
to the drug companies. This was a la cuna in the order an d therefore, drug 
companies went for legal redressal of thei r grievances under writ jurisdiction. The 
Committee feel that there should be  a provision of appeal and a certain 
percentage of amount mu st be deposited by the concerned drug companies 
before going in appeal on the line of the latest amendment made in other Acts 
such as the Consumer Protection Act, 1986. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemical s should make all efforts through the 
Courts to ensure that drug companies in itially deposit a certain percentage, say 
half of the amount due before they resort to judicial remedies. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The period of operation of the DPC O, 1979 was wef 1.4.1979 to 25.8.1987. 
Accordingly a provision of appeal or fo r depositing of a cert ain percentage of 

 46
amount by the drug companies concerned  before going in for appeal cannot be 
made in the DPCO 1979 with retrospective e ffect as it is not feasible  legally. 
However, as in the past, all efforts through the Courts will be made to ensure that 
the drug companies initially deposit a cert ain percentage, say half of the amount 
due before they resort to judicial remedies. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 

 47
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF  
THE GOVERNMENTHAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
 The Committee note that the budgetary provisions of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals for the y ear 2005-06 are Rs.913.25 crore which 
consist of Rs.83.00 crore for Plan and Rs.830.25 crore for Non-Plan.  In BE (2004-
05), the total provision was Rs. 124.39 cr ore (Plan Rs.77.38 crore and Non-Plan 
47.01 crore) which was increased in RE (2004-05) to a level of Rs.407.00 crore 
(Plan Rs.60.00 crore and Non-Plan Rs.347.00 crore).  The Non-Plan loan to PSUs 
has been kept at Rs.748.47 crore in 2005-06 from a level of Rs.21.47 crore from 
BE (2004-05).  Plan investment and loan has been kept at Rs.21.00 crore in 2005-
06 in comparison to Rs.20.20 crore in BE (2004-05).  The Committee find that 
there has been less utilisation in 2004-05 in schemes of Bhopal Gas, HAL, CIPET, 
IPFT, CPDS, NPPA and HOCL.  IPFT could not utilise a fund of Rs.5.73 crore fully 
as there was difficulty in obtaining t he required specialised manpower for the 
purpose.  In case of CP DS, the amount of Rs.3.40 crore allocated for the 
expenditure towards conduct of  feasibility study of setting up of mega chemical 
project was saved as there was delay in appointing the advisor for the project.  
There is saving under CIPET as the agreement for OPEC loan could not be 
finalised.  The same trend exists in the schemes of HAL, HOCL and Bhopal Gas.  
The Committee further note that dur ing the first three years of 10 th Five Year Plan 
too, there has been le ss utilisation in some schemes  of Institute of Pesticide 

 48
Formulation and Technology(IPFT), Chem ical Weapon Convention(CWC) and 
Chemical Promotion and Deve lopment Scheme(CPDS).  Ou t of total allocation of 
Rs.1281 lakh in the firs t three years of the 10 th Plan for IPFT, actual expenditure 
has been Rs. 681.15 lakh, only.  Under CWC, out of Rs. 15 lakh, an expenditure of 
Rs.7.70 lakh, was made during the first two years of 10 th Plan.  The Committee 
had also noted in their 40th Report(13th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2003-
04) of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals that in the Ninth Five 
Year Plan, out of a total allocation of  Rs.4012.56 crore, only Rs. 3398 crore were 
utilised by the Government.  These facts clearly establish that  the utilisation of 
budgetary resources has not been satisfactory .  In the process, there has been 
slippages in achieving the targets fixed during the first three years of 10 th Five 
Year Plan as well.  T he Committee, therefore, des ire that the reasons for 
underutilisation of budgetary allocations should be thoroughly analysed and the 
Department should gear up their machinery to realise the intended purposes and 
also achieve the targets in the remainin g two years of Plan.  With this, the 
Committee endorse the Demands for Grant s of the Department of Chemicals 
Petrochemicals of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers for the year 2005-06. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster. 
 
The actual disbursement of the claims settled by the Office of the Welfare 
Commissioner is carried out by Judicial Officers of the Office of the Welfare 
Commissioner. The Welfare Commissioner is also a si tting Judge of the Madhya 

 49
Pradesh High Court.  It may be noted that the Supreme Court is monitoring the 
disbursement process and t he Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has 
no control on the actual process of disbursement. 
 
The entire provision of Rs.300 crore made in R.E.  2004-05 for meeting the 
Exchange Rate Variation, could not be utilized as the Welf are Commissioner’s 
office was not able to settle the pro-rata  claims quickly because of procedurial 
problems.  However, it ma y be pointed out that t he unutilized amount of Rs.93 
crore is neither a saving nor lapsed amount.  The exch ange rate variation amount 
is linked to the amount that is disinvested from time to time by the Reserve Bank 
of India and since pro-rata compensation has to be completed by 30.4.2006, the 
total amount of exchange rate variation required will have to be paid. 
 
PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS 
 
Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) 
 
During 2004-05, an allocation of Rs . 6.66 crore was made to Hindustan 
Antibiotics Limited (HAL) under Non-Plan and Rs. 2.77 crore under Plan. So far as 
the Plan allocation is concerned, the ent ire amount was released and the same 
has been utilised by the company. The Non- Plan budget provision was made for 
paying terminal benefits to the employee s of the Maharashtra Antibiotics & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited, a Joint Venture of HAL, who have undertaken VSS. This 
amount was to be released subject to t he decision of the Supreme Court. Since 
the final judgement was not pronounced by 31.3.2005, this amount could not be 

 50
released to HAL. However an amount of  Rs. 4.50 crore has been appropriated 
from this money for payment of salaries & statutory dues of the employees of HAL. 
 
Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited (HOCL) 
 
In case of Hindustan Organic Chemical s Limited (HOCL), an amount of Rs. 
7.19 crore was earmarked under the Plan Loan. HOCL was to create charge in 
favour of the Government of India for releasing the amount. An amount of Rs. 1.60 
crore was surrendered due to non-compliance of this condition. 
 
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS 
 
Central Institute of Plastic Engineering & Technology (CIPET) 
 
The Loan Agreement between OPEC Fund authoritie s and Government of 
India has since been signed on 1 st June, 2005 and as su ch the amount provided 
under Externally Aided Project is likely to  be utilized by CIPET in the next three 
years which include the remaining  2 years of the 10th Plan. 
 
Institute for Pesticides Formulation Technology(IPFT) 
 
It is a fact that against the budgetary allocation of Rs. 1281 lakh in the first 
three years of 10 th Plan Period, actual expenditure  has been to the extent of Rs. 
681.15 lakh.  The main reasons for under utilization of the Budgetary allocation are 
as under:- 
 
i)   Recovery of Rs. 27 lakh during 2003-04 for the grant released in the 
earlier years to IPFT for creation of corpus fund. 
 
ii)   Recovery of Rs. 66.60 lakh re leased to IPFT for capital support in 
earlier years. 
 

 51
iii)   Deferment of schemes for creati on of OPCW facilities, library & data 
acquisition facilities due to the absence of qualified manpower. 
 
A cadre restructuring exercise has been initiated so that the Institute has 
the manpower available, commensurate with the needs. Regular monitoring of the 
progress of various programs and the expenditure thereon is being done. 
 
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) 
 
The main reason for slow pace of expenditure was the fact that the 
Chemical Weapons Convention Act 2000, which had been passed by the 
Parliament in August,2000, is yet to co me into force. Now a decision has been 
taken to bring this Act into force w.e.f. 1
st July,2005. Necessary Rules to facilitate 
its implementation have been framed  and action has been initiated to notify the 
same. Funds as allocated will be utilized for the aw areness generation programs 
which are being undertaken to educate the industry and the other stakeholders 
about their obligations under the Convention. 
Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS) 
 
The allocation for CPDS during 2004-05 was Rs.340 lakh which included 
Rs.300 lakh for the feasibility study on Mega Chemical Industrial Estate (MCIE) 
and Rs.40 lakh for other promotional activiti es for the chemical industry. It may be 
stated here that origi nally the consultancy was estima ted to cost at least US$ 1 
million (about Rs.5 crore) and provision of funds had been soug ht on that basis. 
However actual cost of consultancy based on competitive bidding process came to 
Rs. 57.84 lakh only.   The study has since commenced and is progressing well. 
 

 52
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA). 
 
Salary 
 
An amount of Rs. 116.00 lakh was provided under BE/RE during 2004-05.  
Actual Expenditure incurred in  2004-2005  was Rs. 105.35 lakh.  The balance 
amount Rs. 10.65 lakh had been surrendered due to the fact that some of the 
vacant posts could not be filled. 
 
Medical Treatment 
 
An amount of Rs. 10.00 lakh was pr ovided under BE/RE during 2004-05 
and Actual Expenditure incurred was Rs. 0.72 lakh.   
 
The balance amount of Rs. 9.28 lakh had been surrendered as funds could 
not be utilized under this head. 
 
Wages 
 
The budget provision of Rs. 6.50 la kh was made in BE/ RE during 2004-
2005.  The Actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 4.61 lakh. The balance amount of  
Rs. 1.89 lakh had been surrendered, as f unds could not be utilized under this 
head. 
 
Office Expenses 
 
The budget provision of  Rs. 50.00 lakh was m ade in BE/RE during 2004-
2005.  The actual expenditure was Rs. 49. 94 lakh.  A nominal amount of Rs. 0.06 
lakh had been surrendered under this head. 
 

 53
Rent, Rates and Taxes 
 
An amount of Rs. 85.00 lakh was allocated in BE 2004-05.   Rs. 87 lakh 
was allocated in RE 2004-05 under this head.  The actual expenditure incurred 
was Rs. 86.99 lakh. 
Professional Services 
 
An amount of Rs. 30.00 lakh was al located under BE/RE 2004-05.  The 
actual expenditure incurred wa s Rs. 29.99 lakh.  The expen diture in this head is 
payment to Data Entry Oper ators, Young Professionals,  fees to lawyers, ORG 
IMS, consultancy fees to NIPER etc.  The nominal am ount of Rs. 0.01 lakh was 
surrendered under this head. 
 
OTA 
 
The provision of Rs. 1.50 lakh was made in BE/RE  2004-05.  The actual 
expenditure incurred was Rs . 0.74 lakh. The balance amount Rs 0.76 lakh has 
been surrendered due to non-engagement of staff to do the work in late hours. 
 
OAE 
 
The provision of Rs. 5.00 lakh wa s made in BE 2004-05 and in RE budget 
was reduced and allocated Rs. 3.00 lakh.  The actual expenditure incurred was 
Rs. 2.45 lakh.  The amount of Rs. 0.55 la kh has been surrendered.  The saving 
was on account meeting with All India State Drug Controller could not be 
organized during 2004-05. 
 

 54
TA (Domestic) 
 
An amount of Rs. 12.00 lakh was allocated under BE/RE during 2004-05. 
The actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 9.86 lakh.   
 
The balance amount Rs. 2. 14 lakh had been surrendered under this head.  
Due to some of the proposed bulk drug studies not being undertaken resulting in 
saving in Domestic Travel. 
 
TA (Foreign) 
 
An amount of Rs. 7.00 lakh is allocated under BE/RE during 2004-05. The 
actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 3.05 lakh.  The balance amount Rs. 3.95 lakh 
has been surrendered under this  head as funds could not be utilized under this 
head. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 

 55
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE  
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.  4) 
 
The Committee note that presently  dies, moulds, and tools are being 
imported from Taiwan, Korea, Japan, etc. amounting to to tal cost of import around 
Rs. 3000 crores. The facility for design development and fabrication of mould, dies 
and tools does not exist in Bihar, U.P. Jharkhand, Orissa and West Bengal and for 
this, the Government have proposed to establish a centre for design and 
development of tools at Hajipur (Bihar) at the financial cost of Rs. 9.95 crores to be 
borne by State Government of Bihar and Government of India. Presently the 
proposal is under consideration of Planning Commission. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that  the matter may expeditiously be taken up with the Planning 
Commission for early establishment of the centre at Hajipur. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Planning Commission has not provided any amount for setting up a center 
for design and development of tools at Ha zipur (Bihar) during the current financial 
year 2005-06.  However, the Govt. intends  to pursue the matter with the Planning 
Commission at the time when the pr oposals for the Revised Estimates are 
considered by the Planning Commission.   
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 

 56
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
 Assam Gas Cracker Project was proposed as early as in 1984 for the 
utilization of petroleum fraction of natural gas.  The project has been pending for a 
long time. The Committee note that the main delay in setting up of this Project is 
due to shortage of gas  requirement for production of  2 lakh TPA of ethylene.  
When the agreement for supply of gas was signed in October 2000, Reliance 
Assam Petrochemicals Ltd., (RAPL) cons idered the gas supply inadequate for 
production of 2 lakh TPA of  ethylene. Consequently, the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas agreed to supply LPG to ma ke up the shortage.  Since a large 
amount of subsidy from Government was involved, it was decided that some PSUs 
under the Ministry of Petroleum & Natura l Gas should implement this project and 
accordingly Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) has been identified for 
implementation of Assam Gas Cracker Pr oject for which they have prepared a 
detailed feasibility report.  The Committee have now been informed that Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas has sent the pr oposal to the Ministry of Finance for 
clearance of the Project by PIB.  In view  of the considerable time already taken, 
the Committee desire that the requisite  procedures may be expeditiously 
completed so that the Project can take off without any further delay and thereby 
the aspirations of the people of the Region may be accomplished. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The PIB Note was sent to the Minist ry of Finance on 11.2.2005 by Ministry 
of Petroleum & Natural Gas, which was c onsidered in the meet ing of PIB held on 
15.4.2005.  Certain issued regarding cl arity on the feedback prices and the 

 57
subsidy involved, IRR calculated in the Note of GAIL, clarity on OIDB loan, funding 
by all p9artners of the proj ect, environmental clearance,  plan budget support etc. 
were raised by the representative of th is Department and Ministry of Finance and 
the Planning Commission.   After discussions , it was decided that Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas would submit a Supplementary Note for the 
consideration of PIB covering all the points raised in the meeting.  Financial 
Adviser, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas took meet ings on 21.4.2005 & 
04.5.2005 to finalise the Supplementary Note .  GAIL has been advised to prepare 
the Supplementary Note quickly. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
  
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) is entrusted with the task 
of price fixation / revision and other related matters such as monitoring the prices 
of decontrolled drugs and formulations and enforce and implement the provisions 
of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order (D PCO), 1995.  The prices of non-scheduled 
formulations are fixed by manufacturers.   NPPA monitors t he prices through 
scrutiny of the pric e list submitted by manufactu rers, ORG-MARG/IMS report and 
complaints received from official and non-official sources.  It is common 
knowledge that instances of shortages and charging of high  prices are rampant in 
the country, particularly in rural areas in the case of drugs and formulations and for 
this a further closer scrutiny is required.  The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that an effective monitoring of prices of drugs be done whic h are not covered 

 58
under the Price Control Order.  They feel if possible, a ceiling on trade margin of 
drugs may also be fixed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 NPPA is already having an effective system of monitoring the movement of 
prices of non-scheduled medicines of mass consumption marketed through trade 
channel and intervenes whenever instances of unreasonable in crease in prices 
affecting public interest adversely are noticed.  This is an ongoing process.  Due to 
the efforts made by NPPA, 15 companies have reduced the pric e voluntarily in 
respect of 25 formulation packs ranging between 2.14% to 34.62% (statement 
enclosed). 
 
A Committee under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (PI) was 
constituted to examine the span of price control (including trade margin) in the light 
of National Common Minimum Programme and the observations  of the Supreme 
Court in SLP N0, 3668/2003 and to suggest measures for fulfilling the objective of 
National Common Minimum Programme to ens ure the availability of life saving 
drugs at reasonable prices.  This Committee has submitted its interim report to the 
Government.  The Committee has recomm ended, inter-alia, intensive monitoring 
on the prices of all those drugs out of the selected basket (National List of 
Essential Medicines, 2003) which are not under  price control, ce ilings on trade 
margins of drugs, a system of price ne gotiations for the new patented drugs, 
special schemes for people bel ow poverty line, introduction of Rajasthan Model of 
Life Line Fluid Stores (hos pital pharmacy stores run by Medicare Societies) for 

 59
bulk purchase of drugs directly from manufacturer and selling them at reduced 
prices, compounding of offences under the Essential Commodities Act, 
establishment of DPCO cells in all States on the model of Karnataka etc., efforts to 
increase public awareness, wide publicit y to policies and decisions of the 
Government and NPPA etc 
 
A Task Force has also been consti tuted under the Chairmanship of the 
Principal Adviser(PP), Planning Commission to explore various options other than 
price control for achieving the objective of making available life saving drugs at 
reasonable prices. 
 [Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
 In this connection, the Committee not e that a Committee set up by the 
Government on the subject has submitt ed its interim report containing wide-
ranging recommendations for ensuring av ailability of life saving drugs at 
reasonable prices.  Apart from the need for intensive monitoring and fixation of a 
ceiling on trade margin, the recommendations also inter-alia included, introduction 
of the system of price negotiations for the new patented drugs , special schemes 
for people below poverty line, introduction  of Rajasthan Model Life Line Fluid 
Stores (Hospital pharmacy stores run by M edicare Societies) for bulk purchase of 
drugs directly from manufacturers and selling them at reduced prices, 
compounding of offences under the Essentia l Commodities Act, establishment of 

 60
DPCO Cell at States, initiating effort s towards public awareness, to give wide 
publicity to policy decisions, etc.  The Committee desire that appropriate follow-up 
action on those recommendations should be taken with a view to ensuring 
availability of drugs at a ffordable prices to the comm on man.  The Committee 
would like to be informed of the specific action taken thereon. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As a follow-up action on the recomm endations of the Committee headed by 
JS(PI) in its interim report it is stated that after obtaining requisite material from the 
Government of Rajasthan regarding Scheme  for Medical Treatment of BPL and 
other poor persons, a letter has been addre ssed to Health Secretaries of all 
States/ UTs with the request to study the said scheme and examine the possibility 
of adoption of this scheme in the respective State/UT. 
 Further, after obtaining requisite material / information from the 
Government of Rajasthan, a letter has been addressed to Health Secretary / Chief 
Secretary of all States / UTs to consider the Model of Medicare Societies / Life 
Line Fluid Stores with a view to replicating the same in  respective State / Union 
Territory 
Health Secretary Government of Karnataka has also been requested to 
furnish information about the Health In surance Scheme being operated in that 
State and also the details of the functioning of the DPCO Cell in that State.  Letters 
have also been issued to the NIPER, ICMR, OPPI, IDMA and IPA requesting their 
comments on the issue of price negotiation at  the time of introduction of a new 
drug in the country. 

 61
The NPPA has also been requested for its comments on the issue of 
amendment to the Essentia l Commodities Act and the Drugs (Prices Control) 
Order to enable compounding of certain offences and for its comments on the 
need to develop a price inde x for pharmaceuticals for better monitoring on drugs 
price.  The Ministry of Health and Family has also been requested for its 
comments on the issue of gr eater coverage of Health Insurance Scheme, Special 
Scheme for people below poverty line, price negotiation at t he time of introduction 
of a new drug in the country, reduction in taxes and levies in case of drugs falling 
in the national list of Essential Medicines, 2003. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
Another related aspect which e ngaged the attention of the Committee 
related to the widespread usage of drugs banned by the World Health 
Organisation and other similar Organisati ons, in the country.  The Committee 
desire that this menace requires to be me t effectively with by the authorities 
concerned. 

 62
Reply of the Government 
 
 The subject of banned drugs is looked  after by M/o Health and Family 
Welfare.  The reply from M/o Health & Family Welfare is awaited. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.15) 
 
 The Committee note that the Drug Pr ices Liabilities Review Committee 
(DPLRC) has been constituted to assist in  determining /quantifyi ng the liability of 
the drug companies arising on account of the implementati on of the provisions of 
the Drug (Price Control) Or der, 1979.   On the basis of the recommendations of 
the DPLRC, the Drug Prices Equalistion Ac count (DPEA) liability is determined by 
the Government and demand notices are i ssued to the drug companies.  The 
Committee have been informed that, present ly, 32 cases are pending with the 
DPLRC including 22 cases he ld up because of stays gr anted by High Court of 
Mumbai involving a total amoun t of Rs.142 crore.  In all there are also 24 cases 
pending in the Suprem e Court of India and in vari ous High Courts involving 
approximately Rs.101.00 crore held up for recovery from various drug 
manufacturers due to these court cases.   The Ministry have informed that a 
transfer petition has been filed in the Supreme Court fo r transferring all the cases 
pending in various High Courts to the Supreme Court of India.   While expressing 
their concern over the extent of dues locked up, the Committee desire that the 
matter be pursued vigorously for early realization of the legitimate dues to 

 63
Government.  The Committee would like to  be apprised of the latest position 
including the details of the recovery and the extent of pending liabilities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
All possible efforts are being made by t he Government for early recovery of 
DPEA liabilities.   As regar ds the latest position including the details of recovery 
and the extent of pending liabilities, it is stated that under the Drugs (Prices 
Control) Order, 1979 (DPCO 1979), there were 345 bulk drugs under price control.  
The Department has computed tentative liabilities in re spect of 47 bulk drugs only 
which amounts to Rs. 326 crore approx. cove ring 172 cases till the Interim Stay 
dated 30.6.1997 granted by the Hon’ble Bombay  High Court in the writ petition 
filed by the Indian Drugs Manufacturers  Association (IDMA) restraining the 
Department and its Committees  from determining fresh lia bilities.  Out of these 
172 cases where the liabilities have al ready been determined tentatively and 
communicated to the companies, the Department had referred 72 assessment 
cases during the period 1995-1997 to  the DPLR Committee for its 
review/recommendations. Out of these 72 cases, the Committee  gave its 
recommendations in 50 cases giving its vi ews on various issues involved in these 
cases but did not quantify the li ability in these cases.   In view of the stay granted 
by the Bombay High Court, the Committee has not taken up the remaining 22 
cases nor any fresh case.   On the basis  of the views of the DPLRC, Department 
computed the liabilities in respect of 16 co mpanies amounting to Rs.29.42 crore   
and the demand notices were issued to them.  Most of these companies filed writ 
petition in   different High Courts. The revi sed terms of reference  were issued on 

 64
10.10.2002.  After the issue of revised te rms of reference of the Committee, 33 
cases, where the liability was still to be quantified, we re  referred back to the 
DPLRC for quantification of the liability.  Out of these 33 cases, the Committee has 
so far given its report in 30 cases. T he DPLRC has quantified the liability in 26 
cases ( 25 companies – one case linked with another).  
 
The total amount of liability quantified by the DPLRC in respect of these 
cases is to the tune of Rs.135.10 crore as per two Members and as Rs.114.07 
crore as per the recommendation of the Chairman, DPLRC. In 4 cases, DPLRC 
has stated that the Committ ee  was not in a position to  quantify the liability 
because of the above said stay order.   Thus, at present, there are 29 cases 
pending with the DPLRC (for quantification of DPEA liability : 3  because of High 
Court  stay: 26 where no quantification could  be done till the vacation of the stay).   
The tentative amount of liability invo lved in these 29 cases pending with the 
DPLRC is approx. Rs 136.00 cr ore.   In addition to these 29 cases pending with 
the DPLRC, there may be a large number of  liability cases in respect of the 
remaining 298 bulk drugs where the liability is still to be quantified.   The amount of 
liability, in such cases, to be quantified after the stay is vacated may be very large. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 

 65
(Recommendation Sl. No. 22) 
 
Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Li mited (RDPL) is a joint sector 
undertaking promoted by IDPL and the Rajasthan Industrial Investment 
Corporation (RIICO).  The Committee were informed that RDPL has formulated a 
plan to upgrade its plants an d machinery to withstand competition from private 
manufacturers and to expand its market share in the changed scenario.  RDPL 
has sent a proposal in this regard to the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals).  During an on-the-spot study visit of 
the Committee to the company in October , 2004, the matter was also brought to 
their notice.  The Committee were in formed that the co mpany needed some 
financial support for providing it  an additional equity of Rs. 1.00 crore a a part of 
capital investment in order  to upgrade the plant.  The Co mmittee learnt that there 
had been instances when subsidiaries of Public Sector Undertakings were 
extended such financial assistance, in the past.  They feel that the Government 
might not face much difficulty in helping RDPL also.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should come forward for assisting RDPL and the 
latter’s proposal should be considered by the Ministry expeditiously. 
 

 66
Reply of the Government 
 
A proposal was received from RDPL to  help them in arranging inter-
corporate loan to upgrade its plants and ma chinery.  The proposal has been sent 
to the Department of Fertilizers for necessary action.  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16 (3)/2005-Fin. Dated 21.07.2005] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 43 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
N E W  D E L H I           ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,    
November 17 ,  2005                    Chairman, 
Kartika  26,  1927 (Saka)        Standing Committee on  
Chemicals & Fertilizers. 

 67
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2005-06) 
 
THIRD SITTING 
(19.10.2005) 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
Present 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete - Chairman 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
3. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
4. Shri P. Rajendran   
5. Shri Anantha Venkata Rami Reddy 
6. Shri Madhusudan Takkala Reddy 
7. Shri V.K. Thummar 
8. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan  
Rajya Sabha 
 
 9. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
10. Shri B.S.Gnanadesikan 
11. Shri Ajay Maroo 
12. Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha 
13. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
   
 
Secretariat 
1.  Shri P. Sreedharan  - Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Brahm Dutt  - Director 
3.  Shri S.C. Kaliram an  - Under Secretary 
 

 68
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman we lcomed the Members to the sitting. 
 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered t he Draft Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the recommendations c ontained in the Fifth Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petr ochemicals).  After a brief discussion, 
the draft Report was adopted by the Committee with minor amendments. 
 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes, if 
any, arising out of the factual verificati on of the Report by the Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers and present 
the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the ensuing Winter Session. 
   
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

 69
Appendix – II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
contained in the Fifth Report (Fourt eenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2004-05) on Demands for Grants 
(2005-06) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals). 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations  22 
 
II Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos.  2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 
14, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21) 
 
13 
 Percentage to Total 59.09%  
 
III Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s Reply  
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 16) 
 
1 
 Percentage of Total  4.54% 
 
IV Recommendation in respec t of which reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee  
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 1) 
 
1 
 Percentage of Total  4.54% 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. No s. 4, 5, 11, 12, 13, 15 
and 22) 
7 
  
Percentage of Total 
 
31.83% 
 
 
 