FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2004-05) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2004-2005) 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILISERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the  Government on the Recommendations co ntained in the 
Second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals  
& Fertilizers (2004-05) on ‘Dema nds for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)’] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.03.2005 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.03.2005 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) 

 2
CONTENTS 
 
               PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2004-05) ……………………………….. 
 
3 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………… 
 
4 
CHAPTER I Report ……………………………………………………………...
 
5 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government ……………………………………………………… 
 
 
13 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies ……………………
 
 
27 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee……..
 
 
31 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of  which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited …………………………………… 
 
 
34 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2004-05) held on 10th March, 2005……… 
 
  
46 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations  contained in the Second Report (14
th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committ ee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2004-05) on ‘Demands for Grant s (2004-2005) of Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilisers, Department of Fertilizers’………………….. 
 
 
 
 
 
47 
 

 3
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2004-05) 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete -  Chairman 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Afzal Ansari     
3. Shri Jai Prakash 
4. Shri Prahlad Joshi   
5. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
6. Shri Tek Lal Mahto 
7. Shri Punnulal Mohale   
8. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
9. Shri P. Rajendran   
10. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
11. Kunwar Akshyay Pratap Singh  
12. Shri T. Madhusudhan Reddy 
13. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
14. Shri V.K. Thummar 
15. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava   
16. Shri Bhanupratap Singh Verma   
17. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
18. Shri Bhal Chandra Yadav 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan  
23. Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha  
24. Shri Ajay Maroo  
25. Shri Raju Parmar  
26. Shri Sanjay Rajaram Raut 
27. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
28.  Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
29. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh 
30. Shri T.R. Zeliang 
31. Vacant 
Secretariat 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma  -   Additional Secretary 
2. Shri C.S. Joon  -   Director 
3. Shri S.C. Kaliraman  -   Under Secretary 
4. Shri Santosh Kumar  -   Committee Officer 
5. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Senior Executive Assistant 
 

 4
 INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2004-05) 
having been authorised by the Committee to  submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Fourth  Report on Acti on Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in Second R eport (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fert ilizers (2004-05) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2004-2005) of Ministry of Chem icals & Fertilisers,  Department of 
Fertilizers’. 
 
2. The Second Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 th 
August, 2004.  The Replies of Government to all the recommendations contained 
in the Second Report were received on 6 th December, 2004.  The Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers ( 2004-05) considered the Action Taken 
Replies received from the Governm ent and adopted the Draft Action Taken 
Report at their sitting held on 10th March, 2005. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (Fourteen th Lok Sabha) of the Committee is 
given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI          ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,    
March  11, 2005                                Chairman, 
Phalguna 20, 1926 (Saka)                 Standing Committee on  
Chemicals & Fertilizers. 

 5
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deal s with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations c ontained in the Second Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing  Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2004-05) on Demands for Grants (2004-05) re lating to Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (Department of Fe rtilizers) which was presen ted to Lok Sabha on 20 th 
August, 2004.  
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fert ilizers (Department of Fertilizers) was 
requested to furnish replies to the re commendations contained in the Second 
Report within three months from the pr esentation of the Report i.e. by 20 th 
November, 2004.  The action taken replies of the Government in respect of all 
the 22 recommendations contained in the Report were received on 6 th 
December, 2004.  These have been categorised as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
Sl. Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, 13, 14, 15 and 21. 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations  which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Sl. Nos. 9, 12 and 18.  
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in  respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee. 
Sl. Nos. 2 and 8.  
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 10, 11, 16, 17, 19, 20 and 22. 
 
3. The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
recommendations for which only interi m replies have been furnished by 
the Government should be furnished expeditiously.  
 

 6
4. The Committee will now deal with t he action taken by Government on 
some of their recommendations in the ensuing paragraphs:-   
 
A. Under utilisation of funds 
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 14) 
 
5. While examining the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of 
Fertilizers, the Committee had observed th at out of Rs.5900. 00 crore which had 
been made as outlay for the fertilizer PSUs and for Departmental schemes in the 
10th Plan, the actual expenditure in  the first two years of the 10 th Plan had been 
Rs. 1138.58 crore. This was only 19.3%  of the total plan outlay for the 10 th Plan 
whereas a whopping 80.7% of  the outlay had been left to be utilized during the 
remaining three years of the plan.  T he Committee did not appreciate the pattern 
where the major share of the outlay wa s carried forward to the end of the plan 
period resulting in substantial component of the allocation remaining unutilised.   
During the 9 th Plan period too overall utilization of funds was just 42.4%.  The 
casualty on such occasions was planned economic development. The 
Committee had desired that planning should be done with vision and 
commitment based on the analysis of the past achievements and failures, to 
achieve the objectives set forth.  The Committee, therefore, had recommended 
synchronized planning and uniform s pending during each plan period.  The 
Committee had also recommended that Depar tment of Fertilizers should impress 
upon PSUs to take up shortlisted majo r projects/schemes and to generate the 
required funds for the same. Nodal officers  responsible for timely implementation 
of projects should be asked to ensure that the deficiencies noticed once, should 
not recur. 
 
6. The Ministry in their reply to the above recommendation have stated as 
under:- 
“Department of Fertilizers nominat es its representatives on the 
Board of Directors of PSUs under the administrative control of this 
Department.  Department regularly moni tors follow up action with regard 
to activities of the major projects /schemes which Government emphasis 
from time to time by way of taking regular meetings with the Nodal Officers 
responsible for timely implementa tion of projects. Department has a 
technical division which is consulted while taking decision on 
implementation of projects so that deficiencies should not recur.”     

 7
 
7. The Committee note that the Mini stry have merely intimated the 
existing mechanism regarding monitoring.  The Committee had specifically 
pointed out the dismal State of expendi ture of 19.3% only in the first two 
years of the 10 th Plan out of Rs. 5900 crore allo cated for the fertilizer PSUs 
and for Departmental Schemes in the 10 th Plan.  The Committee had also 
reminded about low utilization of this fund during the 9 th Plan period.  To 
overcome this problem of low spending, they had recommended that the 
PSUs should be asked to take up shortlisted major projects/schemes along 
with generation of required funds for them and asking nodal officers, 
responsible for timely implementation of projects to ensure that the 
deficiencies noticed once, do not recu r.  However, after going through the 
reply of the Ministry, the Committee find that the Government has not given 
a satisfactory reply. The reply has not  indicated what steps have been 
taken to ensure uniform spending of  fund, generation of fund and non-
recurrence of deficiencies.  The third year of the 10
th Plan period is about to 
end within couple of months and no corrective proposal based on the 
assessment of the 9 th Plan period and three financial years of the 10 th Five 
Year Plan has yet been formulated.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their earlier recommendation and desire that in the present scenario of 
financial constraints, there should be physical progress in the utilisation of 
plan funds in a systematic way in each year of the Five Year Plan period. 

 8
B. Production of Complex Fertilizers 
(Recommendation No. 8, Para No. 88) 
8. Tariff Commission in its report on co st price study of complex fertilizers 
divided their manufacturers into two gr oups based on the feedstock for sourcing 
their ‘N’. Group-II consists of manufactures of complexes using ammonia based 
on Naptha/fuel oil.  There are only three manufactures namely ‘The Fertilizers 
and Chemicals Travancore Limited’ (FACT) , ‘Madras Fertilizers Limited’ (MFL) & 
GNFC in group-II. The other complexes manufactures based on import ammonia 
and those using ammonia made from indi genous gas are in group-I. Based on 
the cost price study on complex fertilizers by Tariff Commission, the base rate for 
making “on account” payment for complexes w.e.f 1 st January, 2004 was made 
Rs.638 to Rs.2757 per MT for Group-I an d Rs.1611 to Rs.3609 per MT for 
Group-II. Thus while working out c oncessions, plants in group-II get a 
substantially higher payment to com pensate their higher feedstock cost.  
Concession received by group -I are lower than group-II.  Group-I plants are 
further put to disadvantage by disallow ing the handling cost of ammonia. The 
Government treat low cost producer and high cost producer equally without 
giving any incentives to low cost producers, which further leads to wide variations 
in maximum retail prices of different  grades of complex fertilizers. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department of Fertilizers should encourage 
low cost producers by giving them incentives, while compensating the higher cost 
producers to the extent that the units do not turn financially unviable. 
 
9. In their action taken reply, the Ministry have submitted as follows:- 
 
“In the case of complexes, Group-I manufacturers are being 
compensated based on the recomm endations of Tariff Commission 
approved by CCEA.  In the case of Group- II where the cost of ‘N’ is higher 
through naphtha, the original recommend ed price of Rs.198 per unit cost 
of ‘N’ has already been tri mmed to Rs.180 per unit co st of ‘N’.  Since the 
units in Group-II are primarily PSUs, two from the Government of India 
and one Gujarat state PSU treating th em at par with Group-I would make 
them totally financially unviable.  However, while framing the new complex 
policy, this issue will be considered afresh.” 

 9
10. While considering the production of Complexes, the Committee had 
observed that Group-I plants were put to disadvantage on account of 
receipt of low concession as compar ed to Group-II (compensation for 
higher feedstock cost) and by disallo wing the handling costs of Ammonia. 
The Committee had thus recommended th at the Department of Fertilizers 
should encourage low cost producer s by giving them incentives while 
compensating the higher cost producers to the extent that units did not 
turn financially unviable.  The Ministry , in their reply, have referred to the 
recommendation of the Tariff Commission and approval of Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in case of Group-I manufacturers.  
For Group-II, they have simply stated that the cost of ‘N’ through Naphtha 
has been trimmed from Rs. 198 to  Rs. 180 per unit cost and have 
concluded that treating Group-II manuf acturer at par with Group-I would 
make them (Group-II) totally financia lly unviable. The Committee are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Ministry  as to how treating Group-II plants at 
par with Group-I would make them totally  financially unviable.  They feel 
that all is not well with Group-I plants and their problems also need to be 
urgently addressed.   Accordingly, th e Committee desire that while framing 
the New Complex Policy the low cost producers be encouraged by giving 
them incentives so that their future prospects may not become bleak.  

 10
C. Pricing and Availability of Natural Gas and LNG. 
Recommendation No. 21 (Para No. 110) 
11. Regarding the pricing of LNG, the Committee in their earlier Report had 
observed that though the potential demand is huge,  it has been restrained by the 
reluctance of the anchor cust omers in the fertilizer industry to accept the higher 
price band for imported LNG and the newly discovered indigenous gas.  Fertiliser 
industry had estimated that LNG should be made available at a delivered price of 
US $ 3.0 –3.5 per MMBTU to remain competitive in the international market.  The 
Committee had urged upon the Department of Fertilizers (DOF) to explore the 
possibility of delinking the pric ing of gas to the internati onal price of fuel oils in 
consultation with the concerned Minist ries.  The Committee had also strongly 
recommended that the gas pricing shoul d be based on cost of production and 
strategic considerations. They had also desired that the DOF should ensure that 
the price of imported LNG was competitive 
vis-à-vis domestic gas by sorting out 
the related taxation issues. 
 
12. The Ministry, in their action ta ken reply, have now stated as under:- 
 
“An Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG ) has been constituted under the 
chairmanship of Finance Minister to  examine issues relating to ensuring 
preferential allocation of domestic natural gas to the fertilizer industry and 
making available imported LNG to fertilizer units, its pricing and related 
taxation issues.  The first meeting of the IMG has been held on 21.7.2004.  
In pursuance of the decision the firs t meeting of IMG, a study has been 
entrusted to Tariff Commission on prici ng of various components of R 
LNG and transportation tariff of NG/R LNG.  The Tariff Commission has 
commenced the study.  It is expected that Tariff Commission will be able 
to submit its report by mid De cember 2004.  IMG will finalize its 
recommendations keeping in view the report of the Tariff Commission. 
 
As regards pricing of natural gas,  which is currently indexed to 
international fuel oil and with a cap of Rs.2850/ MCM, the matter related to 
revision of natural gas pr ice is currently under exam ination by the Ministry 
of Petroleum & Natural Gas.  The Mi nistry of P&NG has called for the 
comments on revision of natural gas  prices from various other 
Ministries/departments.  On receipt of comments, the Ministry of P&NG 
would take a view and submit a note for consideration of the Cabinet. 

 11
 
As for sorting out of related taxation issues, the Department of 
Fertilizers has taken up the matter with the Inter State Council for 
considering the rationalisation of rates of sales tax on natural gas, naphtha 
and furnace   oil/LSHS used in t he manufacture of fertilizers, the 
Department has suggested that either  the State Governments should levy 
sales tax on raw materials/inputs viz.  natural gas, naphtha, fuel oil and 
LSHS, at rates not more than the floor rates of 4%, or alternatively, natural 
gas, naphtha, fuel oil and LSHS used in the manufacture of fertilizers be 
declared as goods of special importanc e under Section-14 of the Central 
Sales Tax Act, 1956. This measure would bring in uniformity, or at least, a 
ceiling in the rate of sales tax on these raw materials and inputs.” 
 
13. The Committee note that the Government has reported that Inter-
Ministerial Group (IMG) will finalis e its recommendations regarding 
preferential allocation of domestic na tural gas to fertilizer industry and 
making available imported LNG to fertil izer units, its pricing and related 
taxation issue after receiving report from Tariff Commission.  In view of the 
urgent need of preferenti al allocation of domestic natural gas to Fertiliser 
Industry, the Committee desire that Tariff Commission be persuaded to 
finalise their recommendation at the earliest and action taken in this regard 
be intimated to them instantly.  Furth er, on pricing of natural gas, Ministry 
have stated that the Ministry of Petr oleum & Natural Gas would take a view 
and submit a note for consideration of the Cabinet after receiving the 
comments on revision of natural gas prices from various other 
Ministries/Departments.  The Committee strongly feel that this matter too, 
be processed expeditiously  so that th e supply of feedstock, particularly of 
natural gas to the fertilizer industry might be ensured avoiding further 
delay. 

 12
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 4 (Para No. 16) 
 
           The Committee are happy to observe that the Oman India Joint Venture 
Project (OMIFCO) is nearing completion l eaving only 9.42% of the work to be 
done before July, 2005.  The Committee fi nd that DOF is rigorously reviewing 
and monitoring the work to avoid time and cost overruns, by obtaining monthly 
progress reports from OMIFCO.  The Co mmittee hope that the project would be 
completed in the stipulated time and the urea starts flowing to make up the deficit 
as per the long term buy back agreement. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
            By 15 th September, 2004, the overall cumu lative progress of  OMIFCO 
Joint Venture Project has been 96.42% leav ing only 3.58% of the work yet to be 
completed.  It is expected that the pr oject will be commissione d by its due date 
i.e., by mid - July, 2005.  
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 85) 
 
           The Commi ttee find that the budgetary provisions of the Department of 
fertilisers for the year 2004-05 is Rs.13294.17 crore and the net requirement after 
adjusting the recoveries on sale of imported urea is Rs.12828.17  crore.  Out of 
the above net requirement, the Non Plan component is Rs.12698.00 crore which 

 13
is more than 98% of the total budget.  In  the Revised Estimates of 2003-04, total 
Non Plan expenditure was pegged at Rs.12073.00 cror e.  This shows an 
enhancement of Rs.615.00 crore in 2004-05 in Non Plan B udget.  In the current 
year total subsidy outlay both for indi genous, imported fertiliser and concessional 
sale of decontrolled fertilisers scheme together is estimated at Rs.12662.15 crore 
which is more than 99% of the total net Non Plan budget pr ovisions of the 
Department of Fertilisers.  The higher expected outgo on account of payment to 
manufacturers/agencies for concessional sale of decontrolled fertilisers has been 
cited as reasons by the Department  of Fertilisers for the enhanced gross 
requirement for the year 2004-05.  The Committee also find that the Non Plan 
loans to PSUs has been kept at Rs.28.15 crore in the BE of 2004-05, whereas it 
was Rs.268.65 crore in the RE of 2003- 04.  Provision under Plan schemes for 
investments and loans to PSUs too has co me down to Rs.130.17 crore in BE 
2004-05 from Rs.197.00 crore in  the Revised Estimates for 2003-04.  This is on 
account of the closure of some of the urea units and the rest ricted outlay due to 
the pending disinvestment proposal with regard to some other units.  The 
Committee hope that the Ministry would c ontain the expendit ure for the year 
within the sanctioned Budget of t he Ministry and the Committee endorse 
Demands for Grants of the Department of Fertilisers for the year 2004-05 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation made by t he Committee has been noted for 
compliance.  All out efforts will be made  by the Department of Fertilizers to 
contain the expenditure for the year 2004-05 within the sanctioned Budget. 
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 

 14
Recommendation No. 6 (Para No. 86) 
  
           From the figures of actual sale of  Di-ammonium Phosphate (DAP), 
Muriate of Potash (MOP) and Complexes in the country, the Committee find that 
the consumption of decontrolled fertilizers have started showing stagnation.  In 
their 41st Report (13 th Lok Sabha) also, the Committee had expressed concern 
over decreasing consumptio n of these fertilizers.  During evidence, the 
Committee were informed that non-incr ease in cultivable land, optimum 
exploitation of soil pot ential, erratic monsoon and non-addition of irrigation 
facilities etc. are the main reasons for stagnation in the use of  fertilizers in the 
country.  However, the Committee feel that this stagnation in consumption of 
fertilizers is also due to rise in the prices of fertilizers and decrease in the prices 
of agricultural products.  T he Committee, therefore, would like the Department to 
make an assessment of the real cause behi nd the problem.  They desire that the 
Department of Fertilizers in collaboration with the Minist ry of Agriculture should 
look into the aspects of easy affordability of fertilizers, awareness among farmers 
regarding the need for ideal consumption for optimum output and the implications 
of the policy environment in  the phosphatic and potassic sector.  Moreover, the 
Committee feel that it is high time to make realistic assessments regarding the 
expected consumption of these fertilizers to brin g down the gap between the 
budget estimates and actual expenditure on payment for concessional sale of 
decontrolled fertilizers. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
             A Task Force has been c onstituted by the Departm ent of Agriculture & 
Cooperation under the chairmanship of A dditional Secretar y, Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation to examine vari ous issues of pricing urea and other 
decontrolled fertilizers and other policy related issues in the decontrolled fertilizer 
sector.  This Task Force is examining in  detail the reasons for stagnant fertilizer 
consumption and ways to improve the balanced fertilization.   

 15
 
 Support is provided to the States for strengthening extension programmes 
through a number of schemes viz. (i) Kisan Call Centres utilizing massive 
telecom infrastructure, (ii) Mass Media Support to Agriculture Extension using 
low and high power transmitte rs of Doordarshan for providing areas specific 
telecast and utilizing FM Transmitter netwo rk of AIR to provide area specific 
broadcast, (iii) Establishment of Agri culture Clinics and Agri Business by 
Agricultural Graduates, (iv) Innovations in Technology Dissemination for transfer 
of technology and (v) Women in Agricultur e.  All these schemes are operated by 
the Directorate of Extensi on, Department of Agricult ure and Cooperation which 
focuses on decentralized and demand driven extension, farming systems 
approach; multi-agency extension services; use of media and information 
technology, human resources developm ent etc.  All these components 
supplement State’s efforts for awareness creation among farmers not only on the 
package of practices technology of various crops but also on other ‘inputs like 
use of quality seeds, fertilizers, pesticides, access to loans etc. 
 
 In addition, the Government has m ade following efforts for promoting the 
balanced use of fertilizers:- 
 
(i) A Central Sector Scheme on Balanced and Integrated Use of 
Fertilizers has been implemented dur ing IX Plan with financial 
assistance for setting up/strengthening of soil testing laboratories in 
the country, setting up of mechanica l plants for conversion of city 
waste into compost.  The scheme has since been subsumed into 
Macro Management Scheme. 
 
(ii) The Government is promoting soil test based judicious use of 
chemical fertilizers in conjuncti on with organic manures and bio-
fertilizers. 
 
(iii) A Central Sector Scheme of National Project on Development and 
Use of Biofertilizer s has been implemented till September 2004 for 
production, promotion and quality control of Biofertilizers in the 
country. 
 

 16
(iv) A Central Sector Scheme Na tional Project on Organic Farming has 
since been approved by Governm ent with an outlay of Rs.57.05 
crore for implementation during re maining period of X Plan for the 
production, promotion, market dev elopment and certification of 
organic farming in the country.  This includes financial support for 
setting up of production units for organic inputs. 
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation No.  7 (Para No. 87) 
 
 The Committee find that the Departm ent has adopted two group policy for 
working out the concession on DAP from  1.4.2003.  Plants in group-I use 
indigenous phosphoric acid made out of imported raw materials viz. rock 
phosphate and sulphur, whereas group-II unit s use imported phosphoric acid as 
such for the production of DAP.  62% of DAP production s in the country is based 
on imported phosphoric acid and 38% on indigenous phosphoric acid.  The 
normative delivered price recommended by  the Tariff Commission for group-I 
was lower than the normative delivered price recommended for group-II.  Even 
the base rate announced for 2003-04 w.e .f. 1.4.2004 shows a lower price of 
Rs.2120/MT for group-I when compared to Rs.2635/MT for group-II.  But in 2003-
04, the prices of rock phos phate and sulphur were ruling high in the international 
market, whereas the phosphoric acid prices remained uniform at $356/MT.  
Therefore, the Committee recommend that  the Department should work out a 
judicious mix of indigenous  and imported phosphoric acid based production of 
DAP for meeting the requirement of phosphatic  fertilizers in the country.  In view 
of the inadequate availability of basic ra w materials viz. phosphoric acid, rock 
phosphate and sulphur for the production of phosphatic fertilizers, the Committee 
also recommend that the fertilizer companies should set up more joint ventures in 
countries where these raw materials are ava ilable in plenty.  They desire that the 
Government should give necessary incentives for such ventures. 
 

 17
Reply of the Government 
 
The phosphatic and potassic industr y is already decontrolled and the 
decision of joint ventures is being taken based on the commercial viability 
assessed by the company.  In this resp ect, three joint ventures have already 
been established at Senegal, Morocco and Jordan by M/s. IFFCO, Chambal 
Fertilizers and SPIC respectively.  The Government is also encouraging to exploit 
the rock phosphate reserves for long-term contracts and in this respect, a 
meeting of major phosphatic fertilizer manufacturers has been convened with 
coordination of Ministry of External A ffairs to inform regarding the opportunities 
abroad.   
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 93) 
 
In urea units the erstwhile subsidy regime based on unit-wise Retention 
Pricing Scheme has given way to gr oup based New Pricing Scheme from 
1.4.2003.  Under NPS, all policy param eters for determination of concession 
rates upto the end of St age-II of NPS i.e. 31.3. 2006, have already been made 
known to all the urea manuf acturing units in advance.  The rates of concession 
worked out under NPS are based on the aver aging of the retention price of all 
urea units in each group as  on 31.3.2003.  Escalati on, de-escalation in the 
variable cost, related to changes in the price of feedstock, fuel, purchased power 
and water is provided under NPS.  Units having exce ptionally high or low 
retention price i.e. deviation of 20% and above with reference to group average 
have been treated as outliers in their res pective groups.  Those units which have 
lower retention price than the weighted gr oup average are to get the concession 
as per their individual re tention price.  The remain ing units (excluding outliers) 
are to get the concession based upon the weighted group average retention 
price. Outliers have been given special treatment by way of structural adjustment 
which is 50% of the difference between th eir respective retention price and the 

 18
group average.  It is also stated by DOF that due to increased energy efficiency 
and production there has been a general improvement in the profits of various 
urea units during 2003-04, as compared to the preceding years.  But the 
Committee are not that optimistic about th e health of our ur ea units under the 
New Pricing Scheme.  Industr y reports show that the finances of some of the 
units would be under severe strain due to reduced post tax returns on net worth, 
tightening of energy norms  during stage-II due on efficiency consideration and 
reduction in concession during Stage-II due to reduction in capital related 
charges.  The Committee recommend that t he DOF should find solutions to the 
existing problems in a way that woul d help the industry to face the new 
challenges and exploit the new opportunities.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
New Pricing Scheme (NPS) for urea uni ts was formulated with a view to 
replace the cost plus and unit specific Retention Price Scheme (RPS).  The aim 
of NPS is to ensure greater uniformi ty, transparency and efficiency in 
disbursement of subsidy to urea units and inducing them to take cost reduction 
measures on their own to be competitive. As the NPS is efficiency based scheme 
as against the cost plus  nature of erstwh ile RPS, norms have been prescribed 
under NPS. Moreover, pre-set energy no rms notified for urea units are based on 
the actual energy consumption norms achieved by the urea units in past.   
 
Furthermore, under NPS, while there would not be any reimbursement of 
the investment by a unit for improvement in operations, urea units are allowed to 
retain the gains made by them as a resu lt of operational efficiency. Furthermore, 
under NPS, there is no capping on production of urea.   
 
 The Department has recently formulat ed policy for conversion of existing 
naphtha and FO/LSHS based urea units to nat ural gas/LNG as feedstock/fuel.  

 19
Such a conversion will enable the non-gas urea units to remain competitive and 
viable in the changed scenario. 
 
 Furthermore, the Department of Fertilizer s is in the process of constituting 
a Working Group for formulating a policy for Stage-III of NPS commencing from 
31.3.2006, which would inter alia, review the effectiveness of Stage-I and Stage-
II of NPS.   
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation No. 14 (Para No. 94) 
 
             The Government has taken 25% of urea production out of movement 
control for six months from 1.4. 2003 and 50% of urea distribution was 
decontrolled from 1.10.2003.  From the movement trend of deregulated urea, it is 
observed that about 56.5% of despatches are made to the home States of 
fertilizers plants and only 5% has been s ent to far flung North Eastern States, 
Uttaranchal, Himachal Pradesh,  Jammu & Kashmir and Ch attisgarh.  In fact 
these states account for about 18 to 19% of  the total requirement of the country.  
To meet the requirement, ECA allocation to  these states had to be kept between 
90 to 100% during Kharif 2003 and Rabi 2003-04.   Keeping in view the despatch 
trend, a decision was taken to contin ue with only 50% deregulation of 
distributions instead of goi ng for full decontrol from 1 st April 2004 onwards.  The 
Committee feel that the North-East r egion and Central India are very much 
deprived of fertilizer production as the location of fertilizer plants is highly skewed 
in favour of Western and No rthern regions.  Moreover, the high cost of feeding 
the Central, Eastern and North-East ar eas will prevent fertilizer units from 
sending stock to these areas, which has been highlighted in t he movement trend 
of 2003-04.  The Committee apprehend that in the event of total decontrol, 
shortage of fertilizers in certain pockets would aggravate leading to further 
distortions in consumption pattern.  T he Committee, therefor e, recommend that 

 20
the proposed total decontrol of urea should be reviewed.  The Government 
should ensure equitable distribution of urea to the states which are 
geographically placed in difficult terrains.   The Committee also recommend that 
even in the partially decontrolled set up, t he requirements of the hilly, tribal and 
remote areas of the country should be met through ECA allocations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under the new pricing policy for ur ea, the distribution of urea was 
proposed to be totally decontrolled with e ffect from 1.4.2004 after review of 
movement of deregulated urea during 2003 -04 and with the conc urrence of the 
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation).   
 
The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) after holding 
discussions with the State Governm ents had proposed that the present 
arrangement of 50% deregulated regime should be continued for Kharif 2004 and 
for Rabi 2004-05 seasons. 
 
 Keeping in view the re commendations of the DAC and the dispatches of 
deregulated urea in the year 2003-04 and Kharif 2004 by manufacturers, the 
existing system of ECA allocation up to  50% of the installed capacity for each 
unit is being continued for Rabi 2004-05 season also. 
 
 Even under this partial distribution decontrol scheme, the farflung and 
Eastern States were given ECA allocations  catering to near total requirement of 
these States.  For example during R abi 2004-05 season, 100% ECA allocation 
has been made to remote and inaccessible States/UTs like Jharkhand, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Tripura, M anipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Sikkim, Mizoram Pondicherry , Andeman & Nicobar Island, Daman & 
Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli.  In the case of far-flung Eastern States like Bihar, 
Orissa and West Bengal allocation is given in the range  78% to 90%.  The 

 21
allocation to States housing large number  of production units, however has been 
lower since deregulated urea moves into these States freely owing to proximity of 
production units. 
 
 The proposed total decontrol of urea is under review and decision 
regarding further distribution decontrol w ould be taken in consultation with the 
DAC. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 15 (Para No. 95) 
 
            The urea units are required to supply urea upto 100% of their reassessed 
capacity for sale to farmers.  Howeve r, the Committee under stand that the New 
Pricing Policy for urea allows sale of surplus urea production in excess of ECA 
allocations and upto 100% of reassessed capacity, to complex fetilizer units.  The 
policy also allows such uni ts to undertake export on pr inciples of Import Parity 
Price, with the prior approval  of DOF on the condition that 50% of the net gains 
will be surrendered to the Government.  If t he urea sold is in excess of 100% of 
reassessed capacity, the net gains will be shared by the Government and the 
unit in the ratio of 65:35 respectively.  The Committee strongly feel that the 
sharing clause would act as a disincent ive for the producer in a competitive 
environment.  The general prev ailing trend of low import par ity price of urea too 
would dampen the spirit of the manufacturers.  The Committee therefore, 
recommend that the clause regarding the s haring of gains from the sale of 
decontrolled quantities of urea may be revi ewed by the Government and suitable 
amendments be made. 

 22
Reply of the Government 
 
 The policy regarding sale of surp lus urea production in excess of ECA 
allocations and up to 100% re-assessed c apacity was decided keeping in view 
the following factors: 
 
(i) The entire capital cost of the ur ea plants has already been fully paid 
by the Government.  Only in case of few post-92 plants, part of the 
capital cost is still remaining unpaid, which is now being paid 
through the concession scheme; 
 
(ii) Therefore, Government has fi rst right on the entire urea produced 
by these units to be used for agriculture purposes.  In other words, 
the urea units are required to s upply urea upto 100% of their 
reassessed capacity or even beyond if so desired by the 
Government, for sale to farmers; 
 
(iii) Even after reassessment of the installed capacities of urea plants 
with effect from 1.4.2000, these pl ants still have the large hidden 
capacities as is evident from t he past track record of actual 
production levels achieved by  them.  While the reassessed 
capacities are nearly 120%, the actual production touched a level of 
nearly 150% of the original capacity.  Therefore, ur ea units cannot 
be left free to take their own business decisions; 
                               
(iv) The gas based unit would be abl e to to produce extra urea only 
with the additional usage of co stlier naphtha and the same has 
been decided to be recognized in t heir escalation/de-escalation 
claims as per actual input ratio, subject to norms;                
                                                                                                                                         
(v)  The fixed (non-variable) cost  components generally comprising the 
conversion cost, depreciation and the capital related charges 
(CRC), have been fully paid fo r production at 90% level in 
Naphtha/FO/LSHS based units and at 95% level in Gas based 
units.  In other words, for production beyond 90/95% of the re-
assessed capacity, the units actua lly incur only the variable cost; 
and 
 
(vi) In the existing policy of sharing of net gain in the ratio of 50:50 for 
production upto 100% capacity and  in the ratio of 65:35 for 
production beyond 100% capacity,  between Government and the 
unit, the share allocated to the unit is purely an incentive paid out of 
the Government kitty with a view to enhance indigenous production. 
 

 23
The sharing clause in the existing poli cy is not acting as a disincentive for 
the producer in a competitive environment.  Rather, it is working as an incentive 
for the urea units.  Even the import parity price of urea, as determined by DOF on 
quarterly basis, do not act as a deterrent for the urea manufacturers as they are 
free to sell urea to complex manufacturers or export at the mutually agreed price.  
The import parity price is used either for procurement by the Government against 
the import requirement or for the purpose of calculating the net gain to be shared 
with the Government.  The policy has been well accept ed by the industry.   
The Department has not received any repr esentation from any urea unit against 
the aforesaid policy. 
 
In view of the above, the existing policy for sale of urea upto and beyond 
100% of the re-assessed capacity, with shar ing of net gains by the Government 
and the unit, is working well and also 7.73 lakh MT urea over and above the re-
assessed capacity is estimated to be produc ed in the current ye ar by increasing 
the number of stream days and postpon ing shutdowns under the present 
scheme. 
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 21 (Para No. 110) 
  
            Regarding the pricing of LNG, the Co mmittee observe that though the 
potential demand is huge it has been restra ined by the reluctance of the anchor 
customers in the fertilizer industry to a ccept the higher price band for imported 
LNG and the newly discover ed indigenous gas.  Fertilise r industry has estimated 
that LNG should be made available at a delivered price of US $ 3.0 –3.5 per 
MMBTU to remain competitive in the in ternational market.  The Committee urge 
upon the DOF to explore the possibility of delinking t he pricing of gas to the 
international price of fuel oils in consultation with t he concerned Ministries.  The 
Committee also strongly feel that the gas pricing should be based on cost of 

 24
production and strategic consid erations. They also desire that the DOF should 
ensure that the price of im ported LNG is competitive vi s-à-vis domestic gas by 
sorting out the related taxation issues. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
An Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG ) has been constituted under the 
chairmanship of Finance Minister to examine issues relating to ensuring 
preferential allocation of domestic natural gas to the fertilizer industry and making 
available imported LNG to fertilizer units, its pricing and related taxation issues.  
The first meeting of the IMG has been he ld on 21.7.2004.  In pursuance of the 
decision the first meeting of IMG, a study has been entrusted to Tariff 
Commission on pricing of various compone nts of R LNG and transportation tariff 
of NG/RLNG.  The Tariff Commission has commenced the study.  It is expected 
that Tariff Commission will be able to submit its report  by mid December 2004.  
IMG will finalize its recommendations keepi ng in view the report of the Tariff 
Commission. 
 
As regards pricing of natural gas , which is currently indexed to 
international fuel oil and with a cap of  Rs.2850/ MCM, the matter related to 
revision of natural gas pric e is currently under examinat ion by the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas.  The Ministry of P&NG has called for the comments on 
revision of natural gas prices from various other Ministries/departments.  On 
receipt of comments, the Ministry of P&N G would take a view and submit a note 
for consideration of the Cabinet. 
 
As for sorting out of related taxation issues, the Department of Fertilizers 
has taken up the matter with the Inter State Council for considering the 
rationalisation of rates of sales ta x on natural gas, naphtha and furnace   
oil/LSHS used in the manufacture of fe rtilizers. The Depart ment has suggested 
that either the St ate Governments should levy sale s tax on raw materials/inputs 

 25
viz. natural gas, naphtha, fuel oil and LSHS, at rates not more than the floor rates 
of 4%, or alternatively, natural gas, naphtha, fuel oil and LSHS used in the 
manufacture of fertilizers be declared as goods of special importance under 
Section-14 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956. This measure would bring in 
uniformity, or at least, a ceiling in the rate of sales tax on these raw materials and 
inputs.  
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13  of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 26
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 89) 
 
   The Committee were informed last y ear that Department of Fertilizers was 
rationalizing the MRPs of these comp lexes based on Tariff Commission Report.  
From 1.4.2003, the concession rates of  complexes are being worked out on the 
basis of normative cost of production.  The Committee also fi nd that the Inter-
Ministerial Group (IMG) constituted on 19.12.2002, for rationalization of MRPs of 
complexes has submitted the report.  IMG had examined various alternatives for 
adopting a scientific and rati onal methodology for working out the MRPs so that 
inter-se distortions are minimized.  Bu t the Committee find t hat in the proposed 
MRP the minimum for N:P:K complex fe rtilizers is Rs.6920/MT whereas the 
maximum is Rs.9180/MT which shows a variation of Rs.2260/MT between 
different grades of complexes.  The Committee strongly feel that the decisions 
should aim at encouraging the use of phosphate and potash vis-à-vis nitrogen by 
the farmers, so that the ideal N:P:K ratio of 4:2:1 can be achieved.  The 
Department should not delay the process of assessing the im pact of the IMG 
recommendations regarding the rationalizat ion of MRPs of complexes.  The 
Committee also desire that Department of  Fertilizers should fi nalise other policy 
related issues in the decontrolled fertilizer sector. 
Reply of the Government 
           A Task Force has been cons tituted by the Departm ent of Agriculture & 
Cooperation under the chairmanship of A dditional Secretar y, Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation to examine vari ous issues of pricing urea and other 
decontrolled fertilizers and other policy related issues in the decontrolled fertilizer 
sector.  This Task Force is examining in detail the reasons for stagnant fertilizer 
consumption and ways to improve the balanced fertilization.   
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 

 27
Recommendation No. 12 (Para No. 92) 
 
The Committee find that the aver age net subsidy borne by the 
Government on each tonne of urea sold fo r agricultural use has increased from 
Rs. 2450.00 in 1994-95 to Rs. 4473.00 in 2003-04.  Still the resource poor 
medium and marginal farmers find it difficult to purchase the needed fertilizers at 
affordable prices.  The Ministry has argue d that the subsidy to the farmers is 
routed through the fertilizer industry as the country does not have the requisite 
infrastructure to support the administrative mechanism to provide subsidy to each 
farmer as more than 90% of the land holdings in the country are with 
marginal/small and semi-medium farmers.  However, the Committee feel that the 
Government should explore the possibility of disbursing the subsidy on fertilizers 
directly to the farmers. The mode of distribution of subsidy may be worked out by 
roping in the banking system which already has an extensive rural network. 
Reply of the Government 
Since the fertilizers are made available to farmers at the statutorily notified 
maximum retail price (MRP) or indicative  MRPs, which are far less than the cost 
of production of fertilizers, the benefit of subsidy is passed on to farmers in the 
form of subsidized sale prices of fertilizers. As for the payment of subsidy directly 
to farmers in the country, it is reiter ated that payment of subsidy to farmers 
directly is a gigantic task and would involve huge administrative expenditure and 
logistics.  As for the ropi ng in of the banking system, it  is stated that the matter 
was taken up with Reserve Bank of India (RBI), which has in dicated the inability 
of banking system for channeliz ing of fertilizer subsidy to farmers through bank 
branches because it would la y additional pressure on the bank branches, which 
have to fulfil their lending targets and al so participate in various credit linked 
schemes of the Central/State Governm ents. Further, RBI has stated that the 
disbursement of subsidy to farmers through banks may increase the cost of 
operations of banks in rural areas and affect the functioning of the branches, 
which will ultimately affect flow of credit. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 

 28
Recommendation No. 18 (Para No. 98) 
 
 Projects and Development  India Ltd. (PDIL) is basically an organisation 
involved in research and development.  PDIL has three divisions namely 
Engineering and Consultancy Division, Catalyst Division and Research and 
Development Division.  Though the compan y incurred losses during the period 
between 1998-2003, the provis ional profit estimated for the year 2003-04 is 
Rs.8.05 crore.  PDIL’s consultancy division was involved in Namrup revamp, 
upgradation of plants etc.  As a measure to expand its sphere of activities, PDIL 
has been making sustained efforts to divers ify and secure jobs in other sectors 
especially in the gas and oil sector.  Techno Commercial Audit of SSP and DAP 
units are also conducted by PDIL.  R&D division ha contributed to the 
development of catalysts and process know -how required for various industries.  
But the company was declared sick in 1992 by BIFR.  The Committee also 
observe that a revival package for PDIL has been approved by the Government 
which inter-alia envisages closure of R&D division of the company and offer 
VRS/VSS to its employees.  But the Comm ittee strongly feel that there is an 
urgent need to encourage research and developm ent in the fertiliser sector to 
find out the weaknesses and strength of the sector.  Taking note of the 
satisfactory performance of the R&D projects undertaken by PDIL, the 
Committee desire that the Government should ensure the revival of R&D Division 
of PDIL 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The revival package of PDIL  approved by the Government of India in April 
2003 was based on a comprehensive techno- economic analysis.  This revival 
package envisaged closure of R&D Divisi on and Sindri unit of the E&C Division 
and to offer VRS/VSS to their staff.  It is pointed out that before taking the 
decision of closure of R&D Division, Department of Fertilizers had explored the 
possibility of its takeover by CSIR etc.  but none has come forward to take over 
the same. 

 29
 The revival package approved by Go vernment of India has also been 
sanctioned by the Board for Industrial & Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) on 
26.3.2004 and the same is under implement ation.  The company had already 
released the surplus manpower which also includes the staff of R&D Division by 
granting them VRS/VSS benefits. 
  
Now that the R&D Division had al ready been closed and the manpower 
engaged there in had been released on VRS/VSS long back in August – 
September 2003, it would not be possible to consider its revival at this stage. 
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 

 30
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 14) 
 
The Committee observe that out of Rs.5900.00 crore wh ich has been made 
as outlay for the fertilizer PSUs and for Departmental schemes in the 10 th Plan, 
the actual expenditure in th e first two years of the 10 th Plan has been Rs. 
1138.58 crore. This is only 19.3% of  the total plan outlay for the 10 th Plan 
whereas a whopping 80.7% of the outla y has been left to the utilized during the 
remaining three years of the plan.  T he Committee do not appreciate the pattern 
where the major share of the outlay is  carried forward to the end of the plan 
period resulting in substant ial component of the allocation remaining unutilised.   
During the 9 th Plan period, overall utilization of funds was just 42.4%.  The 
casualty on such occasions is planne d economic development. Planning should 
be done with vision and co mmitment based on the analysis of the past 
achievements and failures, to achieve t he objectives set forth.  The Committee 
recommend synchronized planning and spending during each plan period.  The 
committee also recommend that Department  of Fertilizers should impress upon 
PSUs to take up shortlisted major projects/schemes and to generate the required 
funds for the same. Nodal officers responsible for timely implementation of 
projects should be asked to ensure that the deficiencies noticed once, should not 
recur. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
           Department of Fertilizers nominates its r epresentatives on the Board of 
Directors of PSUs under the administrative control of this Department.  
Department regularly monitors follow up action with regard to activities of the 
major projects/schemes which Government emphasis from time to time by way of 
taking regular meetings with the N odal Officers responsible for timely 

 31
implementation of projec ts. Department has a technical division which is 
consulted while taking decision on implementation of projects so that deficiencies 
should not recur.     
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No. 88) 
 
For the production of complexes, t he Committee find that the plants in 
group-I use imported ammonia made from indigenous gas.  Manufacturers using 
ammonia made out of naphtha /fuel oil, are clubbed t ogether in group-II.  While 
working out the concessions, plants in gr oup-II get a substantially higher mileage 
to compensate their higher feedstock cost.  Concessions received by group-I are 
much lower.  Group-I plants are further put to disadvantage by disallowing the 
handling costs of Ammonia and the higher cost of ‘N’ from imported urea.  The 
Committee feel that instead of encouraging low cost production, such producers 
are penalized by treating them at par with high cost producers of complex 
fertilizers.  This does not seem to go well with the concept of making the industry 
cost competitive.  Therefore, the Committee desire that the Department of 
Fertilizers should encourage low cost produce rs by giving them incentives, while 
compensating the higher band producers to the extent t hat the units do not turn 
financially unviable.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
           In the case of complexes, Group-I manuf acturers are being compensated 
based on the recommendations of Tariff Commission approved by CCEA.  In the 
case of Group-II where the cost of ‘N’ is higher through naphtha, the original 
recommended price of Rs.198 per unit cost  of ‘N’ has already been trimmed to 

 32
Rs.180 per unit cost of ‘N’.  Since the units in Group-II are primarily PSUs, two 
from the Government of India and one Gujarat state PSU treating them at par 
with Group-I would make them totally fi nancially unviable.  However, while 
framing the new complex policy, this issue will be considered afresh. 
 
 [M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 33
CHAPTER – V 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 7) 
 
 The Committee find that the total installed capacity of nitrogen as on 
1.4.2004 was 119.98 lakh MTs whereas the actual produc tion was 106.34 lakh 
MTs leaving a gap of 13.64 la kh MTs. Production of ni trogen suffered mainly on 
account of inadequate supply of gas. Ev en the Trombay-V unit of Rashtriya 
Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd. (RCF) , a major producer of urea, has to be shut 
down owing to gas limitation since June  2002. Equipment related problems and 
financial difficulties in some  units too have come in the way of realizing cent 
percent production in urea units. In the ca se of phosphatic fertilizers, as against 
an annual installed capacity of 54.20 lakh MT in 2003-04 actual production was 
only 36.31 lakh MT. This is 33% short of full capacity utilization. The main 
problem in the production of phosphatic fertilizers was stated to be due to 
limitation of main raw materials i. e. phosphoric acid and ammonia. The 
Committee are pained to observe that t he very same problems have been cited 
as reasons for the lower actual producti on since 1998-99. It is  quite unfortunate 
that the lacunae are carried forward without solving them. The Committee 
strongly feel that it is the duty of the Government to ens ure the availability of the 
feedstock for any industry for its surv ival. The Committee recommend that the 
Department of Fertilizers should ensur e the supply of required quantity of 
feedstock for both nitrogenous and phosphatic fertilizers, thereby facilitating full 
utilization of the installed capacity in the country. 
 

 34
Reply of the Government 
 
 Main problem in production of nitrogenous fertilizers is the limited 
availability of gas. Against the total requirement of gas of 33.32 MMSCMD of gas 
by the existing gas based units, the average actual supply during 2003-04 was 
23.24 MMSCMD only. As the supplies of dom estic natural gas are dwindling, the 
gap between supply and demand is to be met, among other things, by import of 
LNG. The Department of Fertilizers is fo r preferential allocation of domestic 
natural gas to fertilizer sector and making available LNG to fertilizer sector at 
reasonable rates. It is in this contex t that an Inter-Ministerial Group has been 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Financ e Minister to   examine   issues  
related to  supply  of natural   gas and LNG  to fertilizers industry. IMG has been 
given the task of examining and work ing out a framewor k which ensures 
preferential allocation of domestic natural gas to the fertilizer industry and making 
available imported LNG to fertilizer units, its pricing and related taxation issues. 
The first meeting of IMG was held on 21.7.2004. Based on the decisions taken in 
the first meeting of IMG, the issue of  reasonableness of pr icing of various 
components of RLNG being marketed by Petronet LNG Limited (PLL) has been 
referred to the Tariff Commission.   
  
Problem in production of phosphatic fertilizers and steps taken: 
  
All the phosphatic & potassic fertiliz ers are decontrolled. Manufacturers 
are free to import the fert ilizer raw material/intermediates required for 
manufacturing these fertilizers at the price negotiated by them with the suppliers. 
 
Government of India is paying conc ession on these P&K fertilizers under 
the Concession Scheme. The prevailing prices of these raw materials/ 
intermediates are recognized as per t he approved methodology for working out 
concession rates under the Scheme. Phos phoric acid is on e of the main 
component used in manufacturing of DAP & complex fertilizers. About 2/3rd of the 
total production of DAP comes through imported phosphoric acid. 

 35
 
Government of India has recognized t he price of phosphoric acid at US $ 
395.45 per MT C&F on cash basis for working out the concession rates for DAP 
& Complex fertilizers for the year 2004-05 . This price is based on the price 
negotiated by the Phosphoric acid Co nsumer Group with the international 
suppliers. It is expected that with the recognition of phosphoric acid price by 
Government DAP manufacturers would be manufacturing these fertilizers in full 
swing.  
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 15) 
  
            The Committee are constrained to note that the Hazira and Thal Projects 
which are spill ov ers from the 9 th Plan period are yet to ta ke off even after two 
years into the 10 th Plan period.  The Committ ee find that the Hazira Urea 
Expansion Project of KRIBHCO and Thal Urea Expansion Proj ect of RCF are 
provided with substantial outlay in the 10 th Plan.  Rs.1440.00 crore has been 
provided for Hazira Project whereas Thal Project’s outlay is Rs.1331.00 crore.  
KRIBHCO and RCF could not commence implementation of these urea 
expansion projects in 2002-03 or 20 03-04 because the pricing policy for 
investments in expansion pr ojects of urea has been fina lized and notifed only in 
January,2004.  Accordingly KRIBHCO has  submitted the proposal for Rs.1750 
crore for approval of Government.  Disinvestment propos al was an added 
disadvantage in case of RCF in going ahead with its expansio n project.  The 
uncertainty and the wavering policies h ad kept development on hold and the 
delay in finalizing the pricing policy fo r expansion projects of urea has been the 
major stumbling block.  Proper planning is not possible in the absence of long 
term policies and it makes the going ve ry tough for manufacturers.  As 
Department of Fertilizers has finally notifed the Pricing Policy for investments 
made in new and expansion projects, th e Committee recommend that all out 

 36
efforts should be made to ensure that  the approved project of KRIBHCO and 
RCF materialise during 10th Plan period itself.  The Committee would also like the 
Government to take the investment dec ision on KRIBHCO’s proposal at the 
earliest as they strongly feel that the capacity expansion in the cooperative sector 
should  be on Government’s priority. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
            Hazira ammonia-urea Expansion project of KRIBHCO was given first 
stage clearance by the Government on 21. 8.2003.  The Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) for the Hazira Fertilizer Project Phase-II was prepared by PDIL, a 
consultancy PSU under the ad ministrative control of Department of Fertilizers.  
The Note for obtaining investment approval of the Public Investment Board (PIB) 
in respect of KRIBHCO’s Hazira Urea Expansion Project for additional annual 
production of 10.56 lakh tones  of urea, at an estimated cost of Rs. 1750 crore, 
has been prepared and circulated for consi deration of PIB in July, 2004 and the 
same is awaiting its approval.  As regar ds, Thal Expansion Project of RCF, the 
management of RCF had submitted Detailed Project Report.  However, in order 
to factually assess costs and benefits on a competitive basis, the company  has 
been asked to furnish Techno-economic F easibility  Study Report for  de-
bottlenecking of plants also.  
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 90) 
   
 The Committee observe that Single Super Phosphate (SSP) is recognized 
as a poor man’s fertilizer which contains  important elements like sulphur and 
calcium alongwith phosphate nutrient.  The role of sulphur in enhancing the 
productivity of the soil is recognized as an essential nutrient for fertilizing the soil 
especially for the oilseed crops.  Ho wever, the SSP consumption has been 
suffering due to erratic policies.  Unlike  other decontrolled fertilizers, the MRP of 

 37
SSP is fixed by State Govern ments.  The Committee regret  to note that the cost 
of production of SSP has been neglected over  the years both in fixing MRPs and 
in calculating the adhoc concessions.  T hey strongly feel that in the larger 
interest of the Indian agriculture se ctor, the importance of SSP needs to be 
recognized.  Otherwise, the already high  closure rate of SSP units due to 
financial constraints would further affect the SSP sector adversely.  Therefore, 
the Committee desire that the recommendations of the Cost Accounts Branch 
(CAB) of the Ministry of Finance be im plemented at the earlie st so that the 
industry is saved and quality SSP is made available to the farmers at reasonable 
prices throughout the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
            The Department has examined the recommendation of CAB and a 
methodology for working out a package for SSP is under finalisation.  The report 
based on the Department’s view would be  put up before CCEA for ensuring that 
the industry is viable and quality SSP is made available to the farmers. 
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation No. 11 (Para No. 91) 
  
 The Committee in its 41 st and 44 th Reports (13 th Lok Sabha) had 
expressed concern over the callous app roach of the State Governments in 
issuing sales certificates which ultimately delays the payment of concession to 
the units.  The Committee find that t he Department had tried to expedite the 
payment of dues to urea un its and the outstanding has come down to Rs.98.52 
crore.  The Committee over the years hav e taken note of the difficult experience 
the producers of DAP/complexes have undergone under the system of 
certification by States.  Th is state of affairs should no t be allowed to continue.  
Therefore, the Committee urge upon Department of Fertilizers to expedite 
working out the details of the new schem e which should replace certification by 

 38
States.  This new scheme should be based  on the data of imports, productions 
and dispatches of fertilizer/fertilizer inputs.   The Committee also desires that the 
consultations with Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), DOE and 
State Governments be completed with the urgency they deserve so that the new 
scheme in lieu of existing methodology can be implemented at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
             The Department is working on the suggestion of the Committee to 
substitute sales certification with a scheme based on imports, production and 
despatches of fertilizer inputs.  In th is respect, the Department has already 
formulated a methodology, which is under examination by the various 
stakeholders. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation No. 16 (Para No. 96) 
 
The Committee note that as against the la st year’s allocation of Rs.150.25 
crore for plan loans, the amount earma rked has been reduced to Rs.63.32 crore 
on account of the closure of Fertilizers Corporation of Indi a Ltd.(FCI),Hindustan 
Fertilizer Corporation Ltd., (HFC), Pyri tes, Phosphates and Chemicals Ltd. 
(PPCL) and some divisions of Projects and Development India Ltd. (PDIL).  Out 
of the plan loans of Rs. 63.32 crore, a major share of Rs.40.50 cr ore has been 
kept for the revamp of the Namrup-II of HFC which has become a separate PSU 
viz. Brahamputra Vaslley Fertilizer Co rporation Ltd.(BVFCL).  The Namrup 
revamp which was to be completed by  July,2003, is now expected to be 
completed by 1.10.2004.  The Committee were assured last  year that the entire 
revamp would be completed by Februar y, 2004.  The Committee express their 
dissatisfaction over the inordinate delay of 31 months causing a loss of Rs.74.37 
crore to the exchequer.  While taking a serious note of the delay the Committee 

 39
desire that the Government should ensure that there is no further slippage in the 
completion schedule of the Namrup revamp. 
 
Reply of the Government 
           Namrup I & III have commenced production after revamp in March,2003.  
As per the overall physical progress of the Narmup Revamp Project II plant which 
was expected to be completed by 1. 10..2004, has now been scheduled for 
commissioning by 31.12.2004.  This sli ppage was due to unforeseen reasons, 
like ethnic violence in Assam in Nov/Dec, 2003, delay in receipt of essential parts 
from overseas vendors and slow progress by Erection contractor.  All efforts to 
rigorously review and monitor the comp letion of construction work and  
commissioning of the project by 31.12.200 4 are being made by Department of 
Fertilizers. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation No. 17 (Para No. 97)  
               
FACT and MFL are stated to be the two PSUs facing financial difficulties. 
High cost of Ammonia production us ing Naphtha, reduced profits from 
Caprolactum and Ammonium Sulphat, in adequate compensation for Factamfos 
are the main reasons for the strained financ ial situation of FACT.  Urea Plant of 
FACT at Cochin has been sh ut down.  The Government of India has waived 
outstanding interest on loans and reduced the interest rates of loans for the units 
to 7%.  The Committee also note that  high price of naphtha as a feedstock, 
reduced compensation for energy cons umption, inadequate compensation for 
cost of ‘N’ and investments made in reva mp resulted in turning MFL financially 
sick.  The Government has taken steps to cushion the negative effects by 
waiving off interest and by proposing a third and long term financial restructuring 
package for revival of MFL.  However, the Committee feel that more has to be 
done by the Govenrment by way of financial assistance and writing off 
outstanding loans.  They recommend t hat the High Powered Committee which 

 40
has been set up in the Ministry for revival of closed fertilizer units, should explore 
the possibility of reviving al l the closed urea plants as  early as possible.  The 
Committee also desire that DOF should make vigorous efforts to finalise the third 
and long term financial restructuing pack age for MFL and the Committee may be 
apprised of the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
            The process of formu lating comprehensive financial restructuring 
package for MFL for Inter-mini sterial Consultations is under  way.   FACT is also 
being considered for financial restructuri ng package in order that Government 
would not extend any financial support during 2004-05 onwards. 
Comments/views of Ministri es/Department’s are being  sought on the proposed 
package in Inter-ministrial consultati ons. The committee will be informed soon 
after taking final decision in the matter.   As regards, revival of closed public 
sector units, PDIL has been asked to make a detailed study and furnish 
reports/recommendations.   
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation No. 19 (Para No. 108) 
 
The Committee find that the Hindust an Fertilizer Corporation Limited 
(HFC) and Fertilizers Corporation of India Limited (FCI) units in the North Eastern 
region have been closed down.  The Departm ent has submitted that the share of 
production of HFC and FCI units to the total consum ption in the country is 
negligible (1.5% in 1999-2000, 1.24% in  2000-01 and 0.38% in 2001-02) and the 
closure of these units wil l have no impact on the tota l urea availability in the 
country.  The Committee feel that this  may be the case from a holistic 
perspective.  But looking from  the regional angle, the existence of only one urea 
unit which is in production viz. Brahmaputra  Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited 

 41
in the North-Eastern region is a serious matter as far as regional balance is 
concerned.  The North-Eastern and Central India are very much deprived of the 
fertilizer units.  The movement trend during the first stage of partial decontrol has 
confirmed the apprehensions of the Committee that the maximum dispatches will 
be made in the home states of the pl ants and only meagre distribution will be 
there to farflung hilly areas.  The Commi ttee, therefore, st rongly urge upon the 
DOF to make concerted efforts for reviving  the closed units in  the North Eastern 
region and to explore the possibility of setting up ammonia-urea plants based on 
synthesis gas from coal gasification after going into the techno-economic 
feasibility of setting up such plants.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In the light of the National Co mmon Minimum Programme, the issue 
regarding the revival of the closed fertilizer  Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) is 
being re-examined based on the mark et demand and their techno-economic 
viability.  For this, Projects & Devel opment India Ltd. (PDIL), a PSU under the 
administrative control of Department of Fertilizers (DOF) has been commissioned 
to undertake the evaluation.  Further action will be taken based on its report.  The 
setting up of ammonia-urea plant based on synthesis gas from coal gasification 
will depend on the ava ilability of this feedstock based on the techno-economic 
viability.  Ministry of Coal has been requested to take up a pilot plant study of the 
various technologies using Indian coal  as a feedstock for manufacturing 
fertilizers.   
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation No. 20 (Para No. 109)  
 
The cost pricing of feedstock is extrem ely important for the fertilizer sector 
as the cost of feedstock accounts for about  60% to 75% of the total cost of 
production.  Natural gas/Liquefied Natural Gas is going to be the most preferred 

 42
feedstock as it is cheaper and efficient.  The recently formulated policies also 
give thrust to gas/LNG as the feedstock for new and expansion projects of urea.  
But the availability of gas at present is only 20.50 million metric standard cubic 
meters per day (MMSCMD) leaving a s hortfall of 12.29 MMSCMD.  It is also 
estimated that the requirement would s hoot up to 55 MMSCMD by 2011-12.  An 
Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) has also been constituted to look into the aspect of 
ensuring preferential allocations of domestic gas to the fertilizer industry, making 
available imported LNG to fertilizer uni ts, its pricing and related issues.  The 
Committee note that the produc tion of urea in many uni ts and fresh investments 
suffer due to non-availability of gas.  It is the duty of the Government to make 
available the preferred feedstock on a priority basis from existing reserves as 
well as from the new reserves that woul d be available in future.  To facilitate 
adequate availability of  feedstock, the matter of pr eferential allocations to 
fertilizer sector pending with the IMG, should be finalized immediately.  The 
Government should also give support to gas exploration projects.  The 
Committee again emphasise that the policy on pricing and availability of 
feedstock be finalized without any further delay.  
 
Reply of the Government 
An Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG ) has been constituted under the 
chairmanship of Finance Minister to examine issues relating to ensuring 
preferential allocation of domestic natural gas to the fertilizer industry and making 
available imported LNG to fertilizer units, its pricing and related taxation issues.  
The first meeting of the IMG has been he ld on 21.7.2004.  In pursuance of the 
decision the first meeting of IMG, a study has been entrusted to Tariff 
Commission on pricing of various compone nts of R LNG and transportation tariff 
of NG/RLNG.  The Tariff Commission has commenced the study.  It is expected 
that Tariff Commission will be able to submit its report  by mid December 2004.  
IMG will finalize its recommendations keepi ng in view the report of the Tariff 
Commission. 
 

 43
Furthermore, we have taken up the ma tter with the Ministry of Petroleum 
Natural Gas for preferential allocation of natural gas to fertilizer sector. Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas is in the process of formulating a policy for ensuring 
preferential allocation of existing natural gas under Administrative Price 
Mechanism (APM) to fertilizer and power sectors.  
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
Recommendation No. 22 (Para No. 111) 
 
In regard to the conversion of existing naphtha and fuel oil/LSHS units into 
gas based units, the Committee find that the Government has formulated policies 
on investment in new and ex pansion projects of urea.  The Committee note with 
concern that the quantum jump in su bsidy over the years has been due to 
increase in the price of feedstock and especially the huge subsidies given on 
urea produced using naphtha and fuel oil/LSHS.  Theref ore, the Committee feel 
that it is most important to keep the cost of feedstock at low levels to have a 
viable fertilizer industry.  Costly fuel mode plants need to be converted into gas 
based plants at the earliest.  The Committ ee would expect the industry to move 
at a faster pace to add capacity by re vamp, modernisation or debottlenecking. 
The only solution to reduce the subsidy burden on the exchequer is to accelerate 
the conversion of naphtha and fuel oil/LSHS plants into  gas based plants.  All 
these things are possible only if the Government ensure cl arity on pricing and 
availability of natur al gas/LNG.  The Committee, t herefore, recommend that the 
Government should address these iss ues with a sense of urgency.  The 
Committee also look forward to the DOF extending all possibl e help in making 
the industry strong enough to face the challenges.   
Reply of the Government 
The Government has, in its recently formulated policy on conversion of the 
existing non-gas based units to NG/LNG, in cluding policies on investment in new 
and expansion projects of urea and de-bottlenecking/rev amp/modernisation of 

 44
existing urea units, made it  clear that NG/LNG is goi ng to be the preferred 
feedstock for production of urea, as natural gas is cheaper as well as 
environment friendly and fertilizer units make  the most efficient use of natural 
gas, utilising both its chemical as well as heat energy.    
 
With a view to ensure preferential avai lability of domestic natural gas and 
making available imported LNG to fertilizer  sector including the existing non-gas 
based urea units switching over to NG/LNG, an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) has 
been constituted under the chairmanship of Finance Minister to examine issues 
relating to ensuring preferentia l allocation of domestic natur al gas to the fertilizer 
industry and making available imported LNG to fertilizer units, its pricing and the 
related taxation issues.  The first meeting of the IMG has been held on 
21.7.2004.  In pursuance of the decision the first meeting of IMG, a study has 
been entrusted to Tariff Commission on pricing of various components of R LNG 
and transportation tariff of NG/RLNG.  The Tariff Commission has commenced 
the study.  It is expected that Tariff Commission will be ab le to submit its report 
by mid December 2004.  IM G will finalize its recommendat ions keeping in view 
the report of the Tariff Commission. 
 
Moreover, the Working Group proposed to be constituted for framing 
policy for Stage-III commencing from 1.4.20 06, would also be entrusted the task 
of fixing milestones for conversion of existing naphtha and FO/LSHS based units 
to NG/LNG.  
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 O.M. No. –5(1)/2004-Finance-II dated 6.12.2004] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI         ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,    
March  11, 2004           Chairman, 
Phalguna  20, 1926 (Saka)     Standing Committee on  
Chemicals & Fertilizers. 

 45
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2004-05) 
 
NINTH SITTING 
(10.03.2005) 
 
 The Committee sat from 1630 hrs. to  1700 hrs. 
 
Present 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete - Chairman 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
1.   Shri Afzal Ansari  
2. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
3. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
4. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
5. Shri V.K. Thummar 
Rajya Sabha 
6. Shri Sanjay Rajaram Raut  
7. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
8. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh 
9. Shri T.R. Zeliang 
Secretariat 
1.  Shri C.S. Joon   - Director 
2.  Shri S.C. Kaliraman   - Under Secretary 
  
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman we lcomed the Members to the sitting. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee consider ed the draft Report on action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations cont ained in the Second Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (Department of Fe rtilizers).  After a brief discussion, the draft Report 
was adopted by the Committee without any amendment. 
 
 
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to make consequential 
changes, if any, arising out of the factua l verification of the Report by the 
Department of Fertilizers of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers and present 
the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 46
Appendix – II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of Action Take n by the Government on  the recommendations  
contained in the Second Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2004-05) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2004-05) of the Ministry of Chem icals & Fertilizers, Department of 
Fertilizers’. 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 22 
 
II Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, 13, 14, 15 and 21) 
 
8 
 Percentage to Total  36.36% 
 
III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government’s Reply  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 9, 12 and 18) 
 
3 
 Percentage of Total 13.64%  
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2 and 8) 
 
2 
 Percentage of Total  9.09% 
 
V Recommendations in respect of  which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,  3, 10, 11, 16, 17, 19, 20 and 
22) 
9 
 Percentage of Total 40.91% 
 