 
 
22  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA  
 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
  
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2007-08) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2006-07) on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
September, 2007/Asvina, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 


 -:2:- 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2007-08) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2006-07) on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertiliz ers 
(Department of Fertilizers)] 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.11.2007 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.11.2007 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
September, 2007/Asvina, 1929 (Saka) 


 -:3:- 
  
CONTENTS 
 
               PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-08) ……………………………….. 
 
4 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………… 
 
5 
CHAPTER I Report ……………………………………………………………... 
 
6 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been accepted 
by the Government ……………………………………..……… 
 
 
24 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies………… 
 
 
36 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 
37 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited …………………… 
 
 
39 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Letter No. 12012/3/2006 -FPP dated 08.03.2007 of Department of 
Fertilizers regarding Policy for Stage -III of New Pricing Scheme for 
urea manufacturing units………………………………………………. 
 
 
 
49 
II Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2007-08) held on 12th September, 2007….  
 
 
55 
III Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seve nteenth Report (14 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2006-07) on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) ………………. 
 
 
 
 
 
57 
 

 -:4:- 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
 
Secretariat 
  1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair - Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri A.K. Singh   - Joint Secretary 
  3. Shri A.S. Chera   - Director 
  4. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Deputy Secretary-II 
  5. Smt. Balwant Kaur Saimbhi - Under Secretary 
  6. Smt. Madhu Bhutani  - Senior Executive Assistant 
  
 
 
* Consequent upon nomination to the Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution, Shri Suresh Angadi, MP (LS) ceased to 
be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 30.08.2007. 
# Nominated w.e.f. 06.09.2007 vice Shri Devdas Apte, MP (RS). 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  -  Chairman 
  
Members  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ajit Singh 
3. Shri Afzal Ansari  
4. Shri Jaiprakash (Mohanlal Ganj) 
5. Shri Sunil Khan 
6. Shri Shrichand Kripalani 
7. Shri Subhash Maharia 
8. Shri Punnu Lal Mohale 
9. Shri A. Narendra 
10. Shri Prasanta Pradhan  
11. Shri Ramswaroop Prasad 
12. Shri P. Chalapathi Rao 
   13. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  
14. Shri Anantha  Venkata Rami Reddy  
15. Shri Devwrat Singh 
16. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
17. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
18. Shri D. Venugopal 
19. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
 *20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
 23. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
24. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
#25. Shri Surendra Lath 
 26. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
 27. Shri Mahendra Sahni 
28. Shri Dilip Singh Judev 
29. Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
30. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
31. Shri T.R. Zeliang 

 -:5:- 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2007 -
08) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twenty Second Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2006 -07) on Demands for 
Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers).  
 
2. The Seventeenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 
26th April, 2007.  The replies of Government to all the recommendations contained 
in the Seventeenth Report were received on 20 th August, 2007.  The Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2007 -08) considered the Action Taken 
Replies received from the Government and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report 
at their sitting held on 12th September, 2007. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-III. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI          ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,   
26 September, 2007                   Chairman, 
4 Asvina, 1929 (Saka)                           Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and  Fertilizers. 

 -:6:- 
REPORT 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observat ions contained in the Seventeenth 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2006 -07) on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers), which was presented t o Lok 
Sabha on 26th April, 2007.  
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were 
requested to furnish replies to the recommendations/observations contained in the 
Seventeenth Report of the Committee within three months from the presentation of 
the Report i.e. by 26th July, 2007.  The Action Taken Replies of the Government in 
respect of all the 20 recommendations/observations contained in the Report were 
received on 20th August, 2007. These have been categorised as follows:- 
 
Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 17 and 19 
        Total - 11 
Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies: 
        Nil  
Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. No. 2 
        Total - 1 
Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 6, 7, 8, 11, 15, 16, 18 and 20 
        Total - 8 
 

 -:7:- 
3. The Committee hope that utmost importance would be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry t o implement 
the recommendations/observations in their letter and spirit for any reason, 
the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation. The Committee further desire that the Action Taken Notes 
on the recommendations/obse rvations contained in Chapter -I of this Report 
and the final replies in respect of the recommendations for which only 
interim replies have been furnished by the Government should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
  
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations in the ensuing paragraphs: 
 
A. Follow-up Action on the recommendations contained in the  Twelfth 
Report of the Committee. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.1) 
 
 
5. The Committee had examined the follow -up action by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee 
on Demands for Grants (2006 -07) of the Department of Fertilizers.  The 
Committee have also reviewed the progress of implementation of their 
recommendations contain ed in the Fifteenth and Seventeenth Reports and 
also the action taken replies submitted by the Department of Fertilizers now.  
The Committee are happy to note that the  New Pricing Scheme Stage -III has 
been finalized and notified on 8 th March, 2007.   The Committee  are also 

 -:8:- 
happy to note that for debottlenecking/ revamp/ modernization of existing 
urea units, there is a provision under NPS -III that companies are free to take 
their own decision and additional production of urea has been incentivised.  
The Co mmittee, however, note that the alternative frame -work for 
reimbursement subsidy directly to the farmers is still under consideration.  
Similarly, revival process of closed fertilizer PSUs are yet to be fully 
implemented.  The Committee, therefore, desire that all out efforts should be 
made by the Government to decide and implement both the important issues 
on priority basis  in a time bound manner and apprise the Committee about 
the outcome of the efforts made by them.    
 
B. Utilization of Tenth Five Year Plan Outlay  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.2) 
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee note that out of Rs.5900 crore plan outlay in regard to 
fertilizer sector in the 10 th Five Year Plan period, the expenditure by the end of the 
year 2005-06 is Rs.2108.72 crore, which is about 35.72 per cent of the approved 
plan outlay.  For the year 2006-07, the likely expenditure is Rs.2987.54 crore.  The 
Committee have been informed that the main reasons for shortfall in utilization of 
plan funds are non -utilization of funds for Hazira Expansion Project of Krishak 
Bharati Cooperative Limited (KRIBHCO) and Thal Expansion of Project of 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF), exclusion of Indian Farmer 
Fertilizers Cooperative Limited (IFFCO) from the administrative control of 
Department of Fertilizers, closing of two PSUs like Fertilizer Corporation of India 
Limited (FCI) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFC), non -
implementation of some major projects of Fertilizers and Chemicals Trava ncore 
Limited (FACT) viz. (i New Sulphuric Acid Plant at Cochin Division, (ii) Railway 

 -:9:- 
siding at Udyogmandal and certain improvements to Phase -I plants in Cochin 
Division, etc.  Similarly, with regard to National Fertilizers Limited (NFL), the 
shortfall in  actual expenditure is due to savings in completion costs of energy 
savings schemes and delay in revamping of Vijaipur -I plant.  In case of Rashtriya 
Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF), the Ammonia - V revamp and the Argon 
recovery project at Thal were  not implemented.  Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) 
has also not utilized the full plan outlay due to dropping of six schemes during the 
year 2005-06 and 2006-07 while in case of Project and Development India Limited  
(PDIL), the funds could not be utilized  due to deferment of procurement of some 
computer items.  
 
         Keeping in view the fact that there is a gap of about Rs.3792 crore in the 
allocation and anticipated utilization of the 10 th Five Year Plan outlay of 
Department of Fertilizers, the Commit tee are of the view that the funds had not 
been utilized by the Department of Fertilizers properly during each year of the 
Tenth Plan period.  The Committee are not satisfied with the reasons furnished by 
the Department for non -utilization of plan funds by  each PSU. The Committee are 
pained to note that although they had repeatedly recommended that Department 
of Fertilizers should review the progress of all projects in a scientific manner on a 
regular basis but no adequate action had been taken by the Gover nment on those 
recommendations. The Committee feel that implementation process of project 
planning in the PSUs/Cooperative unit under the administrative control of the 
Department of Fertilizers was poor as ground realities were not considered while 
formulating and implementing the schemes/projects.  The Committee strongly feel 
that there is no use of fixing the targets if they can not be achieved.  The 
Committee desire that the Department of Fertilizers should, therefore, analyze the 
reasons for continuous failures in achieving the targets during each year of the 
10th Five Year Plan and ensure that the same shall not continue during the 11 th 
Five Year Plan.”   
 
 

 -:10:- 
7. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:-  
 
“The plan achievement i n the 10 th Five Year Plan was low due to non -
availability of gas which impeded any further decision on setting up of new fertilizer 
plant at Thal and Hazira. However, in compliance of the observations of the 
Committee the performance of each of PSU is bein g monitored by the Department 
regularly through the Quarterly Review Meetings held at the level of Secretary (F).  
Next QRM for the quarter ending June, 2007 is scheduled for August, 2007. “  
 
8. The Committee are surprised to note that the Department of F ertilizers 
has not taken the recommendation of the Committee seriously.  The 
Department ,   without following the direction of the Committee, have  simply 
conveyed that they are monitoring the performance of each PSU through the 
Quarterly Review Meetings.  The Committee had straightway recommended  
that the Department should analyse  the reasons for continuous failure for 
achieving the targets during each year of 10 th Five Year Plan  so that such 
failures may not continue during the 11th Five Year Plan. 
 
 The Committee understand that the Quarterly Review Meetings (QRM) 
are regular features of all the Ministries/ Departments.   As such the  
Department have not taken  new  initiative  after analyzing the reasons for 
their failure during each year of 10 th Five Year Plan.  Government should 
examine various factors before formulating any scheme.  The Committee are 
not happy with the Department’s  reply that the plan achievement in the 10 th 
Five Year Plan was low due to non-availability of gas.  Non-availability of gas 
may be one of the reasons but that is not the sole reason for their failure for 
not achieving the targets during the 10 th Plan.  The Committee, therefore,  

 -:11:- 
once again reiterate that Department of Fertilizer should analyse the reasons 
for continuous f ailure in detail and come out with some concrete proposals 
so that they may not face the similar situation in the implementation of 
projects during the 11th Five Year Plan.  
 
C. Maximum utilization of plan outlay during the 11th Five Year Plan 
(Recommendation  Sl. No.4) 
 
9.      The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 
“The Committee note that Planning Commission has approved an outlay of 
Rs.1037.96 crore for various Public Sector Undertakings and miscellaneous 
schemes of the Department of Fertilizers for  the year 2007 -08.  Out of which an 
amount of Rs.992.96 crore will be met from the internal and extra budgetary 
resources (IEBR) and the balance amount of Rs.45.00 crore will be provided 
through budgetary support.  The Committee desire that necessary planning should 
be done by the Department of Fertilizers to avoid any shortfall in utilization of plan 
funds allocated for the first year of 11 th Five Year Plan.  The Committee are of the 
view that Government should take all corrective measures for maximum util ization 
of budgetary amount during the year 2007 -08 after obtaining the project Review 
Reports from all the Public Sector Undertakings on priority basis.  The Committee 
desire that the Department should also review all the on -going schemes of PSUs 
in the m onth of July -August of each year and, if necessary, re -allocate the funds 
among the PSUs during the financial year.” 
 
 
10. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
“ The PSUs have been asked to report their expenditure plan as w ell as 
their actual expenditure for the first quarter of 2007 -08.  Their expenditure will be 
reviewed and corrective measures will be taken expeditiously.”   
 

 -:12:- 
 
11. While expressing their satisfaction over the fact that Department of 
Fertilizers has asked the PSUs to report their expenditure for the first quarter 
of 2007 - 08  with a view to review their performance and take corrective  
measures for better utilization of budgetary amount, the Committee  desire 
that   quarterly review should be made in respec t of each financial year from 
this year onwards and after proper review they should direct the concerned 
PSUs to take corrective measures for proper utilization of amount allocated 
to them.   
 
D. Direct subsidy to farmers 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.6) 
 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
      “The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of the 
Department for the year 2006 -07, were informed that a scheme for disbursal of 
subsidy directly to the farmers in three selected districts where relia ble land 
records are available might be formulated on an experimental basis.  Further, 
while examining the Demands for Grants for the year 2007 -08, the Secretary, 
Department of Fertilizers, during the evidence apprised the Committee that the 
fertilizer industry has agreed to work with Department of Fertilizers in working out 
a pilot project.  The pilot project has not yet started and the fertilizer industry has 
engaged a consultant for this purpose.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the process of starting of pilot projects should be completed expeditiously and 
they be apprised of the status of progress of the pilot project on regular basis.  The 
Committee are of the view that disbursal of subsidy directly to the farmers, instead 
of by industries would minimize the chances of inflated production cost of fertilizers 
and also send a sympathetic message among farmers.  The Committee also 
observe that some companies resort to the tactics of Gold Plating i.e. indicating 

 -:13:- 
lower production capacity and on the  basis of percentage production obtain huge 
subsidy.  The Committee feel that with the introduction of direct subsidy to 
farmers, this tendency would also stop.  The Committee also recommend to 
devise a policy of subsidy according to the economic status of  farmers so that the 
maximum benefit of subsidy may go to peasants, poor and marginal farmers. “  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.7) 
 
13. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“As stated by the Secretary during the course of evidence that the 
Department is pon dering over the nutrient based subsidy to farmers, the 
Committee feel that such a scheme may also help fertilizer manufacturers in the 
reduction of their production cost and would not lead to inflated production cost.  
The Committee would like to caution t hat before switching over to nutrient based 
subsidy, the views of Fertilizers Association of India and experts should be taken 
and the scheme be launched on an experimental basis in one of the PSUs and the 
involvement of private sector may also be examined and considered.   
 
      The Committee hope that the Government would ponder over the subsidy 
issue seriously and implement both the schemes viz., (i) Direct subsidy to the 
farmers and (ii) Nutrient/Feedstock based subsidy to the manufacturers on pilot 
basis and after studying the result and cost effectiveness would implement one of 
them.  The Committee desire that the Government should devise a mechanism to 
find out the production capacity of all the fertilizer units so that the fertilizer units do 
not resort to the practice of gold plating and take hefty amount of subsidy thereof.”   
 
14. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
“The matter relating to alternative framework for reimbursement of subsidy 
directly to the farmers i s under consideration of the Government.  Fertilizers 
Association of India had entrusted a study to Tata Consultancy Services Ltd on 
this matter.  TCS has since submitted its report which is under consideration in the 

 -:14:- 
Government at various levels.  Final d ecision on the need and feasibility of an 
alternative framework for direct subsidy to farmers will be taken shortly.”  
 
15. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have further stated as follows:- 
 
      “The issues recommended by the Committee are unde r active 
consideration of the government. A Group of Ministers (GOM) has been 
constituted to look into sustainable use of fertilizers and pertinent subsidy and 
pricing issues.  These issues are also being looked into by the GOM.”   
 
 
16. The Committee note  with concern that  the matter relating to 
alternative framework for reimbursement of subsidy directly to the farmers 
is still under consideration of the Government alongwith the report of Tata 
Consultancy Services Limited (TCS).  The Committee hope that t he 
Government will take the final decision within shortest  possible time and 
convey its report to the Committee accordingly.  However, the Committee 
are happy to note that Government have constituted a Group of Ministers 
(GOM) to look into the sustainable  use of fertilizers and pricing issues.  The 
terms and conditions also involve the issues of direct subsidy to farmers 
and nutrient based subsidy to manufacturers on pilot basis.  The Committee 
hope that the Department would pursue the matter and try to ge t the Report 
of GOM for the timely decision on these issues. 

 -:15:- 
E. Concession policy for P&K and SSP Fertilizers  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.8) 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers is administeri ng the 
Concession Scheme on P&K and SSP fertilizers for extending financial support to 
decontrolled P & K fertilizers on sale w.e.f 01.10.2006.  The Government accepted 
the recommendation of Tariff Commission’s cost price study on complex fertilizers 
w.e.f. 01.04.2002.  Based on the recommendations of the Tariff Commission (TC) 
and Inter -Ministerial Group (IMG), the Government has implemented a revised 
methodology of working out concession rates for DAP and MOP w.e.f 01.04.2003.  
An Expert Group under the c hairmanship of Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member, Planning 
Commission was set up to work out an alternative methodology of pricing linking 
the price of phosphatic acid with the international price of DAP.  The Expert Group 
has submitted the Report and it is under examination of the Department of 
Fertilizers.  While appreciating the Government’s efforts in this regard, the 
Committee are of the view that the Government are moving at a slow speed in 
finalizing the concession policy.  The Committee, therefore, express their serious 
concern and reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Government should 
finalise their Report on concession policy relating to DAP and other complex 
fertilizers at the earliest.  The Committee hope that early finalization of concession 
policy would help farmers for getting decontrolled phosphatic and potassic (P&K) 
fertilizers at affordable prices.” 
 
18. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
“The Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) on the subject is likely to submit its report 
very shortly. After examination, the report shall be submitted before the competent 
authority for its acceptance and approval.” * 
 
*  At the time of factual verification of the Draft Report, Department of Fertilizers vide their O.M. No. F.No . 5(1)/2007-Fin-II 
(Vol-II) dated 20th  September, 2007 informed as under:- 
        “The Department of Fertilizers administers the Concession Scheme for decontrolled Phosphatic and 
Potassic (P&K) fertilizers based on the recommendations of the Tariff Commi ssion, as adopted by the 
Government.  The Concession Scheme for P&K for 2007 -08 has been notified as approved by the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 23rd August, 2007. 
        Upto 2005-06, the price of phos acid negotia ted by the Phos acid Consumer Group (PACG) was taken into 
account for subsidy.  However, for 2006 -07, the price of phos acid was adopted as per the formula suggested by 
the Expert Group chaired by Prof. Abhijit Sen.  The Expert Group formula linked the normative price of phosphoric 
acid to international price of DAP.  Accordingly, the Concession policy for 2006 -07 was announced.  The 
substantive chance in the Concession policy for 2006 -07 related to the adoption of the normated phosphoric acid 
formula suggested by the Expert Group as against the negotiated price of phosphoric acid adopted earlier. 
       The PACG informed that the price agreed for supply of phosphoric acid in April-May 2007 for 2007-08 is US $ 
566.25 C&F per MT (cash).  This price was found to be significantly less than the price of phosphoric acid derived 
under the formula suggested by the Expert Group, which came to US $ 637 C&F per MT based on the prices of 
imported DAP and imported ammonia that prevailed during the relevant period of 15 th February to 31 st March, 
2007.  On the recommendation of the Department of Fertilizers, the CCEA therefore has approved the 
Concession Policy for 2007-08 adopting the negotiated price of phos acid at US $ 566.25 per MT, since it entails 
lesser outgo of Concession/Subsidy vis-à-vis what was likely had the formula based approach been continued for 
the current year. 
      Separately, an Inter-Ministerial Group(IMG) was set up to examine the other recommendations of the Expert 
Group.  The report of the IMG is under examination.” 

 -:16:- 
19. The Committee have been informed that Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 23 rd August, 2007 had 
approved the concession scheme for P&K for the year 2007 -08 and notified 
it.  The Phos Acid Consumer Grou p (PACG) has also informed the 
Committee that price agreed for supply of phosphoric acid in April -May, 
2007 for 2007 -08 is US $ 566.25 C&F per MT which is less than the price of 
phosphoric acid derived under the formula suggested by the Expert Group, 
i.e. US $ 637 C&F per MT on the recommendations of Department of 
Fertilizers, the CCEA now approved the concession policy for 2007 -08 
adopting the negotiated price of phos acid at US $ 566.25 C&F per MT.  Now, 
the Report of the Inter -Ministerial Group (IMG) set  up to examine the other 
recommendations of the Expert Group is under examination.  The 
Committee are happy to note that Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) has approved the concession scheme for P&K for 2007 -08 and price 
agreed for supply of phos phoric acid has also been reduced from US $ 637 
C&F per MT to US $ 566.25 C&F per MT for 2007 -08.  However, the report of 
the IMG is still under consideration.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that keeping in view the interests of poor, small and margi nal farmers, the 
Department would make all out efforts for expeditious finalization of report 
of IMG.  After receipt of the report, they should not take much time to 
implement the recommendations of the Expert Group. 
 
F. Policy for investment made in new and  expansion projects of urea  
(Recommendation Sl. No.11) 
 
20. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
        “The committee note that the import of urea on Government account is 
made to bridge the gap between assessed demand and supply. The State Trad ing 
Enterprises arrange imports of urea on behalf of the Government. The committee 
find that the imports of urea and DAP has been increased in the year 2005 -06 and 
2006-07 as compared to 2004 -05. The Committee in their earlier Reports have 
been emphasizing the need for increasing production capacity of fertilizers. Due to 
delay in declaration of the fertilizer policy, there has been very few investors to 
come forward to invest in fertilizer sector. This has been resulted into increase of 
imports year after year. The Committee, therefore, expect from the Government to 
help the industry in capacity building of fertilizer units so that dependence on 
imports is minimized.” 

 -:17:- 
21. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
  
 
“The Government has approved the New Pricing Scheme (NPS) Stage -III 
for urea units of 1.2.2007 and notified on 8 th March 2007. New Pricing Scheme 
(NPS) Stage -III is effective from 1.10.2006 to 31.3.2010. Under NPS Stage -III 
additional production of urea has been incentivised. No permission will be required 
from the Government for production beyond 100% of re -assessed urea capacity of 
the unit. It is expected that this will lead to capacity addition in existing urea units 
in the country.  
 
  The present policy for new and  expansion projects was announced in 
January 2004. The existing policy is under review in light of lack of investment in 
this sector for the last seven years. The revised policy for investment in this sector 
is expected to be finalized soon.”   
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.16) 
 
22. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee have been informed that the Department of Fertilizers 
announced a policy in January, 2004 for creation of additional capacity of urea by 
way of new and expansion projects and d e-bottlenecking/revamp/modernization of 
existing urea units.  The policy have generated very good response in the fertilizer 
industry.  The Department has received proposals from various urea companies 
for expansion and de -bottlenecking, which would result  in additional capacity of 
about 50.8 LMT of urea.  However, the Committee are dismayed to note that the 
status of approval of proposals regarding de -bottlenecking and expansion of 
fertilizer units is almost remain the same as compared to the last year.  T he 
Committee are of the view that after approval of pricing policy for urea units for 
Stage-III of New Pricing Scheme (NPS), the capacity utilization of the fertilizer 
industry should also be improved through revamping/modernization of the existing 
urea un its.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that considering the 
stagnated production capacity in fertilizer, the matter regarding examination of the 

 -:18:- 
proposals for de-bottlenecking and expansion of fertilizer units should be taken up 
at the highest level.  The Committee desire that the outcome of the progress made 
in this regard should be conveyed to the Committee within three months from the 
presentation of the Report.”   
 
23. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
        “Under NPS Stage -III, the requirement of approval of Government for de -
bottlenecking of existing units has been done away with.  The companies are 
normally free to revamp their existing units as per their commercial decision.  The 
government had earlier notified the pricing policy for investment made in new and 
expansion projects of urea in January, 2004.  The unavailability of adequate 
quantity of gas has been one of the major bottlenecks for new investment in this 
sector.   
       
 The availability of  gas in the country is now projected to increase 
substantially from 2008 -09 onwards.  The government is considering review of 
existing policy for new and expansion projects to ensure that the revised policy is 
able to attract adequate investments in this sector and utilize the opportunity being 
offered by projected increase in gas availability.  The revised policy is at present 
under consideration of the government.”   
 
24. While expressing their satisfaction over the fact that Stage -III of New 
Pricing Scheme for urea units has been notified which envisage additional 
production of urea beyond 100% of reassessed capacity of unit the 
Committee note with deep concern that Government have not been able to 
declare the fertilizer policy till date despite the fact that  very few investors 
have come forward to invest in fertilizer sector during the last seven years.  
The Government is still reviewing the policy of new  and expansion projects.   
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Government should ponder over 

 -:19:- 
this serious issue and finalise the policy regarding expansion and 
investment in fertilizer sector, which should be investment  friendly and 
lucrative at the earliest.  
 
G. Stage-III of New Pricing Scheme (NPS) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.12) 
 
25.      The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee are happy to note that the Government has approved the 
pricing policy for urea units for Stage -III of New Pricing Scheme (NPS) w.e.f. 
01.10.2006 to 31.03.2010.  The policy has been formulated keeping in view the 
recommendations of the Working Group.  The Committee hope that by 
implementation of Stage -III policy, there will be further investment in urea sector 
maximizing the urea production and incentivising additional urea production.  The 
Committee hope that it would also encourage investment in Joint Ventures (JV) 
projects abroad and also establish a more efficient urea distribution and movement 
system. The Committee also desire that the Government should examine the 
impact of New Pricing Scheme on fertilizer  industry and examine the problems 
faced by the industry and take corrective steps for solving the problems of 
fertilizers industries.   
 
The Committee, however, express their displeasure that Stage -II of NPS 
was upto March, 2006 whereas the Government has  been able to announce NPS-
III in March, 2007 only.  In the absence of any policy for a year or so, there has 
been a lot of uncertainty in the fertilizer sector.  On account of this, not only the 
fertilizer production stagnated, the imports of fertilizers also affected resulting in 
outgoing foreign exchange.   
 
     The Committee hope that the Government would implement the Stage -III of 
NPS in letter and spirit so that fertilizer industry becomes an industry friendly 
sector and much needed investment is put  in the growth of the fertilizer sector.  

 -:20:- 
 The Committee also expect the Government to constantly review the 
progress in regard to implementation of Stage -III of NPS for taking corrective 
measures wherever necessary.”   
 
26. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
 
“The recommendations of NPS Stage -III pricing policy notified by the 
Department of Fertilizers on 8 th March 2007, are being implemented by the DOF. 
The representations and the problems submitted by the Fertilizer comp any, with 
reference to Stage -III policy, are also under examination/consideration of 
Department of Fertilizers.” 
 
 
27. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply given by  the 
Department of Fertilizers that recommendations of New Pricing Scheme 
(NPS) S tage-III are being implemented by them.  Even the Department has 
not specified the problems being faced by the fertilizer sector for the last 
one year in the absence of any policy.  Considering the urgency of the 
matter, the Committee once again strongly r ecommend that sincere efforts 
should be made by the Government to review the progress of 
implementation  of Stage-III of NPS.  As furnished by the Department that the 
representations and problems submitted by the fertilizer companies with 
reference to Stage-III of NPS Policy are under examination of Department of 
Fertilizers, the Committee hope that the Department would resolve such 
issues in an objective manner and make the policy manufactuers’ friendly.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of conclusi ve action taken in the 
matter at the earliest.   

 -:21:- 
H. Revival of closed fertilizer PSUs 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.18) 
 
28.      The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
     “The committee have been informed that in lines with the common 
Minimum Programme of  the Government, the possibilities for the revival of the 
closed units of Fertilizer Corporation Limited (FCI), Hindustan Fertilizer 
Corporation Limited (HFC) and Pyrites Phosphates and Chemicals Limited (PPCL) 
are being explored. In respect of FCI and HFC , the Cabinet had considered a 
proposal for obtaining in -principle approval for revival of these PSUs on 
07.12.2006 and directed that the proposal was submitted to the BRPSE for 
consideration. Their recommendations are awaited. As regards PPCL, a draft 
Cabinet Note for the revival of the company is under finalization in the Department 
of Fertilizers. The Committee desire that the Department of Fertilizers should 
make all possible efforts to canalize and implement the revival package for the 
closed and loss -making fertilizer units. The Committee also desire that the 
Department of Fertilizers should take up the matter with the concerned authorities 
at the earliest.”  
 
29. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
     “Based on the recommendations of the BRPSE, a proposal for obtaining in -
principle approval of the Government for revival of HFC & FCI was submitted to 
the Cabinet on 28.3.2007. The proposal was considered by the Cabinet in its 
meeting held on 12.4.2007 and decided as under:- 
decided ‘in-principle’ to examine the feasibility of reviving FCIL and HFCL, 
subject to the confirmed availability of gas; and  
underlined the need for a hard look at the prospects of revival in view of the 
factors that led to the closure of the entities. 
 
       Pursuant to the Cabinet decision, the companies have drawn a road map. 
Well-run fertilizer PSUs namely, M/s Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd. (RCF) 

 -:22:- 
and M/s National Fertilizer Ltd. (NFL) and Fertilizer Cooperative viz. Krishak Bharti 
Cooperative Limited (KRIBHCO) have been advised to submit detailed proposals 
regarding the possibility of revival and keenness of their company for the same to 
the Department of Fertilizers. As regards PPCL, a draft proposal to be submitted 
to the BRPSE for ob taining their recommendations for revival of the company, is 
under examination in the Department of Fertilizers. 
 
       As regards the two loss making fertilizer PSUs namely, Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Travancore Ltd. (FACT) and Madras Fertilizers Ltd.(MFL),  draft 
proposals for financial restructuring are under finalization in the Department of 
Fertilizers. Thus, the Department has been taking expeditious steps for the revival 
of closed and loss making fertilizer units. The delay in implementation has been 
due to factors which are beyond the control of the Department of Fertilizers.” 
 
30. The Committee note that Government have taken steps for revival of 
closed fertilizer PSUs and the process is at different stages of 
implementation.  The Government have not c learly mentioned about the 
factors which according to them are beyond the control of  Department of 
Fertilizers for the timely implementation of this process.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that Government should take steps to 
remove the hurdles in this regard and expedite the financial restructuring of 
loss making PSUs.  The Committee, however, desire that the Government 
should not ignore the interest of workers in the process of restructuring.     

 -:23:- 
I. Insurance Scheme for farmers 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.20) 
 
31.      The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
       “The committee note that during the year 2006, KRIBHCO had entered into 
a pact with Bajaj Allianz Insurance Co. Limited for a scheme called, ‘Sankat Haran  
Bima Yojana Policy’ for  farmers. The Committee have been informed that 
Department of Fertilizers is planning to start a study for evaluating the success of 
the Scheme. The Committee are surprised to note that even after lapse of one 
year, the Department of Fertilizers is still p lanning to start a study for evaluating 
the success of the Scheme. The committee, therefore, desire that the study be 
started as early as possible so that the success or failure of the Scheme should be 
known which is essential for a decision on the continuation of the Scheme.” 
 
32. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
      “ The Department of Fertilizers have decided to initiate a Study to evaluate 
the success of ‘Sankat Haran  Bima Yojana Policy’ for farmers. The Department  of 
Fertilizers has awarded the evaluation Study to ‘Agricultural Finance Corporation 
Ltd., New Delhi’.” 
 
33. The Committee note that Department  of Fertilizers has decided to 
initiate a study to evaluate the success of scheme called ‘Sankat Haran Bima 
Yojana Policy started by KRIBHCO for farmers.  The Committee desire that 
the study  should be completed in a time bound manner and necessary 
modifications, if required should be made in the present scheme.  The 
Committee also desire that Government should tak e initiatives to popularize 
the scheme amongst the farmers so that their participation is increased and 
they are compensated to the loss of their produce in case of any calamity.  

 -:24:- 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
 The Twelfth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2006 -07) of 
the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) was presented to 
Parliament on 19 th May, 2006.  The fifteenth Action Taken Re port on action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations contained in Twelfth Report was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 27 th February, 2007 and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 1 st March, 2007. Out of the total 19 recommendations, 10 
Recommendations (Sl . Nos. 1,5,6,7,8,9,15,17,18 and 19) were accepted by the 
Government.  In view of the Government’s replies, Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 
12 and 16 were not pursued by the Committee.  In regard to Recommendations at 
Sl. Nos. 2,3,4,10,11,13 and 14, the replies  of the government were of interim 
nature. Subsequently, the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers made a Statement 
regarding the status of implementation of the recommendations contained in 
Twelfth Report of the Committee in Lok Sabha on 18 th December, 20 06 under 
Direction 73 A of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.   
  
The Committee’s analysis of implementation of recommendations by the 
Government has revealed that out of the total 19 Recommendations, the 
Department of Fertilizers have implemented o nly 5 Recommendations so far.  The 
implementation process in regard to 5 recommendations is in progress.  The 
Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2,3,4,10,11,12,13,14 and 16 relating to shortfall in 
utilization of plan outlay, project planning and implementation i n PSUs, plan 
strategies in regard to 11 th Five Year Plan, finalization of Stage -III of NPS, 
disbursal of subsidy directly to farmers, de -bottlenecking/revamp/modernization of 
existing urea units, revival of sick, loss making and closed fertilizer PSUs have  not 
been implemented so far.  The Committee are dismayed at the slow pace of the 
implementation process of their Recommendations and desire that sincere efforts 

 -:25:- 
for properly and timely implementation of their Recommendations should be made 
by the Department of Fertilizer without further delay.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i)        Finalization of Stage-III of NPS.  
The Government has approved the New Pricing Scheme(NPS) Stage -III for 
urea units on 1.2.2007 and notified on 8 th March 2007 (Appendix-I).   New Pricing 
Scheme(NPS) Stage-III is effective from 1.10.2006 to 31.3.2010.   
 
(ii) Debottlenecking/revamp/modernization of existing urea units 
Under NPS -III, no Fertilizer company would need approval from 
Government of India for de -bottlenecking/revamp etc.  The companies are free to 
take their commercial decision on their own for debottlenecking of fertilizer plants.  
Further under NPS Stage-III additional production of urea has been incentivised.  
 
(iii) Disbursal of subsidy to farmers. 
 The matter relating  to alternative frame work for reimbursement of subsidy 
directly to the farmers is under consideration of the Government.  Fertilizers 
Association of India had entrusted a study to Tata Consultancy Services Ltd on 
this matter.  TCS has since submitted its report which is under consideration in the 
Government at various levels.  Final decision on the need and feasibility of an 
alternative framework for direct subsidy to farmers will be taken shortly.  
 
(iv)     Revival of the closed fertilizer PSUs 
          The Department of Fertilizers has been taking all necessary steps  
expeditiously for obtaining the necessary approvals of  the  competent authorities 
for revival  of  the closed  fertilizer  PSUs and  for  financial  restructuring  of  the 
loss making  fe rtilizer PSUs. The process  in this direction are under different 
stages of implementation. The delay  is  attributable  to  factors  which  are  
beyond the  control  of   Department  of  Fertilizers.  
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 5 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 -:26:- 
 
(Recommendation  Sl. No.3) 
 
    The Committee note that there has been marginal increase in production 
capacity in respect of both nitrogenous and phosphatic fertilizers in the beginning 
of the fifth year of Tenth Five Year Plan i.e. in 2006 -07 as compared to the 
production capacity in the end of the Ninth Five Year Plan i.e. in the year 2001 -
02. The committee also no te that consumption of major fertilizers are also on 
increasing trend. The committee find that the demand forecast of urea during the 
Eleventh Plan period as per the Working Group on Fertilizers for the Eleventh 
Plan is 1354.70 lakh tones and demand foreca st for phosphatic fertilizers, 
especially DAP is very high in comparison to the present trend of consumption. 
The committee further note that the demand for phosphatic fertilizers in the 
country is being met through indigenous production based on imported raw 
materials/ intermediates and import of finished fertilizers. Due to lack of efficient 
exploitable reserves of phosphate in the country, it is being expected that the 
import practice will continue during the 11 th Plan period also. The committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should fix higher targets taking into 
account the increasing demand and consumption of all major fertilizers in the 
coming years so as to reduce the import of urea and DAP for the year 2007 -08 
and also to minimize the subsidy borne by the Government on this account.  
 
Reply of the Government 
       Efforts are being made to increase domestic production of urea and also to 
encourage its additional production by revamping/ modernization and adoption of 
alternative source like  Natural Gas/ LNG as feed stock, which is the most cost 
effective and least polluting feed stock in the fertilizer sector.   
       To meet the projected demand for urea during the 11 th Plan period, 
Government has announced  ‘incentive for additional produ ction of urea’ in the 
New Pricing Scheme Stage -III. In case of urea targets fixed for the year 2007 -08, 
are on the higher side as compared to previous year.  

 -:27:- 
       Basic raw materials for production of phosphatic fertilizers are being imported 
because of limited sources in the country. All efforts are being made to improve 
the situation including encouraging Indian companies to enter into Joint Ventures 
with foreign suppliers of raw materials to ensure smooth flow of raw materials into 
the country at reaso nable prices. The production target set for DAP for the year 
2007-08, is also higher as compared to previous year. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
(Recommendation  Sl. No.4) 
      The Committee note that Planning Commission has approved an outlay of 
Rs.1037.96 crore for various Public Sector Undertakings and miscellaneous 
schemes of the Department of Fertilizers for the year 2007 -08.  Out of which an 
amount of Rs.992.96 crore  will be met from the internal and extra budgetary 
resources (IEBR) and the balance amount of Rs.45.00 crore will be provided 
through budgetary support.  The Committee desire that necessary planning should 
be done by the Department of Fertilizers to avoid any shortfall in utilization of plan 
funds allocated for the first year of 11 th Five Year Plan.  The Committee are of the 
view that Government should take all corrective measures for maximum utilization 
of budgetary amount during the year 2007 -08 after obt aining the project Review 
Reports from all the Public Sector Undertakings on priority basis.  The Committee 
desire that the Department should also review all the on -going schemes of PSUs 
in the month of July -August of each year and, if necessary, re -allocate the funds 
among the PSUs during the financial year. 
Reply of the Government 
 The PSUs have been asked to report their expenditure plan as well as their 
actual expenditure for the first quarter of 2007-08.  Their expenditure will be 
reviewed and corrective measures will be taken expeditiously.   
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 -:28:- 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
   The Committee have been informed that Department of Fertilizers has an 
outstanding liability of subsidy payment to the tune of Rs.11582.84 crore for the 
year 2006 -07. Claims in the case of decontrolled indigenous fertilizers, 
decontrolled imp orted fertilizers and indigenous urea have also not been settled 
completely till date. The Committee also find that the Department is not satisfied 
with the budgetary allocation as these are insufficient to make subsidy payment.  
The consumption of all maj or fertilizers is also on increasing trend.  Based on the 
increase in consumption and prevailing higher prices of fertilizer inputs, 
Department of Fertilizers had sought a sum of Rs.32952.94 crore for 
subsidy/concession against which the Ministry of Financ e allocated only Rs.22452 
crore during the year 2006 -07.  The Secretary, Department of Fertilizers apprised 
the Committee during evidence that although the Department have got a sum of 
Rs.28,020 crore including a third supplementary of Rs.3,500 crore, but still the 
subsidy bill of Rs.8082.84 crore will carry forward to the next year.  The 
requirement of the Department for subsidy/concession will come to approximately 
Rs.56,391.16 crore for the current year viz.2007 -08 including carry over of 
Rs.8082.84 cror e. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department of 
Fertilizers to continue their efforts for getting adequate amount of funds from 
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission so that all subsidy bills/claims 
should be settled during 2007-08 itself.  The Committee also desire that corrective 
steps should be taken by the Department to check the higher prices of fertilizer 
inputs so that practice of carrying forward the subsidy bill year after year may be 
avoided. 
Reply of the Government 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
Keeping in view the rising trend in the fertilizer subsidy because of the 
increased cost of fertilizers and requirement in the country, Department of 
Fertilizers is fully concerned for getting adequate amount of funds from Ministry of 
Finance.  Accordingly, attention of Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure 

 -:29:- 
as well as Prime Minister’s Office has been drawn to the extent of under 
provisioning in the Budgetary Allocation. Department is hopeful that adequate 
funds would be made available during the first and second supplementary demand 
for grants. Since the raw materials/interme diates for manufacturing decontrolled 
phosphatic and potassic fertilizers are not available in the country, we have to 
depend upon the import of the same. The country has to bear the rising cost of the 
inputs as well as the finished fertilizers. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
The Committee note that the requirement of Urea during current Rabi 
season was assessed at highest level of 127.08 LMT.  B ut evacuation of the 
imported fertilizers from Port was a constraint since substantial imports of wheat 
were also taking place simultaneously.  It was informed by the Department of 
Fertilizers  that they are coordinating with Department of Food, Public Dis tribution 
and Consumer Affairs,  Ministry of Shipping & Transport and Ministry of Railways 
for proper evacuation of the imported fertilizers from ports to destination in time.  
Regarding availability and distribution of fertilizers, the Secretary, Departme nt of 
fertilizers, during his deposition before the Committee also admitted that there 
could be sufficient fertilizers in a state, but there could be some movement 
problem.  Reportedly, Government have been supplying consistently higher 
quantities than the  assessed requirements and therefore responsibility is on the 
State Government.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of 
Fertilizers should make all possible efforts for better coordination with the Railways 
for proper evacuation of fert ilizers from the ports.  Needless to emphasize that 
Government would coordinate with all State Governments for ensuring timely 
availability of fertilizers throughout the country. 
 

 -:30:- 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Very close coordination is being maintained by the Department of Fertilizers 
with the Railways for ensuring proper evacuation of fertilizers from the ports. Apart 
from weekly meetings with the officials of Railways, joint visits and inspection of 
senior officers from Railways and the Department of Fertil izers to the major ports 
like Kandla, Mundra and Vizag have been organized. These meetings and joint 
visits have yielded good results and the process of evacuation of fertilizers from 
ports has registered improvement. 
      
       Regular interaction is also maintained by the Department of Fertilizers officials 
with the Agriculture Department of the states. In addition, meetings with the state 
governments to review the availability of fertilizers in the current month and supply 
plan for next month, chaired by Secretary (Fertilizers), are held every month to 
establish coordination between the state governments and the Department of 
Fertilizers. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that during the current financial year 
supply of the fertilizer shall be made to district level.  The Committee also 
appreciate that the first week of every month 75% of the requirement would be 
made available and the remaining 25% would be made available within the next 
15 days.  The Committee have also been informed that an online monitoring 
system has also been launched which would enable each Member of Parliament 
to know, in his Constituency, the requirement of fertilizer and availability on daily 
basis.  While appreciating the new initiatives taken by the Department, the 
Committee hope that the promises made by the Department are fulfilled in -toto 
and there will be no procedural delay in this regard.  The Committee are of the 
view that on-line monitoring system should also be available to the Public at large 
from block headquarters where kiosks may be set up in coordination with National 

 -:31:- 
Informatics Centre (NIC) where all the data of the fertil izer demand and availability 
are available district / block -wise.  Such an initiative would bring the transparency 
in the demand and availability and contain the problem of black -marketing and 
hoarding. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 An on -line Fertilizer Moni toring System has been launched by the 
Department of Fertilizers and has been operational.  This system may be 
accessed by the Hon’ble Member of Parliaments / Member of Public to know the 
requirement and  availability of fertilizers in a particular distric t by simply login  to 
urvarak.co.in from Internet kiosk available in any part of India. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
      The Committee are  happy to note that the Government has approved the 
pricing policy for urea units for Stage -III of New Pricing Scheme (NPS) w.e.f. 
01.10.2006 to 31.03.2010.  The policy has been formulated keeping in view the 
recommendations of the Working Group.  The Comm ittee hope that by 
implementation of Stage -III policy, there will be further investment in urea sector 
maximizing the urea production and incentivising additional urea production.  The 
Committee hope that it would also encourage investment in Joint Venture s (JV) 
projects abroad and also establish a more efficient urea distribution and movement 
system. The Committee also desire that the Government should examine the 
impact of New Pricing Scheme on fertilizer industry and examine the problems 
faced by the ind ustry and take corrective steps for solving the problems of 
fertilizers industries.   
 
The Committee, however, express their displeasure that Stage -II of NPS 
was upto March, 2006 whereas the Government has been able to announce NPS -
III in March, 2007 only.   In the absence of any policy for a year or so, there has 
been a lot of uncertainty in the fertilizer sector.  On account of this, not only the 

 -:32:- 
fertilizer production stagnated, the imports of fertilizers also affected resulting in 
outgoing foreign exchange.   
 
     The Committee hope that the Government would implement the Stage -III of 
NPS in letter and spirit so that fertilizer industry becomes an industry friendly 
sector and much needed investment is put in the growth of the fertilizer sector.  
The Committee also expect the Government to constantly review the progress in 
regard to implementation of Stage -III of NPS for taking corrective measures 
wherever necessary.   
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of NPS Stage -III pricing policy notified by the 
Department of Fertilizers on 8 th March 2007, are being implemented by the DOF. 
The representations and the problems submitted by the Fertilizer company, with 
reference to Stage -III policy, are also under examination/consideration of 
Department of Fertilizers.  
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.13) 
 
 The Committee note tha t Gramin Vikas Trust (GVT) established by 
KRIBHCO in 1999 has been implementing two rainfed projects called (i) Western 
India Rainfed Farming Project (WIRFP) and (ii) Eastern India Rainfed Farming 
Project (EIRFP) with the technical and financial assistance  provided by the 
Department for International Development (DFID) of the British Government. The 
EIRFP has completed its extended tenure on 31.03.2005 and WIRFP is being 
implemented by GVT, which will be completed by June, 2007.  At present, 3 
States and 7 districts are covered in WIRFP for developing the farming system 
and establishing village -based institutions with low cost technology.  The 

 -:33:- 
Committee find that such projects have been useful to the backward and tribal 
areas where these projects have been a ble to provide some employment in the 
rural/backward/tribal areas. The Committee, therefore, expect the Department to 
help PSUs/Cooperatives under its administrative control to secure funds from 
various sources to carry out such projects across the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
    Department of Fertilizers has noted this recommendation and PSUs under 
its administrative control will be pursued accordingly. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.14) 
 
The Committee note that Science and Technology in fertilizer industry is the 
backbone of indigenous development in process technology and equipment 
design.  The Science and Technology (S&T) Programme of the De partment of 
Fertilizers primarily lays emphasis on Research and Development processes and 
lower specific energy consumption in fertilizer plants.  For the 10 th Five Year Plan, 
an amount of Rs.5 crore was provided for funding S&T projects for the year 2007 -
08 , the amount has been increased to Rs.5.50 crore under the head to continue 
the present on -going S&T Projects related to Fertilizer Ministry.  The Committee 
recommend that the funds allocated for the year 2007 -08 for S&T programme 
should be enhanced suitably and utilized fully and judiciously with tangible results. 
    
Reply of the Government 
  The funds allocation for the S&T   Programmes of the Department has been 
enhanced  during    2007 -08  to  Rs. 5.5 crores.  The  Scheme  has  been  
advertised widely through newspapers and S&T journals.  The proposals  received  
so far  are under consideration of the Screening Committee.   
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 

 -:34:- 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
     The Committee note that availability of gas is the main constraint in 
setting up of new fertilizer plants and for revival of closed fertilizer units.  The 
Secretary, Department of Fertilizers, during the evidence, apprised the Committe e 
that gas would be available to closed units by 2009-10 and for other units by 2008-
09.  It was also informed by the Department of Fertilizers that an Inter -Ministerial 
Committee has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Petroleum 
for facilitating the connectivity and supply of gas to non-gas based units converting 
to gas and to develop appropriate mechanism for fixing the prices of gas.  The first 
meeting of the Committee is scheduled to be held on 9 th April, 2007.  The 
Committee also note  that major share of the gas is given to power sector.  The 
Committee feel that gas given to power sector does not make any value addition 
but it affects drastically fertilizer sector in terms of value addition and reduce the 
burden of subsidy.  The Commit tee strongly reiterate their earlier 
recommendations made in their Tenth and Twelfth Reports (14 th Lok Sabha) that 
fertilizer sector should be given top priority in the allocation of gas.  The 
Committee also desire that Department of Fertilizers should con stantly coordinate 
with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in the matter.  They also 
recommend that fertilizer industry should be given higher share of gas than that of 
power sector.   
Reply of the Government 
The Department of Fertilizers is in cont inuous touch with Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas for adequate allocation of natural gas to the fertilizer 
sector.  The first meeting of the Committee, under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(Petroleum) was held on 9.4.07.  In the meeting the pipeline con nectivity plan for 
next 3-4 years was projected in detail and it was ascertained that all fertilizer units 
in the country including non-gas based existing units and the closed units will have 
gas pipeline connectivity by 2010 -11.  However, Ministry of Petr oleum & Natural 
Gas has assured adequate availability of gas in future for the fertilizer sector.  The 
price of gas for the fertilizer sector will be considered in subsequent meeting.   
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 

 -:35:- 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
   
 The Committee note that there is a proposal to set up new plants at those 
locations which were closed.  The Committee have been informed that teams have 
been sent to all those lo cations namely viz. Talcher, Durgapur and Barauni to 
make a techno -economic assessment.  As the revival of these units is based on 
the availability of gas based pipeline which is being provided by a private agency, 
the Committee recommend that the matter s hould be taken up by the Department 
of Fertilizers with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural gas to supply the gas to 
the closed units by 2009 -10 positively and for other units by 2008 -09.  The 
Department should also ensure that gas pipelines are also pro vided at the earliest 
i.e. before 31 st March, 2008.  The Committee emphasize that quarterly review of 
the laying of gas pipelines and arrangement of provision of gas should be made by 
the Department of Fertilizers in coordination with the Ministry of Petro leum and 
Natural Gas.  The Committee also hope that techno -economic assessment of the 
closed units should be made at the earliest and there should not be any laxity 
either on the part of the Government or PSUs in this regard.  In case of sick units, 
the Committee recommend to revamp and upgrade the management of some of 
the sick units which are suffering due to mismanagement.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has indicated that the gas 
pipeline connectivity will be provid ed to the closed units by the year 2009 -10 and 
2010-11 positively.  The Ministry has also assured adequate availability of gas for 
revival of the closed units in the country.     
          
   The Government has on 12.4.2007 decided, inter -alia, to examine the 
feasibility of revival of closed units of FCIL and HFCL subject to the confirmed 
availability of gas.  The Government’s decision has been intimated to FCIL and 
HFCL for implementation.  Fertilizer PSUs/Cooperatives – Rashtriya Chemicals & 
Fertilizers L td (RCF), National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) and Krishak Bharati 
Cooperative Ltd (KRIBHCO) have shown their intention to participate in the revival 
process and accordingly process of preparing Techno -Economic Feasibility report 
have been initiated. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
 
  

 -:36:- 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_______________________ NIL ________________________________ 
 

 -:37:- 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
      The Committee note that out of Rs.5900 crore plan outlay in regard to 
fertilizer sector in the 10 th Five Year Plan period, the expenditure by the end of the 
year 2005-06 is Rs.2108.72 crore, which is about 35.72 per cent of the approved 
plan outlay.  For the year 2006-07, the likely expenditure is Rs.2987.54 crore.  The 
Committee have been informed that the main reasons for shortfall in utilization of 
plan funds are non -utilization of funds for Hazira Expansion Project of Krishak 
Bharati Cooperative Limited (KRIBHCO) and Thal Expansion of Projec t of 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF), exclusion of Indian Farmer 
Fertilizers Cooperative Limited (IFFCO) from the administrative control of 
Department of Fertilizers, closing of two PSUs like Fertilizer Corporation of India 
Limited (FCI) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFC), non -
implementation of some major projects of Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore 
Limited (FACT) viz. (i New Sulphuric Acid Plant at Cochin Division, (ii) Railway 
siding at Udyogmandal and certain improve ments to Phase -I plants in Cochin 
Division, etc.  Similarly, with regard to National Fertilizers Limited (NFL), the 
shortfall in actual expenditure is due to savings in completion costs of energy 
savings schemes and delay in revamping of Vijaipur -I plant.  In case of Rashtriya 
Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF), the Ammonia - V revamp and the Argon 
recovery project at Thal were not implemented.  Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) 
has also not utilized the full plan outlay due to dropping of six schemes du ring the 
year 2005-06 and 2006-07 while in case of Project and Development India Limited 
(PDIL), the funds could not be utilized due to deferment of procurement of some 
computer items.  
 

 -:38:- 
         Keeping in view the fact that there is a gap of about Rs.379 2 crore in the 
allocation and anticipated utilization of the 10 th Five Year Plan outlay of 
Department of Fertilizers, the Committee are of the view that the funds had not 
been utilized by the Department of Fertilizers properly during each year of the 
Tenth Plan period.  The Committee are not satisfied with the reasons furnished by 
the Department for non -utilization of plan funds by each PSU. The Committee are 
pained to note that although they had repeatedly recommended that Department 
of Fertilizers should review the progress of all projects in a scientific manner on a 
regular basis but no adequate action had been taken by the Government on those 
recommendations. The Committee feel that implementation process of project 
planning in the PSUs/Cooperative unit under the administrative control of the 
Department of Fertilizers was poor as ground realities were not considered while 
formulating and implementing the schemes/projects.  The Committee strongly feel 
that there is no use of fixing the targets if they can not be achieved.  The 
Committee desire that the Department of Fertilizers should, therefore, analyze the 
reasons for continuous failures in achieving the targets during each year of the 
10th Five Year Plan and ensure that the same shall not continue during  the 11 th 
Five Year Plan.   
 
Reply of the Government 
            
          The plan achievement in the 10 th Five Year Plan was low due to non -
availability of gas which impeded any further decision on setting up of new fertilizer 
plant at Thal and Hazira. H owever, in compliance of the observations of the 
Committee the performance of each of PSU is being monitored by the Department 
regularly through the Quarterly Review Meetings held at the level of Secretary (F).  
Next QRM for the quarter ending June, 2007 is scheduled for August, 2007.   
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 -:39:- 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
      The Committee while examining the Demands for Grants of the Department 
for the year 2006-07, were informed that a scheme for disbursal of subsidy directly 
to the farmers in three selected districts where reliable land records are available 
might be formulated on an experimental basis.  Further, while examining the 
Demands for Grants for the year 2007-08, the Secretary, Department of Fertilizers, 
during the evidence apprised the Committee that the fertilizer industry has agreed 
to work with Department of Fertilizers in working out a pilot project.  The pilot 
project has not yet started and the fertilizer industry has engaged a consultant for 
this purpose.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the process of starting 
of pilot projects should be completed expeditiously and they be apprised of the 
status of progress of the pilot project on regular basis.  The Committee are of the 
view that disbursal of subsidy directly to the farmers, instead of by industries would 
minimize the chances of inflated production cost of fertilizers and also send a 
sympathetic message among farmers.  The Committee also observe that some 
companies resort to the tacti cs of Gold Plating i.e. indicating lower production 
capacity and on the basis of percentage production obtain huge subsidy.  The 
Committee feel that with the introduction of direct subsidy to farmers, this tendency 
would also stop.  The Committee also reco mmend to devise a policy of subsidy 
according to the economic status of farmers so that the maximum benefit of 
subsidy may go to peasants, poor and marginal farmers.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The matter relating to alternative framework for reimbursement  of subsidy 
directly to the farmers is under consideration of the Government.  Fertilizers 
Association of India had entrusted a study to Tata Consultancy Services Ltd on 
this matter.  TCS has since submitted its report which is under consideration in the 

 -:40:- 
Government at various levels.  Final decision on the need and feasibility of an 
alternative framework for direct subsidy to farmers will be taken shortly.  
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
As stated by the Secretary during the course of evidence that the 
Department is pondering over the nutrient based subsidy to farmer s, the 
Committee feel that such a scheme may also help fertilizer manufacturers in the 
reduction of their production cost and would not lead to inflated production cost.  
The Committee would like to caution that before switching over to nutrient based 
subsidy, the views of Fertilizers Association of India and experts should be taken 
and the scheme be launched on an experimental basis in one of the PSUs and the 
involvement of private sector may also be examined and considered.   
 
      The Committee hope tha t the Government would ponder over the subsidy 
issue seriously and implement both the schemes viz., (i) Direct subsidy to the 
farmers and (ii) Nutrient/Feedstock based subsidy to the manufacturers on pilot 
basis and after studying the result and cost effec tiveness would implement one of 
them.  The Committee desire that the Government should devise a mechanism to 
find out the production capacity of all the fertilizer units so that the fertilizer units do 
not resort to the practice of gold plating and take hefty amount of subsidy thereof.   
 

 -:41:- 
Reply of the Government 
  
      The issues recommended by the Committee are under active consideration 
of the government. A Group of Ministers (GOM) has been constituted to look into 
sustainable use of fertilizers and per tinent subsidy and pricing issues.  These 
issues are also being looked into by the GOM.   
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
 The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers is administering the 
Concession Scheme on P&K and SSP fertilizers for extending financial support to 
decontrolled P & K fertilizers on sale w.e.f 01.10.2006.  The Government accepted 
the recommendation of Tariff Commission’s cost price study on complex fertilizers 
w.e.f. 01.04.2002.  Based on the recommendations of the Tariff Commission (TC) 
and Inter -Ministerial Group (IMG), the Government has implemented a revised 
methodology of working out concession rates for DAP and MOP w.e.f 01.04.2003.  
An Expert Group under the chairmanship of Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member, Planning 
Commission was set up to work out an alternative methodology of pricing linki ng 
the price of phosphatic acid with the international price of DAP.  The Expert Group 
has submitted the Report and it is under examination of the Department of 
Fertilizers.  While appreciating the Government’s efforts in this regard, the 
Committee are of the view that the Government are moving at a slow speed in 
finalizing the concession policy.  The Committee, therefore, express their serious 
concern and reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Government should 
finalise their Report on concession policy relating to DAP and other complex 
fertilizers at the earliest.  The Committee hope that early finalization of concession 
policy would help farmers for getting decontrolled phosphatic and potassic (P&K) 
fertilizers at affordable prices. 

 -:42:- 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Inter Ministerial Group (IMG) on the subject is likely to submit its report 
very shortly. After examination, the report shall be submitted before the competent 
authority for its acceptance and approval.  * 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*  At the time of factual verification of the Draft Report, Department of Fertilizers vi de their O.M. No. F.No. 5( 1)/2007-Fin-II 
(Vol-II) dated 20th  September, 2007 informed as under:- 
        “The Department of Fertilizers administers the Concession Scheme for decontrolled Phosphatic and 
Potassic (P&K) fertilizers based on the recommendatio ns of the Tariff Commission, as adopted by the 
Government.  The Concession Scheme for P&K for 2007 -08 has been notified as approved by the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 23rd August, 2007. 
        Upto 2005-06, the price of phos acid negotiated by the Phos acid Consumer Group (PACG) was taken into 
account for subsidy.  However, for 2006 -07, the price of phos acid was adopted as per the formula suggested by 
the Expert Group chaired by Prof. Abhijit Sen.  The Expert Group formula linked the normative price of phosphoric 
acid to international price of DAP.  Accordingly, the Concession policy for 2006 -07 was announced.  The 
substantive chance in the Concession policy for 2006 -07 related to the adoption of the normated phospho ric acid 
formula suggested by the Expert Group as against the negotiated price of phosphoric acid adopted earlier. 
       The PACG informed that the price agreed for supply of phosphoric acid in April-May 2007 for 2007-08 is US $ 
566.25 C&F per MT (cash).  This price was found to be significantly less than the price of phosphoric acid derived 
under the formula suggested by the Expert Group, which came to US $ 637 C&F per MT based on the prices of 
imported DAP and imported ammonia that prevailed during the r elevant period of 15 th February to 31 st March, 
2007.  On the recommendation of the Department of Fertilizers, the CCEA therefore has approved the 
Concession Policy for 2007-08 adopting the negotiated price of phos acid at US $ 566.25 per MT, since it entai ls 
lesser outgo of Concession/Subsidy vis-à-vis what was likely had the formula based approach been continued for 
the current year. 
        Separately, an Inter-Ministerial Group(IMG) was set up to examine the other recommendations of the Expert 
Group.  The report of the IMG is under examination.” 

 -:43:- 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
        The committee note that the import of urea on Government account is 
made to bridge the gap between assessed demand and supply. The State Trading 
Enterprises arrange imports of  urea on behalf of the Government. The committee 
find that the imports of urea and DAP has been increased in the year 2005 -06 and 
2006-07 as compared to 2004 -05. The Committee in their earlier Reports have 
been emphasizing the need for increasing productio n capacity of fertilizers. Due to 
delay in declaration of the fertilizer policy, there has been very few investors to 
come forward to invest in fertilizer sector. This has been resulted into increase of 
imports year after year. The Committee, therefore, ex pect from the Government to 
help the industry in capacity building of fertilizer units so that dependence on 
imports is minimized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government has approved the New Pricing Scheme (NPS) Stage-III for 
urea units of 1.2.2007 and notified on 8th March 2007. New Pricing Scheme (NPS) 
Stage-III is effective from 1.10.2006 to 31.3.2010. Under NPS Stage -III additional 
production of urea has been incentivised. No permission will be required from the 
Government for production beyond 100% o f re-assessed urea capacity of the unit. 
It is expected that this will lead to capacity addition in existing urea units in the 
country.  
 
  The present policy for new and expansion projects was announced in 
January 2004. The existing policy is under review  in light of lack of investment in 
this sector for the last seven years. The revised policy for investment in this sector 
is expected to be finalized soon.   
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 -:44:- 
  (Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
     The Committee note that provision for projects/schemes for the benefit of 
North-Eastern Region and Sikkim has been decrease d from Rs.10 crore to 
Rs.4.49 crore as compared to the last year.   The Committee also note that 
allocation for the current financial year would be utilized for implementation of 
Namrup Revamp Project of M/s. BVFCL for which a feasibility study is being 
conducted by BVFCL to examine the possibility of setting up of Namrup -IV unit for 
manufacturing of urea.  The Committee feel that before allocating the amount the 
feasibility studies should have been well in advance.  The Committee have their 
apprehension that in the absence of such a study the money can be blocked and a 
situation of uncertainty can arise.  The Committee are of the view that the 
Department may be provided the requisite sum of money for carrying out the 
feasibility studies and only then the whole amount should be allocated. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
    The matter regarding sufficient allocation of funds for projects/schemes for 
the benefit of North -Eastern Region and Sikkim has already been taken up with 
the Planning Commission.  Simultaneous ly, M/s. BVFCL has got study conducted 
from PDIL for revamp/retrofitting of existing plants and also for establishing a 
brownfield plant at Namrup.  The Techno -Economic Feasibility Report for the 
same has been received and is under consideration.    
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
  
 The Committee have been informed that the Department of Fertilizers 
announced a policy in January, 2004 for creatio n of additional capacity of urea by 
way of new and expansion projects and de -bottlenecking/revamp/modernization of 
existing urea units.  The policy have generated very good response in the fertilizer 
industry.  The Department has received proposals from va rious urea companies 
for expansion and de -bottlenecking, which would result in additional capacity of 

 -:45:- 
about 50.8 LMT of urea.  However, the Committee are dismayed to note that the 
status of approval of proposals regarding de -bottlenecking and expansion of 
fertilizer units is almost remain the same as compared to the last year.  The 
Committee are of the view that after approval of pricing policy for urea units for 
Stage-III of New Pricing Scheme (NPS), the capacity utilization of the fertilizer 
industry should also be improved through revamping/modernization of the existing 
urea units.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that considering the 
stagnated production capacity in fertilizer, the matter regarding examination of the 
proposals for de-bottlenecking and expansion of fertilizer units should be taken up 
at the highest level.  The Committee desire that the outcome of the progress made 
in this regard should be conveyed to the Committee within three months from the 
presentation of the Report.   
 
Reply of the Government 
  
        Under NPS Stage -III, the requirement of approval of Government for de -
bottlenecking of existing units has been done away with.  The companies are 
normally free to revamp their existing units as per their commercial decision.  The 
government had earlier notified the pricing policy for investment made in new and 
expansion projects of urea in January, 2004.  The unavailability of adequate 
quantity of gas has been one of the major bottlenecks for new investment in this 
sector.   
       The availability of gas in the country is now projected to increase 
substantially from 2008 -09 onwards.  The government is considering review of 
existing policy for new and expansion projects to ensure that the revised policy is 
able to attract adequate investments in this sector and utilize the opportunity being 
offered by projected increase in gas availability.  The revised policy is at present 
under consideration of the government.   
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 -:46:- 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
     The committee have been informed that in lines with the common Minimum 
Programme of the Gove rnment, the possibilities for the revival of the closed units 
of Fertilizer Corporation Limited (FCI), Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited 
(HFC) and Pyrites Phosphates and Chemicals Limited (PPCL) are being explored. 
In respect of FCI and HFC, the Cabinet had considered a proposal for obtaining in-
principle approval for revival of these PSUs on 07.12.2006 and directed that the 
proposal was submitted to the BRPSE for consideration. Their recommendations 
are awaited. As regards PPCL, a draft Cabinet Note  for the revival of the company 
is under finalization in the Department of Fertilizers. The Committee desire that the 
Department of Fertilizers should make all possible efforts to canalize and 
implement the revival package for the closed and loss -making fertilizer units. The 
Committee also desire that the Department of Fertilizers should take up the matter 
with the concerned authorities at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
     Based on the recommendations of the BRPSE, a proposal for obtaining in -
principle approval of the Government for revival of HFC & FCI was submitted to 
the Cabinet on 28.3.2007. The proposal was considered by the Cabinet in its 
meeting held on 12.4.2007 and decided as under:- 
(i) decided ‘in -principle’ to examine the feasibility of r eviving FCIL and 
HFCL, subject to the confirmed availability of gas; and  
(ii) underlined the need for a hard look at the prospects of revival in view of 
the factors that led to the closure of the entities. 
 
       Pursuant to the Cabinet decision, the companie s have drawn a road map. 
Well-run fertilizer PSUs namely, M/s Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd. (RCF) 
and M/s National Fertilizer Ltd. (NFL) and Fertilizer Cooperative viz. Krishak Bharti 
Cooperative Limited (KRIBHCO) have been advised to submit detai led proposals 
regarding the possibility of revival and keenness of their company for the same to 

 -:47:- 
the Department of Fertilizers. As regards PPCL, a draft proposal to be submitted 
to the BRPSE for obtaining their recommendations for revival of the company, i s 
under examination in the Department of Fertilizers. 
 
       As regards the two loss making fertilizer PSUs namely, Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Travancore Ltd. (FACT) and Madras Fertilizers Ltd.(MFL), draft 
proposals for financial restructuring are under fina lization in the Department of 
Fertilizers. Thus, the Department has been taking expeditious steps for the revival 
of closed and loss making fertilizer units. The delay in implementation has been 
due to factors which are beyond the control of the Department of Fertilizers. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.20) 
       The committee note that during the year 2006, KRIBHCO had entered into 
a pact with Bajaj Allianz Insurance Co. Limited for a scheme called, ‘Sankat Haran  
Bima Yojana Policy’ for farmers. The Committee have been informed that 
Department of Fertilizers is planning to start a study for evaluating the success of 
the Scheme. The Committee are surprised to note that even after lapse of one 
year, the Department of Fertilizers is still planning to start a study for evaluating 
the success of the Scheme. The committee, ther efore, desire that the study be 
started as early as possible so that the success or failure of the Scheme should be 
known which is essential for a decision on the continuation of the Scheme. 
 

 -:48:- 
Reply of the Government 
 
       The Department of Fertilizers h ave decided to initiate a Study to evaluate 
the success of ‘Sankat Haran  Bima Yojana Policy’ for farmers. The Department of 
Fertilizers has awarded the evaluation Study to ‘Agricultural Finance Corporation 
Ltd., New Delhi’.  
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5(1)//2007-Fin.II (Vol.-II) dated 20.08.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 33 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI          ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,   
26 September, 2007                   Chairman, 
4 Asvina, 1929 (Saka)                          Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers. 

 -:49:- 
Appendix-II 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
SECOND SITTING 
(12.09.2007) 
 
 
  The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  - Chairman  
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Jaiprakash (Constituency – Mohanlal Ganj) 
3. Shri Sunil Khan 
4. Shri A. Narendra 
5. Shri Prasanta Pradhan 
6. Shri Ramswaroop Prasad 
7. Shri P. Chalapathi Rao 
8. Shri Anantha Venkata Rami Reddy 
9. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
11. Shri Surendra Lath 
12. Shri Dilip Singh Judev  
 
Secretariat   
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Deputy Secretary-II 
 3. Smt. Balwant Kaur Saimbhi- Under Secretary  
 

 -:50:- 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 
3.  ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on Action 
Taken by the Gover nment on the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth 
Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  The draft Report was also 
adopted by the Committee without any amendment. 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes, if 
any, arising out of the factual verification of the Reports by the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (** ** ** ** and Department of Fertilizers) 
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the next Session. 
  
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
  
 
 
 
**  Matters not related to this Report 

 -:51:- 
Appendix – III 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
contained in the Seventeenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2006 -07) on Demands for Grants 
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers).  
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 20 
 
II Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos.1, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 12, 
13, 14, 17 & 19) 
 
11 
 Percentage to Total 55%  
 
III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s Replies  
 
Nil 
 Percentage of Total Nil 
 
IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 2)  
 
1 
 Percentage of Total 5% 
 
V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 6, 7, 8, 11, 15, 16, 
18 & 20) 
  
8 
 Percentage of Total 40% 
 
 
 