 
 
 
13 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2005-06) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
  
 PRICING AND FEEDSTOCK POLICIES  
RELATING TO FERTILIZERS 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Tenth 
Report (Fo urteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2005-06) on ‘Pricing and Feedstock Policies relating to Fertilizers’] 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka) 
 
 


 -:2:-
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2005-06) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
PRICING AND FEEDSTOCK POLICIES  
RELATING TO FERTILIZERS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Tenth 
Report (Fo urteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2005-06) on ‘Pricing and Feedstock Policies relating to Fertilizers’] 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.08.2006 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02.08.2006 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
July, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka) 

 -:3:-
CONTENTS 
 
               PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2005-06) ……………………………….. 
 
4 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………… 
 
5 
CHAPTER I Report ……………………………………………………………...
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government ……………………………………………………… 
 
 
6 
CHAPTER III Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply. …………………… 
 
 
27 
CHAPTER IV Recommendation in respect of which reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee…….. 
 
 
28 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of  which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited …………………………………… 
 
 
29 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2005-06) held on 26th July, 2006….. ……. 
 
 
39 
  
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in  the Tenth Report (14
th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2005-06) on 
‘Pricing and Feedstock Policies relating to Fertilizers’…. ……………
 
  
 
 
41 

 -:4:-
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2005-06) 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete -  Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Afzal Ansari  
*3. Shri S. Bangarappa    
4. Shri Prahlad Joshi   
**5. Shri Sunil Khan 
6. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
7. Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
8. Shri Punnu Lal Mohale   
9. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
10. Shri P. Rajendran   
11. Shri Anantha Venkata Rami Reddy 
12. Shri T. Madhusudan Reddy 
13. Shri Akshyay Pratap Singh  
14. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
15. Shri V.K. Thummar 
16. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma   
17. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava  
18. Shri A.K.S.Vijayan  
19. Shri Bhal Chandra Yadav 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 22. Shri B.S.Gnanadesikan 
23. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
24. Shri Ajay Maroo 
 25. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
26. Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
***27. Shri  Shreegopal Vyas 
      28. Shri T.R. Zeliang 
           $29. Vacant 
       $$30. Vacant 
      $$$31. Vacant 
Secretariat 
1. Shri P. Sreedharan   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Brahm Dutt     -   Director 
3. Shri S.C. Kaliraman   - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Prem Ranjan   - Senior Executive Assistant  
 
*  Nominated w.e.f. 14.02.2006 
** Nominated w.e.f. 20.01.2006. 
*** Nominated w.e.f. 21.04.2006 
$ Consequent upon his expulsion from Rajya Sabha, Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha ceased to be member of 
 this Committee w.e.f. 23
rd
 December, 2005 (vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin Part-II-No-42733 dated 23.12.2005). 
$$ Shri Raju Parmar ceased to be Member of this Committee w.e.f. 2
nd
 April 2006 after his retirement from 
 Rajya Sabha.  
$$$ Become vacant due to sudden demise of Shri Vasant Chavan, MP, Rajya Sabha on 11
th
 July, 2006. 

 -:5:-
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2005-06) 
having been authorised by the Committee to  submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Thirteenth Report on Acti on Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in  the Tenth Report (Fourt eenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fert ilizers (2005-06) on ‘Pricing and 
Feedstock Policies relating to Fertilizers’.  
 
2. The Tenth Report of the Committ ee was presented to Lok Sabha on 22 nd 
December, 2005.  The replies of Government to all the recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report were received on 29 th March, 2006.  The Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2005-06) considered the Action Taken 
Replies received from the Government and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report 
at their sitting held on 26th July, 2006. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in  the Tenth Report (Fourt eenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI          ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,   
31 July, 2006                     Chairman, 
9 Sravana, 1928 (Saka)       Standing Committee on  
Chemicals & Fertilizers. 
 
 

 -:6:-
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations cont ained in the Tenth Report (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2005-06) on 
‘Pricing and Feedstock Policies relating to Fertilizers’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (D epartment of Fertilizers), which was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 22nd December, 2005.  
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fert ilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were 
requested to furnish replies to the recommendations contained in the Tenth Report 
within three months from the present ation of the Report i.e. by 22 nd March, 2006.  
The action taken replies of the Government in respect of all the 14 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 29 th March, 2006. 
These have been categorised as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 10, 12 and 14. 
 
(ii) Recommendation/observation whic h the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
Nil 
 
(iii) Recommendation/observation in respect of which reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee: 
Nil 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 4, 5, 7, 9, 11 and 13. 
 

 -:7:-
3. The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
recommendations for which only interim replies have been furnished by the 
Government should be furnished expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations in the ensuing paragraphs: 
 
 
A.    Stage-III of New Pricing Scheme (NPS) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
5.  In the context of the urea policy beyond 01.04.2006, i.e. to decide about 
the method of fixing selling price, movem ent decontrol, etc., the Government had 
constituted a Working Group under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y.K. Alagh.  The 
Working Group was asked to review performance of Stage-I & Stage-II of NPS for 
urea units and formulation of policy for ur ea units for Stage-III commencing from 
1.4.2006. The Working Group had further constituted six Sub-Committees with a 
view to examining in depth, issues like demand and supply of urea, movement and 
distribution of urea, subsidy given in ot her countries, pricing and availability of 
feedstock, etc.  The Committee had also noted that the Report of the Working 
Group to decide about the policy beyond 01 .04.2006 was under finalization.  The 
Committee had desired that this should be ex pedited as hardly any time was left 
for the commencement of Stage-III of  NPS.  The Committee, however, had 
desired that the Government should take into consideration the following issues 
while finalizing the urea policy beyond 1.4.2006:- 

 -:8:-
(i) Since most of the developed/develop ing countries are giving direct or 
indirect subsidies to their farming sectors, and considering economic 
conditions of small and marginal farmers, growing incidence of 
natural calamities, farm debts, etc., it  is essential that the element of 
subsidy/concession which is about Rs. 16000 crore per annum is not 
brought down.  Rather, it should be periodically raised and linked 
with cost index. 
 
(ii) There is Movement Control/ ECA allocation for urea from the 
beginning and the same is being phased out gradually.  The size of 
the country, its difficult far flung and hilly areas, extreme climates, 
recurrence of natural calamities, et c., call for having some control by 
the Government for movement/allocat ion of fertilizers.  Accordingly, 
the Government should not shy away from their responsibility. 
 
(iii) It should be ensured that with the ever growing population, the 
country should remain self-reliant in  food-grain production, which is 
closely linked with fertilizer policy. 
 
(iv) Sudden decontrol of phosphatic and potassic fertilizers showed its 
great adverse impact on the ideal consumption rati o of NPK in 1992.  
Even after more than a decade, it is yet to be achieved fully in all 
parts of the country.  While framing future policy for any type of 
fertilizers, the motto of balanced use of (NPK- 4:2:1) fertilizers should 
not be lost sight-off. 
 
(v) Supply of gas to fertilizer sector  should continue to be given priority. 
 
(vi) Various suggestions given by the Fertilizer Association of India (FAI) 
in the matter on behalf of fertiliz er industry should be examined in 
depth for implementation. 
 
(vii) Introduction and production of new form of soil nutrients like soluble 
fertilizers should be encouraged to  meet the new agricultural 
techniques like drip irrigation, etc. 
 
(viii) Policy should also include incentives for setting up new fertilizer 
plants as also to take up moder nization/renovation of existing 
fertilizer units. 
 
(ix) Considering the role  and need of public sector in this core area 
future policy should take note of revi val of sick fertilizer units in the 
Public Sector. 

 -:9:-
 
6. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have submitted as follows:- 
 
“The Working Group, constituted under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y.K. 
Alagh to review the effectiveness of Stage I & II of NPS and to formulate a 
policy for Stage-III of NPS, has subm itted its report on 26.12.2005.  The 
report of the Working Group has been examined in the Department with a 
view to formulate a policy for Stage-III of NPS commencing from 
01.04.2006.  In this context, Minister (C hemicals & Fertilizers) also held a 
meeting with representatives of fertilizer industry to el icit their views on the 
report.  Based on these consultations and inter-departmental discussions, 
the Department of Fertilizers has circ ulated a Note for consideration of 
Cabinet Committee on Economic  Affairs.  The Depart ment will also keep in 
view the suggestions made by the Standing Committee.” 
 
7. The Committee have been informed that the report submitted by the 
Working Group constituted to formulate a policy for Stage-III of New Pricing 
Scheme (NPS) has been examined by  the Department.   Based on the 
consultations by the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers with the 
representatives of the fertilizer indus try and also inter-departmental 
discussions, a comprehensive Note has b een circulated for consideration of 
the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affair s.  The Committee had also dealt 
with the matter in their 12 th Report (14th Lok Sabha) presented to Lok Sabha 
on 19.05.2006 wherein they ha d desired that the Department of Fertilizers 
should finalize the policy expeditiously  and apprise them on this account 
within a period of one month after presentation of the Report.   The 
Committee express their unhappiness over th e inordinate delay on the part 
of the Department of Fertilizers in formulating the policy for Stage-III of NPS 
which was to be commenced from 01. 04.2006.  The Committee, accordingly, 
once again urge the Department to take necessary steps to formulate the 
policy for Stage-III of NPS without any further delay. 

 -:10:-
 
B. Feedstock supply to fertilizer plants on priority basis 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
8. The Committee’s examination of feedstock policy for fertilizer industry had 
revealed that gas feedstock is preferr ed over naphtha and coal on account of gas 
based plants being cost efficient and energy saving.  For these reasons as per the 
Government decision taken in January, 2004, all new fertilizer plants as also the 
modernization/revival programmes for exis ting plants will be approved, only if 
those are gas/LNG based.  Even though the Government has been giving fertilizer 
and power sectors priority over  other sectors in terms of pricing and availability of 
gas, there are issues which need to be sorted out at the earliest in 
consultation/coordination with the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.  As against 
the demand of the fertilizer sector for 33.32 million metric standard cubic metre per 
day (MMSCMD), the actual supply of gas during 2003-04 was 22.13 MMSCMD 
only.  With the implementati on of the policy decision of the Government to set up 
only gas based plants and to switch over t he existing plants to gas, the demand of 
gas for fertilizer sector is likely to reach 68 MMSCMD.  In this context, the 
Committee had asked the Government to take adequate steps to allocate requisite 
gas supply to fertilizer plants on priority basis. 
 
 
9. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
 
“As a part of the recently formula ted policy on natural gas allocation 
and prices, the Government has decided  that all avail able APM gas would 
be supplied to only the power and fertilizer sectors against their existing 
allocations after meeting the requir ements of specific  end users committed 
under various court orders.  
 
Furthermore, with the commissioning of LNG terminal of Petronet 
LNG Ltd. and commencement  of supplies of RLNG to consumers w.e.f. 
1.4.2005, the gas based ur ea units along the HBJ pipeline have received 
7.6142 MMSCMD of R-LNG during the period April-September, 2005  and 
the average actual supply of gas to urea units during April-September, 2005 

 -:11:-
increased to 28.4089 MMSCMD.  The shortfall in suppl y of natural gas for 
units along HBJ pipeli ne has, therefore, been si gnificantly reduced. 
However, the availability of gas in terms of the total requirement with 
reference to expansion, de-bottlenecki ng/revamp/modernization proposals 
and for conversion of naphtha and FO/LSHS based units continues to be a 
matter of concern. The total requirement of gas for fertilizer sector including 
the future requirement on account of conversion of non-gas based units to 
NG/LNG, expansion/de-bottlenecking pr oposals and revival of closed urea 
units is 68.6019 MMSCMD.  
 
For meeting the requirements of the gas for the fertilizer sector, the 
Department of Fertilizers is in consta nt interaction with Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas, GAIL (Indi a) Limited and other prospective 
suppliers of natural gas/LNG.  The gas supply scenario is going to change 
in the years to come on account of new gas finds, coal bed methane, coal 
gasification technology, efforts to import LNG from gas rich countries and 
possibilities of importing gas through tr ansnational pipelines.  Indications 
are that by 2010-11, the av ailability of present APM gas supplied by ONGC 
may decline, the supply from domestic joint venture and private suppliers 
will rise, and the quantum of LNG import from supplies such as Qutar, Shell 
and Iran will increase substantially. 
 
In this scenario, the Department is making efforts to ensure that a 
substantial portion of the additional NG/LNG is made available to its various 
fertilizer units located in all parts of the country in the years to come on a 
priority basis.  Such fertilizer units include not only the present functional 29 
urea units but also t he additional urea capacity that  is likely to come up in 
the future by way of greenfield and brownfield expansion, de-bottlenecking 
and revamp projects as well as revival of some of the closed units.” 
 
 
10. The Committee note that with th e commissioning of LNG terminal of 
Petronet LNG Limited and commencement of supplies of RLNG to 
consumers w.e.f. 01.04.2005, the ga s based urea units along the HBJ 
pipeline have received 7.6142 MMSCMD of  R-LNG during the period April-
September, 2005 and the average actual supply of gas to urea units during 
April-September, 2005 increased from  22.13 MMSCMD in 2003-04 to 28.4089 
MMSCMD.  The Committee have been in formed that the Department of 
Fertilizers are in constant interaction with the Ministry of Petroleum and 

 -:12:-
Natural Gas, GAIL (India) Limited and other prospective suppliers of natural 
gas/LNG for meeting the requirements of the gas for the fertilizer sector.  
However, considering the total requireme nt of gas for fertilizer sector 
including the future requirement on account of conversion of non-gas based 
units to NG/LNG, expansion/de-bo ttlenecking proposals and revival of 
closed urea units at 68.6019 MMSCMD, the Committee find that there would 
be a shortfall of 40.00 MMSCMD.  The Committee, therefore, once again 
would like to emphasise that the Government should take concrete steps to 
make all out efforts for adequate supply of gas to the fertilizer industry. 
 
 In regard to the gas supply, th e Department have stated that the 
scenario is going to change in the years to come on account of new gas 
finds, coal bed methane, coal gasifi cation technology, efforts to import LNG 
from gas rich countries and possib ilities of importing gas through 
transnational pipelines.  Considering the need to tap all sources of import of 
gas, the  Committee desire that the Gove rnment in coordination with 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natura l Gas should also explore the 
possibility for supply of NG/LNG through sea rout e and then by 
containers to the fertilizer units.  
 

 -:13:-
C. Pricing of gas for the fertilizer sector. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
11. The Committee had noted that apart from the availabi lity of gas, another 
important area having a bearing on the health and growth of the fertilizer industry 
is pricing of gas for the fertilizer sector.  As per the present decision, the Tariff 
Commission fix the price for gas committed by ONGC and OIL (Rs.3200/MCM).  
However, gas from private/jo int ventures is to be obtai ned at market price.  The 
Fertilizer Association of I ndia (FAI) on behalf of the fertilizer units pleaded before 
the Committee that the industry can affo rd a gas price upto US $3.0-3.5 MMBTU 
whereas joint ventures/imported gas was available at the rate of US$4.5-5 and this 
was affecting adversely the viability of fertilizer units .  The proposed Regulatory 
Authority for the Petroleum Sector which would sort out these matters, is yet to be 
established. The Committee, therefore, had asked the Government to ensure that 
the natural gas is supplied in requisite qu antity at reasonable price to the fertilizer 
industry which is serving the need of agriculture sector/farming community.  
Besides, the Committee had recommended that  the Government should initiate 
necessary action to set up the Petroleum Regulatory Authority at the earliest.  
  
  12. The Ministry, in their reply, have replied as under:- 
“The issue of determination of produc er price for gas produced by 
ONGC and OIL have been referred to Tariff Commission.  Pending 
Government’s decision on the repor t of the Tariff Commission, the 
consumer price of APM gas has been increased from Rs.2850/MCM to a 
fixed price of Rs.3200/MCM on an ad hoc basis w.e.f. 1.7.2005. 
 
The issue of determination of price of Petronet LNG Limited (PLL)’s 
R-LNG is under consideration of th e Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) 
constituted under the chairmanship of Finance Minister to  examine issues 
related to supply of natural gas and LN G to fertilizer industry and to work 
out a framework which ensur es preferential allocati on of domestic natural 
gas to the fertilizer industry and maki ng available imported LNG to fertilizer 
units, its pricing and related taxation issues. 
 
The issue of establishment of Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory 
Board is under examination of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.”   
 

 -:14:-
 
13. The Committee have been info rmed that pending Government’s 
decision on the report of the Tariff Commission, the consumer price of APM 
gas has been increased from Rs. 2850/MCM to a fixed price of Rs. 3200/MCM 
on an ad-hoc basis w.e.f. 01.07.2005 an d the issue of determination of price 
of Petronet LNG Limited (PLL)’s R-LNG is under consideration of the Inter-
Ministerial Group (IMG).  The Committee would like to reiterate that this 
should be sorted out by the De partment of Fertilizers in 
consultation/coordination with the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas so as 
to ensure supply of gas in requisite quantity at reasonable prices to the 
fertilizer industry. 
 
D. Payment of concession under Concession Scheme 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
14. The Committee had noted t hat the procedure for certification, disbursement 
of due amount, etc. differ from  State to State and some of the States are having 
problems in running the scheme for de controlled fertilizers effectively and 
efficiently. The Committee had asked the D epartment of Fertilizers to examine the 
issues with a view to ex ploring an efficient system which should be uniformly 
applicable to all the States.  The primary objective s hould be availability of 
fertilizers to the small and marginal farmers at the lowest possible price. 
 
15. The Ministry, in their reply, have stated as under:- 
 
 “Keeping in view a number of problems in the existing system for 
payment of concession under Conces sion Scheme, Department of 
Fertilizers has now devised an alter native mechanism for release of 
payment. Accordingly, on 26.1.2006, the Department has announced the 
launching of a web based online ‘Fer tilizer Monitoring System’ for 
monitoring production, distribution and sales of decontrolled phosphatic and 

 -:15:-
potassic fertilizers in the country. This  system aims to bring transparency in 
fertilizer distribution and provide an upto-date information to the public on 
the dispatches and receipts of phosphatic and potassic fertilizers to different 
destinations in the country on day to day basis. As per this system, the 
State Governments will exempt the m anufacturers/importers from sales 
certification. The role of  the State Governments in monitoring receipts of 
decontrolled fertilizers in their respecti ve states and ensuring the supply of 
quality fertilizers as per FCO has been maintained.  The implementation of 
the ‘Fertilizer Monitoring System’ is  applicable to D AP, MOP and NPK 
concurrently with the present system w.e.f 1.1.2006.  On satisfactory 
results, the present system of sale certification will be done away with at the 
earliest. Its application to SSP sales will be taken up subsequently.” 
 
 
16. The Committee note that a web b ased online ‘Fertilizer Monitoring 
System’ has been launched on 26.01.2006 for monitoring production, 
distribution and sales of decontrolled phosphatic and potassic fertilizers in 
the country.  The Committee desire that the efficacy of this new system 
should be evaluated so that the uncerta inty regarding the system of sales 
certification ends at the earliest. 
 
E. Concessions on sale of P&K fertilizers 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 
 
17. Regarding the announcement  of the concessions on sale of P&K fertilizers, 
the Committee were informed that the scheme for the year 2005-06 had already 
been announced and for the future policy an Expert Group had been constituted to 
look into the matter.  The Group was to give  their Report by the end of July 2005.  
The Committee had desired to know about  the recommendations of the Expert 
Group as also the follow-up action taken on the recommendations.  
 
 

 -:16:-
18. The Ministry, in their reply, have replied as under: 
“The Expert Group has submitted its report to the Department of 
Fertilizers in December 2005. The re commendations of the Expert Group 
are as under: -  
 
(i) The Subsidy on DAP will form the basis for subsidy on other 
phosphatic and complex fertilizers also.  The subsidy on DAP will 
have three components: - 
 
(a)  The first component relates to the difference in the landed 
 price of imported DAP and the MRP. 
 
(b) The second component of the su bsidy is the cost of marketing 
including all the selling and distribution expenses and dealers' 
margin. This component is substantially based on the Tariff 
Commission’s recommendations with some adjustments and 
is recommended at Rs. 1350 per metric ton.  
 
These two components of subs idy would be payable without 
any discrimination both to domestic manufacturers as well as 
importers.  However, only those importers of DAP would be 
eligible for marketing com ponent of subsidy who have 
infrastructure and extension ne twork for providing various 
services to the farmer in a comprehensive manner and who 
are not exclusively in the business of sale of DAP. 
 
(c) The third component of subs idy will be payable only to 
domestic manufacturers.  This is to offset disadvantage to the 
domestic manufactures of DAP vis-à-vis manufacturers 
abroad.  This recommendation is in line with the observations 
of Gokak Committee wherein it has been brought out that in 
the event of ammonia prices becoming very high or the DAP 
price falling very low in the in ternational market, the domestic 
manufacturer suffers disadvantage to the extent of 26-30%. 
 
(ii) Floor and ceili ng for the disadvantage has  been recommended as 
5% and 20%. The Government may review the competitiveness 
achieved by the industry in future and accordingly consider 
downward revision of these two limits. 
 
(iii) The extent of disadvantage would be estimated on the normated 
cost of phosphoric acid arrived at using the methodology indicated 
by the Expert Group while giving its interim recommendations. This 
would also take into account the cost of holding inventory by the 
domestic industry.  
 
(iv) The cost of domestic production would be arrived at taking into 
account the normated cost of phosphoric acid, international ammonia 
prices, cost of conversion and capital cost based on the norms given 
by the tariff commission.  

 -:17:-
(v) The marketing cost of Rs. 1350  would be escala ted on an annual 
basis linked to WPI (General) index.  
 
(vi) The adjustment in subsidy on the first two components would be 
made quarterly after taking into acc ount the prevalent international 
prices and foreign exchange rates.  
 
(vii) The DAP prices to be taken in to account would be representative 
prices in the international market  so that they are not prone to 
manipulation.  Thus based on these recommendations, the subsidy 
would be independent of any direct cost inputs and industry would be 
able to take their commercial decisions based on a transparent 
reflection of the various elements of subsidy.  
 
(viii) Keeping in view the lower levels of MRP vis-à-vis international prices 
in respect of urea and MOP, the ot her major fertilizers in use, the 
Expert Group did not recommend any immediate change in the 
MRP.  However, changes in MRP may be considered in case the 
MRP goes below 65% of the landed price of imported DAP.  The 
Government may however consider revision in the MRP of DAP in 
case any rationalization is brought in the MRPs of other nutrients.  
 
The Department of Fertilizers has examined the recommendations of 
the Expert Group and prepared a draft note for consideration of CCEA. The 
draft note has been circulated to the concerned depar tments for their 
comments. DOF will put up the proposal  of CCEA after incorporating the 
comments of the concerned ministries.” 
 
19. The Committee note that the Depa rtment of Fertilizers have examined 
the recommendations of the Expert Group constituted to frame the future 
policy regarding the concessions on sale of P&K fertilizers and circulated a 
draft note to the concerned Ministries/Departments for comments on the 
subject to be incorporated in the proposal for Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA).  The Committee have further emphasized the need 
to expedite the policy formulation in their 12 th Report (14 th Lok Sabha) 
presented to Lok Sabha in May, 2006.  The Committee once again urge the 
Government to expedite finalization of future policy on concessions on sale 
of P&K fertilizers. 
 

 -:18:-
CHAPTER - II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED  
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
Fertilizers play an important  role in increasing the agricultural production. 
Till the early 1970’s, fertilizer consum ption was quite low and consequently the 
foodgrains production too wa s low. There used to be a huge foreign exchange 
outgo on account of imports of foodgrains. In the wake of the green revolution in 
the 1970s, there has been a quantum increas e in fertilizer consumption. The 
production of foodgrains has increased from 52 million metric tones (MT) in 1951-
52 to 232.31 MT in 2004-05. Fertilizer consumption has increas ed from about 1kg. 
per hectare to about 96.7 kg. per hectare during the same period. During this 
period, over 50 fertilizer production units have come up in private, public and 
cooperative sectors. 
Reply of the Government 
  These are mere observations of the Standing Committee and no specific 
recommendation has been made.  Therefore, no reply from Government is called 
for. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
OM No.12015/3/2003-FPP dated 29.03.2006]  
  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No 2) 
 
  Out of the three main nutrients namely nitrogen (N), phosphate (P) and 
potash (K), raw materials are available indigenously for nitrogenous fertilizers and 
the country is in the range of self-sufficien cy. In the case of phosphates, paucity of 
domestic raw material constrains the attain ment of its self-sufficiency. Since there 
are no commercially exploitable source of  potash in the country, the entire 
requirement is being met through imports. Presently, the installed capacity of 

 -:19:-
production of nitrogen is about 120.61 lakh MT and that of phosphate is 56.20 lakh 
MT. Considering the need for making avai lable fertilizer to the farmers at 
reasonable prices, from the very beginni ng the Government has been taking 
various steps in this direction. The Fert ilizer Control Order first introduced in 1944, 
was made effective in 1957. Un der this order, the Govern ment was to fix selling 
price of fertilizers. The Government also  retained the right to acquire certain 
percentage of fertilizers from the production  units for distribut ion through Public 
Distribution System (PDS). Similarly, under the Essential Commodities Act (ECA), 
1955, the Government has been issuing ECA allocation since 1972 to specify how 
much fertilizer will move to which State to fulfill the expected demand. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  These are mere observations of the Standing Committee and no specific 
recommendation has been made.  Therefore, no reply from Government is called 
for. 
 [M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
OM No.12015/3/2003-FPP dated 29.03.2006]  
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
Based on the report of the Fertilizer  Prices Committee, the Government 
introduced the Retention Pr ice Scheme (RPS) in 1977 mainly for urea. Under 
RPS, the difference between re tention price (cost of production as assessed by 
the Government plus 12% post-tax return  on net worth) and the MRP was paid as 
subsidy to the production unit s. According to the Government, this system helped 
to increase the investment in fertilizer sector resulting in setting up of big fertilizer 
plants. In the context of problems of  foreign exchange ou tgo on account of 
fertilizer imports, in 1991 a Joint Parliamentary Committee on Fertilizer Pricing 
also examined the issue. Based on the recommendations of the JPC, phosphatic 
and potash fertilizers were decontrolled in  1992. Also, the price of urea was 
increased by 30 per cent. Given the impor tance of fertilizer pricing and subsidy 

 -:20:-
management, a High Powered Fertilizer Pricing Committee (HPC) under the 
Chairmanship of Prof. C.H. Hanumantha Rao examined the matter in 1997-98. 
Subsequently, the Expenditure Reforms Commission (ERC) also examined the 
fertilizer related issues. Based on it s recommendations, a New Pricing Scheme 
(NPS) was introduced w.e.f. 1.4.2003 re placing the RPS syst em. NPS is being 
implemented in two stages viz. Stage-I from 1.4.2003  to 31.3.2004 and Stage-II 
from 1.4.2004 to 31.3.2006. Under the system, existing fertilizer units have been 
divided into 6 groups based on vintage an d feedstock for determining the group 
based concessions. Under this scheme ph asing out of ECA allocation has been 
proposed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
   
These are mere observations of t he Standing Committee and no specific 
recommendation has been made.  Therefore, no reply from Government is called 
for. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
OM No.12015/3/2003-FPP dated 29.03.2006]  
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
The Committee’s examination of feedsto ck policy for fertilizer industry has 
revealed that gas feedstock is preferred over naphtha and coal on account of gas 
based plants being cost efficient and energy saving.  For these reasons as per the 
Government decision taken in January, 2004, all new fertilizer plants as also the 
modernization/revival programmes for exis ting plants will be approved, only if 
those are gas/LNG based.  Even though t he Government has been giving fertilizer 
and power sectors priority over  other sectors in terms of pricing and availability of 
gas, there are issues which need to be sorted out at the earliest in 
consultation/coordination with the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.  As against 
the demand of the fertilizer sector for 33.32 million metric standard cubic metre per 
day (MMSCMD), the actual supply of gas during 2003-04 was 22.13 MMSCMD 
only.  With the implementati on of the policy decision of the Government to set up 

 -:21:-
only gas based plants and to switch over t he existing plants to gas, the demand of 
gas for fertilizer sector is likely to  reach 68 MMSCMD.  The Government, 
accordingly, should take adequate steps to allocate requisite gas supply to 
fertilizer plants on priority basis. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 As a part of the recently formulat ed policy on natural gas allocation and 
prices, the Government has decided that al l available APM gas would be supplied 
to only the power and fertilizer sectors agai nst their existing allocations after 
meeting the requirements of  specific end users commi tted under various court 
orders.  
 
Furthermore, with the commissioning of LNG terminal of Petronet LNG Ltd. 
and commencement of supplies of RLNG to consumers w.e.f. 1.4.2005, the gas 
based urea units along the HBJ pipel ine have received 7.6142 MMSCMD of R-
LNG during the period April- September, 2005  and the aver age actual supply of 
gas to urea units during April-Sept ember, 2005 increased to 28.4089 MMSCMD. 
The shortfall in supply of natural gas for units along HBJ pipe line has, therefore, 
been significantly reduced. However, the ava ilability of gas in terms of the total 
requirement with reference to expansio n, de-bottlenecking/revamp/modernization 
proposals and for conversion of naphtha and FO/LSHS based  units continues to 
be a matter of concern. The total requireme nt of gas for fertilizer sector including 
the future requirement on account of  conversion of non-gas based units to 
NG/LNG, expansion/de-bottlenecking proposals and revival of closed urea units is 
68.6019 MMSCMD.  
 
For meeting the requirements of the gas for the fertilizer sector, the 
Department of Fertilizers is in constant interaction with Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas, GAIL (India) Limited and other prospective suppliers of natural 
gas/LNG.  The gas supply scenario is goin g to change in the years to come on 
account of new gas finds, coal bed methan e, coal gasification technology, efforts 
to import LNG from gas rich countries and possibilities of importing gas through 

 -:22:-
transnational pipelines.  Indications are that  by 2010-11, the availability of present 
APM gas supplied by ONGC may decline, the supply from domestic joint venture 
and private suppliers will rise , and the quantum of LNG import from supplies such 
as Qutar, Shell and Iran will increase substantially. 
 
In this scenario, the Department is  making efforts to ensure that a 
substantial portion of the additional NG/L NG is made available to its various 
fertilizer units located in all parts of the country in the years to come on a priority 
basis.  Such fertilizer units include not only the present functional 29 urea units but 
also the additional urea capacity that is li kely to come up in the future by way of 
greenfield and brownfield expansion, de-bottlenecking and revamp projects as well 
as revival of some of the closed units. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
OM No.12015/3/2003-FPP dated 29.03.2006]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 
  Apart from urea (N), phosphatic and potassic fertilizers play an important 
role in agricultural production. Raw materi al for the manufacture of complexes of 
these fertilizers are imported.  Even t hough these fertilizers were decontrolled in 
1992, some ad-hoc concessions/subsidy ar e being given on these fertilizers.  
Similarly, concession is given on sale of  imported decontrolled fertilizers.  Budget 
provision for the year 2005-06 for sale of indigenously produced decontrolled 
fertilizers was Rs. 4000 crore, whereas provision for concessional sale of imported 
decontrolled fertilizer was Rs. 1200 crore.  The quantum of concession is decided 
by the Tariff Commission which takes into  consideration issues like comparative 
prices of N, P & K fertilizers, customs dut y, exchange rates, etc.   Considering the 
nutrient value and essentiality of P&K fertilizers for continuous food grains 
production and maintaining fertility of th e soil, there is a compelling need to 

 -:23:-
continue with the system so that costly fert ilizers remain within the reach of small 
and marginal farmers.  The Government should also help the fertilizer industry for 
securing long term agreements for im ports of raw materials for P&K 
fertilizers/complexes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Government accepts the recommendat ion of the Standing Committee. The 
import of fertilizer inputs is free and t he P&K manufacturers are free to import 
fertilizers raw material/intermediates as per their commercial decision. However, 
Department of Fertilizers is also exploring ways to prom ote the setting up of more 
joint ventures abroad by the Indian P&K manufacturers  to ensure uninterrupted 
supply of these vital inputs at long term reasonable prices.   
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
OM No.12015/3/2003-FPP dated 29.03.2006]  
   
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
It also came out during the course of  examination that the procedure for 
certification, disbursement of due amount, etc. differ from State to State and some 
of the States are having problems in running the scheme for decontrolled fertilizers 
effectively and efficiently.  The Committee expect the D epartment of Fertilizers to 
examine the issues with a view to expl oring an efficient system which should be 
uniformly applicable to all the States.  The primary objective should be availability 
of fertilizers to the small and marginal farmers at the lowest possible price. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  Keeping in view a number of problems in the existing system for payment of 
concession under Concession Scheme, Department of Fertilizers has now devised 
an alternative mechanism for release of pa yment. Accordingly, on 26.1.2006, the 
Department has announced the launching of a web based onl ine ‘Fertilizer 
Monitoring System’ for monitoring pr oduction, distribution and sales of 

 -:24:-
decontrolled phosphatic and potassic fertilizers in the country. This system aims to 
bring transparency in fertilizer  distribution and provide an upto-date information to 
the public on the dispatches and receipts  of phosphatic and potassic fertilizers to 
different destinations in the country on day  to day basis. As per this system, the 
State Governments will ex empt the manufacturers/i mporters from sales 
certification. The role of  the State Governments in  monitoring receipts of 
decontrolled fertilizers in their respective states and ensuring the supply of quality 
fertilizers as per FCO has been maintained.  The implementation of the ‘Fertilizer 
Monitoring System’ is applicable to D AP, MOP and NPK concurrently with the 
present system w.e.f 1.1.2006.  On satisfactory results, the present system of sale 
certification will be done away with at the earliest. Its  application to SSP sales will 
be taken up subsequently.  
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
OM No.12015/3/2003-FPP dated 29.03.2006]  
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 
  Yet another category of P and K fertilizers is Single Super Phosphate 
(SSP). SSP contains 11% sulphur and 16% phosphorous. SSP manufacturing 
units are spread all over the country.  T he Government provides fixed subsidy on 
SSP and the price fixation is done by the respective State Governments.  MRP 
and price level vary from State to State.  The installed capacity of the SSP fertilizer 
in the country is about 60 lakh MT .  In pursuance of the Committee's 
recommendation made in their 6
th Report (Fourteenth Lok  Sabha), the price 
concession per tonne has been raised from Rs. 650 per tonne to Rs. 975 w.e.f. 
01.09.2005.  The Government has asked t he State Governments to maintain the 
MRP of SSP at the present level resulting in direct additional  concession to the 
farmers.  The Committee feel that this is  a good step for the benefit of the farmers 
at large and trust that farmers' interest would be taken care of in future as well.  

 -:25:-
Reply of the Government 
 
 Department of Fertilizers agrees with the recommendation of the 
Committee and will continue its efforts to promote use of SSP.  
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
OM No.12015/3/2003-FPP dated 29.03.2006]  
   
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that due to constraints in the availability 
of gas, which is the preferred feedsto ck for production of nitrogenous fertilizers 
and the near total dependence of the country on imported raw materials for 
production of phosphatic fertilizers, the Government has been encouraging Indian 
companies to establish joint vent ure production facilities with buy back 
arrangement, in other countries, which have rich reserves of natural gas and rock 
phosphate.  It came out during the course of  examination that a few joint venture 
fertilizer projects have been set up in Senegal, Jordan, Morocco and Oman.  The 
Committee, however, find that these ar e mainly urea based plants.  The 
Committee learn that by the end of the 10 th Five year Plan and th ereafter, there is 
likely to be significant demand-supply gap for fertilizer nutrients and additional 
production capacity, either in India or abroad, would be re quired to meet this gap.  
In the absence of any preferred and economic alternative feedstock, the 
Committee, strongly recommend that the gover nment should take an active role in 
taking up joint venture projects abroad for producing phosphatic and potassic 
fertilizers.  This step will help immensely in securing our future requirements. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Out of the four Joint ventures ment ioned in the recomm endation, the Joint 
Ventures at Senegal, Jordan and Morocco  pertain to phosphatic fertilizers, have 
already given the Indian sponsors an assured source of supply of phosphoric acid, 
a vital input for manufacture of DAP and other phosphate and complex fertilizers.  

 -:26:-
The Department is trying to examine/facilitate the establishment of more such joint 
ventures in close coordination with the industry and the Mini stry of External 
Affairs. MOUs for setting up the following joint ventures have been signed so far: 
 
• Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooper ative Ltd (IFFCO and El Nasr 
Mining Co. (ENMC) have formed a Joint Venture Company, the ‘Indo 
Egyptian Fertilizer Company on 15th November 2005 for setting up a 
phosphoric acid plant in Egypt.  IFFCO will buy back the entire 
Phosphoric Acid production.  Th e target date for commencement of 
construction is mid 2006.  The project construction period is 
estimated to be 36 months and the plant is expected to achieve the 
commercial production by the year 2009.   
 
• Gujarat State Fertilizers & Chemicals Ltd. (GSFC) and Coromandal 
Fertilizers Ltd. (CFL) alongwith Groupe Chimique Tunisien (GCT) & 
Compagnie Des Phosphates De Gafsa (CPG) are setting up a joint 
venture project in Tunisia for production of 3,30,000 MTS of 
Phosphoric Acid per annum.  The JV wi ll sell its full production to 
both the above Indian parties.  An MO U to this effect was signed in 
October, 2005 between GSFC & GCT/CPG.  The project is expected 
to be commissioned by June, 2008. 
 
Besides, KRIBHCO is in discussions with Saudi Arabi an Mining company 
MA’ADEN for possible equity participatio n in a new phosphate project/fertilizer 
complex of MA’ADEN at Ras AzZawr for exploiting and subsequently beneficiating 
phosphate deposits in Al Jalami d and transporting the same  to Ras Az Zawr to 
produce phosphate concentrate.  KRIBHCO’s participation in the total equity of US 
$ 870 million is proposed at around US $ 80 million alongwith pr ovisions for off 
take of part of the product (DAP), exper tise/manpower for project construction, 
operation, maintenance and ma rketing of the product.  While discussions are 
continuing, this Department in association with the Mini stry of External Affairs 
continues to provide assistance for facilitating finalization of the Joint venture.  
  [M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
OM No.12015/3/2003-FPP dated 29.03.2006]  
 
  

 -:27:-
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
---------------- NIL ------------- 

 -:28:-
CHAPTER-IV 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE  
GOVERNMENT HAS NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
-------------------------- NIL  ------------------------ 
 

 -:29:-
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
For the urea policy beyond 1. 4.2006, i.e. to decide about the method of 
fixing selling price, movement decontrol,  etc., the Government constituted a 
Working Group under the Chai rmanship of Dr. Y.K. Al agh. The Working Group 
was asked to review performance of Stage- I & Stage-II of NPS for urea units and 
formulation of policy for urea units fo r Stage-III commencing from 1.4.2006. The 
Working Group further constituted six Sub-Committees with a view to examining in 
depth, issues like demand and supply of urea, movement and distribution of urea, 
subsidy given in other countries, pricing and availability of feedstock, etc. The 
Report of the Working Group to deci de about the policy be yond 1.4.2006 is 
reportedly under finalization. The Committe e desire that this should be expedited 
as there is hardly any time left for t he commencement of Stage-III of NPS. The 
Committee would, however like the Governm ent to take into consideration the 
following issues while finalizing the urea policy beyond 1.4.2006: - 
 
(i)  Since most of the develop/devel oping countries are giving direct or 
indirect subsidies to their farming sectors, and considering economic 
conditions of small and marginal farmers, growing incidence of 
natural calamities, farm debts, etc., it  is essential that the element of 
subsidy/concession which is about Rs. 16000 crore per annum is not 
brought down. Rather, it should be periodically raised and linked with 
cost index. 
 
(ii) There is Movement Control/ ECA allocation for urea from the 
beginning and the same is being phased out gradually.  The size of 
the country, its difficult far flung and hilly areas, extreme climates, 
recurrence of natural calamities, et c., call for having some control by 
the Government for movement/allocat ion of fertilizers.  Accordingly 
the Government should not shy away from their responsibility. 
 

 -:30:-
(iii) It should be ensured that with the ever growin g population, the 
country should remain self-reliant in  food-grain production, which is 
closely linked with fertilizer policy. 
 
(iv) Sudden decontrol of phosphatic and potassic fertilizers showed its 
great adverse impact on the ideal consumption rati o of NPK in 1992.  
Even after more than a decade, it is yet to be achieved fully in all 
parts of the country.  While framing future policy for any type of 
fertilizers, the motto of balanced use of (NPK-4:2:1) fertilizers should 
not be lost sight-off. 
 
(v) Supply of gas to fertilizer sector  should continue to be given priority. 
 
(vi) Various suggestions given by the Fertilizer Association of India (FAI) 
in the matter on behalf of fertiliz er industry should be examined in 
depth for implementation. 
 
(vii) Introduction and production of new form of soil nutrients like soluble 
fertilizers should be encouraged to  meet the new agricultural 
techniques like drip irrigation, etc. 
 
(viii) Policy should also include incentives for setting up new fertilizer 
plants as also to take up moder nization/renovation of existing 
fertilizer units. 
 
(ix) Considering the role  and need of public sector in this core area 
future policy should take note of revi val of sick fertilizer units in the 
Public Sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The Working Group, constituted under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y.K. Alagh 
to review the effectiveness of Stage I & II of NPS and to formulate a policy for 
Stage-III of NPS, has submitted its report on 26.12.2005.  The report of the 
Working Group has been examined in the D epartment with a view to formulate a 
policy for Stage-III of NPS commencing from 1.4.2006.  In this context, Minister 
(Chemicals & Fertilizers) also held a meet ing with representatives of fertilizer 
industry to elicit their views on the repor t.  Based on these consultations and inter-
departmental discussions, the Department of Fertilizers has  circulated a Note for 

 -:31:-
consideration of Cabinet Committee on Ec onomic Affairs.  The Department will 
also keep in view the suggestions made by the Standing Committee. 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
OM No.12015/3/2003-FPP dated 29.03.2006]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
The Committee note that the grant of fert ilizer subsidy is the core issue for 
the Government as well as farmers of t he country. Presently, Budget allocation for 
the subsidy/ad-hoc concessions is m ade under the Budget allocation for the 
Department of Fertilizers which is about  Rs.16000 crore annually. The Fertilizers 
Association of India (FAI) pleaded before th e Committee that the main objective of 
this subsidy to provide its benefits of subsidy to the poor and marginal farmers has 
not been achieved fully. The Committee in their earlier Reports have brought out 
this aspect of providing direct benefit of subsidy to poor farmers time and again. 
However, the response of the Department  of Fertilizers has not been very 
encouraging. The Committee do not shar e the repeated contention of the 
Government stating that t he payment of subsidy to the farmers directly is a 
gigantic task and it is not adm inistratively and logistical ly feasible to implement 
such a scheme. They are of the view t hat the direct subsid y can be provided at 
least to the poor and marginal farmers by categorizing them se parately from the 
big farmers on the lines of the scheme of  providing foodgrains to people below 
poverty line (BPL), i.e., by purchasing fe rtilizers at higher cost and the supplying 
the same at lower rate directly to the category of poor and marginal farmers. The 
Committee trusts that the Government woul d examine this sugges tion at the time 
of finalization of policy for Stage-III of NPS commencing from 1.4.2006. 
 
 

 -:32:-
Reply of the Government 
 
  According to 1995-96 Agriculture Census Data, there are 71.2 million 
marginal/operational holdings having less than one hectare land and 21.6 million 
small holdings of 1-2 hectare size.  While  the marginal holdings constitute 61.6% 
of the total number of the holdings in the country, small holdings constitute another 
18.7.  Thus, both categorie s of holdings account for more than 80% of the 
holdings.  Provision of fertilizer subsidy di rectly to the small and marginal farmers, 
constituting four-fifth of  the operational holdings in the country, may not be an 
economically viable proposition.  The possibility of leakages due to poor economic 
wherewithal of these vulner able rural population, will only lead to greater mis-
management and corruption. This aspect was also examined  by the Working 
Group constituted under the chairmans hip of Dr. Y.K. Alagh and it has 
recommended that a scheme for di sbursal of subsidy directly to farmers in three 
selected districts where reliable land reco rds are available may be formulated on 
an experimental basis.  The recommendation is under examination with a view to 
determination of its feasibility and the possible modalities.  
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
OM No.12015/3/2003-FPP dated 29.03.2006]  
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
 Apart from the availability of gas,  another important ar ea having a bearing 
on the health and growth of the fertilizer industry is pricing of gas for the fertilizer 
sector.  As per the present decision, t he Tariff Commission has fixed the price for 
gas which has been committed by ONGC and OIL (Rs.3200/MCM).  However, gas 
from private/joint ventures is to be obtai ned at market price.  The FAI on behalf of 
the fertilizer units pleaded before the Commi ttee that the industry can afford a gas 
price upto US $3.0-3.5 MMBTU whereas joint ventures/imported gas was available 
at the rate of US$4.5-5 and this was affect ing adversely the viability of fertilizer 
units.  The proposed Regulatory Authority for the Petroleum Sector which would 

 -:33:-
sort out these matters, is yet to be established. The Co mmittee, therefore, would 
like the Government to ensure that the natural gas is s upplied in requisite quantity 
at reasonable price to the fertilizer industry which is serving the need of agriculture 
sector/farming community.  Needless to  emphasize, the Government should 
initiate necessary action to set up the Petroleum Regulatory Authority at the 
earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
   The issue of determination of pr oducer price for gas produced by ONGC 
and OIL have been referred to Tariff Commission.  Pending Government’s 
decision on the report of the Tariff Commi ssion, the consumer price of APM gas 
has been increased from Rs.2850/MCM to a fixed price of Rs.3200/MCM on an ad 
hoc basis w.e.f. 1.7.2005. 
 
  The issue of determination of price of Petronet LNG Limited (PLL)’s R-LNG 
is under consideration of the Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) constituted under the 
chairmanship of Finance Minister to exam ine issues related to supply of natural 
gas and LNG to fertilizer industry and to  work out a framework which ensures 
preferential allocation of domes tic natural gas to the fertilizer industry and making 
available imported LNG to fertilizer units, its pricing and related taxation issues. 
 
  The issue of establishm ent of Petroleum & Natural Gas Regulatory Board is 
under examination of the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.    
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
OM No.12015/3/2003-FPP dated 29.03.2006]  
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 -:34:-
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
 
           It came out  during the course of examinat ion that manufacturers/suppliers 
of P&K fertilizers have certain grievances like delay in announcing the 
concession/prices, delay in reimbursement and non-payment  of arrears, 
particularly for the period prior to 2000.  The ad-hoc concession scheme till the 
year 2000 was being administer ed by the Ministry of Ag riculture and Cooperation 
and thereafter it has been entrusted to the D epartment of Fertilizers.  Reportedly, 
some of the records are yet to be receiv ed by the Department of Fertilizers from 
the Ministry of Agricult ure and Cooperation.  The Committee desires that the 
process should be expedited so that long pending dues to the industry are 
released by the Government at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Payment of concession on the sales of decontrolled phos phatic & potassic 
fertilizers for the period 1997-98 onwards ar e being released on receipt of sales 
certification by the States. However, the re cord pertaining to the period prior to it 
has not been received from the Department of Agricultur e & Co-operation.  In the 
absence of that record, Department could not settle the claims of concession in 
respect of the sales during that peri od. This matter has been taken up with 
Department of Agriculture & Co-operation for transfer of the record. In the wake of 
this recommendation of the Standing Committ ee, Department of Agriculture & Co-
operation has been once again impressed upon to expedite the process.  
 [M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
OM No.12015/3/2003-FPP dated 29.03.2006]  
  

 -:35:-
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 
    Regarding the announcem ent of the concessions on sale of P&K fertilizers, 
the Committee have been informed that t he scheme for the year 2005-06 has 
already been announced and for the futu re policy an Expert Group has been 
constituted to look into the matter.  The Group was to give their Report by the end 
of July 2005.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
recommendations of the Expert Group as al so the follow-up action taken on the 
recommendations.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Expert Group has submitted its repor t to the Department of Fertilizers 
in December 2005. The recommendations of the Expert Group are as under: -  
 
(i) The Subsidy on DAP will form the basis for subsidy on other 
phosphatic and complex fertilizers also.  The subsidy on DAP will 
have three components: - 
 
(a)  The first component relates to the difference in the landed 
 price of imported DAP and the MRP. 
 
(b) The second component of the su bsidy is the cost of marketing 
including all the selling and distribution expenses and dealers' 
margin. This component is substantially based on the Tariff 
Commission’s recommendations with some adjustments and 
is recommended at Rs. 1350 per metric ton.  
 
These two components of subs idy would be payable without 
any discrimination both to domestic manufacturers as well as 
importers.  However, only those importers of DAP would be 
eligible for marketing com ponent of subsidy who have 
infrastructure and extension ne twork for providing various 
services to the farmer in a comprehensive manner and who 
are not exclusively in the business of sale of DAP. 

 -:36:-
 
(c) The third component of subs idy will be payable only to 
domestic manufacturers.  This is to offset disadvantage to the 
domestic manufactures of DAP vis-à-vis manufacturers 
abroad.  This recommendation is in line with the observations 
of Gokak Committee wherein it has been brought out that in 
the event of ammonia prices becoming very high or the DAP 
price falling very low in the in ternational market, the domestic 
manufacturer suffers disadvantage to the extent of 26-30%. 
 
(ii) Floor and ceili ng for the disadvantage has  been recommended as 
5% and 20%. The Government may review the competitiveness 
achieved by the industry in future and accordingly consider 
downward revision of these two limits. 
 
(iii) The extent of disadvantage would be estimated on the normated 
cost of phosphoric acid arrived at using the methodology indicated 
by the Expert Group while giving its interim recommendations. This 
would also take into account the cost of holding inventory by the 
domestic industry.  
 
(iv) The cost of domestic production would be arrived at taking into 
account the normated cost of phosphoric acid, international ammonia 
prices, cost of conversion and capital cost based on the norms given 
by the tariff commission.  
 
(v) The marketing cost of Rs. 1350  would be escala ted on an annual 
basis linked to WPI (General) index.  
 
(vi) The adjustment in subsidy on the first two components would be 
made quarterly after taking into acc ount the prevalent international 
prices and foreign exchange rates.  
 
(vii) The DAP prices to be taken in to account would be representative 
prices in the international market  so that they are not prone to 
manipulation.  Thus based on these recommendations, the subsidy 
would be independent of any direct cost inputs and industry would be 
able to take their commercial decisions based on a transparent 
reflection of the various elements of subsidy.  
 
(viii) Keeping in view the lower levels of MRP vis-à-vis international prices 
in respect of urea and MOP, the ot her major fertilizers in use, the 
Expert Group did not recommend any immediate change in the 
MRP.  However, changes in MRP may be considered in case the 
MRP goes below 65% of the landed price of imported DAP.  The 
Government may however consider revision in the MRP of DAP in 
case any rationalization is brought in the MRPs of other nutrients.  
 

 -:37:-
 The Department of Fertilizers has ex amined the recommendations of the 
Expert Group and prepared a draft note for consideration of CCEA. The draft note 
has been circulated to the concerned depa rtments for their comments. DOF will 
put up the proposal of CCEA after incorporating the comments of the concerned 
ministries. 
   [M/o Chemicals & Fertilizer s (Department of Fertilizers)  
OM No.12015/3/2003-FPP dated 29.03.2006]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
 
Another area having a bearing on the fertilizer policy is the setting up of 
new fertilizer plants and also taking up modernization/renovation programmes of 
the existing plants.  Building of more capacities is essentia l to meet the ever 
growing requirements.   In  the context of delay in clearing some modernization 
proposals of the fertilizer un its like Tata Chemicals Li mited (TCL), Babrala, Indo 
Gulf Fertilizers Limited (IGFL), Jagdishpur and Indian Farmers fertilizers 
Cooperative Limited (IFFCO), the representatives of t he Department of Fertilizers 
assured the Committee that these would be  cleared soon.  Acco rding to the DOF, 
the main reason for delay in approvals has been the long time taken in sorting out 
gas related issues as all new projects  are to be gas based plants only.  As 
recommended elsewhere in the Report, the Committee desire that the Department 
of Fertilizers should sort out this vital issu e in consultation with the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas.  
 
 
 
 
  
 

 -:38:-
Reply of the Government 
 
 Eleven proposals for de-bottlenecki ng/revamp /modernization and three 
proposals for expansion projects of exis ting urea units have been received in this 
Department for approval.   While two of  the de-bottlenecking proposals namely 
Tata Chemicals Limited (TCL), Babrala and Indo Gulf Fertiliz ers Limited (IGFL), 
Jagdishpur  have been approved, the remaining are under consideration.   On this, 
these units have raised some  issues which are under examination. As regards 
expansion projects, two of them have been sent to the respective managements of 
the companies requesting to come up with firmed up cost/detaile d project reports 
and the third one is under consideration.   
 
On the issue of making available gas fo r the fertilizer sector to meet the 
shortfall being faced by the existing gas ba sed units and future requirement of gas 
on account of conversion of non-gas based units to NG/LNG, de-bottlenecking 
projects, expansion projects and revival of  closed urea units, the Department is in 
constant interaction with the Ministry of Natural Gas, GAIL and ONGC.  A series of 
meetings has been held with the official s of the Ministry of P&NG, ONGC and 
GAIL.   Present demand and availability pr ojections reveal t hat any significant 
additional quantities of natural gas/LNG may not become available before 2009. 
 
[M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
OM No.12015/3/2003-FPP dated 29.03.2006]  
  
 
 
 
 
N E W  D E L H I           ANANT GANGARAM GEETE ,   
31 July, 2006                         Chairman, 
9 Sravana, 1928 (Saka)         Standing Committee on  
Chemicals & Fertilizers. 
 

 -:39:-
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2005-06) 
TWELFTH SITTING 
(26.07.2006) 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. 
Present 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete - Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Sunil Khan 
3. Shri P. Rajendran 
4. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
5. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
6. Shri V.K. Thummar 
7. Shri Bhanupratap Singh Verma 
Rajya Sabha 
8. Shri Ajay Maroo 
9. Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
10. Shri Shreegopal Vyas 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri P. Sreedharan   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Brahm Dutt     -   Director 
3. Shri S.C. Kaliraman   - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Santosh Kumar   - Assistant Director 

 -:40:-
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman we lcomed the Members to the sitting. 
 
3. ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 
4. The Committee then considered the Draft Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations cont ained in the Tenth Report of the 
Committee on ‘Pricing and Feedstock Policies relating to Fertilizers’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (D epartment of Fertilizer s).  After a brief 
discussion, the draft Report was ado pted by the Committee with minor 
amendment. 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes, if 
any, arising out of the factual verificati on of the Report by the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (Depar tment of Fertilizers) and pr esent the same to both 
the Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
    
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
** Matters not related to this Report 

 -:41:-
Appendix – II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Go vernment on the recommendations  
contained in the Tenth Report (Fourt eenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2005-06) on ‘Pricing and Feedstock 
Policies relating to Fertilizers.’  
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 14 
 
II Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 10,12 
and 14) 
 
8 
 Percentage to Total 57.14%  
 
III Recommendation which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government’s Reply  
 
Nil 
 Percentage of Total Nil 
 
IV Recommendation in respec t of which reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee  
 
Nil 
 Percentage of Total Nil 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 4, 5, 7, 9, 11 and 13) 
6 
  
Percentage of Total 
 
42.86% 
 
 