 
 
 
 
 
29  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2008-09) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
  DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2008-09) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contain ed in the Twenty -
sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2007-08) on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the Ministry of Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2008/Kartika, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 
 
2 
 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2008-09) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2008-09) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2007 -08) on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2008 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2008 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2008/Kartika, 1930 (Saka) 


 
 
3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
               PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-09) ……………………………….. 
 
4 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………… 
 
5 
CHAPTER I Report ……………………………………………………………... 
 
6 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been accepted 
by the Government ……………………………………..……… 
 
 
27 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies………… 
 
 
50 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 
51 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited …………………… 
 
 
56 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Third sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (2008-09) held on 6 November 2008…….  
 
 
60 
II Analysis of Action Ta ken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -sixth Report (14 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2007-08) on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) ………………. 
 
 
 
 
 
62 
 
 

 
 
4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2008-09) 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri P. Sreedharan   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.S. Chera    -   Director 
 4. Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Deputy Secretary-II 
 5. Smt. Balwant Kaur Saimbhi  - Under Secretary 
  6. Smt. Madhu Bhutani   - Senior Committee Assistant  
  
*  Consequent upon his disqualification for being Member of the Lok Sabha, Shri Jai Prakash (Constituency – Mohanlal Ganj) ceased to be Member 
of this Committee w.e.f. 12.09.2008. 
$ Consequent upon his resignation from Rajya Sabha, Shri Debabrata Biswas  ceased to be Member o f this Committee w.e.f. 23.09.2008. 
# Consequent upon his disqualification for being Member of the Lok Sabha, Shri Ramswaroop Prasad  ceased to be Member of this Committee 
w.e.f. 03.10.2008. 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  -  Chairman 
  
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ajit Singh 
3. Shri Afzal Ansari  
4. Shri Sunil Khan 
5. Shri Shrichand Kripalani 
6. Shri Subhash Maharia 
7. Shri Punnu Lal Mohale 
8. Shri A. Narendra 
9. Shri Anand Paranjpe 
10. Shri Prasanta Pradhan  
11. Shri P. Chalapathi Rao 
12. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  
   13. Shri Anantha  Venkata Rami Reddy  
14. Shri Devwrat Singh 
15. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
16. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
17. Shri D. Venugopal 
18. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
*19. Vacant 
  $20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
 23. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
 24. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
25. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
26. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
  27. Shri Mahendra Sahni 
   28. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi  
   29. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
   #30. Vacant 
   31. Vacant 

 
 
5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals an d Fertilizers   (2008 -09) 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twenty -ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2007 -08) on Demands for Grants 
(2008-09) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
 
2. The Twenty-sixth  Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 
April 2008 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 23 April 2008.  The replies of Government to all 
the recommendations contained in the Twenty -sixth Report were received on 16 July 
2008.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2008 -09) considered 
the Action Taken Replies received from the Government and adopted the Draft Action 
Taken Report at their sitting held on 6 November 2008. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sa bha) of the Committee is 
given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                ANANT GANGARAM GEE TE,                   
November 7, 2008                   Chairman, 
Kartika 16 , 1930 (Saka)                                  Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and  Fertilizers. 
 

 
 
6 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government 
on the recommendations / observations contained in the Twenty - sixth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(2007-08) on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Fertilizers) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 April 2008. The 
Report contained 18 recommendations/ observations. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were 
requested to furnish replies to the recommen dations / observations contained in the 
Twenty-sixth Report within three months from the presentation of the Report, i.e. by 
16 July 2008. The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 18 
recommendations / observations contained in the R eport were received on 16 July 
2008. These have been categorized as follows :- 
 
(i) Recommendations / observations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
 S.Nos.1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 17 and 18       (Total  12) 
 
(ii) Recommendation / observatio n which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply : 
S. No. Nil                                                                     (Total  Nil) 
 
(iii) Recommendations / observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have  not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration : 
S. Nos. 4, 6 and 11                                                         (Total  3) 
 
(iv) Recommendations / observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature : 
S. Nos. 14, 15 and 16                                                   (Total  3) 
 
3. The Committee hope that utmost importance would be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations / observations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is n ot possible for the Ministry to implement the 

 
 
7 
 
recommendations / observations in their letter and spirit for any reason  
whatsoever, the matter should be reported to the Committee with reasons for 
non-implementation. The Committee further desire that the Act ion Taken Notes 
on the recommendations/ observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report  
and the final replies in respect of the recommendations /observations for which 
only interim replies have been furnished by the Ministry should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations in the ensuing paragraphs. 
 
 
A. Capacity Utilization and Production of Fertilizers 
 
(Recommendation S.No.4) 
 
5. Emphasising the need to increase the indigenous production of urea and to 
achieve full capacity utilization of all major fertilizers in the coming years, the 
Committee in their earlier Report had recommended that the installed capacity and 
production of Nitrogen and Phosphate had reached a level of 120.61 lakh MT and 
56.59 lakh MT respectively as on 31 January 2008.  The Committee had noted that 
the target for indigenous production of fertilizers was fixed in consultation with the 
fertilizer industry and the production plan for the year in dicated by them.  To achieve 
the targeted production of urea in the country, the Government had announced the 
New Pricing Scheme (NPS) Stage-III on 8 March 2007, under which the production of 
urea beyond 100% of reassessed capacity in the existing units ha d been incentivised.  
The Committee had recommended that incentive should also  be given to those 
companies which had achieved targets more than 90 per cent.  While stressing the 
need to achieve full capacity utilization of all major fertilizers in the comi ng years, the 
Committee had recommended that the process regarding revival of closed/sick 
fertilizer units should be completed at the earliest and the Government should finalize 
the various policy decisions pending with them without any delay to achieve th e 
production targets fixed for the 11th Plan period.  

 
 
8 
 
 
6. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as follows :- 
 
“The concern of the Committee has been noted  by the Government.  As 
regards the incentive to the companies for production beyond 9 0% of their 
reassessed capacity, it is submitted that the production of urea in the country is 
more than 100% of the installed capacity in the country.   Further, production 
beyond 100% of installed capacity has already been incentivised under NPS 
Stage III effective w.e.f.  1 October 2006. 
 
The revival of closed fertilizer units in the country is under active 
consideration of the Government  and Draft proposal for budgetary support 
from Government towards re vival is currently under inter -Ministerial 
consultations.   
 
As regards the new policy for attracting investments in urea sector,  the 
Department is in the process of finalizing a policy for new investments in the 
urea sector both within the country and abroad.  The expert committee set up 
under the Chairmanship of Prof.  Abhijit Sen, Member Planning Commission to 
look into the options for new investment policies has submitted its report on 
7.5.08.   The policy based on the recommendations of Prof. Sen Committee is 
expected to be finalized shortly.    
 
It is expected that with the announcement of new investment policy, 
there will be additions to the existing indigenous capacity leading to reduction 
in import dependence.     Further, a new policy for encouraging production and 
application of fortified/coated fertilizers has been approved by Government and 
notified w.e.f. 1 June 2008.” 

 
 
9 
 
 
7.   The Committee regret to observe that the Department have not 
offered any explanation for non-acceptance of the recommendation of the 
Committee to incentivise units achie ving production of fertilizers beyond 
90% of their installed capacity.  In the opinion of the Committee, the 
country can achieve a reasonably comfortable position only if an 
atmosphere which encourages and is conducive for production of higher 
quantities o f fertilizers is created by adopting an appropriate strategy.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should consider the 
recommendation of the Committee from this perspective.  As regards 
revival of closed fertilizer companies, the Committee  would expect a 
more proactive role by the Department than what is visible now so that 
brownfield units based on gas are set up within a definite time frame.  
The Committee also desire that the new impending investment policy is 
operationalised at the earl iest so that there will be additions to the 
existing capacity leading to reduction in import dependence in the matter 
of fertilizers. 
 
 

 
 
10 
 
 
B. Distribution of Fertilizers 
 
(Recommendation S.No.5) 
 
8. Commenting on the distribution of fertilizers , the Committ ee in their earlier 
Report had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that there has been an increase in the demand of 
fertilizers in the last few years with urea consumption in the current year 
estimated to be approximately 240 lakh ton nes. The incre ase in consumption 
of fertilizers is expected to continue in the Eleventh Plan period with the 
demand of urea projected at 287.55 lakh ton nes in 2011 -12.  Similarly, the 
demand projected for DAP at 95.1 lakh ton nes, for complex fertilizers at 93.30 
lakh to nes,  for SSP at 45.6 lakh ton nes and for MOP 37.40 lakh ton nes in 
2011-12.  The Committee also note that  various steps have been taken by the 
Department of Fertilizers to meet the projected demand for urea and 
phosphatic fertilizers  during the 11 th Plan period viz., implementation of Stage 
III of NPS w.e.f. 1 October 2006 to 31 March 2010, conversion of non -gas 
based urea units in the country to gas with a definite time frame, capacity 
addition in the existing urea units, revival of seven urea units of H FC and FCI 
and setting up of joint venture projects abroad where abundant reserves of gas 
is available.  The Department has also informed that steps are also being taken 
by the Government to ensure monitoring of fertilizers availability up to the block 
level in all parts of the country.  While appreciating the efforts made by the 
Department for meeting the demand of fertilizer by increasing indigenous 
production through availability of gas and strengthening the delivery 
mechanism, the Committee would like t hat godowns should be established at 
block level and distribution of fertilizers to farmers is monitored from block 
level.  The Committee understand that further distribution of fertilizers 
especially urea from block level is the prerogative of the State G overnment 
even though the Department cannot escape from its responsibility to provide 
fertilizers to farmers as they may have to face the brunt in case of non -
availability of fertilizers to farmers.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Department should devise a mechanism in coordination with the State 
Governments for monitoring the fair distribution of fertilizers from block level in 
order to ensure the transparency in distribution system. 
 
 
 

 
 
11 
 
9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as follows :- 
 
“The contents have been noted. The Department has been impressing 
upon the State Governments to upload the information relating to block -wise 
requirement / supply plan of urea on the web -based Fertilizer Monitoring 
System (FMS) to monitor its availability at block level.”  
 

 
 
12 
 
10. The Committee are happy to note that the Department have been 
impressing upon the State Government s to upload the information 
relating to block-wise requirement/ supply plan of urea on the web -based 
Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) to monitor its availability at the block 
level.  Unfortunately, the reply of the Department  is silent about setting 
up of godowns at the block level.  The Committee are aware of the 
precise role of the State Governments in the matter.  H owever, being the 
nodal policy centre, the Department of Fertilizers have to ensure a 
transparent distribution system which is free of manipulations like 
creation of artificial scarcities, black -marketing, etc. so that the farmers 
are genuinely benefited.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Government should chalk out an appropriate monitoring mechanism in 
consultation with the State Governments with a view to ensuring proper 
distribution of fertilizers in the country.  
 

 
 
13 
 
 
C. Increase in Fertilizer subsidy bill 
(Recommendation S.No.6) 
 
11. Taking note of the tremendous increase in the subsidy amount during the last 
five years, the Committee in their earlier Report had recommended as under :- 
 
“The Committee note that during the last few years the fert ilizer subsidy 
bill has increased substantially mainly because of sharp increase in 
international prices of fertilizer leading to increase in delivery costs of fertilizers 
at the farmgate level.  An additional allocation of Rs. 8 ,985.60 crores(net) is 
required in the current year for reimbursement of all subsidy bills to fertilizer 
units pending for the year 2007 -08.  The Committee were informed that the 
third Supplementary Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Department is likely 
to be only Rs. 4 ,000 crore which would result in carry over liability of 
approximately Rs.5 ,000 crore from the year 2007 -08 to 2008 -09 towards 
payment of fertilizer subsidy.  As far as the year 2008 -09 is concerned in 
January, 2008, the Department of Fertilizer would require Rs. 60, 000 crore to 
meet the subsidy requirement.  Against the current assessment of Rs.90 ,000 
crore the availability in the Budget Estimates (2008-09) is only Rs.31,000 crore. 
 
The Committee are surprised to note that there has been a tremendous 
increase in the subsidy amount during the last five year s.  It has gone almost 
six times since 2004 -05.  The Committee are apprehensive about the 
authenticity of subsidy amount to the tune of Rs. 90,000 crore as submitted by 
the Secretary, Department of Fertilizers.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that industry-wise break up of the subsidy amount be furnished to 
them and the issue regarding the quantum of such a huge subsidy amount 
should be revaluated.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that after 
revaluating the s ubsidy amount, the Government should make sufficient 
budgetary provision to meet the fertilizer subsidy bill including the carryover 
from the previous years.  The Planning Commission and the Ministry of 
Finance should also be apprised to the concern of the  Committee in this 
regard.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that Department of Fertilizers 
should pursue the matter with the Planning Commission so that the adequate 
amount is allocated to the Department of Fertilizers for meeting the subsidy bill 
during the first  year of 11th Plan period.” 
 
 

 
 
14 
 
12. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as follows :- 
 
“It is submitted that the substantial increase in the amount of subsidy 
over last 3-4 years is mainly on account of sharp increase in prices  of fertilizer 
inputs and finished fertilizers in the international market.  This has led to 
increase in the delivered cost of fertilizers at farm gate level and consequently 
increase in per tonne subsidy released on fertilizers.  It may be noted that the 
subsidy on fertilizers is the difference between the normative delivered cost of 
subsidised fertilizers at farm gate level and the selling prices of these fertilizers 
notified by the Government.  The selling prices of these fertilizers have 
remained constant since 28.2.02  till 17th June 2008 and are as below:- 
 
Maximum retail prices of fertilizers, by product 
Fertilizer From 1st 
March 2002 
onwards 
2008/09 as 
on  1.5.2008  
2008/09 
w.e.f 
18.6.2008 
(Rs./tonne product) 
Urea 4830 4830 4830 
DAP 9350 9350 9350 
MOP 4455 4455 4455 
SSP Fixed by 
State 
Government 
3400 3400 
10-26-26 8360 8360 7197 
12-32-16 8480 8480 7637 
14-28-14 8300 8300 7050 
14-35-14 8660 8660 8185 
15-15-15 6980 6980 5121 
16-20-0 7100 7100 5875 
17-17-17 8100 8100 5804 
19-19-19 8300 8300 6487 
20-20-0 7280 7280 5343 
23-23-0 8000 8000 6145 
28-28-0 9080 9080 7481 
 
    
As can be seen from the table above, t he prices of complex fertilizers 
has been further reduced w.e.f. 18 June 2008.   
 
On the other hand, the prices of fertilizer input s and finished fertilizers 
have increased sharply over last four years.  The prevailing average 
international price of fertilizers over last few years is as below:- 
 
Year DAP MOP Urea 

 
 
15 
 
 C&F(FOB US 
Gulf+freight 
Tampa Mundra) 
FOB(FSU) FOB(Arabian 
Gulf) 
1 2 3 4 
2003-04 239.10 97.37 154.44 
2004-05 277.69 133.62 215.55 
2005-06 296.04 158.75 245.77 
2006-07 329.40 172.07 256.72 
2007-08 657.57 263.27 341.20 
May 08 
prices 
1270.00 540.00 645.00 
 
There has also been a continuous increase in consumption of fert ilizers 
and consequently sales of fertilizers in last four years, which is as below : 
 
Year wise sales of fertilizers      (LMT) 
Year  2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 % 
increase in 
2007-08 
over 2004 -
05 
UREA 205.47 221.91 244.85 261.67 27.3 
DAP 60.79 67.51 69.24 75.55 24.2 
MOP 23.14 28.01 23.93 27.82 20.2 
 
In view of the above, the estimated requirement of  subsidy for 2008 -09 
is Rs. 95,013 crore(net) including Rs. 5000 crore carry over from 2007-08.  The 
above estimates have been intimated to Ministry of Finance with all details, to 
make available adequate funds for release of subsidy during 2008-09.” 
 
 
 

 
 
16 
 
13.  The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers have in their action taken 
reply maintained that the substantial increase in the amount of subsidy is 
mainly on account of the sharp increase in the prices of fertilizer inputs 
and finished fertilizers in the international market.  However, the data 
furnished by the Department in the reply in a general way, without 
submitting the unit/company -wise details h ave in no way allayed the 
apprehensions of the Committee about the authenticity of the figures of 
the subsidy amount.  The Committee would, therefore, like to be re -
assured on this score.  They would also like the Department to pursue 
their case accordingl y with the Ministry of Finance so as to obtain 
adequate funds for release of subsidy during the year 2008-09. 
 

 
 
17 
 
 
D. Energy efficiency in Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited 
(BVFCL) 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.7) 
 
14. In their earlier Report, the C ommittee had observed that due to outdated 
machinery and old age technology as in the case of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer 
Corporation Limited ( BVFCL) about which t he Committee were apprised during their 
study tour, consumption of energy was more which wa s ultimately responsible for the 
rise in the cost of fertilizers resulting into the cost of subsidy.  As such, it was 
imperative that Government should also ponder over the root cause of increasing 
subsidy bill in indigenous production and try to plug the loopholes and revamp the 
system.  The Committee felt that increase in the subsidy amount was not the 
permanent solution rather the Department should go into the root cause of high 
subsidy bill and accordingly modernize the existing machinery /technology.  
  
15. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as follows :- 
“The sharp increase in subsidy bill is mainly due to sharp increase in 
international price of fertilizer inputs and finished fertilizers coupled with the 
constant selling price of subsidized fertilizers in the country. Steady increase in 
consumption of fertilizers have also contributed towards increase in subsidy 
bill. 
As regards BVFCL, it is submitted that the units in BVFCL are very low 
capacity units based on old technology, leading  to low energy efficiency.  The 
low efficiency  do impact the cost of production of urea in these units.  
However, the average cost of production from the two units in Namrup is 
estimated at Rs.10000/- PMT of urea for the year 2007 -08, as compared to the 
average cost of production of indigenous urea at Rs.10425/- in 2007-08.  It also 
needs to be noted that the import price of urea currently is more than 
Rs.25,000/-PMT. 
In above context and keeping in view the location  of Namrup units in 
the North -Eastern p art of the country, the production of BVFCL is crucial 
towards meeting the demand in North Eastern region of the country.  
Nevertheless, there is a case for improving the energy efficiency in BVFCL.  
The same is being taken up separately with  the company for making the 
necessary  investments  required towards improvement of energy efficiency in 
the units.”  

 
 
18 
 
16.  The Committee are happy to note that the Department have 
recognised and accepted the case for improving energy efficiency of the 
Brahmaputra Vall ey Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL).  They, 
therefore, desire that the initiatives taken on this count should be 
pursued to their logical conclusions.  The Committee further desire that 
the Department should also launch similar efficiency enhancement  
measures in respect of other fertilizer units also, not only for increasing 
production of fertilizers but also rationalizing the subsidies.   
 

 
 
19 
 
 
E. Timely availability of Fertilizers 
(Recommendation Sl.No.10) 
 
17. Stressing the need for timely and actual  availability of fertilizers in all parts of 
the country, the Committee in their earlier Report had observed that during their field 
visits  there had been non -availability of fertilizers in many parts of the country.  The 
Committee had been apprised by the  Ministry that the availability of urea, which was 
the only fertilizer under partial movement control of Government, remained 
satisfactory throughout the Kharif 2007 season as well as during the current Rabi 
2007-08.  The Committee had also been informed t hat every effort was made by the 
Department of Fertilizers to see that at  least 50% of the months’ requirement was 
available in the beginning of the month and the balance 50% was supplied during the 
first fortnight of the month.  The Committee had noted th at preparation of monthly 
supply plan, payment of subsidy to fertilizer companies only on reaching fertilizers to 
each District, compensation of freight based on actual road and rail heads, Fertilizer 
Monitoring System(FMS), strengthening the State Institu tional Agencies and 
assessment of demand at Block level were some of the effective steps taken by the 
Department in that direction.  In addition to that, Secretary, Department of Fertilizers 
during evidence had stated that from June 2008 onwards they would  be able to send 
the fertilizers to the Block level  and they were also making efforts to see that the 
entire requirement of the Block for the month of June 2008 was made available by the 
end of May 2008 itself.  The Committee had felt that a realistic act ion plan should be 
formulated and implemented in a time bound manner so that fertilizer was actually 
made available to farmers for the Rabi and Kharif crops.  While noting that the 
Department of Fertilizers had taken initiative to supply the ferti lizers at  Block level 
from June  2008 onwards , the Committee had  recommended that an effective 
coordination and monitoring mechanism should be evolved to implement this system 
successfully so that the availability of fertilizers should not remain in official records  
and could reach to the masses actually.  
 
18. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as follows :- 

 
 
20 
 
“The Department has been impressing upon the State Governments to 
upload the information relating to block-wise requirement / supply plan of Urea, 
DAP, MOP and complex fertilizers on the web -based Fertilizer Monitoring 
System (FMS) and also to ensure that fertilizer actually reaches  every block 
within the state as per the supply plan. As on date , 11 States have prepared 
block level supply plan for all fe rtilizers for the month of July  2008 and also 
uploaded the information on FMS.  The DOF is vigorously pursuing with other 
States also and by July end, all States would be in a position to prepare block -
wise supply plan every month and to ensure m ovement of fertilizers as per 
block level supply plan.” 
 
 

 
 
21 
 
19. The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers have been 
impressing upon the State Governments to upload the information 
relating to block -wise requirement/ supply plan of urea, DAP, MoP  and 
Complex Fertilizers on the web -based Fertilizers Monitoring System 
(FMS) so as to ensure that fertilizers reach every block within the State as 
per the supply plan.  The y also note that 11 States have prepared block 
level supply plan for all fertilize rs for the month of July 2008 and 
uploaded the information on FMS.  The Department had also been 
pursuing with rest of the States to implement this process by the end of 
July 2008.  While appreciating the Department in this regard,  the 
Committee desire to know the present status of the exercise.  
 
 
 

 
 
22 
 
 
F. Buffer stock of Fertilizers 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No. 11) 
 
20. Emphasising the need for maintaining a buffer stock of urea to all the States 
and Union Territories, the Committee, in their earlier Report had recommended as 
under :- 
 
“The  Committee  observed that the Department of Fertilizers maintain 
buffer stock of urea through State Institutional Agencies/ Fertilizer companies 
upto 5% of the seasonal demand in only 14 major fertilizer consuming States. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that in view of the increased demand of 
fertilizers, the similar initiative should be taken by the Department in the 
remaining States/ Union Territories also to ensure uninterrupted supply of 
fertilizers to all the States and Union Territories.” 
 
21. The Ministry in their Action Taken Re ply have simply stated that the contents 
have been noted.  
 

 
 
23 
 
22.  The Committee are unhappy over the vague reply furnished by the 
Department.  The action taken note is completely silent about the precise 
action initiated by the Department for maintaining buffer stock of urea in 
the other States/Union Territories.  The Committee would, therefore, like 
to be apprised of the concrete action taken in the matter within a period 
of three months from the presentation of this Report.  
 
 

 
 
24 
 
G. Warehousing capacity in Arunachal Pradesh 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.12) 
 
23. Stressing the need for creation of sufficient warehousing capacity in the North 
Eastern States, particularly, in Arunachal Pradesh so as to re duce its dependence on 
neighbouring States, the Committee in their earlier Report had recommended as under 
:- 
 
” The S tates of North East are facing difficulties of movement and 
transportation of fertilizers in certain parts of the States.  The per tonne c ost of 
transportation has also been exceedingly high as compared to the rest of the 
country.  These are the major bottlenecks in supplying of urea to these States 
in time.  The Committee note that as per the information furnished by the 
Department, Governm ent have decided to reimburse the freight for carrying 
urea on actual basis through a Special Freight Reimbursement Scheme for 
these States.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of 
Fertilizers should evaluate the success of this scheme from time to time and to 
see the result and efficacy of the scheme with a view to implementing it in 
remote and hilly areas also. 
 
The Committee  has been apprised that in North Eastern States 
availability of urea in all the months of the year is always mo re than the 
assessed requirement except in Arunachal Pradesh.  As there is limited 
warehousing in Arunachal Pradesh, Br ahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation 
Limited (BVFCL) has been supplying urea to the dealers of Arunachal Pradesh 
on regular basis from Tezpore and North Lakhimpore as nodal points.  The full 
requirement of the State can be supplied by BVFCL alone.  Despite several 
requests, Arunachal Pradesh has lifted only 163 MT of urea against their 
requirement of 500 MT during the last six months.  T he Committee also note 
that to maintain the mandatory buffer stocks in North Eastern States 
specifically in Arunachal Pradesh, a proposal for creation of buffer stock in the 
North Eastern States will be examined in consultation with BVFCL and the 
State Governments. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that sufficient warehousing 
capacity be created in Arunachal Pradesh to reduced its dependence on 
neighbouring States as the transport facilities in the North Eastern States are 
not adequate and cost effectiv e as in other parts of the country.  The 
Committee also recommend that the Department should take up the matter 
with the Governments of North Eastern States to maintain a mandatory buffer 
stock in the North Eastern States on priority basis in consultation with BVFCL 
and State Governments.  The Committee further recommend that warehouses 
for fertilizers may either be constructed by the BVFCL in case Government of 

 
 
25 
 
Arunachal Pradesh does not establish the same or godowns may be 
constructed by sharing the mutua lly agreed amount by BVFCL and the 
Government of Arunachal Pradesh.” 
 
 
24. The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply have stated as follows :- 
 
“The contents have been noted. The matter is being explored with the 
State Governments in the North East and  M/s. BVFCL.”     
 

 
 
26 
 
 
25. The Committee are happy to note that the Department of Fertilizers 
are exploring the matter regarding maintaining a mandatory buffer stock 
in the North Eastern States with the State Governments in the North East 
and M/s Brahmaputra Val ley Fertilizers Corporation Limited.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the latest position of the 
construction of warehouses for fertilizers in North -Eastern States 
especially in Arunachal Pradesh. 
 
  
 

 
 
27 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
   
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
 The Seventeenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) was presented to 
Parliament on 26 th April, 2007.  The Twenty -Second Report of the Committee on Action 
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in Seventeenth Report 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 th November, 2007.  Out of the total 20 
recommendations, 11 Recommendations (Sl . Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 17 and 
19) were accepted by the Government.  Recommendation at Sl. No. 2 was not pursued 
by the Committee in view of the Government’s reply. In regard to Recommendations at 
Sl. Nos. 6, 7, 8, 11, 15, 16, 18 and 20, the replies of the Government were of interim 
nature.  Subsequently, the Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers was supposed to make a 
Statement in Lok Sabha regarding the status of implementation of the recommendations 
contained in Seventeenth Report of the Co mmittee during the last winter session of 
Parliament under Direction 73A of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  Despite 
repeated requests and reminders to Department of Fertilizers, the Statement could not be 
made in Lok Sabha during the last winter  session.  Now, the Minister of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers made the Statement regarding status of implementation of recommendations 
contained in the Seventeenth Report of the Committee in the Lok Sabha on 13 th March, 
2008 and in Rajya Sabha on 14th March, 2008. 
   
 The analysis of the Committee of implementation of recommendations by the 
Government has revealed that out of the total 20 Recommendations, the Department 
of Fertilizers have implemented only 6 Recommendations so far.  The implementation 
process in regard to 9 recommendations is in progress.  The Recommendations at Sl. 
Nos. 6, 11, 16, 17 and 18 relating to disbursal of subsidy, finalization of fertilizer 
policy, de -bottlenecking/revamp/modernization of existing urea units, availability of 
natural gas to fertilizer units and revival of sick and loss making and closed fertilizer 

 
 
28 
 
PSUs have not been implemented so far.  The Committee are anguished  to note that 
even after repeated recommendations of the Committee, the Government have not 
come out with a ny specific planning to implement these recommendations.  The 
Committee trust that the Department would take all corrective steps to implement 
these recommendations in future. 
  
 The Committee also recommend that in future the Department should ensure 
that the Statement made by the Minister on each of the original Reports is made 
invariably within the specific period i.e. six months after the presentation of Report to 
Parliament as per Direction 73A of the Direction by Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
   
Reply of the Government 
 
(Rec. Sl. No. 2 – Tenth Five Year Plan Performance) 
As per directions of the Committee, the Department has further analyzed the 
reasons for short utilization of plan outlay and non -implementation of projected 
schemes in time.  The other reasons i n addition to lack of availability of gas can be 
summarized as below : - 
 
i)        M/s. FACT has not been able to achieve their project plan as the 
resources required for implementation of the proposed schemes could not be 
generated by the company.   The plan proposals were to be partially 
implemented from their own  internal  accruals.  However,  this  company  
made  continuous   losses  
throughout the Tenth Plan period, thereby, leaving no surplus resources for 
implementation of the proposed schemes.        
  
ii)         M/s MFL could spend only Rs. 66.86 crore out of projected outlay of Rs 
99 crore due to :- 
            (a) Insufficient allocation of funds under Budgetary Support by 
the Planning Commission. 
            (b)   Continuous losses by Company leading to resource crunch.  

 
 
29 
 
 
iii)      Some of the schemes could not be implemented due to change in 
fertilizer policies for Urea and Phosphatic Fertilizer from 2003 onwards, during 
the Tenth Plan Period.  The schemes, especially, by M/s. RCF and M/s. 
KRIBHCO were proposed in view of the ongoing retention price scheme in 
2002 which was later on substituted with a Group Based New Pricing Scheme 
from April, 2003 onwards. 
 
However, the Ministry has noted the observations of the Standing Committee 
and all the schemes which have been proposed for the Eleventh Plan Period are 
being individually scrutinized for the objective of the scheme and its techno -economic 
feasibility.  The Department has also decided to have a review of Plan Expenditure 
every three months f or all the companies, at the level of AS&FA, to oversee the plan 
expenditure in line with that proposed under the plan.      
  (Rec. Sl. No. 6 – Disbursal of direct subsidy to farmers) 
 The report from FAI on the direct subsidy model was received. The repo rt was 
considered in the Department and it has been found that model is not desirable as it 
leads to increase in administrative costs without any tangible benefit either to the 
Government or to the farmers.  The issue of direct subsidy to farmers and targe ted 
subsidy to small and marginal farmers was also placed for consideration in Group of 
Ministers (GOM), which was constituted under the Chairmanship of Agriculture 
Minister to look into sustainable use of fertilizers and pertinent pricing and subsidy 
issues.  The GOM in its final recommendations has not recommended any change in 
the existing delivery mechanism for fertilizer subsidy through the producers. 
 
 
 

 
 
30 
 
 (Rec. Sl. No. 7 – Nutrient/Feedstock based subsidy to farmers)  
As regards the direct subsidy to farmers, the status is as indicated in the reply 
to Recommendation No. 6.   With regard to nutrient based subsidy, it is submitted that 
the same is under consideration of the Government and no final decision has been 
taken in the matter.  However, nutrient  based pricing of fertilizers has been approved 
by the Government on 12.6.08 and the same is being implemented w.e.f. 18.6.08. 
 
As regards the mechanism to find out the production capacity of the fertilizer 
units and discourage gold plating etc., it is sub mitted that the installed capacities of 
urea units in the country has already been reassessed at the start of New Pricing 
Scheme in 2003.   After the reassessment, there is no case of hidden capacity in the 
units.    
    
 (Rec. Sl. No. 8 – Concession Policy for P&K and SSP fertilizers) 
 Based on the examination of the fresh cost price study conducted by the Tariff 
Commission on Phosphatic and Potassic fertilizers and also the long term approach 
suggested by the Expert Group under the chairmanship of Prof. A bhijit Sen (October, 
2005) on Di Ammonium Phosphate (DAP) and Phosphoric Acid adopted by IMG, the 
policy on concession to decontrolled P & K fertilizers w.e.f. 1.4.2008 is at an advance 
stage of consideration and is expected to be finalized very soon. 
    
 (Rec. Sl. No. 11 – Delay in declaration of the fertilizer policy) 
The Department has noted the concern of the Committee regarding increasing 
import dependence.  To encourage indigenous production in the country by way of 
new capacity additions, the Govern ment is in process of finalizing a policy for new 
investments in the urea sector both within the country and abroad.  The expert 
committee set up under the Chairmanship of Prof.  Abhijit Sen, Member Planning 
Commission to look into the options for new inve stment policies has submitted its 
report on 7.5.08.   The policy based on the recommendations of Prof. Sen Committee 
is expected to be finalized shortly.    
 

 
 
31 
 
It is expected that with the announcement of new investment policy, there will 
be additions to the  existing indigenous capacity leading to reduction in import 
dependence.    
  
           (Rec. Sl. No. 15 – Projects/schemes for benefit of North-Eastern Region) 
        The Department has allocated a sum of Rs. 20 crore for the development of 
North Eastern Region which is 10% of the annual plan fund of Rs. 200 crore for the 
year 2008-09.     
The TEFR for revamp/ brownfield plant at Namrup is under consideration of 
Planning Commission.  
  
 (Rec. Sl. No. 16 – De-bottlenecking/revamping/modernization and  
 expansion of fertilizer units) 
Under the New Pricing Scheme Stage III effective w.e.f. 1.10.06, the 
requirement of Government approval for debottleneck/revamp projects has been done 
away with.  The companies are expected to take their own commercial decision s 
based on the provisions under New Pricing Scheme Stage III for addition of new 
capacities.  
 
Further as indicated in the reply to Recommendation No. 1(11), policy for 
attracting new investments in urea sector is under finalization.  Under the proposed 
New Investment Policy, the revamp of existing urea units is also proposed to be 
encouraged through a new pricing dispensation which will incentivise investments in 
existing urea units.  The new investment policy is also expected to encourage 
expansion of fer tilizer units, as a separate pricing dispensation is proposed for such 
capacity additions.    
 
 

 
 
32 
 
   (Rec. Sl. No. 18 – Revival of closed fertilizer units) 
 As regards the revival of closed and loss making fertilizes units, expeditious 
steps are being taken and the process of obtaining the necessary approvals are under 
various stages of implementation, which are briefly described as under:- 
 
 In respect of Barauni unit of HFCL and Ramagundam unit of FCIL, the National 
Fertilizers Ltd. (NFL) has got Techno Ec onomic Feasibility Report (TEFR) prepared 
through  PDIL.  The TEFR which has been received in the Department on  27th June 
2008 is under examination.   
 In respect of Talcher unit and Sindri Unit of FCIL as well as Durgapur unit of 
HFCL, the Rashtriya Chem icals & Fertilizers Ltd. (RCF) has got the TEFR prepared 
through PDIL. The reports which have been received in the Department on 27th June 
2008 are under examination.  
 In respect of Gorakhpur unit of FCIL, KRIBHCO has shown interest in its 
revival and the  TEFR which are already been prepared  will be updated and further 
action would be taken after finalization of the new investment policy of the 
Government.    
Regarding the availability of gas and obtaining of in -principle approvals for 
funds as necessary,  a draft Note for the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) has been circulated for inter -ministerial consultation. The comments of 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (P&NG), M/o. Law and Justice and comments 
of Planning Commission have been rece ived which are under examination.  The draft 
Cabinet Note will be submitted on receipt of comments from other Ministries 
consulted, after incorporating the changes as may be necessary.  
 
 As regards restructuring of FACT, a study was got conducted by consu ltants 
M/s. Deloitte and their report has been received which is under examination.    In 
order to sustain the operations of the company in the interregnum, a one -time grant of 
Rs. 200 crore has been released to the company.     The production units which 
were closed due to financial crisis have since resumed production by the company. 
 

 
 
33 
 
 For financial restructuring of Madras Fertilizers Ltd. (MFL) a study by the 
Consultants M/s. Deloitte was commissioned by the company and their report is 
expected to be rec eived soon.   The recommendations will be included in the Draft 
Note under preparation for approval of the CCEA.  
 
  As regards PPCL, the Patna High Court vide order dated 12.7.2007 has 
ordered the company to be wound up and an Official Liquidator has been  appointed by 
the Court.  The Official Liquidator has taken over the assets of the company and 
consequently the Board of Directors has ceased to exist.  However, options are being 
explored for revival of the Amjhore Mines of the company, through an other P SU 
namely FAGMIL.  
 
(Rec. Sl. No. 20 – ‘Sankat Haran Bima Yojana Policy, Scheme for 
 farmers) 
A copy of the report has been circulated to fertilizer manufacturers inviting their 
comments / suggestions regarding replicability of the scheme and on the 
recommendations of the report. 
 
 (Para 7 of Rec. Sl. No. 1 – Statement made by Minister on original Report) 
Department will ensure that in future the statement made by the Minister on 
each of the original Reports will be made within the specific period i.e. 6 mo nths after 
the presentation of Report to Parliament as per direction 73 -A of the direction by 
Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
 
 
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
 

 
 
34 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
 The Committee note that during the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002 -2007), there 
has been a shortfall in utilization of plan funds and the Department of Fertilizers had 
given various reasons for non -utilization of funds during this period.  The total plan 
outlay for the 10 th Plan period was Rs.5900 crore against the above outlay, the actual 
expenditure was only Rs.2,383.11 crore, which is even less than 50% of the total plan 
outlay.  The Committee are unhappy to note that during the Tenth Plan period, there 
was a shortfall in utilization of funds in almost all the major projects/schemes being 
undertaken by various PSUs under the administrative control of Department of 
Fertilizers resulting into continuous failure in achieving the target fixed for Tenth Plan 
period.  The reasons given by Department for under -utilization of funds are (i) non -
availability of gas for Hazira Expansion Project of KRIBHCO and Thal Expansion 
project of RCF; (ii) Repatriation of Government of India’s equity by IFFCO as IFFCO is 
no more a Coo perative under Department of Fertilizers; and (iii) Closure of Fertilizer 
Corporation of India (FCI).   As regards the FACT, there was no internal generation of 
funds for investment as planned at the outset of Tenth Plan as such there was 
constraints of fu nds.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that re -appropriation of 
funds from one scheme to another should be carried out, so that the amount allocated 
to the Department is fully utilized in the particular financial year. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During the Tenth Plan period, there was a shortfall of expenditure for the 
reasons already stated.  However, as recommended, during the Eleventh   Plan, the 
PSUs are being separately  advised to  plan and complete the schemes  in a time  
bound  manner so that if needed, the  re-appropriation of  funds from   one scheme to 
another scheme can be  carried  out  so  that  the  amount   allocated under  the  
annual  plan is  fully  utilized during the relevant financial year itself. 
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
 

 
 
35 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
The Committee note that the plan Budget proposal of the Department of 
Fertilizers was discussed in the Planning Commission.  The Planning Commission 
had ag reed with the proposals of the Department in respect of Internal and Extra 
Budgetary Resources (IEBR) generated by PSUs, but they have provided a Gross 
Budgetary Support (GBS) of Rs.200.00 crore against the projected requirement of 
Department of Rs.1031.72  crore.   Against the projected requirement of Rs.800.00 
crore for payment of capital subsidy towards conversion of FO/LSHS plants to Gas in 
2008-09, only Rs.150 crore has been allocated which is inadequate to initiate the 
conversion projects in the coming  year.  In view of the above, it has been decided to 
explore alternative means of financing the conversion projects.  Accordingly, an 
alternate scheme for provision of conversion subsidy in place of capital subsidy to 
incentivise and expedite conversion of  FO/LSHS plants is under active consideration 
of the Department.  
 
The Committee also note that the fund provided under various heads under the 
Plan and Non -Plan expenditure has not been utilized.  However, the Committee 
desired that the fund utilization a nd the expenditure under various heads should 
improve in 2008 -09.   The Budget estimates for the year 2008 -09 may be made 
accordingly.  The Committee feel and recommend the Department of Fertilizers to 
strengthen the monitoring mechanism so that the PSU un der the Department are able 
to implement their programme effectively by proper utilization of fund by each PSU 
during each year of the Eleventh Plan so that real benefit should reach the people.  
Reply of the Government 
In order to monitor expenditure of p lan funds on the approved schemes of the 
PSUs, the physical output and outcomes of the schemes/programmers are reviewed 
in the quarterly review meetings held regularly in the Department.   In addition, the 
Department has also undertaken to review Plan expe nditure of all the companies 
every three months at the level of Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser so as to 
ensure that there is no shortfall in utilisation of plan fund vis -à-vis the plan targets.  

 
 
36 
 
The mechanism is expected to result in higher utili sation of plan funds during the 
current financial year. 
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
The Committee note that there has been an increase in the deman d of 
fertilizers in the last few years with urea consumption in the current year estimated to 
be approximately 240 lakh tones. The increase in consumption of fertilizers is 
expected to continue in the Eleventh Plan period with the demand of urea projected at 
287.55 lakh tones in 2011 -12.  Similarly, the demand projected for DAP at 95.1 lakh 
tones, for complex fertilizers at 93.30 lakh tones,  for SSP at 45.6 lakh tones and for 
MOP 37.40 lakh tones in 2011 -12.  The Committee also note that  various steps hav e 
been taken by the Department of Fertilizers to meet the projected demand for urea 
and phosphatic fertilizers  during the 11 th Plan period viz., implementation of Stage III 
of NPS w.e.f. 1st October, 2006 to 31st March 2010, conversion of non-gas based urea 
units in the country to gas with a definite time frame, capacity addition in the existing 
urea units, revival of seven urea units of HFC and FCI and setting up of joint venture 
projects abroad where abundant reserves of gas is available.  The Department  has 
also informed that steps are also being taken by the Government to ensure monitoring 
of fertilizers availability up to the block level in all parts of the country.  While 
appreciating the efforts made by the Department for meeting the demand of fertil izer 
by increasing indigenous production through availability of gas and strengthening the 
delivery mechanism, the Committee would like that godowns should be established at 
block level and distribution of fertilizers to farmers is monitored from block lev el.  The 
Committee understand that further distribution of fertilizers especially urea from block 
level is the prerogative of the State Government even though the Department cannot 
escape from its responsibility to provide fertilizers to farmers as they may have to face 
the brunt in case of non-availability of fertilizers to farmers.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should devise a mechanism in coordination with the 

 
 
37 
 
State Governments for monitoring the fair distribution of fertilizer s from block level in 
order to ensure the transparency in distribution system. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The contents have been noted. The Department has been impressing upon the 
State Governments to upload the information relating to block -wise requiremen t / 
supply plan of urea on the web -based Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) to monitor 
its availability at block level.  
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.7) 
 
The Committee observe that due to outdated machinery and old age 
technology as in the case of BVFCL about which the committee were apprised during 
their study tour, consumption of energy is more which is ultimately responsible for the 
rise in the cost of fertilizers resulting into the cost of subsidy.  As such, it is imperative 
that Government should also ponder over the root cause of increasing subsidy bill in 
indigenous produc tion and try to plug the loopholes and revamp the system.  The 
Committee feel that increase in the subsidy amount is not the permanent solution 
rather the Department should go into the root cause of high subsidy bill and 
accordingly modernize the existing machinery /technology.  
 
Reply of the Government 
As indicated in our reply to the recommendation No.6, the sharp increase in 
subsidy bill is mainly due to sharp increase in international price of fertilizer inputs and 
finished fertilizers coupled with the constant selling price of subsidized fertilizers in the 
country. Steady increase in consumption of fertilizers have also contributed towards 
increase in subsidy bill. 
 

 
 
38 
 
As regards BVFCL, it is submitted that the units in BVFCL are very low 
capacity units ba sed on old technology, leading to low energy efficiency.  The low 
efficiency  do impact the cost of production of urea in these units.  However, the 
average cost of production from the two units in Namrup is estimated at Rs.10000/ - 
PMT of urea for the year  2007-08, as compared to the average cost of production of 
indigenous urea at Rs.10425/ - in 2007-08.  It also needs to be noted that the import 
price of urea currently is more than Rs.25000/-PMT. 
 
 In above context and keeping in view the location  of Namr up units in the 
North-Eastern part of the country, the production of BVFCL is crucial towards meeting 
the demand in North Eastern region of the country.  Nevertheless, there is a case for 
improving the energy efficiency in BVFCL.  The same is being taken u p separately 
with  the company for making the necessary  investments  required towards 
improvement of energy efficiency in the units. 
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
 The Committee note that fertilizer bonds are issued by Ministry of Finance in 
lieu of cash release of fertilizer subsidy.  The Secretary, Department of Fertiliz ers 
apprised the committee during the discussions that Ministry of Finance had issued 
first trenche of Fertilizer Bonds.  However, the fertilizer industry has been unwilling to 
take Fertilizer Bonds in lieu of cash as it has additional financial implicatio ns for the 
companies as the industry feels that bonds can be traded only at discounted rates.  
Moreover the tenure of Bond is too long.  The Department of Fertilizers has, therefore, 
requested the Ministry of Finance to provide cash allocation for release of fertilizer 
subsidy in future. The Department has also requested for a shorter period bonds as 
demanded by the fertilizer industry.  As stated by the Secretary, Department of 

 
 
39 
 
Fertilizers during the course of evidence that discounted rate of bond at 7 to 8% is 
bothering industry due to that there is nil investment in the fertilizer sector. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizer should take up 
this issue with the Ministry of Finance in right earnest and resolve the issue to th e 
satisfaction of fertilizer industries.  The Committee also recommend that the concerted 
efforts should be made by the Government to minimise the subsidy dues so that the 
same are not carried forward in the coming years. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DoF has taken up the issue with Ministry of Finance for additional allocation of 
funds for release of fertilizer subsidy in 2008 -09 in cash and not bonds.  The effort is 
being made to get adequate allocation so that minimum subsidy dues are carried over 
to next year. 
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that the payment of subsidy to fertilizer industries is not 
made in time.  The Committee, there fore, recommend that the payment of subsidy 
should be made in time.  The Committee are of the view that fertilizers industries 
should not be deprived of their money which they have invested and forced to sell the 
fertilizers at the reduced price which is m uch lower than the actual price.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should not make nay 
inordinate delay in the payment of subsidy. 
   
Reply of the Government 
 
 The payment of fertilizer subsidy is a continuous process and the DoF is 
making all efforts to release fertilizer subsidy to fertilizer companies on time, subject to 
availability of budget.   Further, the matter is being regularly taken up with the 

 
 
40 
 
Competent Authority for additional allocation of funds to meet the requirement o f 
fertilizer subsidies.  
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
 The Committee have observed during their field visits that there has been non -
availability of  fertilizers in many parts of the country.  However, the Committee has 
been apprised by the Ministry that the availability of urea, which is the only fertilizer 
under partial movement control of Government, remained satisfactory throughout the 
Kharif 2007 season as well as during the current Rabi 2007 -08.  The Committee have 
also been informed that every effort is made by the Department of Fertilizers to see 
that atleast 50% of the months’ requirement is available in the beginning of the month 
and the balan ce 50% is supplied during the first fortnight of the month.  The 
Committee also note that preparation of monthly supply plan, payment of subsidy to 
fertilizer companies only on reaching fertilizers to each District, compensation of 
freight based on actual road and rail heads, Fertilizer Monitoring System(FMS), 
strengthening the State Institutional Agencies and assessment of demand at Block 
level are some of the effective steps taken by the Department in this direction.  In 
addition to this, Secretary, Depar tment of Fertilizers during his evidence before the 
Committee stated that from June 2008 onwards they will be able to send the fertilizers 
to the Block level.  He further stated that they are also making efforts to see that the 
entire requirement of the Bl ock for the month of June, 2008 is made available by the 
end of May, 2008 itself.  While appreciating the steps taken by the Government for 
timely availability of fertilizers in all parts of the country in the coming years, the 
Committee feel that a realis tic action plan be formulated and implemented in a time 
bound manner so that fertilizer is actually made available to farmers for the Rabi and 
Kharif crops.  The Committee are happy to note that the Department of Fertilizers has 
taken initiative to supply the fertilizers at Block level from June, 2008 onwards.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that an effective coordination and monitoring 
mechanism be evolved to implement this system successfully so that the availability 

 
 
41 
 
of fertilizers should not remain in official records only but it reaches to the masses 
actually.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department has been impressing upon the State Governments to upload 
the information relating to block -wise requirement / supply plan of Urea,DAP, MOP 
and complex fertilizers on the web-based Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) and also 
to ensure that fertilizer actually reaches  every block within the state as per the supply 
plan. As on date 11 states have prepared block level supply plan for all fertilizers for 
the month of July, 2008 and also uploaded the information on FMS.  The DOF is 
vigorously pursuing with other states also and by July end, all states would be in a 
position to prepare block -wise supply plan every month and to ensure movement of 
fertilizers as per block level supply plan. 
 
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
 The states of North East are facing difficulties of movement and transportation 
of fertilizers in certain parts of the States.  The per tonne cost of transportation has 
also been exceedingly high as compared to the rest of the country.  These are the 
major bottlenecks in supplying of urea to these States in time.  The Committee note 
that as per the information furnished by the Department, Government have decided to 
reimburse the freight for carrying urea on actual basis through a Special Freight 
Reimbursement Sc heme for these States.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department of Fertilizers should evaluate the success of this scheme from 
time to time and to see the result and efficacy of the scheme with a view to 
implementing it in remote and hilly areas also. 
 

 
 
42 
 
 The Committee  has been apprised that in North Eastern States availability of 
urea in all the months of the year is always more than the assessed requirement 
except in Arunachal Pradesh.  As there is limited warehousing in Arunachal Pradesh, 
Brhamputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL) has been supplying urea to 
the dealers of Arunachal Pradesh on regular basis from Tezpore and North 
Lakhimpore as nodal points.  The full requirement of the State can be supplied by 
BVFCL alone.  Despite several requests, Arunachal Pradesh has lifted only 163 MT of 
urea against their requirement of 500 MT during the last six months.  The Committee 
also note that to maintain the mandatory buffer stocks in North Eastern States 
specifically in Arunachal Pradesh, a proposal for creation of buffer stock in the North 
Eastern States will be examined in consultation with BVFCL and the State 
Governments. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that sufficient warehousing capacity be 
created in Arunachal Pradesh t o reduced its dependence on neighbouring States as 
the transport factilities in the North Eastern States are not adequate and cost effective 
as in other parts of the country.  The Committee also recommend that the Department 
should take up the matter with the Governments of North Eastern States to maintain a 
mandatory buffer stock in the North Eastern States on priority basis in consultation 
with BVFCL and State Governments.  The Committee further recommend that 
warehouses for fertilizers may either be cons tructed by the BVFCL in case 
Government of Arunachal Pradesh does not establish the same or godowns may be 
constructed by sharing the mutually agreed amount by BVFCL and the Government of 
Arunachal Pradesh. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The contents have bee n noted. The matter is being explored with the State 
Governments in the North East and  M/s. BVFCL.     
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 

 
 
43 
 
(Please see Para No. 25  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
The Committee note that at present 72 small and medium scale fertilizer units in 
the Department of Fertilizers are engaged in operation and producing Single Super 
Phosphate (SSP).  Presently DAP, MOP, SSP and 11 grades of complex fertilizers 
covered under the Concession Scheme on decontrolled P & K fertilizers. In regard to 
availability of Single Super Phosphate at a uniform price across the country, the 
Department is considering a proposal fo r a uniform all India Maximum Retail Price 
(MRP) of SSP.  This forms a part of the input based concession policy on SSP, which 
is on advanced stage of finalization. The Committee also note that the Department is 
also considering to provide freight on transportation to all the fertilizers, including SSP 
on actual basis. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should 
undertake an effective long term planning to ensure early finalization of the proposal 
regarding concession on SSP with input pr ices.  The Committee desire that for the 
interests of poor and marginal farmers State Governments should also be consulted 
in this regard. The Committee would also like Department to complete the process of 
providing freight on transportation to all fertil izers on actual basis without any loss of 
time so as to enable manufacturers to supply fertilizers in all parts of the country 
especially in hilly and remote areas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
At present, 78 SSP manufacturing units are covered under the Conc ession 
Scheme. Department of Fertilizers has announced revised Concession Scheme for 
Single Super Phosphate (SSP) fertilizer for 2008 -09 on 30.04.2008 w.e.f. 1.5.2008.  
Accordingly, the following decisions have been taken: 
(a) Uniform all India MRP of SSP has been announced at Rs.3400/ - per 
metric tonne (PMT) for powdered SSP. The MRP of the granulated SSP 
would be higher by Rs.400/ -PMT. For boronated SSP, the 

 
 
44 
 
manufacturers/marketers are allowed to charge additional 10% of the 
MRP of SSP.  
 
(b) Department of Fertil izers has decided to provide separate rate of 
concession for SSP manufactured based on indigenous and imported 
Rock Phosphate. The base concession rate for SSP manufactured 
using indigenous Rock Phosphate would be Rs.3658/- PMT and for SSP 
manufactured using imported Rock Phosphate would be Rs.5630/ -PMT. 
For SSP manufactured using both indigenous and imported Rock 
Phosphate, the rates of concession would be settled in proportion to the 
production of SSP through the use of the same respectively. The final 
rates of concession will be announced based on the average of low and 
high C&F prices for the preceding month published in FMB or the actual 
weighted average of the imported Sulphur and imported Rock 
Phosphate arrived in the same period. 
 
(c) The entire SSP shal l be marketed by large producers manufacturing 
more than 1 lakh MTPA of SSP or through NPK/Urea manufacturers 
who are already covered under the Concession Scheme and having a 
wide marketing network in the country. 11 manufacturers of SSP have 
been found to producing SSP more than 1 lakh MTPA. 
 
(d) The manufacturers/marketers of SSP will be entitled to receive ‘On 
Account’ payment of 85% (90% with Bank Guarantee) of the claims on 
the basis of arrival/receipt of fertilizers in a district of a state duly 
certified by the Statutory Auditor of the marketer. The balance claims 
would be released on the expiry of the 30 days from the generation of 
the claims. The State Governments are required to send certification of 
receipt/arrival of the entire quantity of SSP. In th ose cases where 
concession has been availed by the manufacturers/marketers but later 
found to be malafide, recovery of ten times of concession would be 
made. 

 
 
45 
 
 
(e) It has been decided to monitor details of raw 
materials/production/dispatch and receipt of SSP in  the districts under 
the Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) with effect from 1.5.2008. 
 
      As regards the proposal to provide freight on transportation to all fertilizers on 
actual basis, the same is being implemented separately. 
 
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
The Committee note that in line with the Common Minimum Programme of the 
Government, the possibilities of revival of FCIL, HFCL and PPCL are being explored.   
A proposal was submitted to the board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises 
(BRPSE) for obtaining ‘in principle’ approval in respect of FCIL and HFCL.  As 
regards PPCL, the feasibility of reviving the Amjhore Pyrite mines  is be ing examined.  
The Committee also note that some of the viable fertilizer PSUs/Cooperatives like 
RCF, NFL and KRIBHCO have expressed their interest in the revival of these Units.  
Timely availability and connectivity of gas and allocation of requisite fund s are the 
main constraints for revival of  closed units.  In regard to availability of gas, Group of 
Ministers (GoM) in their meeting have assured that gas would be made available to 
meet the requirements of fertilizer Industry.  Regarding allocation of fu nds, 
Department of Fertilizers has sought an allocation of Rs.5000 crore under 11th Plan as 
Gross Budgetary Support (GBS).  The Committee recommend  that approved 
revival/proposals should be implemented within a time bound manner.  The 
Committee also desir e that the Department of Fertilizers should pursue the matter 
seriously with the Planning Commission for allocation of requisite funds from time to 
time for early finalization of financing model for revival of closed fertilizer PSUs.  The 
Committee, in their earlier Reports, have repeatedly been recommending that fertilizer 
sector should be given top priority in the allocation of gas.  The Committee is of the 
view that this matter is serious and desire that immediate corrective steps should be 

 
 
46 
 
taken by the Department of Fertilizers to ensure that adequate gas should be made 
available to fertilizer Industries to meet their requirements in a time bound manner.  
Besides ensuring the adequate supply of gas to fertilizer sector, revival package 
should emphasize o n up gradation of technology, technical know -how, incentives for 
skilled workers and engineers.  Surplus and unskilled workers which are liability for 
the industry should be given retirement under Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) 
and adequate funds should  be made available for providing money required for VRS 
to the companies.  As submitted to the Committee during their study visit to BVFCL at 
Guwahati the VRS evoked poor response from workers as they reluctant to leave the 
job, the Committee are of the vi ew that Department should formulate a policy in 
consultation with PSUs and Ministry of Finance for surplus and unskilled workers.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government has already initiated steps for revival of closed fertilizers Units 
and appropriate plan allocations are expected to be available at the time of final 
decision in the matter.  As emphasized by the Committee in its Reports, the question 
of allocation of gas to the fertilizers sector on priority basis has also been taken up 
with the Ministr y of Petroleum and N.G. from time to time and Department of 
Fertilizers has been assured of availability of gas on a priority basis. 
 
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) vide their OM No.2(32)/97 -
DPE(WC)GL-XXII dated 05.06.2000 has issued guidelines for  Voluntary Retirement 
Scheme (VRS) for enterprises that make marginal profits or loss making enterprises.  
As per the guidelines, the managements of PSUs shall introduce these schemes with 
the approval of their Board and the Administrative Ministries.  In implementing the 
VRS Scheme, managements shall ensure that it is extended primarily to such 
employees whose services may be dispenses without detriment to the company.  
Care will  be exercised to ensure that highly skilled and qualified workers are not 
given the option.  As there shall be no recruitment against vacancies arising due to 
VRS, it is important that the organization is not denuded of talent.  In view of this, in 
case of M/s BVFCL, the company will be advised to submit a proposal to Department 

 
 
47 
 
of Fertilizers for VRS/VSS scheme with the approval of their Board.  The Department 
of Fertilizers will examine the proposal in consultation with Department of Public 
Enterprises (DPE) for implementing the scheme and with Minister of Finance for 
providing necessary funds. 
  [M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
 From the facts placed before the Committee about the performances of 
individual Undertakings/Cooperat ive under the administrative control of the 
Department of Fertilizers, the Committee find that KRIBHCO, RCF and NFL are profit 
earning units.   The other PSUs viz.   FACT, MFL and BVFCL are loss making units 
and FCI, HFC and PPCL are closed units.   The Co mmittee note that most of the 
PSUs are suffering losses year after year as their projects are not completed in a time 
bound period and remain under various stages of implementation and no major 
project has been undertaken by them.   The Committee found tha t non-availability of 
assured quantity of gas, non-finalization of New Investment Policy, under examination 
of policy relating to conversion of non -gas based fertilizer units to gas based units, 
delay in finalization of financial restructuring proposal and  revival proposals are the 
main factors responsible for their losses.   However, some initiatives have been taken 
to examine the feasibility to revive/ set up new plants at the existing sites of HFCL, 
FCIL and PPCL.   The Committee desire that the Departme nt of Fertilizers should 
review and monitor the working of all PSUs on a regular basis and to give suitable 
directions to them for taking remedial measures.  The Committee also desire that 
urgent steps should be taken by the Department for early finalizati on of the revival 
and restructuring proposals.   The Committee recommend that the Department of 
Fertilizers should tackle both the issues regarding availability of gas and finalization of 
New Investment and conversion policies at priority basis.   
 
Reply  of  the Government 
 

 
 
48 
 
 The Department of Fertilizers is reviewing and monitoring the performance of 
all PSUs under it on a regular basis through the Quarterly Review Meetings (QRMs) 
at the level of Secretary (Fert.).   The working of all PSUs are also being monitored 
through the mechanism of Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) entered into with 
the respective PSUs every year, by which the performance  parameters are reviewed 
to see whether the targets are achieved.    
 
 Suitable directions are issued to the PSU s wherever deficiencies are noticed, 
to take remedial measures and to improve the performance.  
 
 As regards the revival and restructuring proposals, expeditious steps are being 
taken and the process of obtaining the necessary approvals are under various s tages 
of implementation, which is briefly described as under:- 
 
 In respect of Barauni unit of HFCL and Ramagundam unit of FCIL, the 
National Fertilizers Ltd. (NFL) has got Techno Economic Feasibility Report 
(TEFR) prepared through  PDIL.       
 
 In respect of Talcher unit and Sindri Unit of FCIL as well as Durgapur 
unit of HFCL, the Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd. (RCF) has got the 
TEFR prepared through PDIL, which are being updated in conformity with the 
present market conditions.    
 
 In respect of Gorakhpur unit of FCIL, KRIBHCO has shown interest in its 
revival and the TEFR which are already been prepared  will be updated and 
further action would be taken after finalization of the new investment policy of 
the Government.    
 
Regarding the availab ility of gas and obtaining of in -principle approvals 
for funds as necessary, a draft  Note for the Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs (CCEA) has been circulated for inter-ministerial consultation.  
 

 
 
49 
 
 As regards restructuring of FACT, a study was got con ducted by 
consultants M/s. Deloitte and their report has been received which is under 
examination. In order to sustain the operations of the company in the 
interregnum, a one -time grant of Rs. 200 crore has been released to the 
company. The production unit s which were closed due to financial crisis have 
since resumed production by the company. 
 
 For financial restructuring of Madras Fertilizers Ltd. (MFL) a study by the 
Consultants M/s. Deloitte was commissioned by the company and their report 
is expected to be received soon.   The recommendation will be included in the 
Draft Note under preparation for approval of the CCEA.  
 
 As regards BVFCL, the renovation of the plants is being implemented to 
enhance the capacity utilization by the company.     
 
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
 
 
  

 
 
50 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE  
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------NIL ----------- 

 
 
51 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl.  No. 4) 
 
 The Committee note that the installed capacity and production of Nitrogen and 
Phosphate has reached a level of 120.61 lakh MT and 56.59 lakh MT respectively as 
on 31 st January, 2008.  The Committee also note that the target for indigenous 
production of fertilizers is fixed in consultation with the fertilizer industry and the 
production plan for the year indicated by them.  To achieve the targeted production of 
urea in the country, the Government has announced the New Pricing Scheme (NPS) 
Stage-III on 8 th March, 2007, under which the production of urea beyond 100% of 
reassessed capacity in the existing units has been incentivised.  The Committee 
recommend that incentive should also be given to those companies who have 
achieved targets more than 90 per cent.  The Committee further note that concerted 
efforts are being made by the Department to ac hieve full capacity utilization of all 
major fertilizers in the coming years.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
process regarding revival of closed/sick fertilizer units should be completed at the 
earliest and the Government should finalize the var ious policy decisions pending with 
them without any delay to increase the indigenous production of urea and to achieve 
the production targets fixed for the 11th Plan period. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
The concern of the Committee has been noted by the Gove rnment.  As 
regards, the incentive to the companies for production beyond 90% of their 
reassessed capacity, it is submitted that the production of urea in the country is more 
than 100% of the installed capacity in the country.   Further, production beyond 100% 
of installed capacity has already been incentivised under NPS Stage III effective w.e.f.  
1st October, 2006. 

 
 
52 
 
The revival of closed fertilizer units in the country is under active consideration 
of the Government  and Draft proposal for budgetary suppor t from Government 
towards revival is currently under inter-ministerial consultations.   
 
As regards the new policy for attracting investments in urea sector, the status 
is indicated in the reply to Recommendation No. 1(11).  Further, a new policy for 
encouraging production and application of fortified/coated fertilizers has been 
approved by Government and notified w.e.f. 1st June, 2008.  
 
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
The Committee note that during the last few years the fertilizer subsidy bill has 
increased substantially mainly because of sharp increase in international pric es of 
fertilizer leading to increase in delivery costs of fertilizers at the farmgate level.  An 
additional allocation of Rs. 8985.60 crores(net) is required in the current year for 
reimbursement of all subsidy bills to fertilizer units pending for the yea r 2007-08.  The 
Committee were informed that the third Supplementary Demands for Grants (2007 -
08) of the Department is likely to be only Rs. 4000 crore which would result in carry 
over liability of approximately Rs.5000 crore from the year 2007 -08 to 2008 -09 
towards payment of fertilizer subsidy.  As far as the year 2008 -09 is concerned in 
January, 2008, the Department of Fertilizer would require Rs. 60,000 crore to meet 
the subsidy requirement.  Against the current assessment of Rs.90.000 crore the 
availability in the Budget Estimates (2008-09) is only Rs.31,000 crore. 
 
The Committee are surprised to note that there has been a tremendous 
increase in the subsidy amount during the last five year.  It has gone almost six times 
since 2004 -05.  The Committee are  apprehensive about the authenticity of subsidy 

 
 
53 
 
amount to the tune of Rs. 90,000 crore as submitted by the Secretary, Department of 
Fertilizers.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that industry -wise break up of the 
subsidy amount be furnished to them and  the issue regarding the quantum of such a 
huge subsidy amount should be revaluated.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that after revaluating the subsidy amount, the Government should make sufficient 
budgetary provision to meet the fertilizer subsidy bi ll including the carryover from the 
previous years.  The Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance should also be 
apprised to the concern of the Committee in this regard.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Department of Fertilizers should purs ue the matter with the Planning 
Commission so that the adequate amount is allocated to the Department of Fertilizers 
for meeting the subsidy bill during the first  year of 11th Plan period. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is submitted that the substantial i ncrease in the amount of subsidy over last 
3-4 years is mainly on account of sharp increase in prices of fertilizer inputs and 
finished fertilizers in the international market.  This has led to increase in the delivered 
cost of fertilizers at farm gate lev el and consequently increase in per tonne subsidy 
released on fertilizers.  It may be noted that the subsidy on fertilizers is the difference 
between the normative delivered cost of subsidised fertilizers at farm gate level and 
the selling prices of these fertilizers notified by the Government.  The selling prices of 
these fertilizers have remained constant since 28.2.02  till 17 th June, 2008 and are as 
below:- 
 

 
 
54 
 
Maximum retail prices of fertilizers, by product 
Fertilizer From 1st 
March 2002 
onwards 
2008/09 as on  
1.5.2008  
2008/09 
w.e.f 
18.6.2008 
(Rs./tonne product) 
Urea 4830 4830 4830 
DAP 9350 9350 9350 
MOP 4455 4455 4455 
SSP Fixed by State 
Government 
3400 3400 
10-26-26 8360 8360 7197 
12-32-16 8480 8480 7637 
14-28-14 8300 8300 7050 
14-35-14 8660 8660 8185 
15-15-15 6980 6980 5121 
16-20-0 7100 7100 5875 
17-17-17 8100 8100 5804 
19-19-19 8300 8300 6487 
20-20-0 7280 7280 5343 
23-23-0 8000 8000 6145 
28-28-0 9080 9080 7481 
 
    
  As can be seen from the table above, the prices of complex fertil izers has 
been further reduced w.e.f. 18th June, 2008.   
 
 On the other hand, the prices of fertilizer inputs and finished fertilizers have 
increased sharply over last four years.  The prevailing average international  
price of fertilizers over last few years is as below:- 
          USD/PMT 
Year DAP MOP Urea 
C&F(FOB US 
Gulf+freight 
Tampa Mundra) 
FOB(FSU) FOB(Arabian 
Gulf) 
2003-04 239.10 97.37 154.44 
2004-05 277.69 133.62 215.55 
2005-06 296.04 158.75 245.77 
2006-07 329.40 172.07 256.72 
2007-08 657.57 263.27 341.20 
May 08 prices 1270.00 540.00 645.00 
 

 
 
55 
 
 There has also been a continuous increase in consumption of fertilizers and 
consequently sales of fertilizers in last four years, which is as below : 
Year wise sales of fertilizers      (LMT) 
Year  2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 % increase 
in 2007-08 
over 2004-
05 
UREA 205.47 221.91 244.85 261.67 27.3 
DAP 60.79 67.51 69.24 75.55 24.2 
MOP 23.14 28.01 23.93 27.82 20.2 
 
 In view of the above, the estimated requirement of  subsidy for 2008 -09 is Rs. 
95013 crore(net) including Rs. 5000 crore carry over from 2007 -08.  The above 
estimates have been intimated to Ministry of Finance with all details, to make 
available adequate funds for release of subsidy during 2008-09. 
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.11) 
 
         The  Committee  observed that the Department of Fertilizers maintain buffer 
stock of urea through State Institutional Agencies/ Fertilizer companies upto 5% of the 
seasonal demand in only 14 major fertilizer consuming States. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that in view of the increased demand of fertilizers, the simila r 
initiative should be taken by the Department in the remaining States/ Union Territories 
also to ensure uninterrupted supply of fertilizer to all the States and Union Territories. 
Reply of the Government 
        The contents have been noted. 
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
c 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
 
56 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
 The Committee note that the import of urea on Government account is made to 
bridge the gap between assessed demand and supply.  The State Trading 
Enterprises arrange imports of urea on behalf of Go vernment.  The Committee find 
that the indigenous production of urea is less than the requirements of urea and the 
requirements beyond indigenous production have to be met through higher imports.  
Similarly, the demand of DAP has been increasing during the  years whereas 
indigenous production has been almost static due to lack of investment in fertilizer 
sector, leading to increase in import of DAP.  Considering these facts, the committee 
recommend that concerted efforts should be made by the Department to e ncourage 
the investment in fertilizer sector and in the production of fertilizers so as to enhance 
the production capacity of these fertilizers and to reduce the dependence of the 
country on imports.  The Committee are of the view that investment in domest ic 
capacity addition is feasible option to fulfil the burgeoning demand.  The Committee 
feel that investment in fertilizer sector will be forthcoming only, if reasonable rate of 
return on investment, comparable to other investment avenues available in the 
country is ensured.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department is in the process of finalising a New Investment Policy for urea 
sector which is expected to encourage investments and addition of indigenous 
capacities in future.  The policy is proposed to be  finalised based on the 
recommendation of the Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Prof. Abhijit 
Sen, Member, Planning Commission.  The new Policy is expected to provide a 
reasonable rate of return on investments in urea sector.   
 

 
 
57 
 
Further, in phosph atic sector also an import parity based policy has been 
approved on 26.6.08 w.e.f. 1.4.08 to encourage production of phosphatic fertilizers in 
the country and also facilitate possibility of new investments in this sector.   
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.15 
 
 The Committee note that the Government has approved the pricing policy for 
urea units for Stage-III of New Pricing Scheme (NPS) w.e.f. 1.10.2008 to 31.0 3.2010.  
The policy has been formulated keeping in view the recommendations of the Working 
Group set up under the Chairmanship of Dr. Y.K. Alagh.  The main aim of Stage -III of 
NPS is to increase further investment in urea sector, incentivising additional u rea 
production and encouragement for setting up joint venture projects abroad.  The 
committee also note that specific problems submitted by fertilizer companies which 
their units may face under NPS-III have been examined by the Department.  The draft 
proposal for modifications in the provisions under NPS -III to resolve issues raised by 
fertilizer companies is currently under inter -ministerial consultations.  The committee 
recommend that a stable and final policy be formulated at the earliest to implement 
the Stage-III of NPS successfully.  The Committee also recommend that in order to 
achieve the aim of NPS -III, the proposal for suitable modifications in the provisions 
under this scheme be finalised by the Department in a stipulated time bound period.  
The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to take all possible measures so that 
the objectives set under Stage -III of NPS are met.  The Committee also desire that 
the Department of Fertilizers should explore the feasibility of pricing policy based on 
normative parameters away from cost based formula.  The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The provisions of new Pricing Scheme Stage III are currently under 
implementation.  The proposal for modification in the provision under NPS III to 
resolve issues raised by fertilizer companies is under inter -ministerial consultations 

 
 
58 
 
and is expected to be decided shortly.  As regards the feasibility of Pricing Policy 
based on normated parameters is concerned,  a policy for new investments in urea 
sector based on normated parameter like import parity  bench mark is under active 
consideration of the Department and is expected to be decided shortly.  For the 
existing urea units, possibility of normated parameters based poli cy is being explored 
separately.  However, since units are functioning on various feed stock like gas, 
Naphtha, FO/LSHS etc. with wide variation in cost of production, it will take some time 
to evolve equitable policy for all the existing units based on no rmated parameters.   
Possibility of appointment of financial Consultants to look into the matter is also being 
examined in the Department.   
 
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 The Committee note that the policy announced in January, 2004 envisaged the 
creation of addition capacity through debottlenecking/ revamp/modernization of 
Fertilizer Units, provided that the additional production comes from using nat ural 
gas/LNG as feedstock. The Committee also note that as per the information furnished 
by the Department, three expansion projects have not been finalized due to lack of 
confirmed availability of gas.  Further, a policy proposal for incentivizing convers ion of 
FO/LSHS plants is under inter -ministerial consultation.  The Committee further note 
that the policy for new investments in urea sector has not yet been finalized by the 
Government.  In view of the stagnated production capacity and lack of investment  in 
the fertilizer sector, the Committee once again reiterate that the Department of 
Fertilizers should regularly pursue the matter with the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas and other related agencies for allocation of the natural gas to fertilizer 
sector on priority basis as envisaged in the Draft Natural Gas Utilization Policy.  While 
expressing the concern over the inordinate delay in finalization of policy for 
conversion of non -gas based units of gas based units and new investment policy in 
urea sector, the Committee recommend that both the policies may be finalized without 

 
 
59 
 
any further delay.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department has noted the concerns of the committ ee. An Expert 
Committee under Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member(Agriculture) was constituted by the Group  
of Ministers (GOM), which was set up to look into issues relating to fertilizer sector.  
The committee was mandated to examine various options for a  New Inv estment 
Policy in urea sector and make suitable recommendations.  The Committee has 
submitted its final report on 27th May, 2008.   The proposal for New Investment Policy 
is currently under Inter -Ministerial consultation and the same is expected to be 
finalized shortly.  
 
The Policy for conversion of Non -Based Gas Units to gas is also under Inter -
Ministerial consultations and is expected to be finalized shortly. 
 
With regard to allocation of Natural Gas to fertilizer sector, it is to inform that 
the EGOM, o n gas issues, in its meeting held on the 28 th May, 2008, has decided to 
accord  first  priority to existing urea plants in the country  for allocation of gas.  
Further, it has also been decided to accord highest priority to fertilizer sector including 
existing urea units, de -bottlenecking, expansion and revival of closed units, for 
allocation of gas. 
[M/o of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
O.M. No. 5 (3)/2008-FinII dated 16.07.2008] 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI          ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,                   
November 7, 2008                   Chairman, 
Kartika 16, 1930 (Saka)                           Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and  Fertilizers. 

 
 
60 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2008-09) 
 
THIRD SITTING 
(06.11.2008) 
 
 
  The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1500 hours. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  - Chairman  
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Sunil Khan 
3. Shri A. Narendra 
4. Shri Anand Paranjpe 
5. Shri Prasanta Pradhan 
6. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
7. Shri Anantha Venkata Rami Reddy 
8. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
9. Shri D. Venugopal 
10. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma  
Rajya Sabha 
11. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
12. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
13. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
14. shri Raghunandan Sharma 
 
Secretariat   
  
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P. Sreedharan   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.S. Chera    -   Director 
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Deputy Secretary-II 
5. Smt. Balwant Kaur Saimbhi - Under Secretary 
    
  
  

 
 
61 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman w elcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   
 
3. ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
  
4. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on Action Taken 
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report of 
the Committee on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  The draft Report was also adopted by the 
Committee without any amendment. 
 
5. The Committee aut horised the Chairman to make consequential changes, if 
any, arising out of the factual verification of the Reports by the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals and Department of 
Fertilizers) and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
6.  ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
  
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
  
 
 
 
*  Matters not related to this Report 

 
 
62 
 
APPENDIX – II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  contained 
in the Twenty -sixth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2007 -08) on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 18 
 
II Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 
12, 13, 17 and 18) 
 
12 
 Percentage to Total 66.66%   
 
III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s Replies  
 
Nil 
 Percentage of Total Nil 
 
IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 4, 6 and 11)  
 
3 
 Percentage of Total 16.67%  
 
V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 14, 15 and 16) 
  
3 
 Percentage of Total 16.67%  
 
 