SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2005-06) 
 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
AVAILABILITY AND PRICE MANAGEMENT OF 
DRUGS AND PHARMACEUTICALS 
 
 
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker 28.09.2005 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.11.2005. 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  24.11.2005 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2005/Asvina, 1927 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
INTRODUCTION   
REPORT 
 
PART – I 
 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
CHAPTER – I 
Introductory  
 
CHAPTER – II PRICING AND AVAILABILITY OF DRUGS  
(A) Implementation of Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995- 
Pricing of Scheduled Drugs 
(B) Pricing of Non-Scheduled Drugs 
(C) Role and responsibilities of National Pharmaceutical Pricing 
Authority  
Availability of Drugs at affordable prices and use of generic 
drugs  
 
CHAPTER – III (A) DRUGS FOR PUBLIC HEALTH  
(B) Role of State Governments 
(C) Spurious Drugs  
(D) Revival of sick PSUs  
(E) Indian System of Medicines  
CHAPTER – IV SETTING UP OF NATIONAL DRUG AUTHORITY  
 
CHAPTER – V RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT IN THE PHARMA 
SECTOR 
PART – II 
Recommendations /Observations of the Committee  
ANNEXURE 
The First Schedule of DPCO, 1995  
 
APPENDICES 
I Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2004-05) held on 14.09.2004………………………………………. 
II Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2004-05) held on 23.11.2004 ……………………………………… 
III Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2004-05) held on 10.06.2005 …………………………………… 
IV Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2004-05) held on 01.07.2005 ……………………………………… 
V Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2004-05) held on 20.07.2005 ……………………………………… 
VI Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2005-06) held on 27.09.2005…………….………………………… 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2005-06) 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete -  Chairman 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2 Shri Afzal Ansari     
3 Shri Prahlad Joshi   
4 Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
5 Shri Tek Lal Mahato 
6 Shri Punnu Lal Mohale   
7 Shri A.K. Moorthy 
8 Shri P. Rajendran   
9 Shri Anantha Venkata Rami Reddy 
10 Shri Madhusudan Takkala Reddy 
11 Shri Akshyay Pratap Singh  
12 Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
13 Shri V.K. Thummar 
14 Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma   
15 Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava  
16 Shri A.K.S.Vijayan  
17 Shri Bhal Chandra Yadav 
18 Vacant 
19 Vacant 
20 Vacant 
21      Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 22. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
23 Shri Raju Parmar 
24. Shri B.S.Gnanadesikan 
25. Shri Ajay Maroo 
26. Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha 
27. Shri Vasant Chavan 
28. Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
29. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
30. Shri T.R. Zeliang 
31. Vacant 
Secretariat 
1. Shri John Joseph  - Secretary 
2. Shri P. Sreedharan  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Brahm Dutt  - Director 
4. Shri S.C. Kaliraman  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Santosh Kumar  - Committee Officer 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2005-06) 
having been authorised by t he Committee to submit the Report on their behalf 
present this Seventh Report on ‘Avail ability and Price Managem ent of Drugs and 
Pharmaceuticals’. 
 
2.  The subject was selected for exam ination by the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2004-05).  The Committee considered the information 
sought from the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals), the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Ministry of Science & 
Technology and Ministry of Commerce & Industry on the subject.  The Committee 
took evidence of the representatives of  the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) at t heir sittings held on 14 th 
September, 2004,   23rd November, 2004 and 20th July, 2005.   At the sitting of the 
Committee held on 20 th July, 2005 representatives of the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare, Ministry of Science & Technology and Ministry of Commerce & 
Industry also accompanied the representat ives of the Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals.  
 
3. The Committee also heard the views of  the representativ es of All India 
Organisation of Chemicals & Druggist s (AIOCD) and Low Cost Standard 
Therapeutics (LOCOST) at their sitting held on 10 th June, 2005 and 
representatives of All India Drug Action Network (AIDAN), Indian Drug 
Manufacturers Association (IDMA) and Consumer Unity & Trust Society (CUTS) at 
their sitting held on 1st July, 2005. 
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted this  Report at their sitting held on 
27th September, 2005. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Depar tment of Chemicals & Petrochemicals),  
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,  Ministry of Science & Technology, Ministry of 
Commerce & Industry and Non-Government Organisations for placing their views 
before them and furnishing the informa tion desired in connection with the 
examination of the subject. 
  
6. The Committee place on record their deep appreciation for the work done 
by the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers  (2004-05) on the subject.  
  
7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable 
assistance rendered to them by the Officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached 
to the Committee. 
 
 
New Delhi; 
September  27, 2005                       ANANT GANGARAM GEETE 
Asvina  5, 1927 (Saka)                                         Chairman, 
      Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers. 

REPORT 
PART – I 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS 
 
INTRODUCTORY  
 
 
  
With the growth in population,  the need for making drugs and 
pharmaceuticals available at affordable prices to the masses, has become a 
challenge before the nat ion, more particularly when  about 26.03 crore of the 
population is living below poverty line. The prevalent healthcare system in the 
country caters only to the need of about 20 per cent  of t he population and the 
remaining 80 per cent depend on the ex tremely expensive and unaffordable 
private sector. 
 
 
1.2  During the last two decades, the Indian pharmaceutical industry has grown 
considerably and presently it manufacture s drugs and other products valued at 
about Rs. 35,000 crore annually.  Apart from  meeting indigenous requirements, 
the export of drugs and pharmaceuticals were Rs. 16,681 crore as against import 
of Rs. 2,956 crore during the year 2004-05.  India a ccounts for 8% of world’s 
production by volume (4 th rank) and 1.5% by value (13 th rank).  The industry has 
300 large and medium companies and al so about 6000 small scale units.   
However, the availability of  quality products at affordable prices to the poor 
masses is still an objective of the Government which is yet to be achieved fully.  
The Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals (C&PC) under the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers is responsible for planning, development and control of the 
Pharmaceutical industry alongwith ensurin g availability and pric ing of drugs and 
formulations.  Apart from the Department  of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has responsibility of approv al of new drugs, 

import permission, quality cont rol and clinical trials u nder the Drugs & Cosmetics 
Act, 1940.  Besides, State Drug Controlle rs have responsibility for licensing, 
inspection and enforcement under the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940.    
 
1.3  To regulate the drugs and pharmac euticals industry, the Government 
have announced and updated the ‘National Dr ug Policy’ from ti me to time, the 
main mile-stones being as under :- 
(i) On the basis of recommendations of Hathi Committee Report (1975), 
the Government formulated Comprehensive Drug Policy in 1978. 
(ii) Drug Policy, 1986.  
(iii) Modified Drug Policy, 1994.  
(iv) A new Pharma Policy was formula ted by the Government in 2002.  
However, due to the stay order passed by the Karnataka High Court,  
it could not be implemented. The Department of C&PC has filed a 
SLP before the Hon’ble Supreme Court against this order.    
 
1.4   The Committee are informed by the Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals that a Task Force under the Chairmanship of the Principal 
Advisor, Planning Commission has been constituted inter-alia to examine the 
following aspects:- 
(i) To explore various options other than price control for achieving the 
objective of making available life-sa ving drugs at reasonable prices and 
alternately for imposing the price control, if need be. 
(ii) To examine the issue of monitoring of prices and bulk/pooled 
procurement issues of medicines. 
(iii) To deliberate on the concept of  negotiated prices of patented drugs. 
(iv) To explore the issue of debrandi ng of drugs on selective basis. 
(v) Promotion of low cost gener ic drugs in the country. 
(vi) Exemption/reduction in taxes on life saving/essential drugs. 

(vii) Issue of bringing the medicines incl uded in the National List of Essential 
Medicines, 2003, under price control. 
(viii) Strengthening of the r egulatory mechanism both at the Centre and in the 
States. 
(ix) Establishment of a Central Drug Authority. 
After examining the recommendations of the Task Force, a new 
Pharmaceutical Policy will be formulated.     
 
1.5  The Committee (erstwhile  Standing Committee on Petroleum & 
Chemicals) had earlier exami ned the Drug Policy related issues and made their 
recommendations in their 2 nd Report (10 th Lok Sabha- 1993) and 15 th Report                     
(13th Lok Sabha-2001).  The Commi ttee’s examination of t he subject ‘Availability 
and Price Management of Drugs and Pharmac euticals’, as detailed in succeeding 
Chapters, is aimed to further emphas ise the need and impo rtance of making 
quality medicines available to the masses at affordable prices. The Committee’s 
examination mainly covers; 
(i) Implementation of Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995 - Pricing of 
Scheduled Drugs.  
(ii) Pricing of non-Scheduled drugs.  
(iii) Role and responsibility of NPPA. 
(iv) Availability of drugs/medicines. 
(v) Drugs for public health.  
(vi) Spurious drugs.  
(vii) Revival of sick PSUs. 
(viii) Indian system of medicines.  
(ix) Setting up of National Drug Authority.  
(x) Research & Development in the Pharma Sector.  
  
 
 
 

CHAPTER – II 
 
PRICING AND AVAILABILITY OF DRUGS 
 
(A) Implementation of Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995- Pricing of 
Scheduled Drugs 
 
2.1  During the course of  examination the Committee were informed that 
although the Government had some kind of control immediately after the 1962 war 
with China, price-control of drugs through the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 
(DPCO) under the Essential Commodities Act 1955 came in 1970.  Thereafter in 
1970 the Government had price control ov er all drugs.  The Hathi Committee 
appointed by the Government of India and its report submitted in April, 1975 also 
recommended price control and production control.  Therea fter, gradual reduction 
in span of price control in line with econom ic policies of the country started in the 
drug industry also.  Accordingly, the succ essive policies of drugs control since 
1978 have resulted in decontrol of more and more drugs.  In DPCO, 1979, 347 
drugs were under price control which we re reduced to 142 in DPCO, 1987.  
DPCO, 1995 initially kept control on 76 drugs which were further reduced to 74.   
 
2.2.  The DPCO, 1995 was promulgat ed by the Government on the 6 th 
January, 1995 under section 3 of the E ssential Commodities Act, 1955.  The 74 
bulk drugs specified in the First Schedule ( Annexure) of DPCO, 95 as on date  
and the formulations based t hereon are under price control and their prices are 
fixed/revised by the Government/Nati onal Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) in accordance with the provisions of  DPCO, 95.  These drugs have been 
identified for inclusion under price contro l in the DPCO, 95, on the basis of the 
criteria mentioned in  the ‘Modifications in Drug Policy, 1986,’ announced in 
September, 1994,  as under:- 
(i) The criterion of including drug s under price control will be the 
minimum annual turnover of Rs. 400 lakhs. 
 
(ii) Drugs of popular use, in which t here is a monopoly situation will be 
kept under price control.  For this purpose, if for any bulk drug, 
having an annual turnover of Rs. 100 lakhs or more there is a single 
formulator having 90 per cent or mo re market share in the Retail 
Trade (as per ORG) a monopoly sit uation would be considered as 
existing. 
 

(iii) Drugs in which there is sufficient  market competition viz. at least 5 
bulk drug producers and at least 10 formulators and none having 
more than the 40 per cent market share in the Retail Trade (as per 
ORG) may be kept outside the price control.  However, a strict watch 
would be kept on the movem ent of prices as it is expected that their 
prices would be kept in check by t he forces of market competition.  
The Government may determine t he ceiling levels beyond which 
increase in prices would not be permissible. 
 
(iv) Government will keep a close watch on the prices of medicines 
which are taken out of pr ice control.  In case, the prices of these 
medicines rise unreasonably, the Government would take 
appropriate measures, including reclamping of price control. 
 
(v) For applying the above criteria, to  start with, the basis would be the 
data upto 31 st March, 1990 collected for th e exercise of the Review 
of the Drug Policy.  The updating of the data will be done by the 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority. 
 
(vi) Genetically engineered drugs  produced by recombinant DNA 
technology and specific cell/tissue targeted drug formulations will not 
be under price control for 5 years fr om the date of manufacture in 
India. 
 
2.3  On being enquired by the Commi ttee about the working of the Drugs 
(Prices Control) Order 1995, the Department, in a note submitted that the Order 
has been issued under section 3 of the Es sential Commodities Act, 1955.  Under 
the DPCO 1995, the Central Go vernment is empowered to fix/revise the prices of 
Scheduled bulk drugs and formulations ba sed on them.  The Government have 
constituted National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) and delegated these 
powers to it.  NPPA fixes/revises the prices of the Scheduled bulk drugs and 
Scheduled formulations and it also moni tors the prices of non-Scheduled 
formulations in accordance with the prov isions of DPCO 1995.   The State Drugs 
Controllers help NPPA in monitoring the prices and enforcing the provisions of 
DPCO.  The State Governments are also authorized to take action under the 
Essential Commodities Act for violation of  the provisions of the DPCO 1995.  
However, it is generally observed that the stringent action of prosecution under the 
Essential Commodities Act sometimes does not lead to desired results.  Since 
there are no provisions for compounding of offences and no provisions of fine or 
penalties for the violation of the DPCO  in accordance with the Essential 
Commodities Act and the only provisions  available are for prosecution and 
recovery of the overcharged amount,  t he State Governments find the process 
cumbersome for initiating any action.  The Ministry have informed that the prices of 
drugs are therefore not being monitored very effectively at the State level.   

 
2.4  When the Committee asked whether at times NPPA is late in 
revision of prices of formulations in case  of price reduction of  bulk drug/controlled 
formulation and the drug company is benefi ted due to delay, the Department in 
their post evidence reply submitted as under:- 
“The fixation /revision of prices of  bulk drugs is a continuing process 
and is done based on comprehensive Co st Price Study.  Prices are 
fixed/revised under para 3 of DPCO, 1995. In case of non-submission of 
relevant data by manufacturers of Scheduled bulk drug, the prices are fixed 
under para 11 of the DPCO, 1995 based on available data.  In case of 
reduction in the peak rate of custom s duty, the prices of Scheduled bulk 
drugs and derivatives are reduced on suo-motu basis.  Similarly the 
formulation prices are fixed/ revised as and when there is a reduction in the 
notified price of a Scheduled bulk dr ug.  The DPCO, 1995 has a provision 
that manufacturer /formulators would apply for price fixation/revision as and 
when there is a change in the price of a bulk drug within a period of 30 
days.  However, in the case of dow nward revision in the bulk drug price 
seldom a formulator applies for price revision, hence NPPA has to revise 
prices in such cases on suo-moto basis under para 11 of DPCO, 1995.  
 
Keeping in view the large number  of Scheduled formulations, non-
cooperation of the drug manufacturers and limited staff available with NPPA 
and the other procedural requirements, it does take some time in 
fixing/revising the drug prices, although all efforts are made by NPPA in this 
regard.”   
 
2.5  Asked about the action taken to solve the problems being faced in 
implementation of DPCO at State Level and whether there should be special cells 
of DPCO in each State, the Department in their written reply stated as under:- 
 
“The Government constituted a Committee, on 19 th August, 2004, 
under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (PI) to examine the span of price 
control (including trade margin) in t he light of National Common Minimum 
Programme.  This Committee has subm itted its interim report to the 
Government.  The Committee has recommended, inter-alia, establishment 
of DPCO cells in all States on the model of Karnataka for greater/frequent 
interaction/reporting between the NPPA  and the State Drug Controllers.  
The DPCO Cell in Karnataka was created in 1998.  This Cell is dedicated to 
the work related to DPCO”.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
(B) Pricing of Non-Scheduled Drugs  
 
2.6  The Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals have informed that 
the prices of non-Scheduled drugs and formulations are fixed by the 
manufacturers themselves keeping in vi ew the various factors like cost of 
production, marketing/selling expenses, R&D expenses, trade commission, market 
competition, product innov ation, product qual ity etc. The Government takes 
corrective measures when the public interest is found to be adversely affected. 
 
 
2.7  The Committee have also been informed that in  respect of                   
non-Scheduled formulations where the pric e increase was found very high by the 
NPPA, manufacturers concerned were im pressed upon by the latter to reduce 
prices of those formulations.  When the Committee asked about the monitoring of 
prices of non-Scheduled dr ugs and formulations, the Department in a note, have 
submitted as under:- 
  
“As part of its price monitoring activity, NPPA has been monitoring 
the prices of non-Scheduled formulati ons for quite a long time based on 
market data available in monthly Reta il Store Audit Reports of ORG-IMS.  
There are certain internal guidelines (approved by NPPA/Authority) set for 
monitoring the prices of non-Scheduled formulations.  These guidelines are 
uniformly followed by the NPPA for the whole pharma industry.  The 
guidelines are suitabl y modified from time to ti me based on experience.  
The guidelines which are being presently followed are as under:- 
 
(i) The monitoring of prices of non-Scheduled formulations is 
currently on the basis of data from ORG-IMS. 
 
(ii) Companies are shor t listed where there is an increase in price 
of a non-Scheduled formulation by more than 20% in one year 
and the annual turnover of the formulation pack exceeds Rs. 1 
crore.  Further, the share of t he formulator in that segment of 
the formulation is required to be at least 20% of the market or 
the medicine is one of the first 3 top medicines of that group.  
The criteria, namely, high turn over and 20% price increase 
are designed to identify cases of mass consumption and to 
meet the requirement of ‘public interest’ referred to in para 10 
(b) of the DPCO, 1995. 
 
(iii) The NPPA then initiates ac tion and letters are sent to the 
manufacturers of such formulations to furnish reasons for 

such price increases and also, wherever required, invites 
them to the NPPA for personal hearing and representation 
before the Member Secretary/Chairman. 
 
(iv) The matter is then examined an d submitted to the full meeting 
of the Authority.” 
 
 
2.8  On being enquired by the Committ ee as to whether any problem was 
being faced in fixation/revisi on of prices of drugs under  price control regime, the 
Department replied that it  has been observed that wherever there is price 
reduction in case of bulk drugs, no applicat ion for price fixation/revision of its 
formulations is submitted as required u nder the provisions of DPCO’95.  NPPA 
after waiting for 30 days initiates suo-moto  price revision.  With regard to Bulk 
Drugs pricing, companies are reluctant to allow the officers of the NPPA to visit 
and inspect their manufacturing facilities.  In  the area of monitoring, there is no 
cooperation in sharing of company data with NPPA required from time to time. 
 
2.9  In this connection when the Committee asked  when a drug is 
brought under price control t he company makes a slightly different formulation for 
different presentation and enquired as to  what should be the mechanism to 
overcome such a situation, the Department in their post  evidence reply furnished 
as under:  
“In some cases, it has been noticed that whenever 
Government/NPPA fixes/revises ce iling or non-ceiling price of 
medicines/formulations some drug companies change the composition of 
the medicines/formulations and obtain new license from respective State 
Drug Controller/Licensing Authority. The State Drug Control/Licensing 
Authority should not allow change in composition without any valid ground 
and without consulting DCG (I) & NPPA.” 
 
2.10  On being pointed out by the Co mmittee that sometimes price control 
increases production of decontrolled,  non–essential drugs and decreases 
production of single ingredi ent essential drugs, the D epartment in their written 
reply stated as under :- 
 
“ A Committee on Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Industry under the 
Chairmanship of Shri Jaisukhlal Hath i was constituted on 8-12-1974 to 
examine various facts of the Drug Industr y in India with a view to promote 
growth of the Drug Industry.  The Co mmittee submitted its report in April 
1975 and recommended, inter-alia, abolit ion of brand names in a phased 

manner and procurement of  single ingredient drugs  and drugs included in 
Indian Pharmacopoeia for Central and St ate Government Institutions and 
local bodies under generic names. “ 
 
 
(C) Role and Responsibilities of National Pharmaceutical Pricing 
Authority (NPPA) 
 
2.11  The NPPA has been constituted as an attached office of the 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemical s.  The NPPA is an independent body 
of experts entrusted, inter-alia, with the task of fixation-revision of prices of drugs 
and pharmaceuticals and other related matter s such as updating the list of drugs 
under price control by inclusion and excl usion on the basis of established 
criteria/guidelines and al so to monitor the prices  of decontrolled drugs and 
formulations. 
 
2.12  The functions of the National Ph armaceutical Pricing Authority are:- 
(i) To implement and enforce the pr ovisions of the Drugs (Prices 
Control) Order, 1995 in accordance with the powers delegated to it. 
 
(ii) To undertake and/or sponsor relevant studies in respect of pricing of 
drugs/formulations. 
 
(iii) To monitor the availability of dr ugs, identify shortages, if any, and to 
take remedial steps. 
 
(iv) To collect/maintain data on pro duction, exports and imports, market 
share of individual bulk drugs and formulations. 
 
(v) To deal with all legal matters ar ising out of the decisions of the 
Authority. 
 
(vi) To render advice to the Central Government of changes/revisions in 
the drug policy. 
 
(vii) To render assistance to the Central Government in parliamentary 
matters relating to drug pricing. 
 
 
2.13  The Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals informed that the 
prices of the bulk drugs are fixed/revis ed by the NPPA as per the provisions of 
para 3 of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order 95. Since inception, NPPA has 
fixed/revised prices of 184 bulk drugs  (including derivations) and 2658 

formulations. Further para 11 of the DP CO 95 stipulates that where any 
manufacturer or importer of bulk drug or fo rmulation fails to submit the application 
for price fixation/revision, as the case may be, or to furnish information as required 
under this Order, within the time specified therein, the Government may, on the 
basis of such information as may be available with it, by order fix a price in respect 
of such bulk drug or formulation, as t he case may be.  In case the required 
information/data is not furnished by the Ma nufacturers, NPPA fixes the prices of 
the bulk drugs under para 11 of DPCO’95 based on availa ble information.  Since 
inception of NPPA in 1997, in about 34 cases of bulk drugs and 1988 cases of 
formulations, prices have been fixed invoking  para 11 of DPCO 95. 
 
2.14  Further when the Committee a sked whether some companies are 
charging prices of drugs more than notifi ed by NPPA, the Department in their post 
evidence reply stated that whenever it comes to notice of NPPA, that drug 
companies are charging prices higher than the notified prices of NPPA, necessary 
action under para 13 of DPCO’ 95, to reco ver the overcharged amount is taken.  
From inception of NPPA till June 2005,  an amount of around Rs 89 crores has 
been recovered as overcharged amount. 
  
2.15  On being enquired further whethe r NPPA was facing any difficulty in 
implementation of the Drugs (Prices Cont rol) Order along with suggestions for 
improvement, the Department in a written reply, stated the follo wing difficulties in 
implementation of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order:- 
 
“(i) Non-submission of regular returns like price lists in Form V, yearly 
information on turnover in Form VI etc. by manufacturers/importers. 
 
(ii) Non-submission of Form III/Form IV  for revision of prices wherever 
there is reduction in price of drugs. 
 
(iii) Non-cooperation of the Industry to  provide information for cost cum 
technical studies in case of bulk drugs. 
 
(iv) The high incidence of litigati on when companies are asked to pay 
overcharged amounts, which are often in crores. 
 

As soon as demand notice for reco very of overcharged amount is 
issued, the affected companies/firms immediately approach the Court and 
obtain interim stay order against the re covery of the overcharged amount.  
In certain cases, the companies do not  respond to the demand notice, in 
spite of repeated reminders. 
 
Non-submission of requisite info rmation/data is a major problem 
under DPCO, 1995.  It would be appropriate  to consider incorporation of 
some penalties for minor offences such as non-submission of data, price list 
etc. to ensure better implementation of various provisions of DPCO, 1995.  
These penalties may be expressly m entioned in DPCO, 1995 to ensure the 
proper implementation of various provisions of DPCO, 1995. 
 
In certain cases, it is observ ed that pharma companies choose to 
change the composition of the formulati on manufactured by them to avoid 
the implementation of the ceiling prices fixed by NPPA for the particular 
formulation.  The above practice can be effectively checked, in case, a 
penalty such as cancellation of drug licence is considered.  For this 
purpose, DPCO, 1995 should have some power as provided in Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940.” 
 
2.16   Asked about the suggestions  to strengthen the NPPA, the 
Department stated as under:- 
  
(i) NPPA monitors prices of formulations based on ORG/IMS 
data which cover about 30000 formulations packs 
manufactured and marketed by about 300 Companies.  
During the course of monitori ng, problem of authenticity and 
inadequacy of data and also lack of computerization has been 
noticed.  NPPA does not have adequate 
infrastructure/machinery/staff (technical/professional) for 
dealing with such big industry.  There are only 18 officers in 
the NPPA based in Delhi.  
(ii) To improve the system of moni toring, it is proposed to develop 
a suitable computer software pr ogramme for NPPA, so that 
more accurate and effective monitoring of Scheduled and 
non-Scheduled drugs could be ca rried out.  Also, the present 
system of price monitoring is  being reviewed by the Task 
Force and based on its recommendations, further steps would 
be taken in this regard.  In addition, the following hurdles are 
being faced in way of working of NPPA:- 
   
 (a) DPCO’ 95 has been issued under the powers conferred 
by the Essential Commodities Act’ 1955.  The action for 
penal provisions as per para 24 of DPCO’ 95 are also 
as per the Essential Commodi ties Act’1955.  In the 
absence of specific provis ion in DPCO’95 regarding 

penalties, prosecution etc., implementation of various 
provisions of DPCO’95 are affected.  
 (b) Drug companies fail to furnish information as 
prescribed under DPCO’95, but no specific provision 
for punitive actions are there in DPCO’95 to take action 
against errant companies/units.  
 
(c) There is no provision in DPCO’95 itself to impose 
fine/compound the offence of errant unit.  
  
 
2.17  When the Committee asked about the proposal to set up Cell of 
NPPA in each State for effective monitoring of prices of drugs and 
pharmaceuticals, the Department  in their written reply st ated that an exercise to 
strengthen the NPPA has bee n started and a scheme for computerization of the 
NPPA has been approved.  The Task Force constituted under the Chairmanship of 
the Principal Adviser (PP), Planning Commission is also considering the issue of 
intensive monitoring of pr ices of drugs by the NPPA.  There is a proposal to 
establish DPCO cells in all States on the mo del of Karnataka, wh ich will report to 
NPPA.   
 
 
(D) Availability of Drugs at affordable prices and use of generic drugs.   
  
2.18  Making a presentatio n about availability of essential drugs under 
price control and necessity of bringing mo re drugs under it, the representative of 
Low Cost Standard Therapeutics (LOCOST)  submitted before the Committee as 
under :-   
  “  We have pointed out that ma jor fallacies that the drugs which 
should have been included were not include d in the list.  The most striking 
example is anemia preparati on.  Iron deficiency anemia affects 74 per cent 
of our children and more than half of our women.  There is not a single drug 
for anemia under price control.  Even a drug like ORS for diarrhea, which is 
killing millions of children, is not under price control.  All vaccines for any 
infectious disease were put  outside price control.  My colleague said about 
HIV disease, coronary heart disease and cancer.  These diseases are 
totally excluded.  There is not a sing le drug for these diseases.  On the 
other hand, many of the important diseases like TB, malaria, leprosy, 
hypertension, psychiatric disorders, r eally one or two drugs are under price 
control.  So, by adopting economic cr iteria rather than public health and 
need based criteria, we got a very funny list.  Not only that, the drugs which 
should not have been included got included in  this list.  There were certain 
outdated drugs which no Doctor uses, and hazardous drugs like Analgin in 
the price control list. Essential drugs lik e Vitamin E do not figure.  So, what 

we are saying is now that  the Government has prepar ed a list of essential 
medicines in 1996 and 2003 and when it is deciding which drugs to be put 
under price control, this should be a reference list …….”   
 
2.19  On being enquired by the Committ ee as to whether the Government 
have prepared a list of essential medicines and the number of drugs included 
therein are under price control, the Department of Chemicals and Petro-Chemicals 
in a post evidence reply submitted as under:- 
 
“The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare issued a National List of 
Essential Medicines in July, 2003.  The List contains 354 drugs out of which 
about 50 drugs are under price control.”  
 
 
2.20 When the Committee desired to know as to whether  these drugs listed in 
National List of Essentia l Medicines can be brought under price control, the 
Department in a post evidence written note stated as follows:- 
“A Task Force under the Chairmanship of Principal Adviser, Planning 
Commission has been constituted by t he Government to suggest options 
other than price control in case of  essential/life saving medicines.  A 
decision in this issue woul d be taken after receipt of the report of the Task 
Force.” 
 
2.21  When the Committee asked about the policy of monitoring of drug 
prices in developed countries particular ly where more invent ions are being made, 
the Department, in their written reply, stated that some kind of monitoring 
strategies like price negotiations, bulk pur chase under National Health Schemes, 
Health Insurance Schemes are there in developed countries like Canada, France, 
UK, Japan, Germany, etc.  Such countries  have their own monitoring/controlling 
bodies as per their requirements.  Fo r example, Canada’s Patented Medicines 
Prices Review Board thr ough negotiations sets a maxi mum allowable price that 
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers may charge for patented medicines and any 
attempt to impose higher prices can result in significant fine for the manufacturer.  
In U.K. local healthcare services are pr ovided to the citizens under the National 
Health Service. 
 

2.22 In this regard, duri ng the oral evidence, t he representative of the 
Department of Chemicals and Petro-Chemicals subm itted before the Committee 
as under:- 
“.Also, to take care of any future situation, we are contemplating that 
there should be a price negotiation mec hanism for the new patented drugs 
as is being followed in some count ries like Canada where even before 
approving their marketing they negotiate  the price.  A similar system is 
contemplated here.” 
 
  
2.23  As per the provisions of the mo dified Drug Policy,  1986, drugs in 
which there is sufficient market competition viz. at least 5 bulk drug producers and 
at least 10 formulators and none having more than the 40 per cent market share in 
the Retail Trade (as per ORG) may be k ept outside the price control.  The 
representative of LOCOST stated that there is no free market operating in the area 
of medicines in pharmaceutical industry and in health and hospital service sectors.  
The buyer/end user namely, the patient has no choice as the Doctor makes the 
choice and for patient sometime it is a question of life or death.   Further, for most 
of the products, around 30-40 per cent of market share is cornered by the leading 
3-4 products.  The top selling brand of a particular category often is also the higher 
priced or highest priced one.  The brand leader  in most of the cases is also the 
price leader 
 
2.24  On being pointed out by the Co mmittee that the brand leader being 
the price leader in most cases, there may not be real competition in the market, 
the Department of C&PC in  a post evidence reply stat ed that generally the brand 
leader is also the price leader in case of non-Scheduled drugs. 
 
2.25  While suggesting the ways to come out of this problem, the 
representative of All Indi a Drug Action Network (AIDAN) stated during their 
submission before the Committee that pressure of sales representatives on 
Doctors is tremendous to prescribe thei r branded drugs.  However, if they 

prescribe the generic names, the alter native cheaper medicines can be taken 
which are equally effective. 
 
2.26  Some of the NGO’s working in  drugs and pharmaceutical sector/ 
public health submitted befor e the committee that there is huge variation between 
the prices of various branded medicines.  A few examples being as under :- 
  
S.No. Medicine  Price Range  
1 Amlodipine  5 mg. From Rs. 0.50 to Rs. 4.81 
2. Inj Ceftriaxone From Rs. 50 to Rs. 213 
3. Ciprofloxacin  From Rs. 26.81 to Rs. 85.34
 
2.27  Branded drugs are drugs  which are promoted by  using a proprietary 
name given by the company producing it, in  addition to the chem ical name of the 
compound, for example Paracetamol in I ndian market is marketed as Calpol, 
Metacin, Crocin, Paracip, etc.  In the developed countries only companies which 
have discovered the particular molecule can give it a brand name.  The others can 
sell the molecule (after the patent expires) only under its chemical name.  Because 
the branded drug promoted by the company carries th e cost of drug development, 
the innovator brand is the costliest. 
 
2.28  A representative of  one NGO stated that in  India, however, any 
company, which is involved in manufactu ring/marketing of drugs can give the 
drugs its own brand name.  With the thousands of companies in the Indian market, 
there are hundred and t housands of brands of individ ual drugs which sometimes 
create confusion.  The representative info rmed that recently, the press highlighted 
about LONA drug which is the brand name for both clonazepam and a low sodium 
salt preparation.  In Indi a, there has been virtually no  new drug development but 
there have been numerous successful attempts  for manufacture of new molecules 

developed in the West thr ough other processes.  Br anded drugs are costlier in 
India because of the higher profit marg ins for the companies and because of the 
high cost of drug promotion. 
 
2.29  Generic Drugs are drugs wh ich are marketed only under their 
chemical name i.e. Paracetamol market ed only as Paracetamol I.P.  There is 
otherwise no difference in composition, effect and quality standards requirement in 
generics compared to branded drugs.  In other countries the companies other than 
the innovator company have to market t heir drug as a generic preparation.  The 
annual exports of thousands of crores by Indian companies to both developed and 
developing countries is mainly in the form of low-cost generics.  The same 
companies which export low-cost generic  drugs abroad promote aggressively the 
same drugs as highly pric ed branded drugs in the domestic market.  Very few 
companies manufacture and market thei r drugs in generic form.  This 
phenomenon has prevented the Indian patients or consumers from benefiting from 
access to low cost medicines.   
 
2.30  When the Committee asked about promotion of generic drugs by All 
India Organisation of Chemists and Druggists (AIOCD), their representative during 
the evidence stated that, if any prescription came to his shop, he was not 
supposed to substitute the medicine, if he did so, he could be prosecuted under 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act.  When the Doctor writes a particular medicine like 
Ciploflexin, Cipla, then he has to give only  Cipla.  If he does not  write specifically, 
then the chemist has the right to substitute .  The chemists have a big chart for this 
wherein they can give different  prices for them.  But if they substitute, they would 
be prosecuted.  This is also a hurdle. 
 
2.31  The Committee informed by the r epresentative of LOCOST that in 
India, there is a unique anomaly created by t he Indian Drug Industry known as 
branded generics.  These ar e generics as far as the trade is concerned, but 
branded as far as the patient is concerne d.  To the pharmaceuticals trade and 
institution they are sold at low prices in high volumes as gen erics, but to the 
customers they are made to appear as branded drugs and sold at prices which 
approximate or even exceed the prices of branded dr ugs.  Branded generics 

occupy the space in Indian drugs market  that should have been occupied by true 
generic drugs.  The drug industry markets and promotes them only to the 
pharmaceutical trade and institutions as generics and profits by making high 
volume sales.  In order to give the trade huge margins at the cost of consumer, 
which otherwise be difficult  to justify, the company appends a brand name to the 
drug, making it appear lik e any other branded preparation in the market. The 
Committee were apprised of few examples  where trade margin ranged from 203 
per cent to 714 per cent. 
 
 
2.32    When the Committee pointed out that there was huge trade   
margin on essential drugs, the representat ive of the Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals while admitting this during oral evidence stated that the branded 
products might give a margin of 20 to 30 per cent only, but the margin for some of 
the generic products might be 500 or 1,000 percent.  
 
2.33  In this regard, the represent ative of All India Organisation of 
Chemists and Druggists(A IOCD), suggested that for controlled as well as 
decontrolled medicines, the minimum marg in given to wholesaler and retailer 
should be 20 percent  including the excise duty.    
 
2.34  When the Committee asked whether  there is rationality between the 
cost of production and selling price, the representative of AIOCD stated as under:- 
 
“Today, the NPPA is controlling the controlled category drugs.  In 
decontrolled category, the Government has  no control over the prices.  It 
was said that the prices were too hi gh.  Under the decontrolled category, 
the prices are printed by the manufac turers and their margins on these 
products goes up from 100 per cent to 500 per cent.  The Government 
cannot control it.  We told the Gove rnment that we would take up this 
matter with manufacturers and we would ask them to reduce the prices of 
medicines like Ciproflaxin, nimesulide, etc.   We are ready to support the 
Government in its effort to bring down the prices.  Even in respect of 
generic medicines, we are ready to lower our margin.” 
 
2.35  In this connection, the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals 
has informed that a Committee was consti tuted under the Chairmanship of the 

Joint Secretary (PI) on 19 th August, 2004, to examine the issue of span of price 
control (including trade margin) on drugs  and pharmaceuticals in view of the 
National Common Minimum Programme and the observations of the Supreme 
Court.  The Committee has submitted its in terim Report to t he Government.  The 
proposal of controlling trade margin on drugs was also examined.  However, it was 
felt that it might adversely affect drugs  manufactured by a la rge number of small 
scale manufacturers.  Hence, it was not implemented. 
 
2.36  Further, supplementing the info rmation on the matter, in a written 
note the Tamil Nadu Government has inform ed that to get rid of pocketing of huge 
margin by retailers and to supply essent ial drugs on reasonable  prices, the State 
has a Tamil Nadu Medical Association Corp oration (TNMAC).  As per the system, 
bids for tender prices are called by th e Corporation and the lowest tender is 
awarded for supply of medicines.  TNMA C has a good quality check and  they are 
not only in drugs but also in CT scans.  In all the district hospitals, they are running 
CT scan very well.   
 
 
2.37  It was informed that Delhi Gove rnment is also doing some pooled 
procurement on very reasonable price.  In Rajasthan, there is a lifeline fluid stores.  
They have intervened in the issue of IV  fluids and are selling them through 
Government dispensaries.  It has been very successful.  
 
 
2.38  On being asked by the Committ ee that in order to ensure the 
availability of drugs at r easonable prices  whether the Government should step in 
to open fair price shops at different places after pooled procurement on the lines of 
Tamil  Nadu Government, the Department of   C&PC in a written reply stated as 
under:- 
“The Drug Policy as amended from time to time is directed towards 
making available the quality drugs at reasonable prices.  A Task Force has 
also been constituted under the Chairmanship of the Principal Advisor (PP), 
Planning Commission to explore various options other than price control for 
achieving the objective of making ava ilable life saving dr ugs at reasonable 

prices.  The Task Force is also examining the issue of monitoring of prices 
and bulk/pooled procurement  issues of medicines. “  
 
 
2.39  The Committee asked what Indian Dr ugs Manufacturers           
Association (IDMA) could do for ensuring availability of medicines in hospitals for 
poor people. The representative of the IDMA stated as follows:-  
“if Government has some policy for di stribution of life saving drugs in 
hospitals and Government have a list, our  Association will provide 10 or 20 
per cent free medicines, we will not charge any money”.   
 
2.40  Presently the Government s upervision/control over non-Scheduled 
drugs is based on ORG-MARG survey. Ex plaining the lacuna in the system one 
NGO’s stated that this survey does not reflect the field level realities in the country.  
It takes about one  per cent  sample of the sales of the retail outlets.  In May 2005, 
out of total 237318 Chemists, it collect ed data from 2236 Chemists. It is an 
extrapolation from 280 companies of about Rs. 19000 crore annual sales to 
retailers.  A significant number of regional companies are not covered.      
 
2.41  The ORG-IMS does not reflect figur es of bulk instit utional sales by 
industry.   The Department  of C&PC in a post-evidenc e reply has stated that  
ORG-IMS is a private MNC in the business of collecting/compiling data for the last 
several years.  NPPA is depending on t heir data as no other suitable data is 
available. 
 
2.42  On being enquired by the Commi ttee as to whether there was any 
agency with the Government for collect ion and compilation of data, the 
representative of the Depar tment of C&PC during the course of oral evidence 
admitted  before the Committee that unfor tunately there was no system with them 
for collection and compilation of data for pharma sector except the ORG-IMS.  The 
NPPA has been directed to explore the possi bility of setting up of an independent 
agency in this regard.   
 
2.43  The Committee also enquired about the system to deal with shortage 
of a particular drug and whet her any foolproof mechanism for reporting shortages 
has been developed. The Department in their reply furnished as under :-  

“NPPA is carrying out this respons ibility mainly through monthly 
reports received from the State Drugs Controllers.  As and when the reports 
for shortage for any particular drug, in  any part of the c ountry are received, 
the concerned company is asked to ru sh the stock and make the drug 
available. In case of temporary shor tage for any specific reason, the matter 
is also taken up with the concerned company.  The response of the 
companies has generally been prompt.  
 
In addition to above, NPPA also takes note of the shortage of any 
formulation in any part of the country brought to its notic e by individuals, 
NGOs, print media and Hon’ble Members of Parliament and suitable action 
is taken.  It may be mentioned that normally shor tages are of temporary 
nature and therapeutic substitutes are av ailable in respect of most of the 
medicines.”   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
DRUGS FOR PUBLIC HEALTH  
 
 
  (A) Availability of Essential Drugs  
 
It came out during examination that the healthcare expenditure by the 
Central Government is only about 0.9 perc ent of the total GDP.  The Secretary 
(Chemicals & Petrochemicals), in this regard, informed during evidence that the 
Government contemplate to raise this expe nditure to about 2 to 3 percent of GDP 
over the next five years. 
 
3.2 The representative of LOCOST in formed the Committee that there has 
been divergence between the priorities of public health and drugs covered  under 
DPCO.  The policy is based on market share of a drug company and not on 
whether a particular drug is essential for t he disease pattern in the country.  Only 
drugs with annual turnov er greater than Rs. 4.00 crore,  where there is insufficient 
competition (i.e. one formulator having mo re than 40 per cent share of market 
share despite having at least 5 bulk pr oducers and 10 formulators) are to be 
considered under price cont rol.  Monopoly situation in  which any formulator with 
annual turnover greater than Rs . 1.00 crore in which a si ngle formulator has more 
than 90 per cent share is also to be covere d under price control.  All other drugs & 
formulations were to be exempted from price control.    
 
 
3.3 On being pointed out by  the Commi ttee that the poor people are unable to 
get the essential drugs and desired to know that whether there should be any 
policy for drug manufacturers to produce at  least a certain per centage of essential 
drugs, the Department of C&PC in a wri tten reply stated that  the Indian Drug 
Industry has developed to such a level th at the availability of drugs was not a 
problem and there was no shortage of drugs.  A manufacturer was free to produce 
as medicines as per his corporate policy and prevailing market forces.  However, 

at present, no manufacturer can be com pelled to produce at least a certain 
percentage of essential drugs.   
 
3.4  The representative of LOCOST further added that some of really 
essential drugs have gone out of price contro l, majority of the drugs related to 
public health problem are either under-represented or unrepresented in DPCO 95.  
The anti-cancer and, anti- AIDS drugs are not under price control.  ORS, 
instrumental in preventing dehydration in  diarrhoea, is not covered under price 
control.  The following t able shows the public health problems and the absence of 
their drugs in the Drug Price Control Basket:- 
 
Public Health 
Problem 
Drugs Required for the 
disease   
Drug Listed 
in DPCO for 
the purpose 
Remarks  
1. Iron Deficiency 
anemia 
Ferrous sulphate Folic 
acid 
NONE Anemia is a major public health problem in 
women and children with a prevalence of 
74.3 in children of 6-35 months and a 
prevalence of 49-56% in women (NFHS 
1998/99).  Anemia contributes to 1/3 of 
maternal mortality Exclusion is against 
interests of public health.  
2. Tuberculosis INH, Rifampicin, 
Ethambutol, 
Pyrazinamide.   
Also in view of the 
increasing prevalence of 
drug resistant TB, drugs 
like Ofloxacin, 
Ethionamide, 
Cycloserine, which are 
required but are 
exorbitantly priced 
should be included.  
Rifampicin TB is the single largest killer disease in India 
with 5 lakh deaths per year.  According to 
WHO estimates TB patients spend Rs. 645 
crore on private TB care in 1997.  Rural 
patients have to spend Rs. 1000 per month 
on diagnosis and treatment which invariably 
results in mortgaging of assets and 
valuables. 
3.  Malaria including 
choroquine resistant 
falciparum malaria 
which has become 
prevalent in many 
parts of India. 
Chloroquine, Primaquine, 
Quinine 
Chloroquine Quinine is essential in treatment of 
chloroquine resistant falciparum malaria 
which can otherwise be fatal and which is 
increasing in its prevalence in India. 
4.  HIV 
disease/AIDS 
Zidovudine, Lamivudine, 
Nevirapine, Indinavir 
NONE India had the second highest number of HIV 
disease patients in the world (3-4 million).  
Yet no drug under price controls to make 
them more affordable. 
 
5.  Agents to prevent 
dehydration in 
diarrheal diseases.  
Dehydration due to 
diarrheal diseases 
kills 
 
Oral Rehydration Salts NONE 1 lakh children under 5 years of age die due 
to diarrhea and dehydration.  There are 
more than 1 crore diarrheal episodes/year 
thousands of children every year in India.  
Why is ORS then not represented? 
6.  Leprosy Dapsone, Clofazimine, 
Rifampicin 
 
Rifampicin  The exclusion of  the other two drugs which 
are used in greater quantities is inexplicable. 
7.  Filariasis  Diethylcarbamazine 
citrate 
NONE Six million Indians develop acute filaria and 
45 million have chronic filarial lesions.   

8.  Hypertension Atenolol, Enalapril, 
Hydrochlorthiazide, 
Amlodipine 
Captopril,  
Methyeldopa 
Hypertension is an increasingly common 
problem in rural and urban areas.  Different 
kinds of antihypertensives are required 
depending on the patient’s associated 
conditions. 
9.  Coronary artery 
disease: 
Glyceryl trinitrate, 
Isosorbide dinitrate, Beta 
blocker, Calcium blocker 
NONE Coronary artery disease has prevalence of 
80-120/1000 in urban areas and 30-60/1000 
persons.  Drugs for such a problem should 
be there in such a list. 
 
10.  Vaccines (new) 
for Rabies, Hepatitis 
B: Rabies kills 
thousands of people 
every year in India.  
Hepatitis B is an 
important public 
health problem 
which causes acute, 
chronic hepatitis and 
liver cancer. 
 
Cell culture derived 
rabies vaccine.  The 
current vaccines for 
rabies are very 
expensive.  The old 
vaccine based on sheep 
brain is outdated and 
occasionally hazardous. 
NONE Nearly 1.1-1.5 million people are 
administered rabies vaccine every year.  
The reported mortality with rabies is 30000-
40000 per year, which is an 
underestimation.  A single dose of cell 
culture derived costs Rs. 300 in the market.  
In the immunization of a single patient 5 
doses are required, t he cost per patient 
turns out to be Rs. 1500, which is beyond 
the reach of the poor. 
11.  Cancer: Over 7 
lakh patients 
develop cancer 
every year 
Many drugs are available 
which are however 
prohibitively expensive 
which can play a curative 
or palliative role in 
different types of cancer. 
NONE Many forms of cancer especially in children 
and many in adults are completely curable 
with effective chemotherapy.  However, anti-
cancer drugs are mainly still sourced from 
abroad, and are prohibitively expensive.  
They can costs thousands of rupees per 
dose. 
 
12.  Sera for use in 
tetanus, diphtheria, 
Rh isoimmunization. 
Anti-tetanus serum Anti-
diphtheria antitoxin Anti-
D immunoglobulin 
 
NONE Its exclusion is inexplicable.  
13.  Analgesic-
antipyretic: Fever 
and pain are the 
most common of 
symptoms which 
need to be relieved. 
Paracetamol is the drug 
of choice for relief of 
fever and is a safe 
analgesic.   
Paracetamol 
is excluded 
from the list. 
The exclusion of this drug, which is essential 
and of mass consumption defies logic. 
14.  Anticonvulsants Phenytoin, 
Carbamazepine, Valproic 
acid 
NONE Seizure disorders are common and require 
prolonged even lifelong therapy and should 
have been included. 
     
3.5  In regard to sale of irrational drugs, the  Department of C&PC in a 
written note informed that the combination of drugs are considered irrational, 
illogical or haphazard, if  it does not conform to anyone or more criteria mentioned 
below:- 
 
(a) There is a synergetic or corre ctive action of the combination. 
(b) The drugs are required to be taken simultaneously. 
(c) For better compliance and convenience to the patient. 
(d) These are not-toxic specially for prolonged use. 
(e) There is no adverse interaction between the drugs. 
(f) Doses of each drug is not required to be individualized. 

3.6  The Committee have been further  informed by the Department of 
C&PC that there exists a system in the country for examining the rationality of drug 
formulations marketed in the country thr ough the Drugs Technical Advisory Board 
(DTAB) and its Expert Commi ttee, statutory body  under section (5) of Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act 1940, under the Chairmanship of DG, Health Services, to advise 
the Central and State Governments. Reportedly, some of drugs included in the list 
of Scheduled Drugs are irrational.  
 
3.7  In reply to question about steps taken to ensure low price drugs for 
diseases like HIV/AIDS, t he Secretary, Chemicals & Petrochemicals stated during 
evidence as under :-  
“For HIV/AIDS recently some of  the drugs are being produced as 
generic as a result the I ndian manufacturers have come into the scene and 
the prices have lowered sharply.  For instance, one drug used to cost 
10,000 dollars per person per annum for HIV/AIDS.  Since the Indian 
manufacturer has started manufacturing these, it has been brought down to 
240 dollars per person per annum, which means about 9,600 dollars saving 
per year.  
Similarly, the Government’s effort through NACO is also contributing 
towards lowering these prices. For this HIV/AIDS, bulk purchases are made 
by NACO and the same one which was available for Rs. 9,600, because of 
bulk purchased by NACO, some of these drugs are available now for only 
Rs. 5,000.” 
 
 
3.8  In reply to a question about ensur ing the availability of generic drugs 
on long term basis in the country, the Depa rtment in their written reply submitted 
that in India most of the drugs are gener ic in nature.  However, brand names are 
used by the companies to popularise dr ugs made by them.  Since drugs are 
prescribed by doctors, confidence in th e quality of every ge neric drug is an 
important factor in prom oting acceptance of generic drugs among Medical 
Community.  This, to a great extent, depends upon a confidence in the robustness 
of the drug regulator y system operating in t he country which is substantially being 
addressed by the Capacity Building Proj ect and implementation of the Mashelkar 
Committee Report.  
 
3.9  The Committee also asked w hether the drugs for public health 
problem like anemia, tuberculosis, Malari a, Leprosy, filariasis, hypertension, 

cancer, coronary artery disease and drugs like ORS, Paracetamol alongwith 
vaccines for killer diseases are outside DPCO, 1995, the Ministry in their Post 
Evidence reply stated as under :- 
“The following bulk drugs which are used for treatment of TB, Malaria 
and Hypertension are under price control.   
 
Disease     Name of the Bulk Drug  
Tuberculosis    Rifam picin, Streptomycin 
Malaria    Chloroquine 
Hypertension Pentoxyfylline,  Captopril, Methyldopa, 
Verapamil 
The bulk drugs used for the re maining disorders/diseases are 
outside price control”. 
 
 
(B) Role of State Governments 
 
3.10  The State Drug Controllers  have been entrusted to ensure 
availability of quality drugs at reasonable prices to the public by implementing the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, the Rules made thereunder and 
also under Drugs (Price Control) Order, 1995. During the course of the 
examination of the subj ect, with a view to st rengthening the system, the 
Committee sought the views of State Go vernments in the matter. Important 
views/suggestions received from States /UTs. of Andhra Pradesh, Daman & Diu, 
Delhi, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himacha l Pradesh,  Kerala, Rajasthan, Madhya 
Pradesh, Orissa, Pondichery, Tamil Nadu  etc. and their State Drug Control 
Authorities have been summarized as under:- 
 
(1) Special funds should be released by the Government of India to 
strengthen the manpower and other facilities in the State Drugs 
Control Administration. 
 

(2) Trade margin on drugs should be re viewed so as to bring down the 
prices. 
 
(3) An official updated booklet on the latest price approval on drugs may 
be brought out by the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) as a reference book on annual basis. 
 
(4) Major chunks of medicines are away  from control of prices.  Anti-
Cancer Drugs, Anti-HIV Drugs, Ne utraceuticals, cetrizen and many 
antibiotics are highly priced.   Wherever such instances have been 
referred to NPPA, they have expr essed their helplessness in the 
matter.  The issue of heavy price difference in generic drugs should 
be immediately resolved and ceil ing prices for non-scheduled 
formulations be fixed. 
 
(5) A special cell should be creat ed in each State Drugs Control 
Department to take up appropriate ac tion to monitor the prices of 
drugs and to take legal action against the defaulters. 
 
(6) The Government of India may issue an order to have Maximum 
Retail Price (MRP) includi ng of all taxes on the label of all drugs so 
that public may be protected from the over pricing by the chemists. 
 
(7) Periodic training programme s hould be imparted to train all the 
officers of the Drugs Control Administration for better implementation 
of the Acts relating to drugs and pharmaceuticals. 
 
(8) More drugs should be brought under the ambit of DPCO, 1995 and 
uniform tax structure may be adopted throughout the country to 
encourage R & D. 
 
(9) The companies  doing  R&D in  new molecules should be identified 
and such companies be allowed to  charge reasonable extra R & D 
charge while fixing the ceiling prices  by NPPA. They should also be 

exempted from the DPCO 1995 for at  least five years to meet the 
expenditure incurred on the invention of new molecules. 
 
(10) The Government should curb menace of spurious drugs.    
 
(11) All life savings drugs should be kept under the price control.   
 
(12) The drugs should be manufactu red and sold in  generic names 
instead of brand names. 
 
(13) The drugs which are not in use or have beco me obsolete should be 
removed from the controlled list of DPCO, 1995. 
 
(14) There should be some provisions in DPCO, 1995 to enable the 
Drugs Control Department to impose penalty on chemists for minor 
offences/irregularities instead of prosecution. 
 
(15) The recommendations of the Mashelkar Committee in regard to 
strengthening of State Drug Cont rol Organization should be 
implemented.  
 
(16)  Excess amount charged by the m anufacturers should be recovered 
from them and  deposited in Drug Prices Equalization Account 
(DPEA).   Out of this, some percentage of amount should be 
allocated to those State Drug C ontrollers who have unearthed the 
cases of overcharging.   
 
(17) NPPA should expedite  revisi on/fixation due to change in cost of 
material by revising the ceiling price of drugs and formulations. 
 
(18) All imported drugs and formula tions should be brought under the 
purview of price control. 
 
(19) Need for better coordination bet ween the Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers and Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.     
 

(20) There should be amendment in the Essential Commodity Act so as 
to impose a fine of suitable amount for violations of Drug Prices 
Control Order 1995.  Th is will pave way for departmental action 
against defaulters instead of prosecution. 
 
  
(21) Some more Central Drugs Test ing Laboratories should be set up in 
various parts of the country.   
 
(22) No taxes should be levi ed on the life saving drugs. 
 
(23) There should be ceiling beyond which the increase in prices of 
medicines would not be permissible. 
 
(24) There should be poo led procurement of medicines required for public 
health care like Government hospitals, dispensaries etc.    
    
 (C) Spurious Drugs 
3.11 The Committee have been informed t hat the provisions for quality, 
licensing, storage, sales, distribution of drugs are governed by the provisions of 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 administer ed by the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare. Reported there are cases of fake/ counterfeit/ substandard/ 
spurious drugs.  
 
3.12 A drug shall be deemed to be spurious:-  
¾ If it is manufactured under a name which belongs to another drug.  
¾ If it is an imitation of or is a su bstitute for, another drug or resembles 
another drug in a manner likely to deceive, or bears upon it or upon 
its label or container the name of another drug, unless  it is plainly 
and conspicuously marked so as to reveal its true character. 

¾ If the label or container bears the name of an individual or company 
purporting to be the manufacturer of drugs; which individual or 
company  is fictitious or does not exist; or  
¾ If it has been substituted wholly  or in part by another drug or 
substance or. 
¾ If it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not 
truly a product.  
 
3.13 The Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals has informed that 
the Ministry of Health and Family We lfare had constituted an Expert Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Dr . R.A. Mashelkar.  T he Committee submitted its 
report in November, 2003  It has inte r-alia recommended for stringent penal 
provisions especially in regar ds to spurious drugs and other measures to help in 
investigation and prosecution.  The Drugs  and Cosmetics (Amendment) Bill, 2005 
has been introduced in Rajya Sabha to enhance penalties, to declare the offences 
cognizable and non-bailable, to enable police personnel to file prosecution, to 
provide for special courts for drug re lated offfences and also to compound 
offences under the Act. 
 
3.14 There are 27 States and Central Labor atories functioning throughout the 
country to test the quality of drugs. The Government analysts after testing declares 
a particular drug as spurious or not of standard quality on the basis of identification 
and other tests.  The invest igating agency may also detect spurious drug on the 
basis of investigation. U nder Capacity Building Project, the Central Government 
have undertaken various measures to upgr ade the existing facilities of various 
testing laboratories.  Three new drug-testi ng laboratories are be ing established in 
the newly created States and one new Regi onal Drug Testing laboratory has been 
set up at Chandigarh.  
 
3.15 On being enquired by the Committee as  to whether the Drug Inspectors are 
collecting samples regularly  in each month from each shop, the Department of 

C&PC, in a written note, stated that there is no set policy to collect samples each 
month from each shop in the country.  It depends upon the testing capacity 
available in a particular Stat e as well as the funds ava ilable to pay the cost of 
samples collected by Drugs Inspectors.  Usually the samples are collected at 
random and on suspicion. 
 
3.16  The All India Organisation of Ch emists and Druggist s (AIOCD) in a 
written note furnished to the Committee st ated that the problem of spurious 
medicines is not restricted to India alone and it is a worl dwide phenomenon. No 
study report or authentic record is availa ble in this regard.  The World Health 
Organisation had made a statement that 15 percent of all drugs in circulation in the 
world are counterfeit or s ub standard.    These medici nes give a grave health 
problem sometime leading to death.  It has been further stated in the information 
provided by the WHO that 5 per cent of medicines exported to developed 
countries including USA and as much as 40 per cent exported to the Third World 
Countries are spurious in nature.  
 
3.17   When the Committee enquired as to  what were the observations of 
WHO in regard to spurious drugs in Indi a, the Department of C&PC, in its reply 
has stated that there was a media report alleging that as per WHO report about 35 
per cent of spurious drugs emanated from India.  However, on a specific enquiry 
by the Government of India, WHO has denied having issued such a report. 
 
3.18  The manufacturers of spurious and adultered drugs can be punished 
with a maximum penalty or life impris onment and heavy fine upto Rs.10 lakh. 
However, they are being convicted/punished in rare cases.  In this connection, 
when the Committee desired to  know as to what should  be the modalities to deal 
with such menace, the Department of C&PC, in its written reply, stated that as the 
normal procedures of courts take a long ti me to finish the trial,  the proposed 
special courts might solve the problem.  The Drugs and Cosmetics (Amendment) 
Bill 2005 has also proposed compounding of offences which may help in faster 
disposal of cases. 
 

3.19  The representative of  the Ministry of Health  & Family Welfare while 
agreeing that the prevalence of spurious  drugs was a menace, stated during  
evidence that unfortunately, the regulat ory system in the country was rather 
fragmented and the manuf acturing of these drugs was being done by criminal 
elements in a very clandestine kind of activity.    
 
(D) Revival of Sick PSUs. 
 
3.20  The Committee pointed out that publ ic sector units like Indian Drugs 
& Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (IDPL) and Hindu stan Antibiotics Ltd. (HAL) laid the 
foundation of the drug industr y in the country and also supplied basic drugs for 
public health for long.  Ask ed about the steps taken to revive the sick PSUs under 
the Department of Chemical s & Petrochemicals, the D epartment in a note stated 
that the progress for revival of PSUs under  their administrative control is as 
under:- 
Sl.No. Name of PSU Status 
1. Indian Drugs and 
Pharmaceutical Ltd. (IDPL) 
BIFR had recommended for winding up of the 
company and the company is before the High Court 
for appointment of a Liquidator. The Department has 
filed an appeal in AAIFR against the BIFR’s winding 
up order.  Besided this, the Deptt. also constituted an 
Expert Committee to undertake the study of techno-
economic feasibility of reh abilitating the IDPL.  The 
Committee has submitted its report on 20.04.2005 
which is under examination in the Department.   
2. Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. (HAL) It is a BIFR company.  In the Budget 2004-05, the 
Finance Minister announced financial support for 
restructuring HAL.  The Draft Revised Rehabilitation 
Scheme of HAL was sent for consideration of 
BRPSE in March, 2005.  In the meeting held on 
22.7.2005, BRPSE considered the draft rehabilitation 
scheme.  Follow up action thereon is being taken by 
the Department.  
3. Bengal Chemical and 
Pharmaceutical Ltd.  (BCPL) 
BIFR has sanctioned a Modified Rehabilitation 
Scheme for the company of 14.01.2004.  Follow up 
action thereon is being taken by the Department.  
4. Bengal Immunity Ltd. (BIL) BIFR had recommended for winding up of the 
company.  All the employees have been relieved 

under VSS.  The company is closed and is before 
the High Court for appointing a Liquidator.  
5. Smith Stanistreet 
Pharmaceutical Ltd. (SSPL)  
BIFR had recommended for winding up of the 
company.  All the employees have been relieved 
under VSS.  The company is closed and is before 
the High Court for appointing a Liquidator.  
 
 
 (E) Indian Systems of Medicines 
 
3.21  The Committee pointed out that  the many people prefer traditional 
systems of health and medicines like Ho meopathy, Ayurveda, Siddha.  Asked 
about the steps to strengthen these to supplement the National Health Care 
system, the Department in a note stated that the Departm ent of Ayurvedic, Unani, 
Siddha and Homeopathy  (AYUSH) in collaboration with Council for Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR) have undertake n Traditional Knowledge Digital Library 
(TKDL) project to evolve a digitized dat a base of traditiona l medical knowledge 
embodied in the classical literature of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Yoga systems 
which are codified and well documented but available in public domain in 
languages not accessible to patent examiners.  The objective of TKDL is to 
provide an instrument to the patent office rs for examining patent claims on the 
uses of medicinal plants and to prev ent wrong patenting on  Indian medical 
knowledge.  So far about 60,000 formulati ons from classical Ayurvedic and Unani 
texts have been digitized in Patent Co mpatible Format in 5 international 
languages.  Further work of TKDL is u nderway covering Yoga practices & asanas 
apart from Ayurveda, Unani  and Siddha formulations described in classical 
literature.  Access policy under non-disclosure agreement is in the process of 
necessary approval before making the TKDL  available to in ternational patent 
offices.  The TKDL tool w ould prove an important inst rument against bio-piracy on 
indigenous medical knowledge.   Framing of national law on protection of 
Intellectual Property Rights related to traditional kno wledge has also been taken 
up by HRD Ministry.  Bio-diversity Act and Rules thereunder administered by the 
Ministry of Environment & Forests also  provide for safeguard measures against 
bio-piracy.   

3.22  The strategies outlined in the National Policy on AYUSH, are as 
under :-  
 
a) To promote good health and expand the outreach of health care to 
people, particularly those not pr ovided health cover, through 
preventive, promotive, mitigating and curative intervention through 
Indian Systems of Medicine & Homeopathy;   
b) To improve the quality of teachers and clinicians by revising curricula 
to contemporary relevance and research by creating model 
institutions and Centers of Excellence and ext ending assistance for 
creating infrastructure facilities;  
c) To ensure affordable AYUSH serv ices & drugs which are safe and 
efficacious; 
d) To facilitate availability of raw drugs which are aut hentic and contain 
essential components as requir ed under pharmacopoeial standards 
to help improve quality of drugs, for domestic consumption and 
export;  
e) Integrate AYUSH in health care deliv ery system and National 
Programmes and ensure optimal use of  the vast infrastructure of 
hospitals, dispensaries and physicians;  
f) Re-orient and prioritise research  in AYUSH to gradually validate 
therapy and drugs to addr ess in particular the chronic and new life 
style related emerging diseases;  
g) Create awareness about the strengths of these systems in Indian 
and abroad and sensitize other stakeholders and providers of health;  
h) To provide full opportunity fo r the growth and development of 
AYUSH systems and utilization of the potentiality, strength and 
revival of their glory.  
 
3.23  Asked about steps taken for qua lity control and monitoring of Indian 
system of medicines, the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals stated :- 

  Department of AYUSH have underta ken following initiatives for 
augmenting the quality contro l and monitoring of Ayurv eda, Siddha, Unani (Asu) 
and Homeopathy medicines in the country :- 
(i) 9 th Ayurvedic Pharmaceutical Committee (APC) has been constituted 
which is made up of multi discipline experts.  The APC evaluates and 
approves Pharmacopoeial work assi gned to 13 laboratories.  On the 
recommendations of APC, Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) 
for the manufacturing of ASU drugs  and shelflife studies have been 
started on project basis in 13 identified laboratories.  
 
(ii) The Pharmacopoeial Laboratories of Indian Medicine and 
Homeopathy are the Central Laborat ories established as per the 
legal requirements prescribed in t he Drugs and Cosmetic Act in the 
context of quality control of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and 
Homeopathy medicines.  These laboratories undertake 
pharmacopoeial as well as quality pha rmacopoeial as well as quality 
testing work of ASU & H drugs.  These laboratories are being 
strengthened to augment their functional capacity. 
 
 
(iii) Ayurveda, Sidda, Unani Drug Te chnical Advisory Board (ASUDTAB) 
has been reconstituted.  In it s recent meeting the Board has 
considered the issues of re-classi fication of Ayurveda, Siddha and 
Unani drugs with a view to streamline regulation of different kinds of 
proprietary /patented products and enf orcement of provisions of 
Chapter IV-A of the Drugs & Co smetics Act, 1940 in respect of 
labelling/shelf-life/expiry date of ASU drugs,  creation of central 
licensing authority of ASU drugs etc.  
 
(iv) Department of AYUSH has im plemented schemes to strengthen 
State pharmacies and Dr ug Testing Laboratories for improving their 
functional capacity and productivity.  So far 40 State pharmacies and 
21 Drug Testing Laboratories have been supported under the central 
scheme.  
 
(v) Good Manufacturing Practices (G MP) are implemented since 2000 
as Schedule ‘T’ of Drugs and Cosm etic Act with the objective of 
ensuring manufacturing of qualit y ASU medicines.  GMP seek 
possession of in house quality control laboratory or suitable 
arrangement with recognized laboratory for quality testing of drugs.  
 
(vi) A central scheme has been im plemented to support State Drug 
Licensing Authorities for strengt hening the enforcement mechanism 
of quality assurance of ASU drugs.  
 
(vii) Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani Drugs Consultative Committee 
(ASUDCC) comprising of State Licensing Authorities and central 
representatives, is being reconstituted as per the provisions of Drugs 

and Cosmetic Act.  The responsibility assigned to DCC is to 
recommend modes and modalities fo r uniform implementation of 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act in the context of Ayur veda, Siddha and 
Unani Drugs. The ensuring meeting of  DCC is scheduled in the first 
week of August 2005 to, inter-alia, discuss constitution of a Central 
Licensing Authority for approval  of ASU Patent and Propriety 
medicines and for dealing with matters referred from States.  

CHAPTER – IV 
 
 
SETTING UP OF NATIONAL DRUG AUTHORITY 
 
 
The issues relating to drugs and pharmaceuticals are bei ng dealt with by 
more  than one Ministry/Depar tment of the Central Government.  The pricing 
policy of drugs and pharmaceutical comes under the purview of the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers, the Health Policy is framed by the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare. The patent  aspect is l ooked after by the Ministry of Commerce.  
Again the quality aspects of  drugs are dealt by the Drug Controller General of 
India under the Ministry of Health.  The Ministry of Science and Technology are 
handling the funds for pharmaceutical incent ives for Research & Development for 
developing new drugs.    
 
4.2  For dealing all rela ted issues in a coordinated manner, it was 
envisaged to make modification in Drug Policy, 1986, as announced in September, 
1994 by setting up a National Drug Authority to perform the following functions:- 
 
“(i) Develop and define basic appropr iate standards relating to the 
manufacture, import, supply, promotion and use of drugs. 
 
(ii) To approve and regi ster pharmaceutical products for use in the 
country only, if 
 
(a) It meets real medical need, 
(b) It is therapeutical ly effective, and 
(c) It is acceptably safe. 
 
(iii) To enforce effectively appropria te quality standards of medicines and 
Good Manufacturing Practices, throughout the country, having full 
regard to the needs of public health and standardise dosage strength 
and pack sizes of formulations with a view to check proliferation. 
 
(iv) To monitor standard practices in  drug promotion and use and to 
clearly identify those which are acceptable and prohibit those which 
are unethical and against the consumers’ interest. 
 
(v) To monitor the prescribing practices and to evaluate their 
appropriateness for the purpose of guiding the medical profession 
and for achieving the aim of rational prescribing. 

 
(vi) To ensure that appropriate  information about registered 
pharmaceuticals is made available for the guidance of consumers 
having regard to: 
 
(a) The adverse consequences of non-compliance by patients 
particularly in the case of antibiotics, steroids etc., 
 
(b) Dangers of self-medication, and  
 
(c) The need to involve consumers as full partners in the health 
care system. 
 
(vii) To prepare and publis h a national formulary and formularies relevant 
to various levels (like district hospital, community centre, primary 
health centre) for the guidance of consumers as well as Doctors.” 
 
4.3 The functions mentioned above involv e new responsibilities which will 
include:- 
 
“Special focus on examining the technology of bulk drugs; capacity 
validation of machinery; assessing su itability of manpower for bulk drug 
production; undertaking scientific scrutiny of master formulae for 
manufacture of formulations; develop ing testing labs for cosmetics, 
diagnostics and devices; laying dow n standards for veterinary drugs; 
examination of labels and promotional claims and prescribing procedures 
for public hearing under the Drugs and Cosm etics Act; monitoring of clinical 
trials for the protection of human right s; quality control of  herbal medicines; 
updating new drug approval process; w eeding out of irrational combination 
formulations; and formation of expert committees for examination of new 
drugs.” 
 
 
4.4  The Committee pointed out that  the setting up of proposed National 
Drug Authority was over due and enquired about the reas ons for undue delay in 
setting up the authority, the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals in their 
written reply, furnished as under:- 
 
“A Committee on Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Industry under the 
Chairmanship of Shri Jaisukhlal Ha thi was constituted on 8-2-1974 to 
examine various facets of the Drug In dustry in India with a view to 
promoting growth of the Drug Industry. The Committee submitted its report 
in April 1975 and recommended, inter-a lia, abolition of brand names in a 
phased manner and procurement of si ngle ingredient drugs and drugs 
included in Indian Pharmacopoeia for Central and State Government 

Institutions and local bodi es under generic names.  The Government laid a 
Statement on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 29th March, 1978 containing its 
decisions on the  recommendations of the Committee. Later this came to be  
known as Drug Policy, 1978. 
 
The Government reviewed the Drug Policy, 1978 and restructured it 
in 1986 by announcing ‘Measures for Ra tionalisation, Quality Control and 
Growth of Drugs and Pharmaceuticals In dustry in India’ which, interalia, 
envisaged setting up of a machinery to be called the National Drug and 
Pharmaceuticals Authority to look a fter the rational use of drugs.  The 
importance of quality control and rational use of drugs  was reiterated in the 
‘Modifications in Drug Policy, 1986’ , announced in September, 1994 and it 
was envisaged therein that a National Drug Authority be set up to undertake 
the regulatory functions performed by the Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation (CDSCO) in addition to assuming many new responsibilities.  
This, inter-alia required major structur al changes in the existing regulatory 
system, where licensing of manufacturers etc. as well as enforcement of the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules made thereunder, are primarily 
done by the state authorities.   Efforts are being made to strengthen the 
existing capacity of the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation 
(CDSCO) which would be necessa ry before undertaking the new 
responsibilities and conver sion of CDSCO into a fu ll fledged Central Drug 
Authority (CDA). 
 
Creation of a CDA is under  active consideration of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare.” 
   
4.5  The Department have also informed that the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare constituted an Expert Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. 
R.A. Mashelkar.  This Committee submitt ed its report in November, 2003.  In the 
report, the Mashelkar Committee m ade various recommendations for 
strengthening of drug r egulation including creation of Central Drug Administration 
(CDA), having ten separate divisions to lo ok after multi disciplinarily demands on 
the regulatory system and also taking over drug manufactur ing licensing activities 
in the country by the Centre. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER – V 
 
 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT IN THE PHARMA SECTOR 
 
The Indian Pharmaceuticals Industry has achieved global recognition.  
Leading Indian companies have established marketing and manufacturing 
activities in over 60 countries including USA and Europe.  But to remain globally 
viable and to produce cheaper drugs for t he masses, Research and Development 
(R&D) is a must and more particularly afte r introduction of product patent regime.  
High caliber experts and modern facilities are required in various areas of drug 
development.  In the Indian Pharma ceutical Industry, the average R&D 
expenditure is stated to be around 2 percent  of the turnover contributed by around 
50 companies against the 15-20 percent  in Western countries. 
 
5.2  The Drug Industry is a highly R&D oriented sector in which there is a 
very high rate of obsolescence.  This se ctor has also been identified as one of the 
thrust areas for export.  Therefore, there is a need to ensure that the technologies 
used in the country are cost effective and efficient in tune with disease pattern in 
the country. 
 
5.3  On being enquired by the Committ ee as to what are the difficulties 
being faced by drug manufacturers due to  introduction of patent regime, the 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals,  submitted in a written reply, as 
under:- 
 “With the ushering in of the product Patent regime w.e.f. 1st January, 
2005,  India and the Indian Pharmaceutical Sector will have to face new 
challenges that would accompany such  a change. This will signal the 
beginning of a new chapter as Patent on products also, in addition to patent 
on processes, in the Pharmaceutic al Sector would be granted. This 
necessitates the Industry to innovate and invent and shift focus from mere 
reverse engineering. R&D will hav e to become the cornerstone for 
existence. Researchers will have to app ly their creative skills in producing 
new drugs.  Large investments on R&D has to be taken up in right earnest. 
 
Recognizing the imperativeness of taking proactive measures to give 
the necessary fillip to R&D in the Pha rmaceutical Sector in the country, the 

Government is also taking steps to strengthen the R & D initiatives through 
various Programmes/incentives to the manufacturers.” 
 
5.4  The Pharmaceutical Research  and Development Committee (PRDC) 
was set up under the Chairmanship of Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, Director General, CSIR 
to study and identify the measures need ed to strengthen R&D base of the Indian 
Pharmaceutical Industry and to i dentify the support required by Indian 
pharmaceutical companies to undertake  domestic R&D.  The Committee 
submitted their report in November, 2003. 
 
5.5  When the Committee wanted to know   about the steps taken by the 
Government in regard to encourage the R& D in the Drug sect or, the Department 
of Chemicals & Petrochemicals informed that a Pharmaceutic al Research and 
Development Support Fund (PRD SF) with a corpus of Rs. 150 crore was set up 
under the Department of Science and Technology.  Annual grant of Rs. 150 crore 
has been approved from this year.  Under  Income Tax Act, 150 percent of R&D 
expenditure in drug industry  is exempted upto the year 2007. 
 
5.6  On being enquired by the Committ ee about the effect of recent 
amendments in Patent Act on prices and availability of  drugs,  particularly life 
saving drugs and pharmaceuticals, the Department of C&PC submitted in a written 
note, as under:- 
 
“The existing patent law in the c ountry provides for a strong and 
comprehensive set of safeguards, and inte r-alia, has effective provisions to 
ensure availability of pharmaceutical products at reasonable price through 
compulsory licensing.   Many of the drugs already in the Indian market, 
including those in the National List of Essential Medici nes 2003, are off-
patent and their prices would not get affected by the new patent regime. 
This also would not have an immediate impact on the availability and prices 
of medicines.   
 
  The existing patent law in the country, which provides for a strong 
and comprehensive set of safeguards, is fully equipped to deal with issues 
relating to non  availability of drugs  and/or exploitative pricing. The 

protective/public interest prov isions of the patents law were 
comprehensively reviewed by the Jo int Committee of Parliament, which 
examined the provisions of the Patents  (Sec ond Amendment) Bill, 1999. 
The Committee primarily focused on the efficacy of safeguards of public 
interest and public health concerns. Taking note of the Doha Ministerial 
Conference of WTO in 2001, the Commi ttee restructured the provisions 
relating to public interest, compulsory licensing, Government use, national 
security and public health and nutriti on with a view to enabling an 
appropriate timely and efficient respons e to national and public interest  
concerns. The existing law has effective provisions: 
 
a) To  ensure availability of pr oducts at  reasonable price through 
compulsory licence. {Section 84}. 
 
b) To deal with emergent situation or cases of public non-commercial 
use {Section 92}. 
 
c) The provision relating to parallel import of patented product for 
ensuring availability of patented pr oducts at cheaper price to the 
consumers {section 107A(b)}. 
 
d) To ensure import of  medicines  by Government {section 47(4)}. 
 
e) The Bolar provision pertaining to act of making, constructing, using 
or selling a patented invention merely for the purpose of submission 
of information to the regulatory aut horities before the expiry of term 
of patent  so as to allow swift tr ansition of the patented products into 
the public domain immediately after the expiry of the  term of the 
patent. This provision specially safe guards the interest of generic  
manufacturers {section 107 A(a)}. 
 
     f) For acquisition of patent right by Government {section 102}. 
 
g) To enable use of  patent for  research, experiment and education 
purpose{Section 47(3)}. 
 
h) To enable use of invention for th e purposes of Government {section 
100}. 
 
i) For revocation of patent for non-working in India {section 85}. 
 
j) For revocation of patent in public interest {section 66}. 
 
k) For summary revocation of patent on security consideration {section 
157A}.” 
 
5.7 When the Committee desired to know as to how much amount has been 
spent on R&D by Indian pharma industry during the last five years, the Department 
of Chemicals & Petrochemicals stated in their post-evidence, reply as under:- 
 
“The R&D expenditure of major R&D companies for the last five 
years as obtained from their published Annual Reports is tabulated below: 
 

(Rs. in lakh) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name  1999-
2000 
2000-
2001 
2001-
2002 
2002-
2003 
2003-
2004 
1 Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd.* 6744 6687 7705 19217 27612 
2 Dr. Reddy’s Lab Ltd. * 1327 4154 11076 16349 22604 
3 Sun Pharmaceuticals 
Industries Ltd. 
2010 2500 3360 6577 10768 
4 Cadila Health Care Limited 2130 3507 4155 3830 8820 
5 Wockhardt Limited * NA 4025 3021 3362 6041 
6 Cipla Limited  1192 1981 2249 5171 5650 
7 Nicolas Piramal 864 916 975 1200 5586 
8 Lupin Ltd.  4220 5356 3600 4599 
9 Aurobindo Pharma Ltd. 1433 859 1294 2205 4558 
10 Torrent Pharmaceuticals 
Ltd. 
1616 2174 2247 3122 3967 
11 Glenmark Phrmaceuticals 
Ltd. 
105 2310 1218 3058 3716 
12 Biocon India Limited 609 387 710 1100 2333 
13 USV Limited 1504 1359 1192 1498 2078 
14 Alembic Limited 692 741 1441 1967 1958 
15 IPCA Labs Limited 644 579 826 1298 1703 
16 Sushan 235 632 889 854 1084 
17 Candila Pharma 494 927 889 854 1042 
18 Unichem Limited 361 1097 1007 864 843 
 Total 21960 39055 49610 76126 114962   
  
 *  Figures are from Annual Report, which is for the Calendar Year. 
 
5.8  Asked about the major achievem ents on the Indian Drug Industry in 
developing new drugs, the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals informed in 
a note that the following dr ugs were discovered and approved for marketing in the 
country :-    
 
S.No  Name of the Drug Pharmacological Classification Name of the Discoverer 
1 Hamycin Topical Anti – fungal  M/s Hindustan Antibiotics, Pune.  
2 Centimizone Anti-thyroid Central Drug Research Institute, 
Lucknow  
3 Enfenamic Acid Anti-inflammatory Agent Regional Research Laboratory, 
Hyderabad.  
4 Nitroxazepine 
Hydrochloride  
Anti-depressant M/s Hindustan Ciba-Geigy, Mumbai.  
5za Azabiperidol Neuroleptic Agent M/s Hindustan Ciba–Geigy, Mumbai.  
6 Tinazoline Nasal decongestant  M/s Hindustan Ciba–Geigy, Mumbai. 
7 Centbucridine  Local Anaesthetic agent  Central Drug Research Institute, 
Lucknow  
8 Satranidazole Anti-amoebic  M/s Hindustan Ciba–Geigy, Mumbai. 
9 Amoscanate Anthelminitic M/s Hindustan Ciba–Geigy, Mumbai. 
10 Kyasavur Forest Disease 
(KFD) Vaccine 
Vaccine  Virus Diagnostic Laboratory, Shimoga 
(Karnataka)  
11 Gugulipid Lipid Lowering Agent  Central Drug Research Institute, 
Lucknow.  
12  Centchroman Post –Coital Contraceptive  Central Drug Research Institute, 
Lucknow.  
13. Centpropozon Anti-depressant  CDRI, Lucknow  
14. Bulaquin  Anti-Malaria  CDRI, Lucknow.  

 PART – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. The Department of Chemical s & Petrochemicals under the 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizer s is responsibl e for planning, 
development, regulation and control of the pharmaceuticals industry 
along with ensuring availabilit y and pricing of drugs and 
pharmaceuticals.  With the quan tum increase in population over a 
period of time, the need for m aking drugs and pharmaceuticals 
available at affordable prices to the masses has become a challenge 
before the nation.  From the early 1970s, there have been efforts by the 
Government to implement a ‘National Drug Policy’ to regulate the 
industry.  For this purpose, the Government had set up a Committee in 
1974, popularly known as the ‘Hathi Committee’.  On the basis of the 
Report prepared by this Committee in 1975, the firs t Comprehensive 
Drug Policy was formulated in 1978 .  Subsequently,  keeping in view 
the need, the Drug Policy was revi sed in 1986.  In the context of 
liberalization of the economy and growth of the industry, the Drug 
Policy was modified in 1994.  Sub sequently a new Pharma Policy was 
announced by the Government in 20 02.  However, due to the stay 
order passed by the High Court of  Karnataka on a Public Interest 
Litigation, this new policy has not been enforced.  
 
2. Recently, the Government cons tituted a Task Force under the 
Chairmanship of the Principal Adviser, Planning Commission inter-alia 
to explore various options other than price c ontrol for achieving the 
objective of making available life sa ving drugs at reasonable prices 

and issues related to price control,  patenting of drugs, promotion of 
use of generic drugs, br inging items in the ‘National List of Essential 
Medicines, 2003,’ unde r price control etc.  This Task Force has 
submitted its draft recommendation s to the Government and a new 
Pharma Policy will be formulated by  the Government after considering 
the recommendations of the Task Force along with other inputs on the 
subject.  
 
3. The Committee (the erstwhile Standing Committee on Petroleum 
& Chemicals) examined the ‘Draft Na tional Drug Policy’ and submitted 
their Second report to Parliament on 6th August, 1993.  The Committee 
had made several recommendations about availability of essential and 
life saving drugs of good quality at  reasonable prices, to increase 
health budget from 1 per cent of GDP to WHO guidelines of 5%, 
reservation of drugs for PSUs and revival of PSUs, safeguards in 
patent regime, enhancing R&D expe nditure and to encourage Indian 
systems of medicine.  The Committee (13th Lok Sabha) again examined 
‘Pricing and Availability of Drug s /Pharmaceuticals ‘ and presented 
their 15th Report to Parliament on 29 th August, 2001.  The Committee’s 
present examination of ‘Availabilit y and Price Manage ment of Drugs 
and Pharmaceuticals’ is once again with the objective of making 
available quality medicines at affo rdable prices to the masses.  The 
findings of the Committee as detaile d in the succee ding paragraphs 
relate to the need for amendment of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 
1995, bringing more essential and life saving drugs under price 
control, promotion of use of generi c medicines, increase in National 
health budget, emphas is on more R&D and strengthening of drug 

control offices throughout the country to have proper control over the 
production and availability of esse ntial drugs and pharmaceuticals.  
The Committee desire that their re commendations are considered in 
the formulation of the new Drug /Pharma Policy, which is being 
prepared on the basis of the re commendations of the Task Force 
constituted by the Government.  The Committee’s recommendations/ 
observations are detailed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
4. The Committee note that presen tly the Government fix the prices 
of limited drugs viz. Scheduled drugs under the Drugs (Prices Control) 
Order, 1995.  Over the years the number of such drugs have been 
reduced considerably. The extent of reduction in the span of price 
control can be gauged from the fact  that while all drugs were subject 
to control in 1970, 347 drugs were  under price control in 1979.  
Subsequently, these were reduced to 142 in 1987 a nd as of now only 
74 drugs are under price control.  Curiously enough, the present 
criteria of inclusion of a drug in the list of Scheduled Drugs under the 
price control is limited to fact ors like production monopoly and 
turnover. Surprisingly, considerations like the essential requirement of 
drugs for public health, the concept of life saving drugs etc. are not 
taken into account in the process of enlisting of drugs in the Schedule.   
Even though the ‘Hathi Committe e’ Report recomme nded preparation 
of a ‘List of Essential Drugs’ as far back as 1975, it was only in July, 
2003 and that too on the directive of the Supreme Court that the 
Government prepared a ‘National List  of Essential Medicines’ (NLEM) 
consisting of 354 drugs.  Intriguing ly, out of this NLEM, only 50 drugs 
are under price control. All these clearly show that there is an 

imperative need to have a re-look in to the entire process of inclusion 
of drugs in the Schedule for price control.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Gove rnment should consider bringing 
more NLEM Drugs under price cont rol for the benefit of the poor 
sections of the society,  particularly when several advanced countries 
like Canada, Japan, UK, etc. are stat ed to be having some system of 
price control over essential and life saving drugs. Needless to 
emphasize, the Government should ta ke due note of essential drugs 
meant for diseases like Cancer, T.B, HIV/AIDS and new set of diseases 
like encephalitis and leptospirosis which are increasingly affecting the 
urban and rural poor masses.     
 
5. The prices of non-Scheduled dr ugs and formulations are fixed by 
the manufacturers based on factors like cost of  production, marketing 
expenses, R&D expenses, market competition, quality of product etc.  
Even though one of the main objectives of the National Pharmaceutical 
Pricing Authority (NPPA) is to moni tor prices of non-Scheduled drugs, 
it has no machinery for collection of price related basic data across 
the country.  The Committee are distressed to note that NPPA depends 
entirely on a private organisation’s  Survey reports for price related 
data in the country.  The Committee would like the Government to 
strengthen the wings of NPPA to ma ke it self-sufficient to carry out its 
activities independently and effectively.    
 
6. The Committee note that the State Drugs Controllers help the 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) in monitoring the 

prices and enforcing the provisions  of Drugs (Prices Control) Order 
(DPCO), 1995.  The State Government s are authorised to take action 
under Essential Commodities (EC) Act, 1955 for violation of the 
provisions of the DPCO,1995.  Ho wever, prosecution under EC Act, 
1955 sometimes does not lead to stri ngent action against defaulters.  
At present, there are no provisions of fine or penalties for the violation 
of the DPCO’95 for  non-submission of requisite data, price list and for 
not allowing officers of NPPA to  visit and inspect manufacturing 
premises.  The Committee, therefore,  desire that DPCO,’95 should be 
amended suitably to incorporate provisions for compounding offences 
by stringent  fines or penalties therein. 
 
7. The Committee also find that at  present the prices of drugs are 
not being monitored effectively at the State level.  In th is regard, they 
have been apprised by the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals that except in Karn ataka where a DPCO Cell has been 
constituted for monitoring the pric es of drugs, which is working well, 
there is no effective mechanism in other States.  There is a proposal 
by the Department to establish DP CO Cells in all the States on the 
model of Karnataka, which will re port to NPPA.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the process of creation of  DPCO Cells should be 
expedited in all States on the lines of Karnataka for proper monitoring 
of prices of drugs and pharmaceuticals in a time bound schedule.   
 

8. The Committee’s exam ination has clearly rev ealed that there is 
an urgent need to revamp and stre ngthen the National Pharmaceutical 
Pricing Authority (NPPA) and the Dr ug Regulatory Mechanism in the 
States in order to make the regula tory role exercised by them more 
effectively.  NPPA depends on the State Drug Administration for 
feedback in fixing/regulating the pri ces of drugs and pharmaceuticals.  
However, the Committee find that ther e is lack of sufficient staff and 
infrastructure with the State Drug Co ntrollers to cope with the growth 
of the pharma sector, the complex nature of the industry and the 
demand and availability of  medicines across the country. As per the 
information made available by the Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals to the Committee, an exercise to strengthen the NPPA 
has been started and a scheme fo r its computerization has been 
approved.  The Committee feel that  without an effective NPPA and 
Drug Regulatory Mechanism in the States, the desire d objective of 
monitoring the prices of drugs to safeguard the interest of 
patients/consumers cannot be achieved fully.    They, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should ensure that the NPPA and the 
Drug Regulatory Mechanism in the States must be strengthened 
expeditiously and the Committee  be informed about the conclusive 
action taken in this regard. 
 

9. The Committee note that prese ntly not all patented drugs are 
under price control in  the country.  They feel that after the 
amendments in the Patent Act and the coming of the product patent 
era, the availability and prices of drugs might be affected.   
Apprehensions have been expressed about its possible impact on 
prices, in particular. In this regard, the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has informed that so me kind of monitoring strategies, 
price negotiations etc.  are prevalent in developed countries like 
Canada, France, U.K. etc. As per the information furnished to the 
Committee, in Canada, the Patented Medicines Prices Review Board, 
through negotiation, fixes a maximu m chargeable price for patented 
medicines by the pharmaceutical manufactures and any attempt to 
impose higher prices than the fixed ones attracts stringent fine.  
During the course of evidence, the Committee were also apprised by 
the representative of the Department that to take care of such a 
situation in future, they are contemplating that there should be a price 
negotiation mechanism for the new pa tented drugs prior to the grant 
of marketing approval.  The Committee desire that the proposal should 
be concretized and enforced  in the country expeditiously.   
   
10.  The Committee note that as pe r the present policy, drugs in 
which there is sufficient market co mpetition are kept outside price 
control.  The criteria for deciding su fficient market competition is that 

there are at least 5 bulk producer s and 10 formulators and none of 
them has more than 40 per cent market share in the retail trade.  It has 
been stated by the representatives of non-official organisations during 
their evidence before the Committee  that in actual practice, a fair 
competitive situation does not exist in the market.  Ac cording to them, 
the  brand leader is the price leader  in most of the cases and hence, 
the market forces do not tend to appe ar to determine the prices of the 
drugs. Specific cases were also quote d to substantiate the point.  The 
Committee’s  examination revealed th at though, there is a provision 
that a strict watch will be kept on the movement of the prices and the 
Government may determine the ceil ing levels beyond which increase 
in prices would not be permissible,  this provision has seldom been 
applied.  In this context, some of the State Governments have also 
informed that when the cases of high prices of Anti-cancer drugs, 
Antibiotics, Neutraceuticals and Cetrizine were referred to the National 
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA), the latter conveyed its 
helplessness in curtailing the high prices. The Committee are unhappy 
over this unsatisfactory state of af fairs and desire that the situation 
should be remedied forthwith. They therefore, recommend that for the 
category of drugs for the same th erapeutic use, the Government 
should determine a reasonable cei ling beyond which increase in 
prices may not be allowed. 
 

11. It came out during examinati on that Indian Drug Companies 
export generic drugs worth thousands of crores of rupees to various 
developed and developing countries.  However, these very companies 
promote aggressively the same drugs as highly priced branded 
drugs/formulations in the domest ic market.  Reportedly medical 
representatives influence the professionals to prescribe branded 
drugs.  This phenomenon has prevent ed the masses from access to 
the low cost generic medicines ma nufactured by the Indian Drug 
Industry. The Committee are of the co nsidered view that in order to 
overcome this situation, there is an urgent need for promotion of 
generic drugs in a big way. They, therefore, desire that the Department 
of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, in coordination with the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, shoul d devise ways to ensure use of 
generic drugs in a massive way, so that the people are able to get 
quality drugs at reasonable prices. 
 
12. The Committee find that for non-Scheduled drugs, the Maximum 
Retail Price (MRP) printed by the ma nufacturers is very high.  While 
the drug is available to retailers at a substantially low price, the benefit 
does not percolate to the consumer .  When the Committee drew the 
attention of the Department to th e information made available by an 
NGO that there were huge trade margins on essential drugs to the 
extent of even 240, 714 percents in  certain cases,  the representative 

of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals while admitting 
this during the evidence stated that the branded products might give a 
margin of 20 to 30 per cent only,  but the margin for generic products 
might be 500 or 1000 per cent du e to market factors. The Committee 
further observe that the  proposal  of controlling the trade margin on 
drugs was examined by a Departme ntal Committee constituted by the 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemi cals,    but it was felt by the 
Department that it might adversely affect the drugs produced by a 
large number of small manufac turers and hence, was not 
implemented.  The Committee are not convinced of the reasons 
advanced by the Department.  They,  therefore, strongly recommend 
that the Department of  Chemicals and Petroche micals should take 
concrete steps to reduce the  trad e margins, particularly on essential 
and life saving drugs.    
 
13. The Committee note that there exists a system for examining the 
rationality of drugs and formulations  marketed in th e country through 
the Drugs Technical Advisory Board (DTAB) and its Expert Committee, 
a statutory body under section  (5) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 
1940, under the chairmanship of DG , Health Services to advise the 
Central and  State Governments.   The Committee have been informed 
that some drugs like Vitamin E, Analgin, Diosmine , etc. which are 
hazardous, unscientific and irrationa l and abundantly available in the 

market, still come under the Firs t Schedule of the Drugs (Prices 
Control) Order (DPCO), 1995.  The Committee feel that such 
unscientific and irrational drugs ar e manufactured and promoted only 
with the profit motive.  They, theref ore, desire that while reviewing the 
list of Scheduled Drugs as recomm ended by the Committee elsewhere 
in the Report,  hazardous and ob solete drugs should be dropped 
therefrom. Besides, the Commi ttee also recommend that the 
Government should discourage pr omotion of  unscientific and 
irrational drugs.   
 
14. The Committee are concerned to note that a number of 
spurious/fake/counterfeit/sub-standard drugs are available in the market 
which is becoming a health hazard for the common people. The 
representative of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare admitted 
candidly during oral evidence before  the Committee th at unfortunately, 
the monitoring and regulatory system  was rather fragmented in the 
country and that spurious drug manu facturing was done mostly by the 
criminal elements in a very cla ndestine manner.  In the Committee’s 
view such a situation exists du e to unregulated pharmaceutical 
manufacturing units being run by some unscrupulous drug 
manufacturers.    The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government should strengthen the dr ug regulatory authorities to 
ensure proper checking at production / distribution level.  Steps should 

also be taken to modernize the existi ng laboratories to  check cases of 
spurious drugs.  
 
15. The Committee further find that  the provisions for quality, 
licensing, storage, sales and distribution of drugs are governed by the 
provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetic s Act, 1940, administered by the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welf are.  The Committee desire that the 
Department of Chemicals and Petr ochemicals should impress upon 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare that the drug distribution and 
delivery system should be made more effective and all the drugs 
produced indigenously as well as imported should be assessed for 
safety, efficacy and quality before they are made available to the 
consumers.  In this connection, the Committee would also like the 
Ministry of Health and Family We lfare to implement various measures 
in letter and spirit as recomm ended in the Mashelkar Committee 
Report to check the prevalence of spurious/fake drugs in the country. 
 
16. The Committee are of the firm  opinion that public sector 
enterprises engaged in the manufacture of drugs have an important 
role not only in relation  to availability, but also with reference to 
pricing. They, however,    regret to note that the public sector units like 
Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL) and  Hindustan 
Antibiotic Limited ( HAL) which laid the foundation of drug and 

pharmaceutical sector in the country are being neglected and there 
have been inordinate delays in the  approval of their revival packages.  
For instance, the first revival packag e of IDPL was  approved by the 
Board for Industrial and Financial Re construction (BIFR) as early as 
1994.  The Committee in their earlie r Reports, particularly on Demands 
for Grants, have been recommending for early revival of sick PSUs 
under the Department. Considering the fact, that PS Us have been 
producing medicines for public health and their strategic potentialities 
in the market, the Committee reiterate that the Government should 
take urgent steps for revival of PSUs under the Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals.        
 
17. The Committee are dismayed to note that the Government’s 
expenditure on public health is less than 1 per cent of Plan outlay as 
against the guidelines of WHO to sp end 5 per cent of the GDP.  The 
Secretary, Chemicals & Petrochemicals submitted before the 
Committee that the Government propose to raise it to 2 to 3 per cent of 
GDP.  Considering the regular outbreaks of deadly diseases in various 
parts of the country from time to  time, the Committee would like the 
Government to address the issue in  its entire significance. They, 
therefore, would like the Department  to prepare a time schedule with 
specific plans for upgradat ion of the public healthcare system in the 
country for the benefit of the poor by raising the outlay for public 
health. 
 

18. The Committee note that some  of the States  like Tamil Nadu 
procure medicines through a centra lised tender system at a very low 
price than MRP  for distribution for public health.  In Rajasthan also, 
there are lifeline fluid st ores which are working well in selling the fluid 
to the public through Government dispensaries.  The Committee find 
that one of the terms of reference of  the Task Force  constituted under 
the Chairmanship of the Principal Adviser, Planning Commission to 
explore various options other than  price control for achieving the 
objective of making available life savi ng drugs at reasonable prices, is 
to examine the issue of monito ring of prices and bulk/pooled 
procurement of medicines.  The Committee are of the view that 
medicines can be procured under the pooled procurement system  
particularly for public hospitals, dispensaries, primary health centres 
etc. The Committee, ther efore, recommend that the system of pool 
procurement of medicines should be  evolved througho ut the country 
in coordination with the State Governments.   
 
19. The Committee find that the Department of AYUSH has been 
taking various initiatives to augment the quality control and 
monitoring of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani and Homeopathy system of 
medicine.  The Committee are of the view that traditional systems of 
medicine are in use in the country from the ancient times and form an 
important component in  the country’s health  care system.  The 

Committee, therefore wo uld like the Government to enhance the 
budget for these systems substantiall y to improve the health care in 
the country, particularly of the poor masses.  Adequate publicity 
should be made of the action taken to propagate these medicines for 
the information of the public. 
 
20. The Committee note that presen tly the issues relating to drugs 
and pharmaceuticals are being dealt by more than one Ministry.  While 
the issue relating to pricing of drugs and pharmaceuticals policy 
comes under the Ministry of Chem icals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals), the Health Policy is framed by the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welf are.  The Ministry of Science and 
Technology deal with the Research & Development while patent issue 
is being looked after by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry. 
Evidently, there is no single authorit y at present, to deal with all the 
issues relating to dr ugs and pharmaceuticals in a coordinated and 
unified manner.  It is pertinent to  point out here that the ‘Hathi 
Committee’ recommended as far back as in 1975 for setting up of a 
‘National Drug Authority’ for the pur pose. This was  al so envisaged in 
the Modified Drug Polic y announced in 1994.  Unfortunately, the 
proposed authority is yet to be set up . The Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals has informed that efforts are being made to 
strengthen the existing capacity of the Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation (CDSCO) which would be  necessary before undertaking 

the new responsibilities and conver sion of CDSCO into a full fledged 
Central Drug Authority.  The Committ ee are of the opinion that a co-
ordinated approach to deal with a ll issues relating to the drugs and 
pharmaceuticals brooks no delay.  They therefore, strongly 
recommend that as envisaged in the modified Drug Policy, a National 
Drug Authority should be created without any further delay. 
 
21. The Committee are co ncerned to note that after introduction of 
the product patent in India w.e.f. Ja nuary, 2005, the availability of low 
cost medicines might be affected in the long run and for this the Indian 
Drug Industries will have to  concentrate on Research and 
Development (R&D).  In this context, during the course of evidence the 
Committee were apprised that a fu nd called Pharmaceutical Research 
and Development Support Fund (PRDSF) with a corpus of Rs.150 crore 
was set up under the Depa rtment of Science and Technology.  Now, 
this fund has been converted from th is year into an annual grant of 
Rs.150 crore.  Further, as per th e information made available to the 
Committee by the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, the 
expenditure on R&D by the private sector pharma industry has 
increased from Rs. 219 crore in 19 99-2000 to Rs. 1149 crore during 
2003-04.  However, this expenditure seems to be inadequate in view of 
the large amount being spent by  the Pharma companies of the 
advanced countries.  The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that 
budget for R&D on drugs should be incr eased substantially.  For this, 
the Government should consider is suing directives to the big drug 

manufactures to earmark certain per centage of their turnover.  The 
Government should also consider pr ovision of fiscal incentives on a 
long-term basis for research and development efforts in drugs.    
 
 22. During examination of the su bject, several State Governments 
have submitted to the Committee var ious suggestions to strengthen 
the Government’s contro l over production, supp ly and marketing of 
drug formulations across the countr y.  These suggestions which have 
been listed out elsewhere in the Report inter-alia include strengthening 
the State Drug Control Administrati on, bringing out publications by 
NPPA, bringing life saving drugs like anti-cancer and Anti-HIV drugs 
under price control, strengthening R&D in Pharma Sector, curbing 
spurious drugs, fixing ceiling on drug prices, pooled procurements for 
public health, etc.  The Committee would like that the suggestions of 
the State Governments should be co nsidered for incorporation in the 
proposed new Pharma Policy al ong with recommendations of the 
Committee contained in the preceding paragraphs as also the Report/ 
recommendations of the Task  Force constituted under the 
Chairmanship of Principal Advisor, Planning Commission.  The 
Committee would await Government’s conclusive action taken in the 
matter within a period of six months  from the presentation of their 
Report.   
 
 
New Delhi; 
September  27, 2005                       ANANT GANGARAM GEETE 
Asvina  5, 1927 (Saka)                                         Chairman, 
      Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers. 

ANNEXURE 
 
FIRST SCHEDULE OF DPCO, 1995 
 
1. Sulphamethoxazole 
2. Penicillins 
3. Tetracycline 
4. Rifampicin 
5. Streptomycin 
6. Ranitidine 
7. Vitamin C 
8. Betamethasone 
9. Metronidazole 
10. Chloroquine 
11. Insulin 
12. Erythromycin 
13. Vitamin A 
14. Oxytetracycline 
15. Prednisolone 
16. Cephazolin 
17. Methyldopa 
18. Aspirin 
19. Trimethoprim 
20. Cloxacillin 
21. Sulphadimidine 
22. Salbutamol 
23. Famotidine 
24. Ibuprofen 
25. Metamizol (Analgin) 
26. Doxycycline 
27. Ciprofloxacin 
28. Cefotaxime 
29. Dexamethasone 
30. Ephedrine 
31. Vitamin B1 (Thiamine) 
32. Carbamazepine 
33. Vitamin B2 (Riboflavin) 
34. Theophylline 
35. Levodopa 
36. Tolnaftate 
37. Vitamin E 
38. Nalidixic Acid 
39. Griseofulvin 
40. Gentamicin 
41. Dextropropoxyphene 
42. Halogenated Hy droxyquinoline 
43. Pentazocine 
44. Captopril 
45. Naproxen 
46. Pyrental 

47. Sulphadoxine 
48. Norfloxacin 
49. Cefadroxyl 
50. Panthonates & Panthenols 
51. Furazolidone 
52. Pyrithioxine 
53. Sulphadiazone 
54. Framycetin 
55. Verapamil 
56. Deleted X 
57. Glipizide  
58. Spironolactone 
59. Pentoxyfylline 
60. Amodiaquin 
61. Sulphamoxole 
62. Frusemide 
63. Pheniramine Maleate 
64. Chloroxylenols 
65. Becampicillin 
66. Lincomycin 
67. Chlorpropamide 
68. Mebhydroline 
69. Chlorpromazine 
70. Methendienone 
71. Phenyl Butazone 
72. Lynestranol 
73. Salazosulphapyrine 
74. Diosmine 
75. Trimipramine 
76. Deleted X 
 
 
x are omitted vide S.O. No. 626 (E) dated 02.09.1997. 
 

Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILISERS 
(2004-05) 
 
FIFTH SITTING 
(14.09.2004) 
 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1645 hrs. 
Present 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete - Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Prahlad Joshi    
3. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
4. Shri P. Rajendran   
5. Shri V.K. Thummar 
6. Shri Bhanupratap Singh Verma   
7. Shri Bhal Chandra Yadav  
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8. Shri Raju Parmar 
9. Shri Ajay Maroo 
10.  Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha 
11. Shri Sanjay Rajaram Raut  
12. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh 
 
Secretariat 
1.  Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair   - Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri C.S. Joon   - Deputy Secretary 
3.  Shri S.C. Kaliraman   - Under Secretary 
 
 

 
Representatives of Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals 
1. Shri Ramesh Inder Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Gurdial Singh Sandhu  - Joint Secretary  
3. Smt. Veenu Gupta   - Director  
4. Shri Harish Kumar   - Director  
5. Ms. Harmeet Singh   - Director 
6. Shri Gurdeep Singh   - Director 
 
Representatives of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
1. Shri Vinay Bansal    - Chairman 
2. Shri Pradip Mehra    - Member Secretary 
3. Shri A.K. Parashar    - Director 
4. Shri Y.K. Venkatesh    - Director 
5. Shri O.P. Sharma    - Director 
6. Shri B.S. Raghunthan   - Director 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  After sometime , officers of the Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals and representatives of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) were called in.  The Chairman welcomed them and on his request they 
introduced themselves to the Committee. 
 
3.  Thereafter, the Committee were briefed by the officers of the Department 
of Chemicals & Petrochemicals and repr esentatives of NPPA on the subject 
‘Availability and Price M anagement of Drugs and Pharma ceuticals’.  During the 
course of briefing, the members were en lightened on various issues relating to 
price control of drugs, price differ entials of drugs and pharmaceuticals, 
overcharging on drugs by pharmaceutical companies,  levy of taxes on medicines,  
Patent Laws, spurious drugs, drug policie s, etc.  Members also raised some 
queries which were replied to  by the representatives of Department and NPPA. 
 
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided that a study tour may be undertaken to 
Jaipur and Mumbai in the month of October, 2004.  
 
5. The verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.

Appendix- II 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILISERS 
(2004-05) 
 
SIXTH SITTING 
(23.11.2004) 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete - Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Afzal Ansari  
3. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
4. Shri P. Rajendran  
5. Kunwar Akshyay Pratap Singh  
6. Shri V.K. Thummar 
7. Shri Bhal Chandra Yadav 
8. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
9. Shri T. Madhusudhan Reddy 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
11. Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha 
12. Shri Sanjay Rajaram Raut  
13. Shri T.R. Zeliang 
 
Secretariat 
1.  Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair   - Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri C.S. Joon   - Deputy Secretary 
3.  Shri S.C. Kaliraman   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 

Representatives of Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals 
(i) Shri Pratyush Sinha   - Secretary 
(Ii) Shri G.S. Sandhu   - Joint Secretary 
(Iii) Shri Ramesh Inder Si ngh  - Joint Secretary  
 
Representatives of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
(I)  Shri Vinay Bansal    - Chairman 
(ii) Shri Pradip Mehra    - Member Secretary  
Representatives of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
(i) Shri B.R. Wadhawan   - Deputy Drugs Controller 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and also extended congratulat ion to Shri Madhusudhan Reddy, MP, 
Lok Sabha on his nomination to the Committee.  
 
3. Thereafter, the representatives of t he Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals were called  in. The Committee, then, 
took oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals in connection with examin ation of the subject ‘Availability and 
Price Management of Drugs and Pharmaceuticals’.  
 
4. During the course of discussion, the main issues which were taken up are 
as under:- 
(i) Price control of drugs; 
(ii) New category of essential medi cines which may not come under the 
list of life saying drugs; 
(iii) Making provisions for control of  Drugs Controller General of India 
(DCGI) over State Drugs Controller; 
(iv) Monitoring of prices of decontrolled drugs and formulations; 
(v) Role of NPPA in fixation/ revision of prices of drugs; 
(vi) Amendment required in Drug  Price Control Order, 1995 and 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955; 
(vii) Export and import of drugs and pharmaceuticals; 
(viii) Exempting medicines from sales tax; and 
(ix) Research & Development acti vity in drugs and pharmaceuticals 
sectors.  
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

Appendix-III 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2004-05) 
 
FOURTEENTH SITTING 
(10.06.2005) 
 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1740 hrs. 
 
Present 
 
Shri P. Rajendran  -  Acting Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Prahlad Joshi 
3. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
4. Shri Tek Lal Mahto 
5. Shri A.Venkatarami Reddy 
6. Shri T. Madhusudhan Reddy 
7. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
8. Shri V.K. Thummar 
9. Shri Bhanupratap Singh Verma 
10. Shri Bhal Chandra Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
11. Shri Ajay Maroo 
12. Shri Raju Parmar  
13. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
14. Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
15. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh 
16. Shri T. R. Zeliang 
Secretariat   
1. Shri S.K. Sharma   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P. Sreedharan   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri C.S. Joon     -   Director 
4. Shri S.C. Kaliraman   –  Under Secretary 
 

Representatives of Low- Cost Standard Therapeutics (LOCOST) 
1. Shri S. Srinivasan   - Managing Trustee 
2. Dr. Anurag Bhargava   - Consultant 
 
Representatives of All India Organisation of Chemists and Druggists 
(AIOCD) 
1. Shri R. B. Puri    - President  
2. Shri J. S. Shinde   - General Secretary  
3. Shri Batu Anwrade   - Administrative Secretary 
4. Shri R.K. Khera   - President, HSCDA 
5. Shri Satish Vij    - General Secretary, HSCDA 
6. Mahesh Parekh   - President, Sangli District Chemists  
       A s s o c i a t i o n  
 
At the outset, owing to non-presence of  Chairman of the Committee, the 
Committee chose Shri P. Ra jendran, a Member of t he Committee to act as 
Chairman in accordance with Rule 258 (3) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha.  The Acting Chairman then welcomed the representatives 
of Low- Cost Standard Therapeutics (LOCOST)  to the sitting of the Committee. 
  
2. Thereafter, the representatives of  LOCOST made a brief audio-visual 
presentation highlighti ng the activities of their organisation as well as problems 
being faced by the people in availability and pricing of drugs and pharmaceuticals.  
They specifically mentioned about price dist ortions in the same category of drugs 
and high margin being earned by traders.    
 
3. Subsequently, the Co mmittee called the representatives of All India 
Organisation of Chemists and Druggists (AIOCD) and welcomed them to the 
sitting.  After hearing their views on t he subject, the Members raised various 
queries which were answered by the representatives of AIOCD & LOCOST. 
 
4. During the course of sitting, the following issues came up for discussion:- 
(i) Regulatory Mechanism for drugs & pharmaceuticals.  
(ii) Issues relating to spurious drugs.  
(iii) Issues relating to generic drugs and their high prices.  
(iv) Quality control/ check on drugs and need for National Drug Authority.  
(v) Rationalisation of prices of  drugs and pharmaceuticals.   
(vi) Pooling of drugs in the country  on the lines as be ing done in Tamil 
Nadu and Delhi.  
(vii) High Trade Margin on drugs and pharmaceuticals.    
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 

Appendix-IV 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2004-05) 
 
FIFTEENTH SITTING 
(01.07.2005) 
 
 
 The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1800 hrs. 
 
Present 
 
Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha  - In the Chair 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
3. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
4. Shri P. Rajendran  
5. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
6. Shri V.K. Thummar 
7. Shri Bhanupratap Singh Verma 
8. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
10. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh 
11. Shri T. R. Zeliang 
 
Secretariat 
  
1.      Shri C.S. Joon     -   Director 
  
 
 

Representatives of Indian Drug Manufacturers’ Association (IDMA)   
1. Shri N.R. Munjal   - Vice-President 
2. Shri G. Wakankar   - Executive Director  
3. Shri S.K. Arya    - Joint Director   
 
Representatives of Consumer Unity & Trust Society (CUTS) 
 
1. Shri Vinayak R Pandey  -    Asstt. Policy Analyst   
 
Representatives of All India Drug Action Network (AIDAN) 
1.  Dr Mira Shiva    - Managing Director   
2.  Dr Arun Kumar   - Member  
  
At the outset, owing to non-presence of  Chairman of the Committee, the 
Committee chose Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha, a Member of the Committee to act 
as Chairman in accordance with Rule 258 (3) of Rules of Pr ocedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok Sabha.  The Acting Chairman then called the representatives of 
Indian Drug Manufacturers’ Association (I DMA), Consumer Unity & Trust Society 
(CUTS) and All India Drug Action Network (AIDAN) and welcomed them to the 
sitting of the Committee. 
  
2. Thereafter, the representatives of  IDMA, CUTS and AIDAN expressed their 
views on the subject ‘Availabili ty and Price Management of Drugs & 
Pharmaceutical.    
 
3. During the course of the sitting,  the following issues came up for 
discussion:- 
(i)  Pricing framework of dr ugs and pharmaceuticals and its 
 rationalisation; 
(ii) Issues relating to spurious drugs; 
(iii) Compulsory licensing and regulati ons of drugs and pharmaceuticals;  
(iv) Product patent and its e ffect on prices of drugs; 
(v) High trade margin on drugs and pharmaceuticals; 
(vi) Removal of banned and bannable drugs from the market; and  
(vii) R&D activities on drugs. 
  
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 

Appendix-V 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2004-05) 
 
SIXTEENTH SITTING 
(20.07.2005) 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1800 hrs. 
 
Present 
 
 Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  - Chairman 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2.    Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
3. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
4. Shri P. Rajendran 
5. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
6.  Shri V.K. Thummar 
7.  Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava 
8. Shri Bhanupratap Singh Verma 
9. Shri Bhal Chandra Yadav 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha 
11. Shri Ajay Maroo 
12.  Shri Raju Parmar  
Secretariat   
1.  Shri P. Sreedharan   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C.S. Joon     -   Director 
3. Shri S.C. Kaliraman   –  Under Secretary 
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan   - Under Secretary 
 

Representatives of Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)  
 
1. Ms. Satwant Reddy   - Secretary 
2. Shri R.I. Singh   - Joint Secretary  
3. Shri G.S. Sandhu   - Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Mukesh Kakkar   - Joint Secrtary 
5. Shri K.M. Kaul   - Consultant  
  
Representatives of other Departments 
 
1. Shri Anthony De Sa  - Join t Secretary, Deptt. Of Commerce 
2. Shri Sanjay Kumar   - Director, Deptt. Of Commerce 
3. Shri Ashwini Kumar  - Dr ugs Controller General Of India 
4. Shri N.N. Prasad  - Join t Secretary, Dept.. Of Ipp 
5. Shri Shiv Basant   - Joint Secretary, Deptt. Of Ayush 
6. Dr. D.C. Katoch  - Dy. Adviser, Deptt. Of Ayush 
7. Dr. G. T. Samathanam - Advi ser, Deptt. Of Sciency &   
     Technology 
 
8. Dr. R.R. Abhyankar  - Adviser, Dsir 
9. Shri G.M. Bagai  - Scientist, Dsir  
 
  ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
2.  At the outset, Hon’ble Chai rman welcomed the Members and the 
representatives of the various Ministries/Departments concerned to the sitting of 
the Committee for examination of the s ubject ‘Availability and Price Management 
of Drugs and Pharmaceuticals’.    
  
3. Thereafter, the representatives  of Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals made a brief audio-visual presentation highlighting the activities of 
the Department particularly relating to the subject under examination. 
  

4. The Committee then took evidence of the officials of Departments 
concerned on the various aspects of the su bject.  During the course of evidence, 
the following issues came up for discussion:- 
(i) Aspects relating to spurious drugs; 
(ii) Rationalisation of excise  duty/taxes relating to drugs; 
(iii) Effects of introduction of VAT on the prices of medicines; 
(iv) Task Force for new Pharmaceutical Policy;  
(v) Research & Development in drugs and pharmaceutical sectors; 
(vi) Strengthening of drug regulator y mechanism  and the National 
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA); 
(vii) Implementation of recommendat ions of Mashelkar Committee; 
(viii) Reducing trade margin on generic drugs; 
(ix) Need to create an independent body  by Government of India to 
collect and for cross checking the data provided by ORG-MARG 
survey; 
(x) Ensuring the availability of ess ential drugs at reasonable rates; and 
(xi) Pharmaceutical Policy, 2002. 
 
 
5.  ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
6. ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
   
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
** Matter not related to this Report 
 
 
 

Appendix-VI 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2005-06) 
 
SECOND SITTING 
(27.09.2005) 
 
 The Committee sat from 1200 hrs. to 1300 hrs. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete - Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
    
2. Shri Prahlad Joshi   
3. Sardar Sukhdev Singh Libra 
4. Shri Tek Lal Mahto 
5. Shri P. Rajendran   
6. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
7. Shri V.K. Thummar  
8. Shri Bhanupratap Singh Verma   
9. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
10. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
11. Shri Raju Parmar 
12. Shri Ajay Maroo 
13.  Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
14. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh 
15. Shri T.R. Zeliang 
Secretariat 
1.  Shri P. Sreedharan   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Brahm Dutt      -   Director 
3. Shri S.C. Kaliraman   –  Under Secretary 

  
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting. 
He invited the Members to give their s uggestions, if any, pertaining to the draft 
report which had been circulated to the Members.  
  
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft Report in detail on 
‘Availability and Price M anagement on Drugs and Pharma ceuticals’ and adopted 
the same with some minor changes. 
  
4. The Committee, then, authorised the Chairman to finalise the Report after 
factual verification from the Department  of Chemicals & Petrochemicals.  
Considering the fact that the Government was in the process of formulation of a 
new Drug/Pharma Policy, the Committee decided that the Report may be 
presented to the Hon’ble Speaker instead of waiting for the Winter Session.  This 
would facilitate the Government in c onsidering their recommendations while 
formulating the new Drug/Pharma Policy.  
 
5. ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 
6. The Committee also appr eciated the work done by the officials of the Lok 
Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee in preparation of the Report.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
** Matter note related to this Report  
 
 