THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2004-05) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2004-2005) 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILISERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Rec ommendations contained in the First 
Report (Fo urteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2004-05) on ‘Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)’] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on  21.12.2004 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   21.12.2004 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka) 

 2
CONTENTS 
 
               PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2004-05) ……………………………….. 
 
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………… 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER I Report ……………………………………………………………...
 
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government ……………………………………………………… 
 
 
8 
CHAPTER III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies ……………………
 
 
15 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee……..
 
 
19 
 
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of  which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited …………………………………… 
 
 
23 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2004-05) held on 16th December, 2004…. 
 
 
30 
  
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations  contained in the First Report (14
th Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Chemical s & Fertilizers (2004-05) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilisers, Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals’…………… 
 
  
 
 
 
32 
 

 3
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2004-05) 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete -  Chairman 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Afzal Ansari     
3. Shri Jai Prakash 
4. Shri Prahlad Joshi   
5. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
6. Shri Punnulal Mohale   
7. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
8. Shri P. Rajendran   
9. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy 
10. Kunwar Akshyay Pratap Singh  
11. Shri V.K. Thummar 
12. Shri Bhanupratap Singh Verma   
13. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava   
14. Shri Bhal Chandra Yadav 
  ** 15. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
** 16. Shri Tek Lal Mahto 
** 17. Shri T. Madhusudhan Reddy 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
23. Shri Raju Parmar 
24. Shri Ajay Maroo 
25. Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha 
26. Shri Sanjay Rajaram Raut 
27. Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
28. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh 
29. Shri T.R. Zeliang  
* 30. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan  
31. Vacant 
 
*  Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 24.9.2004 
** Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 16.11.2004 
 
(iii) 

 4
 
(iv) 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary  -   Additional Secretary 
2. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair -   Joint Secretary 
3. Shri C.S. Joon  -   Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri S.C. Kaliraman  -   Under Secretary 
5. Shri Santosh Kumar  -   Committee Officer 
6. Smt. Madhu Bhutani - Senior Executive Assistant 
 

 5
 INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2004-05) 
having been authorised by the Committee to  submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Third Repor t on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in First Re port (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fert ilizers (2004-05) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2004-2005) of Ministry of Chem icals & Fertilisers,  Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals’. 
 
2. The First Report of the Committ ee was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 th 
August, 2004.  The Replies of Government to all the recommendations contained 
in the First Report were received on 25 th November, 2004.  The Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers ( 2004-05) considered the Action Taken 
Replies received from the Governm ent and adopted the Draft Action Taken 
Report at their sitting held on 16th December, 2004. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations 
contained in the First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given 
in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI         ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,    
December 20, 2004           Chairman, 
Agrahayana 29, 1926 (Saka)     Standing Committee on  
Chemicals & Fertilizers. 

 6
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Committee deal s with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations cont ained in the First Report (Fourteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2004-05) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2004-05) relating to Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemical s’ which was presented to Lok Sabha 
on 20th August, 2004.  
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fe rtilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) was requested to furn ish replies to the recommendations 
contained in the First Report within three months from the pr esentation of the 
Report i.e. by 20th November, 2004.  The action tak en replies of the Government 
in respect of all the 21 recommendations  contained in the Report were received 
on 25th November, 2004.  These have been categorised as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 11, 13, 15 and 20. 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations  which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
Sl. Nos. 3, 9, 10, 12 and 14. 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in  respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee. 
Sl. Nos. 6, 8 and 16. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
Sl. Nos. 2, 5, 7, 17, 18, 19 and 21. 
 
3. The Committee desire that the final replies in respect of the 
recommendations for which only interi m replies have been furnished by 
the Government should be furnished expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with t he action taken by Government on 
some of their recommendations in the ensuing paragraphs.   

 7
A. Under-utilisation and monitoring of funds 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
5. While examining the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals, the Committee had pointed out under-utilisation of 
funds in some of the schemes and PSU s for the year 2003-04.  There was 
under-utilisation of funds in Chemic als Promotion & Development Scheme 
(CPDS) and Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL).  Viewing this seriously the 
Committee had desired that the Department should make every effort for fully 
utilisation of amount allocated in Budget Estimates for the year 2004-05 and 
ensure that money should be utilized evenly during each quarter of the year.  The 
Committee had, therefore, recommended that continuous monitoring should also 
be ensured in this regard and Department should contain the expenditure for the 
year within their sanctioned budget and must follow the instructions of Ministry of 
Finance to observe austerity in Non-Plan expenditure. 
 
6. The Ministry while replying to this observation has merely stated that the 
recommendation of the Committee regarding efforts made by the Department for 
continuous monitoring and full utilisati on of funds allocat ed in BE 2004-05 had 
been noted and instructions had been iss ued to the implementing agencies in 
this regard advising to observe austerity in Non-Plan expenditure in accordance 
with the instructions of Ministry of Finance.  However, it seems they have not 
taken any steps for effective monitoring so  far during the financial year and also 
not detailed what austerity measures had been adopted in this regard. 
 
7. The Committee feel that their recommendation has not been taken in 
a serious manner.  In the reply, the Ministry has simply mentioned that the 
recommendation has been noted and no details in regard to monitoring 
and austerity measures taken so far have been furnished.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that whatever effo rts have been taken by the Government 
in regard to monitoring and austerit y measures should be reported to them 
and the implementation of their recommendation must be taken seriously 
in letter and spirit. 

 8
B. Assam Gas Cracker Project 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
8. Assam Gas Cracker Project was to  be commissioned for production of 3 
lakh tonnes per annum of ethylene as per terms and conditions of Assam Accord 
to give boost to the developmental activities in the State.  Later on a Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Chem icals & Petrochemicals) reduced the 
production of ethylene to a level of  2 lakh tonnes per  annum as per the 
associated availability of gas.  Oil India Limited (OIL) is to supply 1.35 MMSCMD 
for the project and Oil & Natural Gas Corp oration Limited (ONGC) to supply 1.35 
MMSCMD of gas for the project.  T he agreement between the ONGC and 
Reliance Assam Petrochemicals Limited (RAPL) regarding supply of 1.35 
MMSCMD gas is pending because RAPL has informed that 5 MMSCMD gas to 
be supplied by OIL is sufficient for 1,30,000 tonnes of et hylene per annum.  
However, with supply of 1.35 MMSCMD of gas by ONGC, RAPL would produce 
only 28,000 tonnes of Ethy lene per annum for the first five years and 15,000 
tonnes of Ethylene per annum for the remain ing ten years.  Th is shortfall from 2 
lakh tonnes of Ethylene per  annum is the bone of contention between RAPL and 
Government for which LPG is to be supp lied by Indian Oil Co rporation Limited 
(IOCL) and the price and subsidy on LPG is to be approved by the Government.  
The subsidy of Rs. 6,000 crore over a period of 15 years was required to be 
reimbursed to the Oil Companies for supplying feedstock at the concessional rate 
of Rs. 600 per thousand cubic metres.  In this context, the Committee had 
recommended that since 20 years had al ready been passed by then, the 
Government should make real and serious efforts to complete the project by 
settling the long pending iss ues without any further loss of time.  The Committee 
had desired that the feasibilit y of implementing this pr oject through other Public 
Sector Undertakings such as GAIL should also be explored seriously and with a 
sense of urgency and they should be apprised of the concrete steps taken by the 
Ministry in this regard within one month of presentation of this Report. 

 9
9. The Ministry, now, in its Action Taken reply, has stated  that there was a 
large amount of subsidy involved in t he implementation of the project and the 
project might be implement ed by some PSU.  In order to discuss the 
viability/parameters of the project, Secretary (P&NG) held a meeting on 13 th 
August, 2004 to discuss the project.  In  that meeting, there was a broad 
consensus that the project be put up by one of the public sector oil companies.  
On the question of which company should play a lead role in  this regard both 
GAIL/ONGC showed their inte rest.  A period of three months was given to both 
the companies to prepare their feasibility reports.  On the expiry of this period, 
Secretary (P&NG) would take another meeting to finalise the lead player for this 
project. 
 
10. The Ministry, in this connection, has further stated that after Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas had finalised the lead player for this project and worked 
out the project parameters as well as the financial implications of various 
elements of subsidy, a meeting would be held at the level of Secretary (C&PC) to 
give a fresh final shape to the matter for decision of the Government. 
 
11. Assam Gas Cracker Project which was proposed in 1984 for the 
utilisation of petroleum fr action of natural gas is still pending due to some 
hurdles.  Even after a lapse of 20  years, due to non-availability of 
feedstock, acquirement of land by Reliance Assam Petrochemicals Limited 
(RAPL), finalisation of Gas Supply Agreement by India Oil Corporation 
Limited (IOCL) with RAPL for supplying  the LPG, this project could not be 
completed.  The Committee are cons trained to note that even today 
Government is not serious about impl ementation of this project.  The 
project is being inordinately delaye d resulting in high increase in subsidy 
and cost of establishment of the proj ect.  Going through the efforts made 
by the Government till date it seems that the Government is not sincere in 
its commitment made to the North-E astern people under the Assam accord 
to give boost to the developmental activities in the area.  The Committee 

 10
while reiterating their earlier recomme ndation desire that all out efforts 
should be made by the Government to give a concrete shape to this long 
pending project as early as possible and they be apprised of the same after 
the decision of the Government. 
 
C. Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
12. While examining the issue of Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster, the Committee 
had noted that there was s ubstantial and severe cont amination of land and 
drinking water supplies with heavy me tal and persistent or ganic contaminants 
both within the plant and in its surroundi ng areas.  The Committee had desired 
that the toxic wastes should be remov ed without any further delay and they 
should be apprised of the action taken by the Government thereon.   
 
13. The Ministry in their Action Taken reply has stated that Engineers India 
Limited (EIL) has submitted a technical pr oposal for the remova l of toxic wastes 
lying in and around the Union Carbide Plant at Bhopal.  For this, a meeting of 
Secretary (C&PC) was held on 5th August, 2004 with officials of Madhya Pradesh 
Government, Ministry of Environment & Forests and Central Pollution Control 
Board to discuss the proposal of EIL.  In the meeting, the methodology of EIL for 
the removal of toxic wastes lying at  the plant site and decommissioning of 
Methane Iso Cynate (MIC) and Sevin plant s was approved.  The EIL has been 
requested to give fi nancial estimates for this wo rk taking into consideration 
various activities as specified in it s proposal.  It would also submit the 
commercial terms for this assignment.  The estimate and commercial terms for 
this work from EIL are awaited. 

 11
14. The Committee are not satisfied with the pace of development for 
removal of toxic wastes in and aroun d Union Carbide Plant at Bhopal.  
After a meeting of Secretary (C&PC) on 5 th August, 2004 with officials of 
Madhya Pradesh Government, Minist ry of Environment & Forests and 
Central Pollution Control Board, no substantial breakthrough has been 
reported in the matter.  It is well kn own that the matter is serious enough 
and is being raised frequently by National/International NGOs in and 
outside the country.  The Committee, in their earlier Report, had also 
observed that there is substantial and severe contamination of land and 
drinking water supplies with heavy metal and persistent organic 
contaminants in the plant and it s surrounding areas. The Committee had 
noted that the matter of removal of  toxic wastes from land and water 
should have been taken up side by si de with other aspects of Bhopal Gas 
Leak Disaster settlement but  that was not done in th e right earnest.  Now, 
Union Carbide has been sold to Dow Chemicals of U.S.A. and Central and 
State Governments are not taking up th is issue seriously and vigorously.  
The Committee, therefore, once again urge the Government to take up this 
matter on priority basis for removing the toxic wastes without any further 
delay.  They desire that they should be  apprised of the action taken in this 
regard within one month after presentation of this Report.  
  
D. Mancozeb Plant of Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
15. The Committee, in their earlier Report, had noted that  HIL could not 
resolve the technical problems of Mancozeb Plant and could operate the plant for 
six months only after its commissioning in August, 2002 resulting in blocking of 
capital of Rs. 9.97 crore.  This was because the in-h ouse R&D activity was not 
sufficient to maintain the shelf-life of the product. The Committee had observed 
that all the factors were not kept in mind before commissioning the project.  They 
therefore, had desired that strict action should be taken against officers 

 12
responsible for such omissions and recommended that a detailed study in regard 
to Mancozeb plant be conducted without  delay and requis ite technology 
incorporated in the plant expeditiously. 
 
16. In this connection, the Ministry in their Action Taken reply has informed as 
under:- 
 “According to HIL, the process for Mancozeb was designed in 
accordance with the BIS specificati ons and accordingly the Detailed 
Project Report (DPRs) was prepared and  the plant had been installed.  
While the project of HIL was under  erection and finally came up for 
commercial production, competitors had put up their plant with improved 
process technology in terms of Shelf Life  as well as suspensibility.  Thus 
no individual or group of employees of  HIL can be held responsible for the 
above.  However, a proposal  to appoint consultant for the improvement of 
Mancozeb technology has been approved by the Board of Directors and 
the work will be awarded to the consultant shortly.” 
 
 
17. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Government 
that no individual or group of employee s of HIL responsible for omissions 
made by them in commissioning of Manc ozeb Plant on the plea that while 
the project of HIL was under erection and finally came up for commercial 
production, competitors had put up their plant with improved process 
technology in terms of Shelf Life as we ll as suspensibility.  In the era of 
liberalisation and globalisation such an argument is totally unacceptable 
because the officials are supposed to keep their eyes on the competitors in 
the market for which they are paid by the Government/Undertaking.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate th eir earlier recommendation and desire 
that after having identified responsib le officers, strict action should be 
taken against them for such an om ission and requisite technology should 
be incorporated in the plant expeditiously. 
 

 13
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.1) 
 
 The Committee note that out of total funds of Rs.5886. 00 lakh available 
with the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals under plan allocation during 
the year 2002-03, Rs.693.25 lakh has not been utilized.  Similarly, during the 
year 2003-04 under the non plan schemes, out of the total availability of funds of 
Rs.45065.00 lakh, Rs.5727.28 lakh have been shown as savings / surrender and 
out of a fund of Rs.5500.00 lakh, under plan scheme Rs.1213.42 lakh remained 
unutilized.  Further, there ar e aberrations in percentag e utilization of expenditure 
as low as 10.80% in (2002-03) and 5. 16% in (2003-04) under Chemicals 
Promotion Development Scheme (CPDS).  The Plan expendi ture for Hindustan 
Antibiotics Ltd. (HAL) in  2002-03 and (2003-04) has been only 66.67% in both 
the years.  The Committee view with serious concern the underutilization of funds 
by the Department during t hese years.  The Committee desire that every effort 
should be made by the Department to utilize fully the money allocated in BE 
2004-05.  In order to ensur e full utilization, efforts should be made to utilize the 
money evenly during each quarter of the year, continuous monitoring in this 
regard should also be ensured.  With  this the Committee endorse the Demands 
for grants of the Department  of Chemicals and Petrochemic als of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers.  However,  they recommend that the Department 
should contain the expenditure for the y ear within the sanctioned budget of the 
Department and follow the inst ructions of the Ministry of Finance to observe 
austerity in non-plan expenditure. 
 

 14
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee regarding efforts to be made by 
the Department for continuous monitoring of utilization of funds allocated in 
BE2004-05 has been not ed.  Instructions have been issued to the implementing 
agencies in this regard.  They have also been advised to observe austerity in 
non-plan expenditure in accordance with t he instructions of the Ministry of 
Finance. 
  
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.4) 
 
The Committee are given to understand that CIEPT has been 
endeavouring itself to become self-sufficient as far as cash  expenditure is 
concerned from the year 2001-02 onwards.  The organization is making all efforts 
to increase the number of short-term courses, technical services and R&D 
projects.  However, to sustain the pr ofitability and meet  the challenges of 
competition in coming years, a lot still r equires to be done.  It is appreciable that 
CIPET has fixed targets for the income to be generated during the year 2004-05, 
centre-wise and item-wise.  The Committee desire that all efforts should be made 
to realize these targets so as to make t he organization self-sufficient as soon as 
possible. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 CIPET has been advised to make all effo rts to achieve the targets fixed so 
as to make the organization self-sufficient as soon as possible. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 

 15
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
 A special allocation of Rs.200.00 lakh was made for conducting a 
feasibility study for the establishment of a Mega C hemical Industrial Estate 
(MCIE) during 2003-04.  The project has b een under considerat ion since 1999.  
However, the Committee find that even a consultant has not been appointed so 
far.  Under the Annual Plan 2002-03 and 2003-04, an expenditure to the tune of 
only Rs.5.62 lakh and Rs.12.04 lakh respectively has been made.  The 
Committee feel that the est ablishment of a Mega Chem ical Industrial Estate 
would augment the activities of the ch emical industries.  They, therefore, 
recommend that Government should make a ll out efforts to establish MCIE in a 
time bound manner.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The task of undertaking a feasibility st udy to establish  an MCIE has been 
entrusted to M/s Mott MacDonald,  a reputed international agency with relevant 
experience.  In accordance with the terms of  agreement,  the  work is expected 
to be completed in a period of 12 months. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
The Committee have been informed th at the total Minimum Annual 
Turnover (MAT) value of 27000 formulation packs is about Rs. 20,000 crore – out 
of which 23,000 formulation packs having MAT value less than Rs. 1 crore, 
amount to Rs. 4,000 crore.  NPPA monitors the prices of medicines which have 
MAT value of Rs. 1 crore and above only.  The Committee feel that it is due to 
these non-controlled medicines that  the main  variation        in   prices  takes  
place.   The  Committee,  therefore,  recommend   that    the Government must 
take some measures to control the pric es of these non-controlled medicines also 
on case to case basis. 

 16
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The National Pharmaceutical Pricin g Authority is also monitoring the 
prices of non Scheduled medicines . NPPA has taken note of the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee.   Considering the low efficacy and 
high volume of effort involved in monitoring the prices of the formulations which 
have MAT value of less than Rs. 1 crore, it has been decided to initiate 
monitoring of such drugs on case to ca se basis based on complaints received 
from the State Drug C ontrollers and like authorities.   The Government have also 
constituted a Committee in August, 2004  under the Chairmanship of Joint 
Secretary (PI) to examine the span of pr ice control (including trade margin) in 
view of the National Co mmon Minimum Programme and the views expressed by 
the Supreme Court in SLP (C) No. 3668/2003. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004]  
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.15) 
 
 The Committee are informed that HI L has entered into an agreement with 
M/s International Panacea Ltd., New Delhi fo r marketing of bio-fertilizers.  As per 
agreement, HIL is eligible for 12% commission for sale through private trade and 
51% for institutional sale.  In the opinion of the Committee, this is a wise step and 
they desire that HIL should go into further diversification of its activities where 
generation of resources is possible. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 According to the Company, HIL is expl oring the possibility of diversification 
into other areas. HIL is also taking st eps to introduce new g eneration molecules, 
which have the potential of getting higher contribution. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 

 17
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
 The operating loss of Rasayani Unit  of the Hindustan Organic Chemicals 
Ltd. (HOCL) has increased from Rs.2050 lakh in 2002-03 to Rs.2715 lakh in 
2003-04.  The net profit of Cochin Unit of HOCL has also declined from a level of 
Rs.2957 lakh in 2002-03 to  Rs.2303 lakh in 2003-04 .  The Committee further 
note that the networth of t he company has also decreased to a level of Rs.7.17 
crore as on 31 March, 2004 as against Rs.95.57 crore as on 31.3.2003.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should make all out 
efforts to improve the performance of HO CL.  Efforts should also be made to 
ensure that Hindustan Fluorocarbon Ltd, a subsidiary of HOCL, remains viable. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 According to HOCL, the operating lo ss of Rasayani unit increased from 
Rs.2050 lakhs in 2002-03 to Rs.2715 lakhs in 2003-04 on the basis of provisional 
accounts because of the steep increase in the main raw material cost, such as (i) 
Benzene, (ii) Methanol and (i v) Naphtha.   The increase  had ranged from15% to 
40% in respect of the said raw mate rials without any corresponding increase in 
the finished products of the company.  Though the company could marginally 
increase the prices of finished products, but  in respect of the main product like 
aniline the prices are always adjusted to match the landed cost of imported 
material.There had been unscrupulous import s of aniline from certain countries 
other than those cove red under anti-dumping duty, duri ng the period at prices 
below the cost of production.   The said  situation prevailed for most part of the 
year and owing to margin squeeze, the operating loss of Rasayani unit had gone 
up by about Rs.7 crores in 2003-04, ev en though the Rasayani unit and also the 
company, as a whole, achieved higher sales in 2003-04 as compared to 2002-03 
by more than Rs. 15 crores. 
 
 Benzene being the major common raw material for both  Rasayani and 
Cochin unit of the company and coupled wit h the steep price increase in respect 

 18
of another major raw material of Coch in unit viz. LPG, which could not be 
absorbed in the price of finished products, the Cochin unit also suffered a decline 
in operating profit in the year 2003-04 as compared to the year 2002-03. 
 
Since the prices of the company’s products are dictated by the market conditions, 
depending upon the quantum of imports, situations which are beyond the control 
of the Company, it becomes difficult for the Company to remedy the situation. 
 
 However, the company took a lot of  initiatives to reduce the cost of 
operations and wherever possibl e, achieved reduction in the cost of production, 
through (i) energy conservation methods, (i i) achievement of higher efficiencies 
in the consumption of raw materials and (iii) in administrative overheads. 
 
 With all the above initiatives, the co mpany, in fact, maintained its net 
losses at more or less the same level of about Rs.44 crores in 2003-04 as 
compared to the previous year.  However,  the company made liability provisions 
in respect of certain liabilities, which the company had been carrying forward in 
the last 2-3 years to the extent of about Rs.44 crores , mainly consisting of the 
following: 
 
(i) Doubtful debts     Rs.16.98 crores 
(ii) Interest from subsidiary    Rs.  2.61 crores 
(iii) Wage settlement     Rs.  3.78 crores 
(iv) Doubtful recovery of loan and Interest  from       Rs.   1.71 crores 
M/s Smith Stanistreet Pharmaceuticals Ltd 
(a PSU) 
(v) Gratuity provisions for em ployees up to Rs.13.65 crores 
superannuation 
(vi) Delayed payment charges payable to  Rs.  7.50 crores 
supplier of raw material (BPCL) for past 
period. 
 
 As a result of all the above provisions, and the consequential effect on the 
losses, the net-worth of the company had gone down to the extent of Rs.87 

 19
crores in 2003-04 (bringing down the same fr om the level of Rs .95.57 crores as 
on 31.3.2003 to the level of Rs.7.17 crores as on 31.3.2004). 
 
 The Company is in disinvestment m ode of disinvesting 32.61% of equity 
shares of Government of India out of the present le vel of equity of 58.61% 
leaving only 26% of equity shares with the Government  of India.  A package 
linked with the disinvestment has already  been approved by the Government of 
India. The BIFR has already sanctioned a rehabilitation/revival package for HFL.  
However, HOCL has filed an appeal against the same.  As such the matter is 
pending with AAIFR. Viability of HFL w ould depend on the outcome of the 
appeal.   
 
 In the meantime, the Financial Instit utions have issued notice to the HFL 
for the realization of their dues under Se ction 13 of the Se curitisation and 
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and En forcement of Security Interest Act, 
2002.  However, as intimated by HOCL, th ey are taking necessary action to file 
their objections against the Notice served by the Financial Institutions. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 

 20
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO  
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.3) 
 
The Committee find that Rs.1.28 crore has been allocated in BE (2004-05) 
for ongoing schemes of providing Com puter Aided Design/Computer Aided 
Manufacturing facilities and plastic recycling and waste management.  The waste 
management is the need of the hour today as recycling of plastic waste is going 
to cost heavily.  In this regard during the evidence, the Secretar y, Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals apprised the Committee that they in collaboration 
with other Ministries were trying to finalise the Petrochemical Policy giving 
considerable emphasis on plastic recycling as  the role of plastics increasing day 
by day for modern development.  The Co mmittee, however, feel that an amount 
of Rs.1.28 crore is too meager an amou nt for this purpose.  The Committee 
desire that waste man agement be accorded high prio rity.  They recommend that 
extra efforts be made for waste management activities and plastic recycling and 
the financial allocation for these activities be augmented. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 CIPET  has been advised to  put extra efforts on Pl astic Waste Recycling.  
However, for the time being the existing allocation of funds on this account has 
been considered sufficient for this purpose.   
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.9) 
 The Committee find that although the CWC Act was enacted on 28 th 
August, 2002, it has not so far been enforced.  Th e Committee have come to 

 21
know that in a meeting of  the steering Committee of National Authority held in 
July 2004 under the Chairmanshi p of Cabinet Secretary, it was decided to bring 
the CWC Act into force.  The rules and regulations in this regard have also not 
been framed as yet.  The Committee, ther efore, desire to bring CWC Act into 
force immediately and not ify the rules and regulations thereunder without any 
further delay.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
It is stated that in the last meeting of the Steering Committee of the 
National Authority for CWC under the Ch airmanship of the Cabinet Secretary 
held on 8 th July, 2004 it was decided to bring this Act into force while holding in 
abeyance Articles 18 and 39 of the Act relating to the requirement of Registration 
and the punishment thereof.  For the Act to come into force,  necessary Rules 
and Regulations need to be notified.  To  draft the Rules, a Committee under the 
Chairmanship of JS (Chemicals) with r epresentatives from  the Legislative 
Department, Ministry of Law and the National Authority for CWC has been 
constituted.    Immediately after the Rules are framed, action for bringing into 
force the CWC Act will be taken. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.10) 
 
A provision of Rs. 5 crore has been made under Pharmaceutical Research 
& Development Programme during 2004-05 against Rs. 25 lakh  during 2003-04.  
The Patent Act of 1970 is required to be amended to usher in the era of product 
patents in the pharmaceutical sector in compliance with obligation under the 
WTO and TRIPS.  For this, the Indian ph armaceutical industry has to focus on 
research and development.  In view of the importance of research and 
development in the field of pharmaceutic als, the Committee feel that the amount 

 22
of Rs. 5 crore for R&D earmarked for this year is very meagre.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly reco mmend that the budget allocation for pharmaceutical 
research should be increased at least to a level of Rs. 50 crore to meet the 
challenges of the future. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Keeping in view the observations of the Committee r egarding the meagre 
availability of funds under the Pharmaceutical Research and Development 
Programme, the Department will endeavour to obtain more allocation in the 
budget for the next financial year. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
 The Committee note that the Nationa l Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) fixes/ revises prices of scheduled formulation and monitors the 
movement of prices of non-scheduled formulations.  However, there has been 
wide variation in prices of drugs in the market.  Drug policy 1994 aimed at 
abundant availability of essential drugs at reasonable prices.  The Committee 
further note that to encourage competit ion and improve avai lability under 1994 
Drug Policy the number of bulk drugs under control was brought down from 142 
in 1987 to 74 in 1995.  The Govern ment also brought Dr ug Policy 2002, which 
decreased the number of cont rolled drugs but this has been challenged in Court.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that to ensure easy av ailability of drugs at 
affordable prices to the common man, Government should take all necessary 
steps to have the matter settled early by the Court. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The pricing aspect of the Pharmac eutical Policy 2002, announced by the 
Government in February, 2002 is pending before the Supreme Court.  This 

 23
Department has been following up this case  from time to time and the last 
hearing in this case was on 22 nd November, 2003.  The Central Agency Section 
of the Department of Legal Affairs has informed in June, 2004 that the matter will 
be listed as and when the L earned Chief Justice gives directions.  This 
Department is following up this issue wit h the Department of Legal Affairs.  
However, no date for early listing has been conveyed to this Department. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.14) 
 
 The Committee have come to know that  on complete eros ion of networth 
of the Hindustan Insecticides Limited (H IL), the company has been referred to 
BIFR on 29th January, 2004.  The company is in production of insecticides, agro-
pesticides and eco-friendly bio-pestici des which have vast demand in the 
country.  The National Anti Malaria Programme (NAMP) was made successful on 
account of DDT being supplied by HIL to various State Governments.  The 
Committee feel that DDT is in lar ge demand in Municipal Corporations/ 
Municipalities even today.  The Committee, therefore, are of the view that referral 
of the Company to BIFR at this juncture indicates a sorry state of affairs.  The 
management of HIL has sent a proposal of  Rs.122.00 crore to Government for 
write off/relief for capital restructuri ng of HIL.  The Committee recommend that 
Government should take all necessary m easures for the financial revival of the 
company.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 As HIL stands referred to BIFR, the financial revival or otherwise would 
depend on the proceedings/decision of the BIFR, which is a quasi-judicial body 
created under Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provision) Act, 1985.  
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 

 24
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE  
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
Assam Gas Cracker Project which was proposed as early as  in 1984  for 
the utilisation of petroleum fraction of natural gas.  However, due to some hurdles 
particularly regarding availability of  feedstock, the pr oject has not been 
implemented even after elapse of 20 years. The land for the project has also not 
been acquired by Reliance A ssam Petrochemicals Limited (RAPL) since they 
want that gas supply agreement be finalised first.  The Indian Oil Corporation has 
also not signed any agreement with RAPL for supply of LPG as the question of 
payment of subsidy to the company by  the Government has not been settled.  
The Committee further note that subsidy of Rs. 6000 crore over a period of 15 
years is required to be reimbursed to t he Oil Companies  for supplying feedstock 
at the concessional rate of Rs. 600 per thousand cubic metres.  Since 20 years 
have already passed, the Committee recommend that the Government should 
make real and serious efforts to complete the project by settling the question of 
providing subsidy without any further loss of time.  The feasibility of implementing 
this project through another public sector undertaking such  as GAIL should also 
be explored seriously and with a sense of  urgency.  The Committee desire that 
they should be apprised of the concrete steps taken in this regard within one 
month of presentation of this Report. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As a large amount of subsidy is in volved in the implementation of the 
project, a view was expressed that the project ma y be implemented by some 
PSU.  In order to discuss the viability/ parameters of the project, Secretary 
(P&NG) held a meeting on 13 th August, 2004 to discuss the project.  In this 
meeting, there was a broad consensus that the projec t be put up by one of the 
public sector oil companies.  On the question of which company should play a 
lead role in this regard both GAIL/ONGC s howed their interest.  A period of three 
months was given to both the companies to  prepare their feasibility reports.  On 
the expiry of this period, Secretary (P&NG) would take another meeting to 

 25
finalise the lead player for this project.  However, recently it has been decided 
that GAIL and ONGC would both finalis e their views on this project by 25 th 
October, 2004. 
 
After Ministry of Petroleum & Natura l Gas has finalised the lead player for 
this project and worked out the project parameters as well as the financial 
implications of various elements of subsid y, a meeting would be held at the level 
of Secretary (C&PC) to give a fresh final  shape to the matter for decision of the 
Government. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendations Sl.No. 8) 
 
The Committee have been informed that the Government of India has filed 
no objection in the New York Federal Co urt for removal of toxic wastes within 
and surrounding areas of former Union Carbide Plant.  It has also been informed 
by the Ministry that Engineers India Limited (EIL) was requested to prepare a 
plan for the removal of toxic wastes and its cost estimates.  EIL has submitted its 
proposals and the Madhya Pradesh Gove rnment has also agreed with the 
former’s proposal for removal of toxic wa stes and decommissioning of the plant.  
The Committee desire that the toxic wast es should now be removed without any 
further delay and the Committee be apprised of the same.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
On the request of the Departmen t, Engineers India Limited on 2 nd 
July,2004, has submitted a technical proposal for the removal of the  toxic wastes 
lying in and around the Uni on Carbide Plant at Bhopal .  A meeting was held in 

 26
the chamber of Secretary(C&PC) on 5 th August,2004 with officials of Madhya 
Pradesh Government, Ministry of Envir onment and Forests and Central Pollution 
Control Board  to discuss t he proposal of EIL.  In the meeting  the methodology 
of EIL for the removal of toxic wastes lying at the plant site and decommissioning 
of MIC and Sevin Plants was approved.  The EIL has been requested to  give  
financial  estimate for this work taking in to consideration various activities as 
specified in its  proposal.  It would  also  submit the  commercial terms for this  
assignment. The estimate  and commercial te rms  for this work from Engineers 
India Limited is awaited. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.16) 
 
 The Committee note that Mancozeb Plant of HIL could operate only for six 
months after its commissioning in August 2002 resulting in blocking of capital of 
Rs.9.97 crore.  This was because the in -house R&D activity was not sufficient to 
maintain the shelf-life of the product.  While the Mancozeb produced from private 
companies have shelf-life of about 2 year s and suspensibility  of more than 70% 
by mass, that produced by HIL plant has a shelf-life of one year only and 
suspensibility of mere 50%.  They are constrained to find that all the factors were 
not kept in mind before commissioning the project.  They desire that strict action 
should be taken against officers responsible for such omissions.  Now the 
Ministry has informed that a consultant having exposure of mancozeb technology 
has been identified for conducting detaile d study.  The consultant has already 
done preliminary study.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that detailed 
study in regard to Mancozeb plant be conducted without delay and requisite 
technology incorporated in the plant expeditiously. 
 

 27
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 According to HIL, the process for Mancozeb was designed in accordance 
with the  BIS Specifications and accordin gly the Detailed Project Report (DPRs)  
was prepared and the plant had been installe d.  While the project of HIL was 
under erection and finally came up for co mmercial production, competitors had 
put up their plant with improved process tech nology in terms of Shelf Life as well 
as suspensibility.  Thus no individual or  group of employees of HIL can be held 
responsible for the above.  However, a proposal to appoint consultant for the 
improvement of Mancozeb technology has been approved by the Board of 
Directors and the work will be awarded to the consultant shortly. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

 28
CHAPTER – V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.2) 
 
In the Tenth Five Year Plan, the Cent ral Institute of Plastics Engineering 
and Technology (CIPET) has been sancti oned plan assistance of Rs.80 crore 
under externally aided projects (EAP) and Rs.20 crore as Domestic Budget 
Support (DBS).  The external ly aided project “capacity building of CIPET centres 
for development of thrust areas” was to  be funded by OPEC.  Initially the loan 
amount was US $ 16.67 million and later reduc ed to US $ 13.67 m illion.  Earlier, 
CIPET wanted the am ount as Grants-in-Aid on t he lines of World Bank 
assistance.  However, later on it convey ed its decision to accept the soft loan.  
The Committee find that the draft loan agreement in this regard is still under 
process and has not yet been finalized by the Department of Economic Affairs 
and Department of Legal Affairs.  The Commi ttee feel that this may result into 
slow down in technological up gradation plan of the differ ent Centres of CIPET.  
They, therefore, desire that the Department of C hemicals & Petrochemicals 
should take up the matter with the D epartment of Economic Affairs and Legal 
Affairs so that the loan agreement is finalised at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The matter has been taken up with Dep tt. of Economic Affairs.  In fact, the 
Draft Loan Agreement proposed to be signed by OPEC and the Govt. of India 
contains some clauses which may affect  sovereign powers of the country.  
Therefore, the issue has already been taken up through Indian Embassy in 
Vienna to approach OPEC Loan authorities for deletion of these Clauses.  The 
Deptt. is taking all possible steps for early finalisation of the loan agreement. 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 

 29
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
 The Committee are informed that fo r establishment of new extension 
centres of CIEPT, hundred per cent funding proposals are not coming from 
States/industry associations.  The Gove rnment of Rajasthan has requested that 
the Central Government should also prov ide part fund for such centres as was 
being done in the past.  The Committee find  that there is proposal for setting up 
three new CIPET Centres in Rajast han, Maharashtra and NCR area.  They, 
therefore, recommend that new extension centres at places identified may be 
opened with 50 per cent assistance from the Central Government.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 In the proposals for Mid term Appraisal of the 10th Plan, the Planning 
Commission has been requested to restor e its earlier decision for setting up 
CIPET Centres on 50:50 cost sharing ba sis between the Central Government 
and the State Government instead of entire funding by CIPET.   
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No. 7) 
 
The Committee find that there are 1058  appeals and 44 revi sion petitions 
lying pending in the Office of the Welfare Commissi oner as on 30 th June,2004, 
relating to Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster.  About 11647 applica tions are also 
pending for scrutiny and motion hearing in t he court of Welfar e Commissioner.  
The Committee feel that these cases might  be dealt with speedily if the Office of 
Welfare Commissioner is held  by a full-time judge.  The Committee have been 
informed that presently the Office of Welfare Commissioner is being held by a 
sitting judge of the Madhya Pradesh High Court who has  his preoccupations in 
the High Court too.  The Co mmittee observe that even after the lapse of many 
years, the Government has not been able to get appointed a full time High Court 

 30
Judge.  They feel that it would be in the fitness of things to have a full-time judge 
to deliver justice to the victims of  Bhopal Gas tragedy because recently, on 19 th 
July,2004, the Supreme Court has also gi ven a directive for disbursement of 
compensation amount to Bhopal Gas victims expeditiously.  The Committee also 
desire that all the cases relating to appeals, revision petitions and applications for 
scrutiny and motion hearing are disposed of quickly. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
At present the post of t he  Welfare Commissioner, Bhopal Gas Victims  is 
being held on  part time basis by Just ice Deepak Verma, a sitting judge of the 
Indore bench of Madhya Pr adesh High Court.  The Minister(Chemicals and 
Fertilizers) has again requested , on 9 th August,2004  the Mini ster of Law and 
Justice to request the Chief Justice of Madhya Pradesh High Court to nominate a 
sitting judge of that High Court on a full  time basis to function as Welfare 
Commissioner.  Secretary, Ministry of Law  and Justice has al so been requested 
to bring the observations of the Standing  Committee to the notice of the Chief 
Justice of MP High Court for making available the services of a sitting High Court 
Judge as Welfare Commissioner  on full time basis. .  The recommendations of 
Committee have also been brought to t he notice of the Welfare Commissioner, 
Bhopal Gas Victims, Bhopal.  The Department is making all out efforts to provide 
necessary staff and infrastructure to t he office of the Welfare Commissioner for 
the expeditious disposal of the claim cases. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
The Committee observe that as and when networth of a company erodes, 
the company is referred to Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction 
(BIFR). In the opinion of the Committee, before closi ng down the company, all  

 31
possibilities be explored to run the company including the proposal from workers’ 
cooperative because once the company is referred to BIFR, chances of its revival 
are very grim.  The Ministry have info rmed that they have received a proposal 
from Smith Stanistreet Wo rkers’ Union for forming an Industrial Co-operative 
Society and run the undertaking.  The Committee, therefor e, recommend that 
before winding up the company all poss ibilities to run the undertaking be 
explored.  They desire that  the proposal submitted by  the Workers’ Union of 
SSPL be examined positively and a chance given to the workers of SSPL to run 
the undertaking on co-operative basis.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
  The proposal is under the consideration of the Government.   
 
 [Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
The Committee are informed that the Board for Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction (BIFR) has sanctioned revi sed modified rehabilitation scheme for 
Bengal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) which envisages a number 
of reliefs and concessions from the Government and other agencies.  The 
Ministry has also informed that the huge accumulated losses of BCPL will not get 
wiped out by 2007-08.  The networth of the company has since become positive 
amounting to Rs. 739.74 lakh in relation to  its total assets amounting to Rs. 
3257.66 lakhs.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the reliefs and 
concessions in accordance with revi sed modified rehabilitation scheme 
sanctioned by BIFR be given to BCPL  and the management of BCPL should 
make all efforts to wipe out the losses fully by 2008-09.    
 
 

 32
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The proposals contained in the revi sed rehabilitation scheme will require 
and approval of the Ministry of Fi nance and other Ministries/Departments 
concerned of the Government of Indi a, before submitting the same for the 
approval of the Cabinet.   The Department is making efforts to expedite the case.   
The recommendation of the Committee to wipe out the losses fully by 
2008-09 has been brought to the notice of the BCPL. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limit ed (IDPL) was established in 1961 
with the primary objective of creating self-sufficiency in essential life saving drugs 
and medicines.  With deterioration in performance of the company, except 
production of some formulations in units of IDPL, the production of medicines in 
all its units and subsidiaries has been stopped.  During the evidence, the 
Committee were apprised by the Secret ary, Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals that the Government  have decided to appoint a Technical 
Committee for assessment of revival prospe cts and future of IDPL which is likely 
to submit its recommendations by October, 2004.  The Committee hope that the 
Government would expedite this process l eading to the revival of IDPL units so 
that the production of essential life saving drugs might be restarted in these units.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Government has since constituted the Expert Committee to conduct a 
techno-economic feasibility study of restructuring IDPL .  The Expert Committee 
consists of the following members: 
 
(i) Dr. P. Rama Rao, Director, NIPER  - Chairman. 
(ii) Dr. L. K. Behl, Ex- CMD, IDPL   - Member. 
(iii) Shri P.M. Mehta     - Member. 

 33
(iv) Shri Probir Roy, Ex-MD, BCPL   - Member. 
(v) Deputy Secretary (Finance)    - Member Secretary. 
 
The Expert Committee has been asked to submit its report by 31st October, 2004.   
Further action will be taken after the re ceipt of the report  of  the Expert  
Committee.     
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 21) 
 
The Committee note that the Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL), Pimpri 
is a sick Public Sector Company referred to the Board for Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction (BIFR).  The Finance Minister in Budget S peech of 2004-05 has 
announced that HAL will be given financial  support for rest ructuring.  The 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemical s  has also informed that revised 
modified draft rehabilitation scheme has been received from HAL which includes 
reliefs/ concessions like one time settlem ent with banks, payme nt of statutory 
dues, VSS and fixed/working capital requ irement, sale of land, waiver and 
sacrifices from Government of Indi a, bank and financial institutions and 
budgetary support from the Government.  T he Committee feel that in order to 
ensure easy availability of antibiotics, th e revival of HAL is imperative.  The 
Committee, therefore, recomm end that suitable reliefs/ concessions be given to 
HAL so that its restructuring process is completed as early as possible leading to 
enhanced production of antibiotics by its sick units. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
   The revised draft rehabilitation sc heme submitted by the HAL is being 
examined in the Department.  The views of  the Government will be conveyed to 
IDBI and BIFR for sanctioning the Rehabilitation Scheme for HAL.  The proposal 

 34
contained in the Rehabilitation Scheme w ill also require the approval of the 
Ministry of Finance and other Ministries/ Departments concerned of the 
Government of India before submitting the same for  the approval of the Cabinet.  
The Department is making efforts to expedite the case. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) O.M. No 16(4)/2004-Fin. dated 18.11.2004] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI         ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,    
December 20, 2004           Chairman, 
Agrahayana 29, 1926 (Saka)     Standing Committee on  
Chemicals & Fertilizers. 

 35
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2004-05) 
 
SEVENTH SITTING 
(16.12.2004) 
 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1615 hrs. 
 
Present 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete - Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Afzal Ansari  
3. Shri Prahlad Joshi 
4. Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra 
5. Shri A.K. Moorthy 
6. Shri A. Venkatarami Reddy  
7. Shri V.K. Thummar 
8. Shri Bhanupratap Singh Verma  
Rajya Sabha 
9. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
10. Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha 
11. Shri Sanjay Rajaram Raut  
Secretariat 
1.  Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair   - Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri S.C. Kaliraman   - Under Secretary 
  
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman we lcomed the Members to the sitting. 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee consider ed the draft Report on action taken by 
the Government on the recommendations c ontained in the First Report of the 
Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals’.  After a brief discussion, 
the draft Report was adopted by the Committee without any amendment. 
-30-

 36
-31- 
 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes, 
if any, arising out of the factual verification of the Report by the Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals of the Mini stry and present the same to both the 
Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
  
5. ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
** Matter not related to this Report 

 37
Appendix – II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of Action Take n by the Government on  the recommendations  
contained in the First Report (Fourt eenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2004-05) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2004-05) of the Ministry of Chem icals & Fertilizers, Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals’. 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 21 
 
II Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 11, 13, 15 and 20) 
 
6 
 Percentage to Total 28.57% 
 
III Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of Government’s Reply  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3, 9, 10, 12 and 14) 
 
5 
 Percentage of Total 23.81% 
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 6, 8 and 16) 
 
3 
 Percentage of Total 14.28% 
 
V Recommendations in respect of  which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 2, 5, 7, 17, 18, 19 and 21) 
7 
 Percentage of Total 33.34% 
 
 
 
 
-32- 
 