 
 
 
 
 
28  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2008-09) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
  
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2008-09) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommend ations contained in the Twenty -
fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2007-08) on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the Ministry of Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
 
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2008/Kartika, 1930 (Saka) 
 
 


 - 2 -  
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2008-09) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2008-09) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty -
fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2007-08) on Demands for Grants ( 2008-09) of the Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals)] 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2008 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2008. 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
November, 2008/Kartika, 1930 (Saka)


 - 3 -  
CONTENTS 
 
               PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-09) ……………………………….. 
 
1 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………… 
 
2 
CHAPTER I Report ……………………………………………………………... 
 
3 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been accepted 
by the Government ……………………………………..……… 
 
 
30 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies………… 
 
 
54 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee... 
 
 
56 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited …………………… 
 
 
60 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Third sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (2008-09) held on 6 November 2008…….  
 
 
 63 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report (14 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2007-08) on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) …………………………………………………………. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
65 
 

 - 4 -  
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2008-09) 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri P. Sreedharan   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.S. Chera    -   Director 
 4. Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Deputy Secretary-II 
 5. Smt. Balwant Kaur Saimbhi  - Under Secretary 
  6. Shri Harish Sethi   - Committee Assistant  
 
*  Consequent upon his disqualification for being Member of the Lok Sabha, Shri Jai Prakash (Constituency – Mohanlal Ganj) ceased to be 
Member of this Committee w.e.f. 12.09.2008. 
$ Consequent upon his resignation from Rajya Sabha, Shri Debabrata Biswas  ceased to be Member of this Committee w.e.f. 23.09.2008.  
# Consequent upon his disqualification for being Member of the Lok Sabha, Shri Ramswaroop Prasad  ceased to be Member of this 
Committee w.e.f. 03.10.2008. 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  -  Chairman 
Members  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ajit Singh 
3. Shri Afzal Ansari  
4. Shri Sunil Khan 
5. Shri Shrichand Kripalani 
6. Shri Subhash Maharia 
7. Shri Punnu Lal Mohale 
8. Shri A. Narendra 
9. Shri Anand Paranjpe 
10. Shri Prasanta Pradhan  
11. Shri P. Chalapathi Rao 
12. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  
   13. Shri Anantha  Venkata Rami Reddy  
14. Shri Devwrat Singh 
15. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
16. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
17. Shri D. Venugopal 
18. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
*19. Vacant 
  $20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
 23. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
 24. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
25. Shri Om Prakash Mathur 
26. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
  27. Shri Mahendra Sahni 
   28. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi  
   29. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
   #30. Vacant 
   31. Vacant 

 - 5 -  
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers   (2008 -
09) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twenty -eighth Report on Action Taken by the Governmen t on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2007 -08) on Demands for 
Grants (2008 -09) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
 
2. The Twenty-fifth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 
16 April 2008 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 23 April 2008.  The replies of 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report were 
received on 16 July 2008.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(2008-09) considered the Action Taken Replies received from the Government 
and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report at their sitting held on 6 November 
2008. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action  Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI          ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,                   
November 6, 2008                   Chairman, 
Kartika 15, 1930 (Saka)                           Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and  Fertilizers. 
 

 - 6 -  
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations / observations contained in the Twenty Fifth 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2007 -08) on Demands for Grants (2008 -09) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 16 April 2008. The Report contained 19 
recommendations / observations. 
 
2. The Ministry  of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish replies to the recommendations / 
observations contained in the Twenty -Fifth Report within three months from the 
presentation of the Report, i.e. by 16 July 200 8. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the 19 recommendations / observations contained in 
the Report were received on 16 July 2008. These have been categorized as 
follows :- 
 
(i) Recommendations / observations which have been accep ted by the 
Government : 
 S.Nos.1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17 and 19 (Total  14) 
 
(ii) Recommendation / observation which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply : 
S. No. 4                                                                       (Total  1) 
 
(iii) Recommendations / observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration : 
S. Nos. 5 and 10                                                         (Total  2) 
 
(iv) Recommendations / observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature : 
S. Nos. 15 and 18                                                       (Total  2) 
 

 - 7 -  
3. The Committee hope that utmost importance would be  given to the 
implementation of the recommendations / observations accepted by the 
Government. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement the 
recommendations / observations in their letter and spirit for any reason, the matter 
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The 
Committee further desire that the Action Taken Notes on the recommendations / 
observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report  and the final replies in respect 
of the recommendations for which only interim replies have been furnished by the 
Government should be furnished expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations in the ensuing paragraphs. 

 - 8 -  
 
 
A. Establishment of new extension centres of CIPET  
 
(Recommendation S.No.3) 
 
5. Dealing with the Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology 
(CIPET), the Committee in their earlier Report had recommended as under :- 
 
“The Committee note that the plan budget o f CIPET in BE (2008 -09) 
is of Rs.31.00 crore consisting of OPEC Loan Assistance of Rs.13.5 crore,  
Government of India counterpart funding against OPEC Loan of Rs.1.5 
crore and Rs.16 crore for ongoing and New Schemes of CIPET.  The 
Committee have been informed that courses are being offered and students 
have been enrolled in these courses during academic years 2006 -07 and 
2007-08 at 3 new CIPET centres at Panipat (Haryana), Jaipur (Rajasthan) 
and Aurangabad (Maharashtra).  The Committee have also been infor med 
that the construction work at these centres is expected to be completed by 
March 2009. The Committee have been further informed that Rs.7.98 crore 
was released to CIPET in March 2007 for setting up a Plastics Waste 
Management Centre at Guwahati and the  Foundation Stone Laying 
Ceremony of the Centre is scheduled to be held on 7 April 2008.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that construction work at 3 new CIPET 
Centres should be completed on scheduled time.  The Committee also 
recommend that Plastics W aste Management Centre at Guwahati should 
be operationalized as early as possible to contain environmental problems 
created by plastic waste.” 
 

 - 9 -  
6. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows :- 
 
“The Government had informed the Stand ing Committee that the 
new extension centres of CIPET at Panipat,  Jaipur and Aurangabad and 
Jaipur are expected to be completed by March 2009, as per schedule, the 
project at Panipat has got delayed as the land for the proposed centre is yet 
to be allotted by the Government of Haryana.  The matter regarding delay in 
allotment of land by the Government of Haryana was taken up by 
Secretary, Chemicals and Petrochemicals with Chief Secretary, 
Government of Haryana in June 2007, October 2007 and December 2007. 
The State Government of Haryana informed CIPET that the request for 
allotment of land was under consideration and was to be placed for 
consideration before the board of Directors of the Haryana State Industrial 
and Infrastructure Development Corporation Lt d. (HSIIDC).  The Secretary 
(C&PC) has again written to Chief Secretary, Government of Haryana about 
allotment of land for the CIPET centres  at Panipat on 23 May 2008.  
However, the courses are being conducted in the hired premises. A 
reminder to the Chie f Secretary of Haryana from Secretary of this 
Department has also been issued in the first week of July 2008. 
The process for purchase of machinery for the Plastics Waste 
Management Centre has already begun in CIPET. The Plastics Waste 
Management centre at  Guwahati is likely to be operationalized by March 
2009.” 

 - 10 -  
 
7. The Committee are happy to note that the projects for establishment 
of new extension centres of the Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and 
Technology (CIPET) at Jaipur and Aurangabad are expected to be completed 
by March 2009, as per schedule. They are also happy to note that the 
Plastics Waste Management Centre at Guwahati is likely to be 
operationalised by March 2009.  They would like to be apprised about the 
exact time when these centers would actually be functional. 
 
The Committee regret to note that the project at Panipat has been 
delayed as the land for the proposed centre is yet to be allotted by the 
Government of Haryana.  From the action taken reply it is evident that the 
efforts made even at the Secretary level have not yielded the desired results 
so far.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the matter should now be taken 
up at the highest level so that the benefits of the new extension centre could 
be availed of by all concerne d, particularly, the students, in the right 
environment. 
 
 

 - 11 -  
 
B. Removal / Disposal of toxic wastes from the Union Carbide Plant site 
 
(Recommendation S.No.5) 
 
8. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that the Madhya Pradesh 
Pollution Control Board has prepared a road map for the removal/disposal of toxic 
wastes from the Union Carbide Plant site and a Task Force under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (Chemicals and Petrochemicals) has been monitoring 
the removal/disposal of toxic wastes. Pointing out  that the Bhopal Gas Tragedy 
had taken place in December 1984 and still roadmaps were being prepared for the 
work to be undertaken, the Committee had expressed their displeasure over the 
abnormal delay in removal/disposal of toxic wastes.  The Committee ha d 
recommended that steps taken for removal of toxic wastes from Union Carbide 
Plant site be expedited and the Committee be intimated about the action taken in 
this regard.  They had also desired to be informed about the time frame by which 
the entire toxic waste will be removed. 
 
9. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows :- 
 
“The fourteenth meeting of the Task Force constituted to monitor the 
progress made in removal/disposal of the toxic wastes lying in and around the 
former UCIL  plant site at Bhopal under the Chairmanship of Secretary (C&PC) 
was held on 9 June 2008. The Task Force had directed the Government of 
Madhya Pradesh to transport 40 MT of Lime Sludge to the Transportation, 
Storage, Disposal Facility (TSDF) at Pithampur b y 30 June 2008.  The State 
Government has informed that the 40 MT of Lime Sludge has been transported 
from Bhopal to Pithampur and disposed of in the TSDF in the last week of June 
2008.  The other approximately 350 MT of toxic wastes has to be incinerated and 
efforts are being made to expedite the process, by the Government of M.P.  The 
Phase-II of the Roadmap would be complete after the incineration is done. 
 

 - 12 -  
The Phase -III consisting of soil and ground water remediation would be 
started after IICT, NEERI a nd NGRI submit their reports of the Task Force.  The 
Task Force held its fifteenth meeting on 17 June 2008 and it was decided in 
consultation with CSIR that NEERI and NGRI would finalize the Site Remediation 
Strategy for soil and ground water remediation in 24 months.” 

 - 13 -  
10. The Committee are unhappy to point out that the Action Taken note is 
completely silent about fixation of a definite time frame by which the entire 
toxic waste will be removed from the Union Carbide India Limited’s (UCIL) 
plant, Bhopal.  What has caused concern to the Committee is that even after 
a lapse of about 24 years since occurrence of the tragedy, various 
authorities are still in the process of rendering their inputs for finalisation of 
a strategy for environmental remediation work in and around the UCIL plant.  
All these are indicative of the lack of urgency in addressing to the sensitivity 
of the whole issue which is regrettable, to say the least.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Department should gear up the machinery an d 
draw a definite time frame for completion of the whole process.  
 

 - 14 -  
 
C. Establishment of six new centres of NIPER 
(Recommendation S.No.8) 
 
11. While dealing with the budgetary allocation for the National Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research for the year 2008 -09, the Committee in 
their earlier Report had recommended as under :- 
 
“The Committee note that the National Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research (NIPER) seeks to promote excellence in the 
sphere of pharmaceutical education and to meet the current and future 
needs of the pharmaceutical sector in India.  Keeping in view the 
importance of its objectives, the plan budget for the Institute has been 
raised to Rs. 75.00 crore in the BE 2008 -09 particularly to strengthen the 
infrastructure facilities of Institute, start new schemes in addition to 
completion of on -going schemes and for other new NIPERs.  The 
Committee are happy to note that Cabinet had approved in August, 2007 
for setting up of six new NIPERs at Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Kolkata, 
Hazipur, Rae Bareli and Guwahati.  Out of these, some courses have been 
started at four places namely, Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Hazipur and 
Kolkata during the academic year 2007 -08.  The Committee have been 
informed that the process of appointing con sultants for preparation of 
Detailed Project Reports (DPR)s for the new NIPERs has been started and 
these Institutes are likely to become fully operational towards the end of 
11th Five Year Plan.  While appreciating the development, the Committee 
recommend that steps should be taken to make these institutes fully 
operational within the stipulated time period to achieve the desired 
objectives.” 
 

 - 15 -  
12. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows :- 
 
“The Department has initiated steps to start some courses at 
Guwahati and Rae Bareily. While arrangements at Guwahati have been tied 
up, the same at Raebareily have not yet been finalized. As per 
recommendations of the Committee, Government will take necessary steps 
to make the new NIPERs fully  operational within the stipulated time period, 
i.e. by the end of the 11th Five Year Plan to achieve the desired objectives.” 
 

 - 16 -  
13. The Committee trust that all efforts would be made to ensure 
operationalisation of the six new centres of National Institut e of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER) during the 11 th Five Year 
Plan itself in the overall interests of the indigenous pharmaceutical sector.  
 

 - 17 -  
 
D. National Pharmaceuticals Policy 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.10) 
 
14. Emphasising the need for exped itious finalisation of a National 
Pharmaceuticals Policy, the Committee, in their earlier Report, had recommended 
as under :- 
 
“The Committee note that the National Pharmaceutical Pricing 
Authority (NPPA) is responsible for price fixation/revision of drugs  and 
formulations and other related matters. IT also monitors the prices of 
decontrolled drugs and formulations and oversees the implementation of 
the provisions of drugs (Price control) Order.  The Committee also note that 
the provision of Rs.10.00 crore was made in the plan budget of NPPA for 
the year 2007 -08 for taking up new items like building robust and 
responsive statistical system, creation of State level cells, schemes for 
interaction with states, consumer awareness and publicity through 
Electronic and Print Media, strengthening the existing monitoring and 
enforcement work.  This budget of Rs. 10 crore allocated towards new 
schemes could not be sanctioned due to non finalization of the draft 
National Pharmaceutical Policy - 2006 which is still under consideration of 
Group of Ministers. In BE 2008 -09 plan budget of NPPA of Rs. 11.50 crore 
has been restored since the draft is expected to be approved and the new 
schemes are likely to be sanctioned thereafter. The Committee fails to 
understand that in spi te of their strong recommendation regarding 
finalization of National Pharmaceuticals Policy -2006 made in their 
Twentieth Report (2006-07) which is an Action Taken Report of the Seventh 
Report of the Committee (2005-06), the Department has remained static o n 
such a crucial issue. The Committee, therefore, express their deep anguish 
over the delay and reiterate their earlier recommendation regarding 
finalization of National Pharmaceutical Policy, 2006 so that funds 

 - 18 -  
earmarked for NPPA are utilized fully to ach ieve the objectives for which 
they are allocated.” 
 
15. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows :- 
 
“The Cabinet Note on draft National Pharmaceuticals Policy – 2006 
has been referred to a Group of Ministers (GOM) for its examination.  So far 
four meetings of GOM have been held on 10 April 2007, 12 September 
2007, 30 January 2008 and 30 April 2008. 
 
In this context it is also stated that this Department has not remained 
static on the issue of finalization of draft National Pharmace uticals Policy-
2006.  Hon’ble Minister (C&F and S) has written two letters dated 30.5.2007 
and 4.3.2008 to the Chairman of Group of Ministers expressing his concern 
over delay in finalization of the draft policy and requesting for an early 
decision.    
 
As decided in the 4 th Meeting of GOM as mentioned above, the 
matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare as 
well as the Department of Legal Affairs in the Ministry of Law & Justice.” 
 

 - 19 -  
16. The Committee consider it unfortunate that no headway has been 
made in the finalisation of the National Pharmaceuticals Policy.  Considering 
the concerns of the common man in the matter of availability of drugs, its 
pricing and other related issues, the Committee are anxious that an 
appropriate pol icy addressing those vital areas are finalised and 
implemented at the earliest.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that 
necessary steps be taken without any further loss of time.  
 

 - 20 -  
 
 
E. Promotion and Development of Chemical Industry  
(Recommendation Sl.No.12) 
 
17. Commenting on the Chemicals Promotion and Development 
Schemes, the Committee, in their earlier Report had recommended as under :- 
“The Committee note that Rs.2.00 crore has been proposed for the 
Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS)  which has been 
made with a view to ensure promotion of chemicals, including 
pharmaceuticals, by organizing various seminars, workshops as well as 
setting up of a Mega Chemicals Industries Estate in two identified States of 
West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh.  While appreciating that Mega 
Chemicals Estates have been set up in two States and that resulted into 
receipt of applications from five States for setting up of Petroleum, 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIR) in their States, 
the Committ ee recommend that such estates should be set up in other 
states which would encourage them to express their willingness in setting 
up PCPIR in their States.  The Committee desire that the funds earmarked 
for CPDS be utilized fully to achieve the desired results.” 
 
18. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows :- 
“With the establishment of the PCPIR, the Mega Chemical Industrial 
Estate (MCIE) have been subsumed in the above sector. The Department 
has received applications from 6 State s for hosting Petroleum, Chemical 
and Petrochemical Investment Regions (PCPIR) as detailed below. 
 
(i) Proposal from the Government of Andhra Pradesh for hosting a PCPIR 
at Vishakhapattnam -Kakinada-Rajahmundry within the 
Vishakhapattnam and East Godavari Districts. 
 

 - 21 -  
(ii) Proposal from the Government of Karnataka for hosting a PCPIR within 
the coastal districts of Dakshina Kannada and Udupi of Karnataka. 
 
(iii) Proposal from the Government of Gujarat for hosting a PCPIR at Dahej 
spread over the blocks of Vagra and Bharuch of South Gujarat. 
 
(iv) Proposal from the Government of West Bengal for hosting a PCPIR 
at Haldia spread over the Haldia Municipal Corporation and 
Nayachar islands in Purba Medinipur.   
 
(v) Proposal from the Government of Orissa for hosting a PCPIR  in 
Paradeep region.   
 
(vi) Proposal from the Government of Tamil Nadu for hosting a PCPIR in 
Cuddalore-Nagapattinam districts of Tamil Nadu. 
 
Apart from PCPIR, other major activities to be taken up from CPDS 
are The India-Chem 2008, promotion through international conventio ns like 
Prior Informed consent, REACH etc. The funds as earmarked for CPDS will 
be fully utilized to achieve the desired results of promotion and 
development of chemical industry as a whole.” 
 

 - 22 -  
19. The Committee hope that the proposals received  from the s ix willing 
States for hosting Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical Investment 
Regions (PCPIR) will be duly examined and taken to their logical 
conclusions.  They also desire that the other activities proposed are actually 
taken up so that the budgetary al locations for promotion and development 
of chemical industry are productively utilized. 

 - 23 -  
 
F. Loss due to non -production of full capacity of DDT by 
Hindustan Insecticides Ltd. (HIL) 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No. 14) 
 
20. Taking note of the performance of the Hindustan Insecticides Limited 
(HIL) after implementation  of its Revival Package, the Committee, in their earlier 
Report had recommended as under :- 
 
“The Committee note that the Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL) 
was running into losses due to non -operational reasons.  The Committee 
also note that after implementation of revival package, the company is 
earning profit which is a good sign.  While appreciating that company is 
earning profit now, the Committee would like to know the reasons for non -
operation of some of the units of HIL which ultimately resulted into losses.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Company should introspect and 
the Department should investigate these factors so that such a situation do 
not recur in future.  The Committee desir e that all the parameters should be 
explored in coordination with State Government and other agencies before 
setting up any unit so that unnecessary closure of units do not result into 
losses and the money spent on setting up the units is not wasted.  The 
Committee would also like that other sick companies under the Department 
should follow the same steps taken by HIL so that they may also earn 
profit.” 
 
21. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows :- 
 
“M/s Hindustan Insecticides wa s incurring losses due to non -
operational reasons and underwent restructuring. The non -operational 
losses mainly relate to idle wages paid to the employees of erstwhile Delhi 
Unit, which was ordered closed w.e.f. 1.12.1996 as per orders of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in order to conform to Delhi Master Plan.  HIL along with 
167 other hazardous industries have been covered under the ambit of 

 - 24 -  
Supreme Court orders.  The idle wages were paid to these employees until 
their relocation at Bhatinda in Punjab as per order s of Supreme Court. 
Since the relocation, the unit is functional. The Rehabilitation package was 
approved by the Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs on 27 July 2006. 
In the year 07 -08 HIL had a shown a profit of Rs 6.58 crores. One reason 
for loss is non - production of full capacity of DDT for which Health Ministry 
has to give order.  The matter is being taken up with the Health Ministry. 
 
Similarly, M/s Southern Pesticides Corporation Ltd. (SPEC) was the 
subsidiary of Hindustan Insecticides Ltd.  The Uni t essentially was 
established to cater to the needs of National Anti Malaria Eradication 
Programme of Ministry of Health for supply of BHC whose manufacture and 
consumption has been banned by the Government of India w.e.f. 1.4.1997.  
Thus SPEC was also closed due to extraneous reasons. 
 
However, for all future projects to be set up by HIL, adequate 
diligence will be made to ensure that these projects are dealing with the 
requests of the State Governments, various agencies, etc. and that the 
projects are functional in nature.” 
 

 - 25 -  
22. The Committee are happy to note that after implementation of the 
Revival Package, the Hindustan Insecticides Ltd. (HIL) is now earning profit.  
The Committee desire that the issues restricting production  of DDT to its 
full capacity by the Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL) should be taken up 
with the Ministry of Health so that the expectations from the Revival Package 
are legitimately met and the company sustains its profit making trend in the 
future years as well.  
 

 - 26 -  
G. Revival of IDPL  
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.15) 
 
23. Stressing the need for the revival of the Indian Drugs and 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), the Committee, in their earlier Report  had 
recommended as under :- 
 
”The Committee note that IDPL which had done pioneerin g work in 
the manufacturing of drugs and pharmaceutical is presently not viable.  The 
Committee have been informed that the Draft Rehabilitation scheme for 
revival of IDPL has been referred to Group of Ministers (GOM) for 
consideration at the first instanc e.  The recommendations of the Group of 
Ministers are awaited.  The Committee hope that GOM would soon meet 
and finalize its recommendations for revival of IDPL. 
The Committee feel that revival of IDPL is very important issue as it 
has social obligation to  manufacture and produce Life Saving Drugs at a 
reasonable price whereas the private companies have no social obligation 
to manufacture and produce Life Saving Drugs at a reasonable price to the 
general public.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that IDPL should not 
only be revived but efforts should also be made to make a model drug 
company in the public sector.” 
 
24. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows :- 
 
“The revival proposal is still under consideration of GOM.” 
 

 - 27 -  
 
25. The Committee observe that the revival proposal for Indian Drugs and 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL) is under consideration of a Group of 
Ministers (GoMs). Considering its significant and the originally assigned role 
as the prime manufacturer of life saving drugs in the public sector, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should vigorously pursue 
expeditious finalisation of the revival proposal for IDPL.  The Committee 
would like to be kept apprised of the progress in the matter.   

 - 28 -  
 
H. De-linking of Ka rnataka Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals 
Ltd. from Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
26. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that there was a 
proposal under consideration to de-link Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals 
Limited (KAPL) from Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) and this proposal is likely 
to be finalized in 2008 -09.  The Committee had desired to be informed about the 
action plan in this regard.  The Committee had also noted that an amount of 
Rs.95.00 lakh has been released for setting up of Cephalosporin Project at KAPL.  
In view of above the Committee had recommended that Cephalosporin Project 
should be set up as early as possible so that KAPL should increase its exports. 
 
27. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows :- 
 
“The proposal for de -linking of Karnataka Antibiotics and 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL) from Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) 
is being examined by the Department in consultation with the Finance 
Ministry.  The  developments that have taken place in view of the revival of 
HAL will also be kept in view while taking a final view on the issue of 
delinking.  A final decision in this regard has not yet been taken. 
 
The requirement of funds from the Government for sett ing up of 
Cephalosporin Project by KAPL is Rs. 7.10 crore. An amount of Rs. 95 lakh 
has already been released in March 2006. Department is making efforts to 
release balance fund of Rs.6.15 crore to KAPL so that this project can be 
set up as early as possible.” 

 - 29 -  
28.  The Committee note that in respect of de -linking of Karnataka 
Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (KAPL) from Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd., a 
final decision is yet to be taken by the Department in consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance. The Comm ittee hope that a final decision in this regard 
would be taken soon, keeping in view all relevant considerations.  
 
 The Committee also note that an amount of Rs.6.15 crore is still to be 
released by the Department to set up the project of Cephalosporin by  KAPL 
despite the fact that a decision to this effect had been taken long back and 
Rs.95 lakh released two and a half years ago. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Department should make utmost efforts for setting up of the 
Cephalosporin Project by KAPL. 

 - 30 -  
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Sl.No. 01 
 
The Committee have analyzed the implementation of 
recommendations/observations contained in their Sixteenth Report on 
Demands for Grants  (2007-08) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  The analysis of the 
Committee shows that out of 18 recommendations contained in their 
Report, the Government have implemented some recommendations viz 
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 8,10,12,13 and 15.  Some 
recommendations viz. Recommendation Sl. Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, and 16 as per 
latest information submitted to the Committee are at various stages of 
implementation.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Go vernment 
should implement the recommendations expeditiously and apprise the 
Committee of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.01 (04) 
 
The Committee had recommended that steps should be taken for 
timely completion of the project for estab lishment of new extension centres 
of CIPET at Panipat, Jaipur and Aurangabad.  The Committee had also 
desired that in future CIPET centres should be established in the vicinity of 
polytechnic centres imparting education in plastic/polymer technology. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
New Centres of CIPET 
 
 The Government had informed the Standing Committee that the new 
extension centres of CIPET at Panipat, Jaipur and Aurangabad are likely to 
be completed by March 2009.  While the centres at Aurangabad and Jaipur 

 - 31 -  
are expected to be completed by March. 2009, as per schedule, the project 
at Panipat has got delayed as the land for the proposed centre is yet to be 
allotted by the Government of Haryana. The matter regarding delay in 
allotment of land by the Government of  Haryana was taken up by 
Secretary, Chemicals and Petrochemicals with Chief Secretary, 
Government of Haryana in June, 2007, October, 2007 and December, 
2007.  The State Government of Haryana had informed CIPET that the 
request for allotment of land was und er consideration and was to be placed 
for consideration before the Board of Directors of the Haryana State 
Industrial and Infrastructure Development Corporation Ltd. (HSIDC). The 
Secretary (C&PC) has again written to Chief Secretary, Government of 
Haryana about allotment of land for the CIPET centre at Panipat on May 23, 
2008. However, the courses are being conducted in the hired premises. A 
reminder to the Chief Secretary of Haryana from Secretary of this 
Department has also been issued in the first week of July’08. 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.01 (05) 
 
The Committee had hoped that all cases relating to the disbursement 
of pro-rata compensation to the victims of Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster would 
be disposed of expeditiously.  Besides, the Committee had recommended 
that Department should take up with the Ministry of Urban Development 
and State Government of Madhya Pradesh for providing safe drinking water 
in area affected by Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster and make sincere efforts to 
contain the problem of water contamination in the affected area. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Pro-rata compensation to victims of Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster. 
 
The distribution of pro-rata compensation to the victims of the Bhopal 
Gas Leak Disaster is being carried out by the Office of the Welfare 
Commissioner under the orders of the Supreme Court and the Government 

 - 32 -  
of India bears the expenditure on Exchange Rate Variation component of 
the compensation.  The compensation amount was deposited with the 
Reserve Bank of India as per the orders of the Supreme  Court and is 
directly transferred to the Account of the Welfare Commissioner, at Bhopal, 
as and when a request is made by the Welfare Commissioner to Reserve 
Bank of India  to provide the funds for disbursal, against the claims settled, 
which are then pro vided by the Reserve Bank of India by disinvesting the 
funds available in the Dollar Account maintained by them.  The Government 
of India, therefore, has no direct role in the actual disbursal process.  It may 
be reiterated that the requests of the Welfare  Commissioner to the 
Supreme Court for issuing directions to close the pro -rata claim cases of 
nearly 13,000 absentee claimants are pending with the Supreme Court.  
 
Recommendation Sl.No.01 (06) 
 
The Committee had recommended that the toxic wastes from Uni on 
Carbide Plant site at Bhopal be removed without any further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Removal of Toxic wastes from Union Carbide Plant Site at Bhopal. 
 
The fourteenth meeting of the Task Force constituted to monitor the 
progress made in removal/d isposal of the toxic wastes lying in and around 
the former UCIL plant site at Bhopal under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary(C&PC) was held on 9 th June, 2008. The Task Force had directed 
the Government of Madhya Pradesh to transport 40 MT of Lime Sludge to 
the Transportation, Storage, Disposal Facility (TSDF) at Pithampur by 30th 
June,2008.  The State Government has informed that the 40 MT of Lime 
Sludge has been transported from Bhopal to Pithampur and disposed of in 
the TSDF in the last week of June, 2008.  T he other approximately 350 MT 
of toxic wastes has to be incinerated and efforts are being made to expedite 
the process, by the Government of M.P.  The Phase -II of the Roadmap 
would be completed after the incineration is done. 

 - 33 -  
 The Phase-III consisting of s oil and ground water remediation would 
be started after IICT, NEERI and NGRI submit their reports of the Task 
Force.  The Task Force held its fifteenth meeting on 17 th June, 2008 and it 
was decided in consultation with CSIR  that NEERI and  NGRI would 
finalize the Site Remediation Strategy for soil and ground water remediation 
in 24 months. 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.01 (07) 
 
The Committee had recommended that all out efforts should be 
made to make the Assam Gas Cracker project complete and functional 
within the stipulated time period. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Earnest efforts are being made for timely completion of the project. 
So far the following activities have been undertaken: 
i) BCPL has prepared an action plan for 60 months starting from April, 
2007.  
ii) A Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(C&PC) reviews the progress of implementation of Assam Gas 
Cracker Project at regular intervals.   
iii) 890 Acres of land out of 1108 Acres needed for the project have 
been acquired by BCPL.   
iv) Government of Assam have informed that the rehabilitation process 
has already been started and expected to be completed within 
August, 2008.   
v) Feedstock Agreements have been signed. 
vi) M/s Engineers India Limited (EIL) appointed as Project Management 
Consultants.  
vii)  Financial Closure is to be completed by September, 2008. 
viii) Necessary Environmental and Pollution clearance both from State 
and MoEF has been obtained. 

 - 34 -  
ix) The Geotechnical Survey and topographical survey work completed. 
x) BCPL state d that the bids from prospective licensors for Ethane 
Cracker Units, Polypropylene Unit and LLDPE/HDPE sweetening 
units have been received and consequent upon technical and 
commercial amendments being carried out, the Licensors are 
scheduled to be awarded contracts by end of July, 2008.  
xi) Construction activities at site including construction of warehouse, 
site fencing and construction of boundary wall, construction of site 
office, railway siding, roads and drains are under process. 
xii) Rs.37.43 crore h as been released during the year 2007 -08 and 
Rs.100 Crores released during 2008 -09 by the Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Government of India towards Capital 
Subsidy for implementation of the project. 
 
Recommendation Sl.No 01  (16) 
 
The Committee  had recommended that Government should not 
frequently change their economic policy, especially in such cases where a 
substantial amount of money is involved.  The Committee had also 
cautioned that before setting up units like Caustic Soda Plant in Rasayani in 
Maharashtra by HOCL the arrangement of all inputs like power, land, water, 
etc. should be explored in tandem with the State Government. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Caustic Soda Plant in Rasayani by HOCL  
 
  All requests, in terms of water, electricity e tc. have been arranged 
and necessary funds have also been placed. Directions were also given to 
HOCL for making arrangement of all inputs like power, land, water etc. 
before hand in tandem with the State Government.   
 HOCL was provided an amount of Rs. 20 crores for restart of Caustic 
Soda/Chlorine Plant at Rasayani, Maharashtra.  Reconstruction activities 

 - 35 -  
have been completed and pre commissioning, testing and start up activities 
have already been taken up.  The plant will be operational by end June, 
2008.  This activity is a part of physical restructuring scheme of HOCL.  
With the start up of Caustic/Chlorine Plant at Rasayani Unit, the annual 
turnover of Rasayani Unit would go up to Rs. 210 crores as per the Revival 
Plan from the present turnover of Rs 106.00 crores. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals &Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.2 
 
 The Committee have been informed that the Planning Commission 
have approved outlays of Rs.1960 crore fo r different schemes of the 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals during the 11 th Five Year Plan.  
The Committee have also been informed that plan allocation for 2007 -08 
(RE) and 2008 -09(BE) are Rs.170.00 and Rs.295.00 crore respectively.  
While appreciating the fact that the Department have made some important 
achievements during the year 2007 -08 such as action initiated for 
establishment of 6 new NIPER like institutes, approval and promotion of 
PCPIR policy etc.  and the Department have endeavored to ma ke the 
chemical sector an engine of higher economic growth, the committee 
recommend that the Department should adopt proper planning to achieve 
the targets set out in the 11 th Five Year Plan.  The Committee also 
recommend that the allocated funds should be  utilized in proportionate 
manner during each year of the land and the previous trend of utilization of 
major portion of allocated funds during the terminal year of the Plan period 
should be discouraged.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department is taking suitable steps to evenly spread the 
approved outlay during the Five Year Plan period in a proportionate 
manner.  It may, however, be appreciated that by the end of June’08 out of 

 - 36 -  
Rs 295.00 crores, the actual plan expenditure was Rs.102.00 crores and 
another Rs 8.00 crores is in the offing. The Department is also 
endeavouring to initiate appropriate planning measures to make the 
Chemical Sector an engine of high economic growth.   
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
 
Recommendation Sl.No. 3 
 
The Committee note that the plan budget of CIPET in BE (2008 -09) 
is of Rs.31.00 crore consisting of OPEC Loan Assistance of Rs.13.5 crore, 
Government of India counterpart funding against OPEC l oan of Rs. 1.5 
crore and Rs.16 crore for ongoing and New Schemes of CIPET.  The 
Committee have been informed that courses are being offered and students 
have been enrolled in these courses during academic years 2006 -07 and 
2007-08 at 3 new CIPET centres at  Panipat (Haryana), Jaipur (Rajasthan) 
and Aurangabad (Maharashtra).  The Committee have also been informed 
that the construction work at these centres is expected to be completed by 
March, 2009. The Committee have been further informed that Rs. 7.98 
crore was released to CIPET in March, 2007 for setting up a Plastics Waste 
Management Centre at Guwahati and the Foundation Stone Laying 
Ceremony of the Centre is scheduled to be held on7th April,2008.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that construction work  at 3 new CIPET 
Centres should be completed on scheduled time.  The Committee also 
recommends that Plastics Waste Management Centre at Guwahati should 
be operationalized as early as possible to contain environmental problems 
created by plastic waste. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government had informed the Standing Committee that the new 
extension centres of CIPET at Panipat,  Jaipur and Aurangabad and Jaipur 
are expected to be completed by March, 2009, as per schedule, the project 

 - 37 -  
at Panipat has got delay ed as the land for the proposed centre is yet to be 
allotted by the Government of Haryana.  The matter regarding delay in 
allotment of land by the Government of Haryana was taken up by 
Secretary, Chemicals and Petrochemicals with Chief Secretary, 
Government of Haryana in June, 2007, October, 2007 and December, 
2007. The State Government of Haryana informed CIPET that the request 
for allotment of land was under consideration and was to be placed for 
consideration before the board of Directors of the Haryana State Industrial 
and Infrastructure Development Corporation Ltd. (HSIIDC).  The Secretary 
(C&PC) has again written to Chief Secretary, Government of Haryana about 
allotment of land for the CIPET centres  at Panipat on May 23, 2008.  
However, the courses ar e being conducted in the hired premises. A 
reminder to the Chief Secretary of Haryana from Secretary of this 
Department has also been issued in the first week of July’08.   
 
The process for purchase of machinery for the Plastics Waste 
Management Centre has  already begun in CIPET. The Plastics Waste 
Management centre at Guwahati is likely to be operationalized by March, 
2009. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.6 
 
The Committee note that the Assam Gas Cracker Project was 
approved by the Government on 18 th April, 2006 and a Joint Venture 
Company (JVC) namely M/s Brahmaputra Cracker an d Polymer Limited 
(BCPL) was incorporated on 8 th January, 2007.  Also the Hon’ble Prime 
Minister of India laid the foundation stone of M/s Brahmaputra Cracker and 

 - 38 -  
Polymer Limited of Assam Gas Cracker Project at Lepetkata, Assam on 
9.4.2007 and M/s Brahmapu tra Cracker and Polymer Limited have 
prepared a Project Implementation Work Schedule for 60 months starting 
from April, 2007.  The Committee, while expressing their satisfaction over 
the substantial progress made, now desire that all out efforts should be 
made to make the project complete and functional within the stipulated time 
period.  The Committee also recommend that steps should be taken to 
properly utilize the employment potential of the Assam Gas Cracker Project 
and preference should be given to fam ilies whose land has been affected.  
The Committee note with satisfaction that Central Institute of Plastics 
Engineering and Technology (CIPET) is at present undertaking 
entrepreneurial development programmes in consultation with Gas 
Authority of India Lim ited (GAIL) at Guwahati.  The Committee also note 
that Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals have suggested to the 
Government of Assam for integrating efforts and working out Action Plan 
towards down streaming.  The Committee hope that Government of A ssam 
would act on the Action Plan in the right earnest for harnessing the 
employment potential in the State of Assam.   The Committee also desire 
that in addition to generate employment potential in Assam, similar efforts 
should be made in other North East ern States including Sikkim in 
coordination with respective State Governments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Subsequent to the information furnished by the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals to the Standing Committee of Parliament for 
Ministry of Chemi cals & Fertilizers on Demands for Grants, the Monitoring 
Committee reviewed the progress of the implementation of the project on 
21st May, 2008.  The following further progress has been made in this 
regard are as follows: 
 M/s Brahamaputra Cracker & Polymer Limited (BCPL) have informed 
that in the 6 th Board Meeting of BCPL held on 12.5.2008, a 4 -

 - 39 -  
member sub -committee of the Board comprising of BCPL, OIL & 
Numaligarh Refinery Limited has been constituted for facilitating 
speedy approvals in respect of proposal  for items under the Civil 
Works, Purchase, Consulting Services and Contract Services in line 
with GAIL’s Delegation of Powers and procedure in this regard and 
accord approvals within its delegated powers.  
 Subsequent to release of Rs.30 crores during Nove mber, 2007 and 
of Rs.7.43 crores  released to BCPL towards capital subsidy during 
March, 2008, a further amount of Rs 100 crores was released to 
BCPL in June 2008. 
 Topographical & Geo-Technical surveys have been completed.  
 Permanent boundary demarcation markers have been installed. 
 Central Industrial Security Force has been deployed at Dibrugarh for 
BCPL duty. 
 
The Chairman BCPL/CMD GAIL has informed that the project will be 
completed on schedule. Further a Business Plan for Rs. 445.19 crore for 
the financ ial year 2008 -09 has been submitted as per which the major 
activities scheduled for being undertaken are:- 
 Awarding of contracts for Process Packages for Polypropylene, 
LLDPE/HDPE Swing and Ethylene Cracker units 
 Construction activities at site including c onstruction of warehouse, site 
fencing and construction of boundary wall, construction of site office, 
railway siding, roads and drains. 
Government of Assam has informed that the remaining land for the 
project will be handed over after completion of resett lement and rehabilitation 
of families residing on the project area. On the issue of taking steps to properly 
utilize the employment potential of the Assam Gas Cracker Project and 
preference be given to families whose land has been affected and that the 
Government of Assam needs to act on the Action Plan in the right earnest for 
harnessing the employment potential in the State of Assam, it is stated that the 

 - 40 -  
Government of Assam has been requested to take necessary steps. Also, 
during the Monitoring Committee  Meeting on 30.06.08, the Commissioner, 
Industries and Commerce, Government of Assam, assured to put up an 
integrated plan for the downstream industries soon. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.7 
 
 The Committee note that the Institute of Pesticides Formulation 
Technology (IPFT) is engaged in the development of environmental friendly 
pesticides formulations which is highly essential for the safety of users  and 
preservation of the environment.  The Committee also note that the institute 
is playing a catalytic role for the growth of pesticides industry in the country.  
As  submitted by the Department that a project sponsored by the Ministry of 
Agriculture reg arding Pesticide Residue Analysis - Monitoring of Pesticide 
Residues at National level is under progress, the Committee hope that 
project would be made more effective and IPFT would play a pivotal role in 
this regard for the soil health as well as for the h eal of consumers.  The 
Committee is happy to note that IPFT is developing ecofriendly Neem 
Based Pesticide.  The Committee hope that such an initiative would not 
only be environment friendly but also cost effective.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that sincere efforts should be made in this regard at 
tandem with Ministry of Environment and Forests and Ministry of Science 
and Technology and Ministry of Commerce and other concerned 
organizations.  The Committee have been informed that the post of Chief 
Executive Officer and Director IPFT and seven posts at the level of 
scientists have been filled up during 2007 -08.  The Committee hope that 
now the Institute would function smoothly and achieve the desired 
objectives. 
  

 - 41 -  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The project for monitoring of pesticides residues, sponsored by the 
Ministry of Agriculture being implemented by IPFT for the Haryana region,  
is continuing in the current year.  IPFT is functioning smoothly. 
 The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals initiated  a project 
for development of safe and environment friendly pesticides utilizing the 
Neem seeds under a country programme titled “Development and 
Production of Neem Products as Environment Friendly Pesticides”.  The 
first phase of this programme was undert aken at two locations i.e. Nimpith, 
West Bengal and at Nagpur, Maharashtra.  The Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals is implementing the Phase II of this project in which ten 
participating organizations including Central Coffee Research Institute, 
Indian Cardamom Research Institute, Tocklai Experimental Station Jorhat, 
UPASI Tea Research Foundation Valparai (all of which are with the Ministry 
of Commerce and Industry) and the Punjab State Council for Science and 
Techno logy, Vivekananda Institute of  B iotechnology West Bengal, Bidhan 
Chandra  Krishi Viswavidyalaya West Bengal, Neem foundation Nagpur, 
Indian Toxicology  Research Centre, Lucknow (which is under the Ministry 
of Science and Technology) and Institute of Pesticides Formulation 
Technology Gurgaon are associated.  Regional Network on Pesticides for 
Asia and the Pacific (RENPAP) is the Technical Coordinator.  The Ministry 
of Environment and Forests, Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Rural 
Development and Land Resources have been apprised ab out the project 
and were also involved in a seminar on Production and Promotion of Neem 
Based Pesticides as Environment Friendly Bio -degradable Alternatives to 
Chemical Pesticides organized by the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals during 2007.  Th us Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has been interacting with the Ministry of Commerce, 
Ministry of Science and Technology, Ministry of Environment and Forests 
and Ministry of Rural Development on this project. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
 

 - 42 -  
Recommendation Sl.No.8 
 
The Committee note that the National Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research (NIPER) seeks to promote excellence in the 
sphere of pharmaceut ical education and to meet the current and future 
needs of the pharmaceutical sector in India.  Keeping in view the 
importance of its objectives, the plan budget for the institute has been 
raised to Rs. 75.00 crore in the BE 2008 -09 particularly to strengt hen the 
infrastructure facilities of Institute, start new schemes in addition to 
completion of on -going schemes and for other new NIPERs.  The 
Committee are happy to note that Cabinet had approved in August, 2007 
for setting up of six new NIPERs at Hyderab ad, Ahmedabad, Kolkata, 
Hazipur, Rae Bareli and Guwahati.  Out of these, some courses have been 
started at four places namely, Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Hazipur and 
Kolkata during the academic year 2007 -08.  The Committee have been 
informed that the process of  appointing consultants for preparation of 
Detailed Project Reports (DPR)s for the new NIPERs has been started and 
these Institutes are likely to become fully operational towards the end of 1th 
Five Year Plan.  While appreciating the development, the Commi ttee 
recommend that steps should be taken to make these institutes fully 
operational within the stipulated time period to achieve the desired 
objectives.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department has initiated steps to start some courses at 
Guwahati and Raebareily. While arrangements at Guwahati have been tied 
up, the same at Raebareily have not yet been finalized. As per 
recommendations of the Committee, Government will take necessary steps 
to make the new NIPERs fully operational within the stipulated time  period 
i.e. by the end of the 11th Five Year Plan to achieve the desired objectives.  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 

 - 43 -  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation Sl.No.9 
 The Committee have been informed that as per the approved 
programme, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals in 
association with the Indian Chemical Council has undertaken total 10 
awareness programmes  in different parts of the country having good 
concentration of chemical industries relevant to the Chemicals Weapons 
Convention.  The industry is being educated about their obligations under 
this convention through these programmes.  They are also given p ractical 
training on how to file their declaration.  Considering these facts, the 
Committee recommend that more such awareness programmes be 
organized as these programmes are extremely relevant and beneficial to 
the delegates as presentations are made by experts covering the provisions 
of Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) Act and its implication.  The 
Committee also reiterate their earlier recommendation made in their 16 th 
Report on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) that safety steps under Chemical 
Weapons Convention should also be applied for the safety of general public 
at large.  The Committee, therefore, desire that in the hazardous chemical 
industries, adequate provision of antidotes and other safety and protective 
measures should be arranged to contain ant untoward incidents and the 
personnel engages in such industries should be properly trained to use all 
the protective devices. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 During the financial year 2008 -09, it is planned  to undertake  about 
12 awareness generation programmes  in different parts of the country with 
concentration of chemical industry relevant to Chemical Weapons 

 - 44 -  
Convention.  The locations for such programmes are in the process of 
being finalized in consultation with  the chemical industry associations and 
other concerned stake holders, after due publicity.   In these awareness 
programmes due attention would be given to the relevance to the safety of 
factory workers and the general public at large as per the Safety, Health 
and Environment (SHE).  Regulatory measur es will also be properly 
brought out as far as the CWC is concerned.  The general safety of workers 
is ensured by the Ministry of Labour and Employment under the Factories 
Act. As per the guidelines it is ensured that the firms arrange part -time/full 
time trained medical personnel as per the needs. The facilities relating to 
medical, personal protection equipment etc. are checked up   during 
inspection of facilities covered by the Chemical Weapons Convention. The 
firms ensure that the antidotes are availabl e, depending upon their 
requirements. However the Department in association with the Indian 
Chemical Council actively promotes safety norms through seminars and 
workshops. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
 
Recommendation  Sl. No. 11 
 
The Committee note that the Government is providing grants for 
promotion of export of pharmaceuticals which inter -alia includes organizing 
seminars/workshops. While appreciating the fact that various activities were 
carried out for promotion of pharma export during the year 2007 -08 by 
utilizing funds under PEPS, the Committee recommend that vigorous and 
sustained efforts should be made for promotion of export of 
pharmaceuticals in the coming year also. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department has noted the recommendation of the Committee 
and will ensure that vigorous and sustained efforts would be made for 
promotion of export of pharmaceuticals. 

 - 45 -  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
Recommendation Sl.No.12 
 The Committee note that Rs.2.00 crore has been proposed for the 
Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS) which has been 
made with a view to ensure promotion of c hemicals, including 
pharmaceuticals, by organizing various seminars, workshops as well as 
setting up of a Mega Chemicals Industries Estate in two identified States of 
West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh.  While appreciating that Mega 
Chemicals Estates have been  set up in two States and that resulted into 
receipt of applications from five States for setting up of Petroleum, 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIR) in their states, 
the Committee recommend that such estates should be set up in other 
states which would encourage them to express their willingness in setting 
up PCPIR in their states.  The Committee desire that the funds earmarked 
for CPDS be utilized fully to achieve the desired results. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With the establishment o f the PCPIR, the Mega Chemical Industrial 
Estate (MCIE) have been subsumed in the above sector. The Department 
has received applications from 6 States for hosting Petroleum, Chemical 
and Petrochemical Investment Regions (PCPIR) as detailed below. 
  
(vii) Proposal from the Government of Andhra Pradesh for hosting a PCPIR 
at Vishakhapattnam -Kakinada-Rajamundry within the Vishakhapattnam 
and East Godavari Districts. 
(viii) Proposal from the Government of Karnataka for hosting a PCPIR within 
the coastal districts of Dakshina Kannada and Udupi of Karnataka.   
(ix) Proposal from the Government of Gujarat for hosting a PCPIR at Dahej 
spread over the blocks of Vagra and Bharuch of South Gujarat.   

 - 46 -  
(x) Proposal from the Government of West Bengal for hosting a PCPIR 
at Haldia spread over t he Haldia Municipal Corporation and 
Nayachar islands in Purba Medinipur.   
(xi) Proposal from the Government of Orissa for hosting a PCPIR  in 
Paradeep region.   
(xii) Proposal from the Government of Tamil Nadu for hosting a PCPIR in 
Cuddaore-Nagapattinam districts of Tamil Nadu. 
Apart from PCPIR, other major activities to be taken up from CPDS 
are The India-Chem 2008, promotion through international conventions like 
Prior Informed consent, REACH etc. The funds as earmarked for CPDS will 
be fully utilized to achieve t he desired results of promotion and 
development of chemical industry as a whole. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation  Sl. No. 13 
 
The Committee note with satisfaction that some new schemes viz. (i) 
Creation of IPR Facilitation Centre at Pharmexcil (ii) Establishment of new 
NIPERs at some places (iii) New schemes in NIPER, Mohali (iv) C ritical 
Assistance for WHO  - GMP pre qualification for pharma PSUs  and (v) 
Setting up of centre for advanced tool design and development at Hazipur 
were started during last year with an allocation of Rs. 14.00 crore.  Further 
some new schemes have been l aunched in the current year to the tune of 
Rs. 37.50 crore.  The Committee note that allocation under new schemes 
has been increased from Rs. 14.00 crore to Rs. 37.50 crore in the current 
year.  The Committee hope that money earmarked for the new schemes 
would be utilized at the optimum level. 

 - 47 -  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Department has noted the recommendation of the Committee 
and shall make every endeavor that the money earmarked for the new 
schemes would be utilized at the optimum level. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
 
 
Recommendation Sl.No. 14 
 
 The Committee note that the Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL) 
was running into losses due to non -operational reasons.  The  Committee 
also note that after implementation of revival package, the company is 
earning profit which is a good sign.  While appreciating that company is 
earning profit now, the Committee would like to know the reasons for non -
operation of some of the uni ts of HIL which ultimately resulted into losses.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Company should introspect and 
the Department should investigate these factors so that such a situation do 
not recur in future.  The Committee desire that all the pa rameters should be 
explored in coordination with State Government and other agencies before 
setting up any unit so that unnecessary closure of units do not result into 
losses and the money spent on setting up the units is not wasted.  The 
Committee would also like that other sick companies under the Department 
should follow the same steps taken by HIL so that they may also earn profit. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 M/s Hindustan Insecticides was incurring losses due to non -
operational reasons and underwent res tructuring. The non -operational 
losses mainly relate to idle wages paid to the employees of erstwhile Delhi 
Unit, which was ordered closed w.e.f. 1.12.1996 as per orders of Hon’ble 

 - 48 -  
Supreme Court in order to conform to Delhi Master Plan.  HIL alongwith 167 
other hazardous industries have been covered under the ambit of Supreme 
Court orders.  The idle wages were paid to these employees until their 
relocation at Bhatinda in Punjab as per orders of Supreme Court. Since the 
relocation, the unit is functional. Th e Rehabilitation package was approved 
by the Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs on 27 th July, 2006. In the 
year 07-08 HIL had a shown a profit of Rs 6.58 crores. One reason for loss 
is non- production of full capacity of DDT for which Health Ministry ha s to 
give order.  The matter is being taken up with the Health Ministry. 
 
 Similarly M/s Southern Pesticides Corporation Ltd. (SPEC) was the 
subsidiary of Hindustan Insecticides Ltd.  The Unit essentially was 
established to cater to the needs of National A nti Malaria Eradication 
Programme of Ministry of Health for supply BHC whose manufacture and 
consumption has been banned by the Government of India w.e.f. 1.4.1997.  
Thus SPEC was also closed due to extraneous reasons. 
 
 However, for all future projects to  be set up by HIL, adequate 
diligence will be made to ensure that these projects are dealing with the 
requests of the State Governments, various agencies, etc. and that the 
projects are functional in nature. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.22 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendations Sl. No. 16 
 
The Committee note that Government has approved the proposal  
received from HAL for setting up new powder injectable facilities for 

 - 49 -  
Cephalosporin and up gradation of existing vialing  facilities for Betalactum 
(Penicillin) Antibiotics complying to WHO -GMP standards at an estimated 
cost of Rs. 20.17 crore.  The Committee hope that thes e projects would be 
completed in time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
HAL has reported that the trial production of Cephalosporin injections 
will commence in September, 2008 and the commercial production will start 
in October, 2008. 
The work on upgradation of e xisting vialing facilities for 
Betalactum(Penicillin) Antibiotics would commence in November 2008. This 
work will be completed by March 2009. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
 
Recommendation Sl.No. 17 
 
The Committee note that revival scheme of BCPL has been 
approved on 21 st December, 2006 and out of cash infusion of Rs. 207.19 
crore, Rs. 117.19 crore has since been released to BCPL in 2006 -07.  
Rs.90.00 crore is to be released  as interest free loan during the 11 th Plan.  
Out of this Rs. 20.00 crore has been released during 2007 -08.  The 
Committee have been informed that the company is expected to be revived 
by 2010-11.  The Committee have also been informed that the company is 
short of skilled technical manpower.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that revival plan of BCPL should be completed in time and 
steps should be taken immediately to recruit technical personnel by 
incentivising them as per its requirement.  The Committe e also note that 
there is surplus unskilled workers as such Voluntary Retirement Scheme 
(VRS) was planned for 200 employees.  Out of which only 19 employees 
opted for VRS.  The rest of the employees are reluctant to opt for VRS.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should devise a 

 - 50 -  
mechanism in consultation with Ministry of Finance to encourage the 
employees who are reluctant to opt for VRS. 
 
The Committee recommends that Letter of Credit system adopted by 
the company should be reviewed a nd loopholes, if any, should be plugged.  
While expressing satisfaction over reforms carried out for revival of the 
company, the Committee are of the view that the company should 
strengthen its management.  Besides this the Committee desire that a 
sound pu rchase policy should function with an optimum efficiency without 
further going into micro aspects of the purchase policy.  The Committee 
also desire that production should be made on orders and not on 
anticipation as unsold product may lead to wastage of money. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The item-wise reply is as under: 
 
(i) Recruitment of Technical Personnel - BCPL has recruited/selected about 
18 professionals in Production, Marketing, Finance, Personnel, Quality 
Control/Assurance, etc. during the last one y ear. The Company has plans 
to strengthen its Marketing Department by engaging Business Associates 
during the current year. The Company will further recruit professionals as 
per need after modernization/upgradation of the Plants.  
 
(ii) Encouragement for VR S- In view of the Revision of Pay (1997) and 
receipt of wage arrears, existing employees are not keen to opt for VRS 
with the existing pattern of compensation.  However, efforts are being made 
to reduce the unproductive losses through VRS. 
 
             So far as the efforts on the part of the Department is concerned, it 
is stated that the VRS is offered to the PSU employees as per the existing 

 - 51 -  
policy of the Government. It is not possible to devise any separate policy of 
VRS specific to BCPL.  
 
(iii) Letter of Credit system- The company has reported that the assignment 
to evaluate the system of ‘Letter of Credit’ (LC) being followed by BCPL at 
present, has been awarded to M/s Kay & Kay Associates, a Kolkata based 
Chartered Accountants Firm on 2nd April, 2008. 
 
           The report from M/s Kay & Kay Associates is expected  soon. Action 
will be considered in the light of the report that may be submitted by M/s 
Kay & Kay Associates.  
 
(iv) Purchase Policy - Purchase Procedure being followed by BCPL was 
approved by the Board of Directors during 1988 with amendments from 
time to time. The procedures are being reviewed for revision in line with the 
procedures being followed by other PSUs.  
 
(v) Production Against Order -BCPL is ensuring that goods are being 
produced against orders and not on anticipation of orders, to avoid 
accumulation of unnecessary inventory.  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 19 
 
The Committee note that company is under liquidation as a 
result of order dated 8 th April, 2003 passed by the Board of Industrial 
and Financial Reconstruction.  High Court of Orissa has since 
appointed provisional Liquidator, though the appointment has been 
stayed for the present by the Hon’ble High Court.  The Committee also 
note that workers of the company want to participate in the 

 - 52 -  
management.  The Committee during their visit to Bhubaneshwar and 
Puri on 10th and 11th December, 2008 observed that no capital subsidy 
or financial assistance was given by the Government for the last many 
years.  Even banks have frozen cash credit facilities.  Besides the 
above, there was no adequate marketing network.  The production 
facilities have not been upgraded during the last five years and 
Government of Orissa have also stopped purchase of medicines from 
them.  Considering these facts, the Committee recommend that 
instead of winding up of ODCL, it should be revived in the interest of 
workers. 
 
 The Committee is dismayed to note tha t agreement with M/s 
Medicure was made at unit level without obtaining the approval of 
Board of Directors of ODCL and IDPL.  Though the matter is sub -
judice, the Committee caution that such an agreement at Unit level 
should not be made in future by any com pany as it may lead to legal 
complication for a long time at the cost of company.  The Committee 
feel that a sound management at the top level and unit level are 
perquisite for avoiding such an erroneous agreement and running the 
affairs of the company effectively.  
Reply of the Government 
       
        The issue of agreement entered into by ODCL with Medicure at 
plant level without obtaining approval of Board of Directors has been 
examined in the Department and  IDPL and ODCL have since been 
instructed no t to enter into such agreements at unit level without 
obtaining approval of Board of Directors of ODCL and IDPL. 
 
  2.    On 8.4.2003, Board for Industrial & Financial Reconstruction    
(BIFR) order for winding up ODCL. High Court of Orissa appointed 
provisional Liquidator, though its appointment was stayed by the High 

 - 53 -  
Court first at the instance of employees of ODCL and thereafter 
Medicure .   
 
3.     Both IDPL and Medicure have submitted plans for revival of ODCL 
to the High Court of Orissa.  High Court e ntrusted the plans to the 
liquidator for evaluation. Taking into account the report of the liquidator 
and the submissions of the promoters, High Court is yet to pass 
judgement. 
 
4.   Further action will be considered by IDPL and the Industrial 
Promotion an d Investment Corporation of Orissa (IPICOL), an 
undertaking of the Govt. of Orissa in the light of judgement of the 
Orissa High Court. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
         

 - 54 -  
CHAPTER-III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION / OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
Recommendation S. No. 4 
 
 The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India on 19th July,2004 directed the 
Welfare Commissioner for Bhopal Gas L eak Disaster to disburse the 
unspent amount of Rs.1503 crore which accrued due to interest and 
exchange rate variation to the disaster victims on pro -rata basis.  The 
disbursement of pro -rata compensation started on 15.11.2004.  Till 31st 
January, 2008, claims of 5,61,668 persons have been settled and they have 
been paid a total pro -rata compensation of Rs.1506.97 crores.  The work 
for distribution of pro-rata compensation was to be completed by 30th April, 
2006.  However, an application in respect of the n early 31,000 absentee 
claimants had been filed by the office of the Welfare Commissioner in the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court on 15th February, 2006 for treating all such cases 
as closed.  Till 7th March, 2008, over 4500 claimants have come forward to 
settle their pro-rata claims after the directions issued by the Supreme Court 
on 23rd August, 2006.  The Welfare Commissioner filed an application in 
the Supreme Court again on 18th December, 2007, alongwith a Status 
Report, requesting that the almost 13,000 absentee claim cases may be 
treated as closed.  The orders of the Supreme Court are awaited.  The 
Committee now hope that all cases relating to the disbursement of pro -rata 
compensation would be disposed of expeditiously as per the orders of the 
Hon'ble Supreme Cou rt.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Government should disburse the compensation in a time bound manner 
and the Committee be informed about the deadline by which the 
disbursement of pro -rata compensation will be completed which has been 
pending for a very long time.  The balance amount of the absentees' claims, 

 - 55 -  
if any, should be utilized for the Common Welfare Scheme for disaster 
victims and their families in order to spend the whole amount. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The distribution of pro-rata compensation to the victims of the Bhopal 
Gas Leak Disaster is being carried out by the Office of the Welfare 
Commissioner under the orders of the Supreme Court and the Government 
of India bears the expenditure on Exchange Rate Variation component of 
the c ompensation.  The compensation amount was deposited with the 
Reserve Bank of India as per the orders of the Supreme Court and is 
directly transferred to the Account of the Welfare Commissioner, at Bhopal, 
as and when a request is made by the Welfare Commis sioner to Reserve 
Bank of India to provide the funds for disbursal, against the claims settled, 
which are then provided by the Reserve Bank of India by disinvesting the 
funds available in the Dollar Account maintained by them.  The Government 
of India, therefore, has no direct role in the actual disbursal process.  It may 
be reiterated that the requests of the Welfare Commissioner to the 
Supreme Court for issuing directions to close the pro -rata claim cases of 
nearly 13,000 absentee claimants are pending with the Supreme Court. The 
Supreme Court vide their order dated 16th October, 1992 had directed that 
the amount of compensation received from Union Carbide Corporation 
should only be used for disbursal to the victims of the Bhopal Gas Leak 
Disaster, therefo re, the balance amount of the compensation amount 
cannot be utilized for the Common Welfare Scheme for disaster victims and 
their families, or any other purpose. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 

 - 56 -  
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation Sl.No. 5 
 
 The Committee note that the Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control 
Board has prepare d a road map for the removal/disposal of toxic wastes 
from the Union Carbide Plant site and a Task Force under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary(Chemicals and Petrochemicals) has been 
monitoring the removal/disposal of toxic wastes.  The Committee have been 
informed that Phase-I of the roadmap has been completed and the work to 
be taken up under Phase -II has also started.  The Committee have been 
further informed that for implementation of Phase -III of the roadmap which 
includes dismantling and decommissioning of the plant and remediation of 
the soil and ground water, the Indian Institute of Chemicals 
Technology(IICT) is preparing recommendations for the 
dismantling/remediation of the old plants and the recommendations for soil 
and ground water remediation are b eing prepared by the National 
Environmental Engineering Research Institute(NEERI) and the National 
Geophysical Research Institute(NGRI).  The Committee note that Bhopal 
Gas Tragedy took place in December, 1984 and still roadmaps are being 
prepared for the work to be undertaken.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
express their displeasure over abnormal delay in removal/disposal of toxic 
wastes.  The Committee recommend that steps taken for removal of toxic 
wastes from Union Carbide Plant site be expedited a nd the Committee may 
be intimated about the action taken in this regard.  The Committee would 
also like to be informed about the time frame by which the entire toxic waste 
will be removed. 
 
 

 - 57 -  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The fourteenth meeting of the Task For ce constituted to monitor the 
progress made in removal/disposal of the toxic wastes lying in and around 
the former UCIL plant site at Bhopal under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(C&PC) was held on 9 th June, 2008. The Task Force had directed the 
Government of Madhya Pradesh to transport 40 MT of Lime Sludge to the 
Transportation, Storage, Disposal Facility (TSDF) at Pithampur by 30th 
June, 2008.  The State Government has informed that the 40 MT of Lime 
Sludge has been transported from Bhopal to Pithampur and disposed of in 
the TSDF in the last week of June, 2008.  The other approximately 350 MT 
of toxic wastes has to be incinerated and efforts are being made to expedite 
the process, by the Government of M.P.  The Phase -II of the Roadmap 
would be complete after the incineration is done. 
  
The Phase-III consisting of soil and ground water remediation would 
be started after IICT, NEERI and NGRI submit their reports of the Task 
Force.  The Task Force held its fifteenth meeting on 17 th June, 2008 and it 
was decided in consultation with CSIR that NEERI and NGRI would finalize 
the Site Remediation Strategy for soil and ground water remediation in 24 
months. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.10 
 
The Committee note that the National Pharmaceutical Pricing 
Authority (NPPA) is responsible for price fixation/revision of drugs and 
formulations and o ther related matters. IT also monitors the prices of 
decontrolled drugs and formulations and oversees the implementation of 

 - 58 -  
the provisions of drugs (Price control) Order.  The Committee also note that 
the provision of Rs. 10.00 crore was made in the plan b udget of NPPA for 
the year 2007 -08 for taking up new items like building robust and 
responsive statistical system, creation of State level cells, schemes for 
interaction with states, consumer awareness and publicity through 
Electronic and Print Media, stre ngthening the existing monitoring and 
enforcement work.  This budget of Rs. 10 crore allocated towards new 
schemes could not be sanctioned due to non finalization of the draft 
National Pharmaceutical Policy - 2006 which is still under consideration of 
Group of Ministers. In BE 2008 -09 plan budget of NPPA of Rs. 11.50 crore 
has been restored since the draft is expected to be approved and the new 
schemes are likely to be sanctioned thereafter. The Committee fails to 
understand that in spite of their strong rec ommendation regarding 
finalization of National Pharmaceuticals Policy -2006 made in their 
Twentieth Report (2006-07) which is an Action Taken Report of the Seventh 
Report of the Committee (2005-06), the Department has remained static on 
such a crucial issue. The Committee, therefore, express their deep anguish 
over the delay and reiterate their earlier recommendation regarding 
finalization of National Pharmaceutical Policy, 2006 so that funds 
earmarked for NPPA are utilized fully to achieve the objectives fo r which 
they are allocated. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
 The Cabinet Note on draft National Pharmaceuticals Policy – 2006 
has been referred to a Group of Ministers (GOM) for its examination.  So far 
four meetings of GOM have been held on 10 th April, 2007, 12th September, 
2007, 30th January, 2008 and 30th April, 2008.   
 
 In this context it is also stated that this Department has not remained 
static on the issue of finalization of draft National Pharmaceuticals Policy -

 - 59 -  
2006.  Hon’ble Minister (C&F and S) has written two letters dated 30.5.2007 
and 4.3.2008 to the Chairman of Group of Ministers expressing his concern 
over delay in finalization of the draft policy and requesting for an early 
decision.    
 
 As decided in the 4 th Meeting of GOM as mentioned above, the 
matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare as 
well as the Department of Legal Affairs in the Ministry of Law & Justice.  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 

 - 60 -  
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.15 
 
The Committee note that IDPL which had done pioneering work 
in the manufacturing of drugs and pharmaceutical is presently not 
viable.  The Committee have been informed that the Draft 
Rehabilitation scheme for revival of IDPL has been referred to Group 
of Ministers (GOM) for consi deration at the first instance.  The 
recommendations of the Group of Ministers are awaited.  The 
Committee hope that GOM would soon meet and finalize its 
recommendations for revival of IDPL. 
 
The Committee feel that revival of IDPL is very important issue 
as it has social obligation to manufacture and produce Life Saving 
Drugs at a reasonable price whereas the private companies have no 
social obligation to manufacture and produce Life Saving Drugs at a 
reasonable price to the general public.  The Committee,  therefore, 
recommend that IDPL should not only be revived but efforts should 
also be made to make a model drug company in the public sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The revival proposal is still under consideration of GOM. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.25 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 - 61 -  
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 18 
 
 
The Committee have been informed that there is a proposal under  
consideration to de -link Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals Limited 
(KAPL) from Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) and this proposal is likely 
to be finalized in 2008 -09.  The Committee would like to be informed about 
the action plan in this regard.  The Committee have also been informed that 
Rs.95.00 lakh has been released for setting up of Cephalosporin Project at 
KAPL.  In view of above the Committee recommend that Cephalosporin 
Project should be set up as early as possible so that KAPL should i ncrease 
its exports. 
Reply of the Government 
 
            The proposal for de -linking of Karnataka Antibiotics and 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL) from Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) 
is being examined by the Department in consultation with the Finance 
Ministry.  The developments that have taken place in view of the revival of 
HAL will also be kept in view while taking a final view on the issue of 
delinking.  A final decision in this regard has not yet been taken. 
       

 - 62 -  
     The requirement of funds fr om the Government for setting up of 
Cephalosporin Project by KAPL is Rs. 7.10 crore. An amount of Rs. 95 
lakhs has already released in March 2006. Department is making efforts to 
release balance fund of Rs. 6.15 crore to KAPL so that this project can be 
set up as early as possible. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Deptt. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No.16(3)/2008-Fin  dated : 15.07.2008] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
ANANT GANGARAM GEETE, 
NEW DELHI              Chairman, 
November 7, 2008                     Standing Committee on  
Kartika 16, 1930 (Saka)                 Chemicals and Fertilizers 

 - 63 -  
Appendix-I 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2008-09) 
 
THIRD SITTING 
(06.11.2008) 
 
 
  The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1500 hours. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  - Chairman  
 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Sunil Khan 
3. Shri A. Narendra 
4. Shri Anand Paranjpe 
5. Shri Prasanta Pradhan 
6. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
7. Shri Anantha Venkata Rami Reddy 
8. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
9. Shri D. Venugopal 
10. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma  
Rajya Sabha 
11. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
12. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
13. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
14. shri Raghunandan Sharma 
Secretariat   
  1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P. Sreedharan   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.S. Chera    -   Director 
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Deputy Secretary-II 
5. Smt. Balwant Kaur Saimbhi - Under Secretary 
    
  

 - 64 -  
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty-fifth Report of 
the Committee on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals).   After some 
discussion, the draft Report was adopted by the Committee with some minor 
amendments. 
  
4. ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** **  
 ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes, if 
any, arising out of the factual verification of the Reports by the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals and 
Department of Fertilizers) and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
6. ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** **  
 ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
   
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
  
 
 
 
** Matters not related to this Report 

 - 65 -  
Appendix – II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
contained in the Twenty-fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2007 -08) on Demands for Grants 
(2008-09) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fer tilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 19 
 
II Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1,2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 
11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17 and 19) 
 
14 
 Percentage to Total  73.68% 
 
III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s Replies  
(Vide Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
1 
 Percentage of Total 5.26% 
 
IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 5 and 10)  
 
2 
 Percentage of Total 10.53% 
 
V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 15 and 18) 
  
2 
 Percentage of Total  10.53% 
 
 