 
 
 
21  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA  
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
  DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2007-08) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommenda tions contained in the 
Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2006 -07) on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals)] 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
September, 2007/Asvina, 1929 (Saka) 
 
 


 -:2:- 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2007-08) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2006-07) on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) o f the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals] 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.11.2007 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.11.2007 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
September, 2007/Asvina, 1929 (Saka) 


 -:3:- 
CONTENTS 
 
               PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2007-08) ……………………………….. 
 
4 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………… 
 
5 
CHAPTER I Report ……………………………………………………………... 
 
6 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/observations which have been accepted 
by the Government ……………………………………..……… 
 
 
22 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies………… 
 
 
36 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 
37 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited …………………… 
 
 
38 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2007-08) held on 12th September, 2007….  
 
 
43 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (14 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2006-07) on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Minis try of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) …………………………………………………………. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 

 -:4:- 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
  1. Shri M. Rajagopalan Nair - Additional Secretary 
  2. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
  3. Shri A.S. Chera  - Director 
  4. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Deputy Secretary-II 
  5. Smt. Balwant Kaur Saimbhi - Under Secretary 
  6. Shri Prem Ranjan  - Senior Executive Assistant 
  
* Consequent upon nomination to the Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution, Shri Suresh Angadi, MP (LS) ceased to 
be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 30.08.2007. 
# Nominated w.e.f. 06.09.2007 vice Shri Devdas Apte, MP (RS). 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  -  Chairman 
  
Members  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ajit Singh 
3. Shri Afzal Ansari  
4. Shri Jaiprakash (Mohanlal Ganj) 
5. Shri Sunil Khan 
6. Shri Shrichand Kripalani 
7. Shri Subhash Maharia 
8. Shri Punnu Lal Mohale 
9. Shri A. Narendra 
10. Shri Prasanta Pradhan  
11. Shri Ramswaroop Prasad 
12. Shri P. Chalapathi Rao 
   13. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  
14. Shri Anantha  Venkata Rami Reddy  
15. Shri Devwrat Singh 
16. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi 
17. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava 
18. Shri D. Venugopal 
19. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
 *20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
 23. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
24. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
#25. Shri Surendra Lath 
 26. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
 27. Shri Mahendra Sahni 
28. Shri Dilip Singh Judev 
29. Shri R. Shunmugasundaram 
30. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
31. Shri T.R. Zeliang 

 -:5:- 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers   (2007 -
08) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their beha lf, 
present this Twenty First Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2006 -07) on Demands for 
Grants (2007 -08) of the M inistry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
 
2. The Sixteenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 
26th April, 2007.  The replies of Government to all the recommendations contained 
in the Sixteenth R eport were received on 27 th July, 2007.  The Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2007 -08) considered the Action Taken 
Replies received from the Government and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report 
at their sitting held on 12th September, 2007. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI          ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,   
26 September, 2007           Chairman, 
4 Asvina, 1929 (Saka)               Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and  Fertilizers. 

 -:6:- 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
 This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations /observations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2006 -07) on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) , which 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 26th April, 2007.  
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of  Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish  replies to the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the 
Committee within three months from the presentation of the Report i.e. by 26th 
July, 2007.  The Action Taken Replies of the Governme nt in respect of all the 18 
recommendations/observations contained in the Report were received on 27th 
July, 2007. These have been categorised as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13 15 and 16 
        Total - 12 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
        Nil  
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies  of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Sl. No. 11 
        Total - 1 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
 Sl. Nos. 3, 9, 14, 17 and 18. 
        Total - 5  
 

 -:7:- 
3. The Committee hope that utmost importance wo uld be given to the 
implementation of the recommendations/observations accepted by the 
Government.  In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to implement 
the recommendations/observations in their letter and spirit for any reason, 
the matter shou ld be reported to the Committee with reasons for non -
implementation. The Committee further desire that the Action Taken Notes 
on the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report 
and the final replies in respect of the recommendations for which only 
interim replies have been furnished by the Government should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
  
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations in the ensuing paragraphs: 
 
A. FOLLOW-UP ACTION ON RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED 
IN ELEVENTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
5. The Committee had analysed the follow -up action by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Eleventh 
Report of the Committee on Demands for Gra nts (2006 -07) of the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals.  The Committee had 
noted that certain recommendations were at the various stages of 
implementation by the Government.  The Committee have further 
reviewed the progress of implementation (in t he matters dealt with by 
the Committee in their Eleventh Report) in their Fourteenth and 

 -:8:- 
Sixteenth Reports and also the action taken replies furnished by the 
Government now.  The Committee note that some of the 
recommendations of the Committee like pro-rata compensation to 
victims of Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster, Removal of Toxic Wastes from 
Union Carbide Plant site at Bhopal, etc. are yet to be fully 
implemented.  This has been reflected by the Committee in their 
various Reports.  The Committee, therefore, rec ommend that the 
Government should take time bound conclusive action on the 
recommendations of the Committee.  
B. Disbursement of pro-rata compensation to Bhopal Gas victims and 
provision of safe drinking water to the contaminated areas. 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No. 5) 
 
6. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in July, 2004 directed the 
Welfare Commissioner for Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster to disburse the 
unspent amount of Rs.1503 crore which accrued due to interest and 
exchange rate variation to the disaster victims on pro -rata basis.  The 
disbursement of pro -rata compensation started on 15.11.2004.  About 
5,73,539 claimants were given compensation as on 31.1.2007.  The 
Department has informed that 38 appeals and 4 Review Petitio ns are lying 
with the Welfare Commissioner.  Besides, 56 applications are pending for 
scrutiny and motion hearing.  The work for distribution of pro -rata 
compensation was to be completed by 30th April, 2006.  However, an 
application in respect of nearly 31 ,000 absentees claimants had been filed 
by the office of the Welfare Commissioner in the Hon'ble Supreme Court on 
15th February, 2006 for treating all such cases as closed.  Decision of the 
Supreme Court is awaited.  The Committee now hope that all cases r elating 
to the disbursement of pro -rata compensation would be disposed of 
expeditiously as per the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and NGOs 
who have been assigned the task of contacting beneficiaries would do their 
work in a time -bound manner.  It is , therefore, imperative to have a control 
on their functioning. 

 -:9:- 
 
 The Committee while appreciating the initiative of Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals for providing safe drinking water in the gas 
affected area wherein the gas leakage had mixed wit h the soil resulting into 
contamination of water till now, are failed to understand as to why after 
such a long time the provision of providing safe drinking water has not been 
taken up effectively.  Had the Government taken up this issue earlier, the 
situation would have been different.  The Committee express their 
displeasure on learning the fact that even after the expiry of twenty one 
years of the tragedy, water is still being supplied by tankers instead of 
making any arrangement of piped water.  Though it is not the subject matter 
of the Department even then the Committee recommend that the 
Department should take up the matter with the Ministry of Urban 
Development and State Government of Madhya Pradesh and make sincere 
efforts to contain the problem of  water contaminations in the affected area.  
The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals also cannot shirk their 
responsibility as the gas leakage and its after effect have tangible effect on 
relief operations for which the Department has been made a nodal agency.” 
 
7. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
“The work of distribution of pro -rata compensation to the victims of 
the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster which was to be completed by 30th 
April,2006 as per directions of the Su preme Court had already been 
completed by that date by the office of the Welfare Commissioner, Bhopal 
Gas Victims.  However, an application in respect of nearly 19,000  
absentees claimants had been filed by the Office of the Welfare 
Commissioner in the Hon 'ble Supreme Court on 23rd August,2006 for 
treating all such cases as closed.  The matter is pending in the Supreme 
Court. 
 
As far as supply of safe drinking water through pipelines from the 
Kolar Reservoir to 14 localities around the UCIL plant site is co ncerned, in 
April,2006, the Government of India sanctioned money for a project under 
the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission(JNNURM) and the 
Government of M.P. had sanctioned Rs.14.31 crore to Bhopal Municipal 
Corporation(BMC) for providing saf e drinking water through pipelines from 
the Kolar Reservoir to 14 localities around the UCIL plant site.  The 
Coordination Committee for implementation  of various social, economic 
and medical rehabilitation programmes/schemes for the victims of Bhopal 
Gas Leak Disaster set up by the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals is in constant touch with the State Government for 
implementation of this project.  The representatives of Bhopal Gas Victims 
and associated NGOs have also been involved for preparatio n of the 
blueprint of this project, so as to cover all the affected bastis.  The 

 -:10:- 
Government of Madhya Pradesh has informed that the work on the project 
is expected to start in the second fortnight of May,2007, as the tender 
process was scheduled to be over  by 3rd March,2007.  The Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals is also following up with the State 
Government to ensure that the funds are spent for the contaminated 
groundwater affected bastis and there is no diversions of the pipelines to 
other areas.  The Secretary(C&PC) herself is monitoring the progress of the 
project with the State Government.” 
 
8. The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals have stated 
that disbursement of pro -rata compensation to Bhopal Gas victims, as 
per directions of the Supreme Court, has been completed by 30 th April, 
2006.  However, the matter in respect of 19000 absentees claimants is 
pending in the Supreme court.  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the matter of absentees claimants should be disposed off immediately  
after the pronouncement of the judgement by the Supreme Court.  The 
Committee while appreciating the fact that the Government of India as 
well as the Government of Madhya Pradesh have sanctioned money 
for a project for providing safe drinking water throug h pipelines to 14 
localities around the Union Carbide of India Limited ( UCIL) plant site, 
desire that the project be implemented in time and there is no 
diversion of the stipulated fund. 

 -:11:- 
C. Disposal of toxic wastes from Union Carbide Plant site at Bhopal 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
9. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee are happy to note that a Task Force under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary(Chemicals and Petrochemicals) is monitoring the 
removal/disposal of toxic wastes.  The Task Forc e accepted the final 
recommendations of the Technical Sub -Committee for removal/disposal of 350 M 
T of different types of toxic wastes by incineration, at the incinerator at 
Ankleshwar, Gujarat and for lime sludge weighing approximately 40 MT, to the 
secured landfill to be sent to the Transportation, Storage, Disposal Facility (TSDF), 
at Pethampur, near Indore.  The permission for incineration at the incinerator at 
Ankleshwar, Gujarat has been obtained from the State Government of Gujarat and 
the Ministry of Finance has allocated Rs.1.00 crore to the Department for meeting 
the 50 % share of expenditure estimated for the purpose.  Considering these 
developments, the Committee desire that toxic wastes from Union Carbide Plant 
site at Bhopal be removed without any further delay and the Committee may be 
intimated about the action taken in this regard.” 
10. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
  
 “The tenth meeting of the Task Force set up in compliance with the 
Orders of the High Co urt of Madhya Pradesh, Jabalpur dated 30th March, 
2005 and 13th May,2005 was held on 3rd May,2007, wherein it was 
decided to hold a preliminary meeting of the technical sub committee of the 
Task Force in the month of May,2007, under the convenorship of the  
Chairman of the MPPCB to look into the issues related to the 
implementation of the phase -III and give clear recommendations on (i) 
decommissioning and dismantling of the structure; (ii) Bio -remediation of 
the soil and (iii) examination of the extent of th e contamination of ground 
water.  The Technical Sub -Committee   met on 25 th May, 2007 at Bhopal. 
The Government of India has sanctioned Rs. 1 crore, in compliance with 
the orders of the Hon'ble High Court, dated 13th May, 2005, as the share of 
the Union of India for the removal/disposal of approximately 40 MT of Lime 
Sludge at the TSDF at Pithampur and approximately 350 MT of other toxic 
wastes to be incinerated at the incinerator at Ankleshwar, Gujarat for the 
fund to be operated by the Principal Secretary , Bhopal Gas Tragedy, Relief 
and Rehabilitation Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh and the 
Chairman, Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board Bhopal.  A Demand 
Draft for Rs.1 crore dated 4th May,2007 has since been sent to the State 
Government of Madhya Pradesh as the  share of the Central Government.” 
 

 -:12:- 
11. The Committee have been informed that the Government of India 
has sanctioned and issued a Demand Draft for Rs.1 crore, in 
compliance with the  orders of the Hon’ble High Court, dated 13 th May, 
2005, as the share of the Union of India for the removal/ disposal of 
approximately 40 MT of Lime Sludge at the Transportation, Storage, 
Disposal Facility ( TSDF) at Pithampur and approximately 350 MT of 
other toxic waste to be incinerated at the incinerator at A nkleshwar, 
Gujarat  for the fund to be operated by the Principal Secretary, Bhopal 
Gas Tragedy, Relief and Rehabilitation Department, Government of 
Madhya Pradesh and the Chairman, Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control 
Board, Bhopal.  The Committee now expect t hat the toxic wastes  shall 
be removed immediately  as thes e are lying there for over two 
decades. 
D. Setting up of NIPER like Institutes in the country 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
12. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee note that the N ational Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research (NIPER) seeks to promote excellence in the 
sphere of pharmaceutical education and to meet the current and future 
needs of the pharmaceutical sector in India.  Keeping in view the 
importance of its objectives, the Plan budget for the Institute has been 
raised from Rs.13.00 crore in the RE 2006 -07 to Rs.28.66 crore in the BE 
2007-08 particularly to strengthen the infrastructure facilities of Institute and 
start new schemes in addition to completion of  the on-going schemes. The 
Committee are happy to note that for the 11 th Plan a proposal for setting up 
5 more NIPER like Institutes in the country has been mooted and Planning 
Commission has accorded ‘in -principle’ approval for the same.  The 
Committee ho pe that as suggested by the Planning Commission, the 
Government would actively consider private-public partnership. Considering 

 -:13:- 
the fact that NIPER has been doing yeomen’s service to the pharmaceutical 
sector, the Committee strongly recommend that Planning  Commission 
finally approve the proposal expeditiously and Ministry of Finance 
accordingly allocate the money for the same. The Committee also 
recommend that new schemes/projects should be completed in a time 
bound manner so that desired objectives of the Plan funds are achieved.  In 
this regard, the Committee also desire that the Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals  also pursue the matter seriously with Planning 
Commission, Department of Expenditure and other concerned authorities.” 
 
13. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
  
“For NIPER, Mohali, a total of Rs.28.66 crores have been earmarked 
as Plan Grant in the B.E. 2007-08. This includes Rs.8.66 crores for ongoing 
activities and Rs.20 crores for New Schemes covering inf rastructure 
upgradation, Teaching Programme, IT and R&D.  NIPER has been asked to 
send the detailed proposals for obtaining approvals of the concerned 
authorities so that the funds could be released at the earliest and works on 
the projects/schemes could be started at the earliest.  
 Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, in consultation with the 
Planning Commission has proposed to set up six NIPERs during the 11 th 
Five Year Plan.  Presently, the proposal for setting up of four new NIPERs 
is at advanced stages of approval.  Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) 
has accorded its ‘in principle approval’ to start courses in four NIPERs at 
Ahmedabad (Gujarat), Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh), Hajipur (Bihar) and 
Kolkata (West Bengal) in its meeting held on 23.05.07.   Department is now 
in the process of obtaining approval from CCEA.  “ 
 
 
14. The Committee have been informed that the proposal for setting 
up of four new NIPERs at Ahmedabad (Gujarat), Hyderabad (Andhra 
Pradesh), Hajipur (Bihar) and Kolkata (West Bengal) has got ‘in 
principle approval’  of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) and 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is now in the 
process of obtaining approval from CCEA.  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Department of Chemicals and Pet rochemicals should 
take necessary steps for obtaining approval from CCEA expeditiously 

 -:14:- 
and expedite the process of setting up of more NIPERs in the country  
within a stipulated time period and the Committee should be informed 
about such target. 
 
E. Awareness generation programmes for  
Chemical Weapons Convention and the CWC Act 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
15. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee appreciate that all the Chemical Units which are 
producing Schedule II and Schedule III chemic als have to declare those so 
that the chemicals produced can not be used for producing chemical 
weapons as per the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).  The 
Committee note that for such monitoring an enhancement of Rs.0.18 crore 
has been made on the BE 2007 -08 as compared to RE 2006 -07.  The 
Committee feel that such safety steps are not only for adherence to 
Chemical Weapons Convention but also for the safety of general public at 
large. “ 
 
 
16. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
  
 
 “While undertaking the awareness generation programmes for 
Chemical Weapons Convention and the CWC Act, the importance of these 
programmes for ensuring adherence to the CWC, the relevance to the 
safety of factory workers and  general public at large   as per the Safety, 
Health & Environment (SHE) regulatory measures will also be properly 
brought out.” 
 
 

 -:15:- 
17.  The Committee note that the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals will bring out the relevance of Chemical Weapons 
Convention (CWC) for saf ety of factory workers and general public at 
large but they did not elaborate on this crucial issue.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should use print and 
electronic media for creating awareness among factory workers in 
particular and public at large in general so as to protect them from the 
dangerous and toxic effect of such chemicals as well as also to 
prevent any mishappening which may occur as a result of 
unawareness.  The Committee would also desire that Government 
should device such mechanism which may be taken aftermath of any 
such eventuality for their effective control. 
F.  Finalization of the National Pharmaceutical Policy and Restructuring and 
strengthening of the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
  
18. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee note that the National Pharmaceutical Pricing 
Authority (NPPA) is responsible for price fixation/revision of drugs and 
formulations.  It monitors the prices of decontrolled d rugs and formulations 
and oversees the implementation of the provisions of Drugs (Prices Control) 
Order.  The planned expenditure has been increased from Rs.1.50 crore in 
2006-07 to Rs.11.50 crore in 2007-08 in order to restructure and strengthen 
the NPPA,  as stipulated in the proposed National Pharmaceutical Policy, 
2006, by setting up Drug Price Monitoring Cell in each State for monitoring 
of the drug prices in the concerned State.  The Committee hope that 
National Pharmaceutical Policy, 2006 would be finalized soon and the funds 
earmarked for NPPA would be utilized fully to achieve the objectives for 
which they are allocated.” 

 -:16:- 
19. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
 “National Pharmaceutical Policy,2006 was considered by t he Union 
Cabinet at its meeting held on 11.1.2007.  The Cabinet has since 
constituted a Group of Ministers (GOM) for considering the Policy at the first 
instance for its recommendations.  The first meeting of the GOM was held 
on 10.4.2007.  As soon as the National Pharmaceutical Policy is approved 
by the Cabinet, action would be initiated to set up Drug Monitoring Cell in 
each State for monitoring prices of drugs.” 
 
20. The Committee regret to note that the National Pharmaceutical 
Policy, which is a requisi te for price control of drugs, has not been 
finalized yet.  It was still being considered by a Group of Ministers 
(GOM) whose first meeting was held on 10.04.2007.  The Committee 
strongly recommend that this policy should be finalized without any 
further d elay so that restructuring and strengthening of NPPA is 
completed and Drug Monitoring Cells are set up in each State for 
monitoring the prices of drugs.  
G. Promotion of export of pharmaceuticals 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
21. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Government is providing grants for 
promotion of export of pharmaceuticals which inter -alia includes organizing 
seminars/workshops. The Committee also note that against ‘Nil’ Plan and 
0.05 crore Non -Plan Budget for t he year 2006 -07, Rs. 1.00 crore Plan and 
0.5 crore Non-Plan Budget has been proposed for the year 2007 -08. While 
appreciating the increase in allocation for the year 2007 -08, the Committee 
recommend that vigorous and sustained efforts should be made for 
promotion of export of pharmaceuticals.” 

 -:17:- 
 
22. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
  
 “The Department has noted recommendation of the Committee and 
ensures that vigorous and sustained efforts would be made for promotion of 
export of pharmaceuticals.” 
 
23. Although the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has 
stated that vigorous and sustained efforts would be made for 
promotion of export of pharmaceuticals, however, no details have 
been given about the steps taken in this regard.  The Committee, 
therefore, would like to be apprised about such details. 
 
H.  Utilization of the funds allocated for the  
chemicals promotion and development scheme 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
  
24. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
  
 “The committee note that Rs.2.10 crores has been proposed for the 
Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS) which is targeted 
to gear up Indian Chemical Industry which is facing various challenges 
posed due to liberalization and globalization and to tu ne it to adopt world 
class technology so as to become competitive in global market along with 
the multinationals and other big companies.  The Committee desire that the 
funds earmarked for CPDS be utilized fully to achieve the desired results.” 
 
25. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
  
 
 “Efforts will be made to fully and properly utilize the funds allocated 
under the scheme for various activities  for promotion of Indian chemical 
industry.” 
 
 

 -:18:- 
26. Although the Department of  Chemicals and Petrochemicals has 
stated that efforts will be mad e to fully and properly utilize  the fund 
allocated under the scheme, no details have been given in this regard.  
The Committee deplore such casual reply of the Department and 
would like to be apprised about such details and the latest position.  
 
I. Revival of the sick Public Sector Undertakings engaged in 
manufacturing of Pharmaceutical products 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
27. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee observe that Public Sector Undertakings of the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals especially those engaged in 
manufacturing of pharmaceuticals products are playing a significant role in 
developing and availing low cost medicines which would have otherwise 
been beyond the capacity of poor people. There is no denial of the fact that 
these Undertakings have social obligation which  private companies do not 
have. The Committee note that this may be one of the reasons of non -
profitability of some of the Public S ector Undertakings. While appreciating 
the role of Public Sector Undertakings as social manager, the Committee 
recommend that all -out efforts should be made in order to revive the sick 
industries which were hitherto languishing due to many reasons beyond 
their control. The Committee desire that besides financial support for the 
revival of sick companies, the Government should give a little more 
autonomy and develop effective managerial skill among Officers at the helm 
of affairs. The Committee feel that man agerial skill and Human Resource 
Development are as essential as providing financial assistance only then 
the public sector companies would compete with private sector in terms of 
profitability.” 
28. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
 “Consistent with the policy of UPA Government to revive public sector units 
set up for manufacture of critical bulk drugs and in order to keep a check on prices 
of drugs, Government has approved revival plans of Hindustan Antibiotics Limited, 
Pune, and Bengal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals Limited, Kolkata. The 
rehabilitation plan for revival of IDPL was placed before the Cabinet. The Cabinet 
has referred the revival of IDPL to GoM for consideration at the first instance. GoM 
has been constituted.         

 -:19:- 
 The Board level officers of CPSEs are selected for appointment by the 
PESB. They are expected to utilize and develop managerial skills in the context of 
requirement of their assignment. These functionaries enjoy powers to re -organize 
the working of the company where necessary by taking approval of their Board of 
Directors. In addition, the CPSEs, also sign MoU with the Department. The MoU 
inter alia provide for issues concerning autonomy and provides  for delegation of 
powers to CPSUs. 
 
            The Board of the PSUs are vested with powers to take all important 
decisions. 
             
 The DPE has framed guidelines for the functioning of PSUs. The 
observation of the Committee has been brought to the notice of DPE.” 
 
 
29. The Committee are happy to note that Government has approved 
revival plans of Hindustan Antibiotics Limited, Pune and Bengal 
Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited, Kolkata and the rehabilitation 
plan for revival of IDPL has been referred to Group of Ministers ( GOM) 
for Consideration at the first instance.  Also the Department of Public 
Enterprises ( DPE) has framed guidelines for the functioning of PSUs 
and the observation of the Committee has been brought to the notice 
of DPE.  While appreciating the effort of the Government, the 
Committee expect that these PSUs would be revived very soon and the 
desired objectives would be achieved. 
 

 -:20:- 
J. Setting up a caustic soda plant in Rasayani in Maharashtra by HOCL 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
  
30. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
  
 “The Committee note that management  of HOCL   decided to set up  a 
caustic soda plant in Rasayani in Maharashtra.  The Committee also note that 
because of high cost of power, the Government of Maharashtra did not allow them 
to have their own captive power plant.  As a result Rs.95 crore unit had to shut up. 
The Committee express their dismay over such an  attitude of the  Government of 
Maharashtra which wasted Rs.95 crore of HOCL and incurred great loss to the 
company. The Committee also  caution that bef ore setting up such units the 
arrangement of all inputs like power, land water, etc., should be explored in -
tandem with the State Government so that such faux -pas do not recur.  As evident 
from the statement  of Secretary that there was liberlisation at th at time, the 
Committee are of the view that Government should not frequently change their 
economic policy especially in such cases where a  substantial amount of money is 
involved in the production of chemicals useful for industries as a whole.” 
 
31. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
 
 “The observation of the Committee regarding the Government of 
Maharashtra has been conveyed to the Government of Maharashtra for 
appropriate necessary action.   HOCL  has also been conveyed the direction of the 
Committee for making arrangement of all inputs like power, land, water etc before 
hand in tandem with the State Government.  Regarding desisting from frequent 
change of economic policy by the Government, the same has been noted.” 
 
32. Although the observation of the Committee has been conveyed 
to the Government of Maharashtra and HOCL fo r appropriate 
necessary action, these are not sufficient .  The  Department has not 
given any explanation about the steps taken to avoid recurrence of 
such losses in future.  Government should categorically state that they 
would not change their economic  policy frequently  until and unless it 
is expedient to do so in the larger public interest.   

 -:21:- 
K. Revival of IDPL 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
33. The Committee had recommended as under:- 
  
“The Committee are failed to understand that IDPL which had done 
pioneering work in the manufacturing of drugs and pharmaceutical is presently not 
viable. Many scientists have left the company due to one reason or the othe r. The 
Committee express their displeasure over such sorry state of affairs. The 
Committee are of the view that some concrete steps should be taken to stop the 
brain-drain. While appreciating the recommendation of BRPSE for revival of IDPL, 
the Committee h ope that the recommendation of BRPSE will be   implemented 
soon and Government would do their best for the revival of IDPL keeping in view 
of its social obligation. “ 
 
34. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated as follows:- 
  
              “The recommendation of BRPSE for revival of IDPL was placed before 
the Cabinet for consideration /decision. The Cabinet has since referred the 
proposal to Group of Ministers(GoM) for its recommendations. The GoM  has 
since been constituted on 1.6.2007.” 
 
35. The Committee have been informed that the recommendatio n of 
Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises ( BRPSE) for 
revival of IDPL was placed before the Cabinet which has since  referred  
the proposal to Group of Minister s (GoM) for its recommendation.  The 
GoM has been constituted on 01.06.2007.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should pursue the matter for the 
expeditious approval of the revival proposal of IDPL and get them 
informed about the action taken in this regard.   

 -:22:- 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
  
 The Committee have analyzed the implementation of recommendations/ 
observations contained in their Eleventh Report on Demands for Grants (2006-07).  
The analysis of the Committee shows that out of 21 recommendations contained 
in the Report, the Government have implemented some recommendations viz.  
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 10, 11, 17, 18 and 20.  Some recommendations 
viz.  Recommendation Sl. Nos. 5, 6, 7 and 8 as per latest information submitted to 
the Committee are at various stages of implementation.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Government should implement the recommendations 
expeditiously and apprise the Committee of the conclusive action taken in this 
regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 (Rec Sl.No. 5 - Establishment of 3 new CIPET Centres)        
 
 The basic machinery for conducting training programmes in the three new 
CIPET Centres have been installed in the hir ed  temporary premises and training 
programmes are being duly conducted for the academic year 2006 -07.   Process 
for procurement of advance machinery (CNC, Microprocessor Control, etc.) has 
been initiated and it is expected that they would  be installed by Ju ly, 2007 at  the 
respective centres.  All the steps are being taken to ensure timely completion of 
these projects within the stipulated time frame i.e.  upto March, 2009. 
 
(Rec.Sl.No. 6 - Pro-rata compensation to victims of Bhopal Gas Leak 
Disaster) 
 
 
 The work of distribution of pro -rata compensation to the victims of the 
Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster which was to be completed by 30th April, 2006 as per 

 -:23:- 
directions of the Supreme Court had already been completed by that date by the 
office of the Welfare Commissioner, Bhopal Gas Victims.  However, an application 
in respect of nearly 19,000 absentees claimants had been filed by the Office of the 
Welfare Commissioner in the Hon'ble Supreme Court on 23rd August,2006 for 
treating all such cases as closed.  The matter is pending in the Supreme Court. 
 
(Rec. Sl. No. 7 - Removal of Toxic wastes from Union Carbide Plant 
site at Bhopal) 
 
 The tenth meeting of the Task Force set up in compliance with the Orders 
of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Jabalpur dated 30th March,2 005 and 13th 
May,2005 was held on 3rd May,2007, wherein it was decided to hold a preliminary 
meeting of the technical sub committee of the Task Force in the month of 
May,2007, under the convenorship of the Chairman of the MPPCB to look into the 
issues rela ted to the implementation of the phase -III and give clear 
recommendations on (i) decommissioning and dismantling of the structure; (ii) Bio -
remediation of the soil and (iii) examination of the extent of the contamination of 
ground water.  The Technical Sub -Committee met on 25th May, 2007 at Bhopal. 
The Government of India has sanctioned Rs.1 crore, in compliance with the orders 
of the Hon'ble High Court, dated 13th May,2005, as the share of the Union of India 
for the removal/disposal of approximately 40 MT of Lime Sludge at the TSDF at 
Pithampur and approximately 350 MT of other toxic wastes to be incinerated at the 
incinerator at Ankleshwar, Gujarat for the fund to be operated by the Principal 
Secretary, Bhopal Gas Tragedy, Relief and Rehabilitation Departm ent, 
Government of Madhya Pradesh and the Chairman, Madhya Pradesh Pollution 
Control Board Bhopal.  A Demand Draft for Rs.1 crore dated 4th May, 2007 has 
since been sent to the State Government of Madhya Pradesh as the share of the 
Central Government. 
(Rec.Sl.No. 8 – Early Commissioning of Assam Gas Cracker Project) 
  
 A Joint Venture Company namely “Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer 
Limited” was incorporated on 8 th January 2007 which is responsible for 
commissioning of Assam Gas Cracker Project within stipul ated time. The review 

 -:24:- 
meetings are being taken at regular interval at the level of Secretary (C&PC) and 
Joint Secretary(PC) for early implementation of the Assam Gas Cracker Project.  
MOS (C&F) also takes review meetings at his level in for speedy implementation. 
 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 5 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
The Committee note  that revised plan outlay for the 10 th Five Year 
Plan(2002-07) was Rs.612.42 crore with Rs.418.42 crore as budgetary support 
and Rs.194.00 crore as IEBR mainly through PSUs. Out of this Rs.418.42 crore, 
only Rs.179.52 crore has been spent during the first four years of the 10 th plan 
which comes to about 42.9 per cent only. However, if RE of Rs.404.31 crore for 
the year 2006-07(terminal year of the 10 th Plan) is utilized fully, the total utilization 
would be around Rs.583.83 crore, almost 40 per cent more th an that envisaged at 
the start of the plan. The Committee also note that against RE of Rs.404.31 crore, 
an amount of Rs.354.21 crore has been released for utilization as on 20.3.2007. 
Considering all these aspects, the Committee recommend that in future pl anning 
should be done properly to ensure utilization of allocated funds in proportionate 
manner during each year of the Plan and to discourage the trend of utilization of 
major portion of allocated funds during the terminal year of the plan period. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
             The release of an amount of Rs.354.21 crore during March 2007 was 
mainly  due to the revival packages of HOCL, HAL and BCPL for which Rs.250.00 
crore 23.31 crore and Rs.55.00 crore respectively were released.  As a result of  
these releases, the overall plan allocations and utilisation of funds under various 
annual plans could not be maintained in a proportionate manner.  

 -:25:- 
 
The Department will however, ensure that utilisation of plan funds, as far as 
possible, is systematic and in proportion with the plan allocations. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
 The Committee note that the Plan budget of CIPET has been incre ased 
from Rs.32.66 crore in RE (2006 -07) to Rs.38.51 crore in BE (2007 -08).  The 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals has informed that the BE of Rs.38.51 
crore for the year 2007 -08 comprises OPEC Loan Assistance of Rs.20 crore and 
Domestic Budget Supp ort (DBS) of Rs.18.51 crore out of which an amount of 
Rs.11.26 crore is for New Schemes of CIPET; Rs.5.25 crore is for establishment 
of new extension centres at Panipat (Haryana), Jaipur (Rajasthan) and 
Aurangabad (Maharashtra) and Rs.2 crore as counterpar t funding against OPEC 
Loan Assistance.  The Committee have been further informed that the temporary 
building/workshops have been identified and training activities at all the 3 centres 
have already commenced for the current academic year.  The project pro posal 
stipulates completion of the project in 3 years for each of the centres, from the 
date of approval i.e., as 31 st March, 2006.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that steps should be taken for timely completion of the project for establishment of 
new extension centres at Panipat, Jaipur and Aurangabad.  The Committee also 
desire that in future CIPET Centres should be established in the vicinity of 
polytechnic centres imparting education in plastic/polymer technology. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
The ba sic machinery for conducting training progrmmes in the three new 
CIPET Centres have been installed in the hired temporary premises and training 
programmes are  being duly conducted for the academic year 2006 -07 .  Process 
for procurement of advance machine ry (CNC, Microprocessor Control, etc.) has 
been initiated and it is expected that these would  be installed by July, 2007 at the  

 -:26:- 
respective centres.  All the steps are being taken to ensure  timely completion of 
these projects within the stipulated time f rame i.e. by  March, 2009. The 
recommendation of the Committee has been noted and in case of establishment of 
CIPET Centres in future, all efforts will be made to impress upon the  concerned 
State  Govt. to provide the land in the vicinity of polytechnic i mparting education in 
Plastics and Polymer Technology. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
 The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in July, 2004 d irected the Welfare 
Commissioner for Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster to disburse the unspent amount of 
Rs.1503 crore which accrued due to interest and exchange rate variation to the 
disaster victims on pro -rata basis.  The disbursement of pro -rata compensation 
started on 15.11.2004.  About 5,73,539 claimants were given compensation as on 
31.1.2007.  The Department has informed that 38 appeals and 4 Review Petitions 
are lying with the Welfare Commissioner.  Besides, 56 applications are pending for 
scrutiny and moti on hearing.  The work for distribution of pro -rata compensation 
was to be completed by 30th April, 2006.  However, an application in respect of 
nearly 31,000 absentees claimants had been filed by the office of the Welfare 
Commissioner in the Hon'ble Suprem e Court on 15th February, 2006 for treating 
all such cases as closed.  Decision of the Supreme Court is awaited.  The 
Committee now hope that all cases relating to the disbursement of pro -rata 
compensation would be disposed of expeditiously as per the deci sion of the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court and NGOs who have been assigned the task of contacting 
beneficiaries would do their work in a time -bound manner.  It is, therefore, 
imperative to have a control on their functioning. 
 
 The Committee while appreciating the initiative of Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals for providing safe drinking water in the gas affected area 
wherein the gas leakage had mixed with the soil resulting into contamination of 

 -:27:- 
water till now, are failed to understand as to why after suc h a long time the 
provision of providing safe drinking water has not been taken up effectively.  Had 
the Government taken up this issue earlier, the situation would have been 
different.  The Committee express their displeasure on learning the fact that eve n 
after the expiry of twenty one years of the tragedy, water is still being supplied by 
tankers instead of making any arrangement of piped water.  Though it is not the 
subject matter of the Department even then the Committee recommend that the 
Department should take up the matter with the Ministry of Urban Development and 
State Government of Madhya Pradesh and make sincere efforts to contain the 
problem of water contaminations in the affected area.  The Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals also cannot  shirk their responsibility as the gas 
leakage and its after effect have tangible effect on relief operations for which the 
Department has been made a nodal agency. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The work of distribution of pro -rata compensation to the victims  of the 
Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster which was to be completed by 30th April,2006 as per 
directions of the Supreme Court had already been completed by that date by the 
office of the Welfare Commissioner, Bhopal Gas Victims.  However, an applicati on 
in respect of nearly 19,000 absentees claimants had been filed by the Office of the 
Welfare Commissioner in the Hon'ble Supreme Court on 23rd August,2006 for 
treating all such cases as closed.  The matter is pending in the Supreme Court. 
 
 As far as supply of safe dr inking water through pipelines from the Kolar 
Reservoir to 14 localities around the UCIL plant site is concerned, in April,2006, 
the Government of India sanctioned money for a project under the Jawaharlal 
Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission(JNNURM) and th e Government of M.P. 
had sanctioned Rs.14.31 crore to Bhopal Municipal Corporation(BMC) for 
providing safe drinking water through pipelines from the Kolar Reservoir to 14 
localities around the UCIL plant site.  The Coordination Committee for 
implementation  of various social, economic and medical rehabilitation 

 -:28:- 
programmes/schemes for the victims of Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster set up by the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is in constant touch with the State 
Government for implementation of this project.  The representatives of Bhopal Gas 
Victims and associated NGOs have also been involved for preparation of the 
blueprint of this project, so as to cover all the affected bastis.  The Government of 
Madhya Pradesh has informed that the work on the project  is expected to start in 
the second fortnight of May,2007, as the tender process was scheduled to be over 
by 3rd March,2007.  The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is also 
following up with the State Government to ensure that the funds are spent f or the 
contaminated groundwater affected bastis and there is no diversions of the 
pipelines to other areas.  The Secretary(C&PC) herself is monitoring the progress 
of the project with the State Government. 
 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that a Task Force under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary(Chemicals and Petrochemicals) is monitoring the 
removal/disposal of toxic wastes.  The Task Force accepted the final 
recommendations of the Technical Sub -Committee for removal/disposal of 350 M 
T of different types of toxic wastes by incineration , at the incinerator at 
Ankleshwar, Gujarat and for lime sludge weighing approximately 40 MT, to the 
secured landfill to be sent to the Transportation, Storage, Disposal Facility (TSDF), 
at Pethampur, near Indore.  The permission for incineration at the in cinerator at 
Ankleshwar, Gujarat has been obtained from the State Government of Gujarat and 
the Ministry of Finance has allocated Rs.1.00 crore to the Department for meeting 
the 50 % share of expenditure estimated for the purpose.  Considering these 

 -:29:- 
developments, the Committee desire that toxic wastes from Union Carbide Plant 
site at Bhopal be removed without any further delay and the Committee may be 
intimated about the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  The tenth meeting of the Task F orce set up in compliance with the Orders 
of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, Jabalpur dated 30th March, 2005 and 13th 
May,2005 was held on 3rd May,2007, wherein it was decided to hold a preliminary 
meeting of the technical sub committee of the Task Force  in the month of 
May,2007, under the convenorship of the Chairman of the MPPCB to look into the 
issues related to the implementation of the phase -III and give clear 
recommendations on (i) decommissioning and dismantling of the structure; (ii) Bio -
remediation of the soil and (iii) examination of the extent of the contamination of 
ground water.  The Technical Sub -Committee   met on 25 th May, 2007 at Bhopal. 
The Government of India has sanctioned Rs. 1 crore, in compliance with the 
orders of the Hon'ble High Court, dated 13th May, 2005, as the share of the Union 
of India for the removal/disposal of approximately 40 MT of Lime Sludge at the 
TSDF at Pithampur and approximately 350 MT of other toxic wastes to be 
incinerated at the incinerator at Ankleshwar, Gujarat for the fund to be operated by 
the Principal Secretary, Bhopal Gas Tragedy, Relief and Rehabilitation 
Department, Government of Madhya Pradesh and the Chairman, Madhya Pradesh 
Pollution Control Board Bhopal.  A Demand Draft for Rs.1 crore dated 4th 
May,2007 has since been sent to the State Government of Madhya Pradesh as 
the  share of the Central Government. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

 -:30:- 
(Recommendation Sl. No.7)  
 
 
   The Committee have been informed that the Gas Authority of India Limited 
(GAIL) has been identified as lead promoter with 70 percent equity participation to 
implement the  Assam Gas Cracker Project with Oil India Limited, Numaligarh 
Refinery Limited and Assam Industrial Development Corporation each having 10 
percent equity participation in the project.  The Committee note that project was 
approved by the Cabinet Committee o n Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 18 th April, 
2006 and a Joint Venture Company i.e. M/s Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer 
Limited was incorporated on 8 th January 2007 and some progress has been made 
towards implementation of the project.  The Committee express th eir satisfaction 
that foundation stone laying ceremony of the Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer 
Limited has been held on 9 th April, 2007.  The Committee now desire that all out 
efforts should be made to make the Project complete and functional within 
stipulated time period as the project is a part of Assam Accord signed as far back 
as 1985 and should not be prolonged any more which hitherto could not take off 
due to one reason or another. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A Joint Venture Company namely “Brahmaputra C racker and Polymer 
Limited” was incorporated on 8 th January 2007 which is responsible for 
commissioning of Assam Gas Cracker Project within stipulated time. The review 
meetings are being taken at regular interval at the level of Secretary (C&PC) and 
Joint Secretary(PC) for early implementation of the Assam Gas Cracker Project.  
MOS (C&F) also takes review meetings at his level in this connection. The Joint 
Venture Company have been asked to prepare an Action Plan for timely 
implementation of this Project. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 

 -:31:- 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
 The Committee note that the Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology 
is getting Departmental grant fo r day-to-day activities as well as capital support.  
The Committee have been informed that the difficulty of the shortage of manpower 
faced by the Institute has been overcome by undertaking cadre review exercise.   
Subsequently, recruitment process has bee n completed and some more scientists 
will be in position before 30 th April, 2007.  Further the process of filling up of the 
post of Director is under way.  The Committee hope that the scientist and Director 
will join the Institute very soon so that it discharges its assigned function smoothly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It has been informed by IPFT that 5 Scientists and one Hindi Translator 
have already joined duties in IPFT.  The remaining two Scientists are also likely to 
join soon.   Further it may also be added here that proposal for filling up the post of 
Director IPFT was submitted to the Appointment Committee of Cabinet for its 
approval.  The recommendation has been received and offer of appointment has 
been sent to recommended candidate. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.10) 
 
 The Committee appreciate that all the Chemical Units which are producing 
Schedule II and Schedule III chemicals have to  declare those so that the 
chemicals produced can not be used for producing chemical weapons as per the 
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).  The Committee note that for such 
monitoring an enhancement of Rs.0.18 crore has been made on the BE 2007 -08 
as compared to RE 2006 -07.  The Committee feel that such safety steps are not 
only for adherence to Chemical Weapons Convention but also for the safety of 
general public at large.  
 
 
 

 -:32:- 
Reply of the Government 
 
 While undertaking the awareness generation programmes for Chemical 
Weapons Convention and the CWC Act, the importance of these programmes for 
ensuring adherence to the CWC, the relevance to the safety of factory workers 
and  general public at large  as per the Safety, Health & Environment (SHE) 
regulatory measures will also be properly brought out. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
The Committee note that the Government is providing grants for promotion 
of export of pharmaceuticals which inter -alia includes organizing 
seminars/workshops. The Committee also note that against ‘Nil’ Plan and 0.05 
crore Non -Plan Budget for the year 2006 -07, Rs. 1.00 crore Plan and 0.5 crore 
Non-Plan Budget has been proposed for the year 2007 -08. While appreciating the 
increase in allocation for the year 2007 -08, the Committee recommend that 
vigorous and sustained efforts should be made for p romotion of export of 
pharmaceuticals. 
 Reply of the Government 
The Department has noted recommendation of the Committee and ensures 
that vigorous and sustained efforts would be made for promotion of export of 
pharmaceuticals 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 -:33:- 
(Recommendation Sl. No.13) 
 
 
 The committee note that Rs.2.10 crores has been propose d for the 
Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS) which is targeted to gear 
up Indian Chemical Industry which is facing various challenges posed due to 
liberalization and globalization and to tune it to adopt world class technology so as 
to become competitive in global market along with the multinationals and other big 
companies.  The Committee desire that the funds earmarked for CPDS be utilized 
fully to achieve the desired results. 
 
Reply of the Government 
     Efforts will be made to fully and properly utilize the funds allocated under 
the scheme for various activities  for promotion of Indian chemical industry. 
 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
The Committee observe that Public Sector Undertakings of the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals especially those engaged in manufacturing of 
pharmaceuticals products are playing a significant role in developing and availing 
low cost medicines which would have otherwise been beyond the capacity of poor 
people. There is no denial of the fact that these Undertakings have social 
obligation which  private comp anies do not have. The Committee note that this 
may be one of the reasons of non -profitability of some of the Public Sector 
Undertakings. While appreciating the role of Public Sector Undertakings as social 
manager, the Committee recommend that all -out efforts should be made in order 
to revive the sick industries which were hitherto languishing due to many reasons 
beyond their control. The Committee desire that besides financial support for the 

 -:34:- 
revival of sick companies, the Government should give a little m ore autonomy and 
develop effective managerial skill among Officers at the helm of affairs. The 
Committee feel that managerial skill and Human Resource Development are as 
essential as providing financial assistance only then the public sector companies 
would compete with private sector in terms of profitability. 
 
Reply of the Government 
             Consistent with the policy of UPA Government to revive public sector units 
set up for manufacture of critical bulk drugs and in order to keep a check on prices 
of drugs, Government has approved revival plans of Hindustan Antibiotics Limited, 
Pune, and Bengal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals Limited, Kolkata. The 
rehabilitation plan for revival of IDPL was placed before the Cabinet. The Cabinet 
has referred the revival of IDPL to GoM for consideration at the first instance. GoM 
has been constituted. 
          The Board level officers of CPSEs are selected for appointment by the 
PESB. They are expected to utilize and develop managerial skills in the context of 
requirement of their assignment. These functionaries enjoy powers to re -organize 
the working of the company where necessary by taking approval of their Board of 
Directors. In addition, the CPSEs, also sign MoU with the Department. The MoU 
inter alia provide for issue s concerning autonomy and provides  for delegation of 
powers to CPSUs. 
            The Board of the PSUs are vested with powers to take all important 
decisions. 
            The DPE has framed guidelines for the functioning of PSUs. The 
observation of the Committee has been brought to the notice of DPE. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 -:35:- 
(Recommendation Sl. No.16) 
 
 
 The Committee note that management  of HOCL   decided to set up  a 
caustic soda plant in Rasayani in Maharashtra.  The Committee also note that 
because of high cost of power, the Government of Maharashtra did not allow them 
to have their own captive power plant.  As a result Rs.95 crore unit had to shut up. 
The Committee express their dismay over such an  attitude of the  Government of 
Maharashtra which wasted Rs.95 crore of HOCL and incurred great loss to the 
company. The Committee also  caution that before setting up such units the 
arrangement of all inputs like power, land water, etc., should be explored in -
tandem with the State Government so that such faux -pas do not recur.  As evident 
from the statement  of Secretary that there w as liberlisation at that time, the 
Committee are of the view that Government should not frequently change their 
economic policy especially in such cases where a  substantial amount of money is 
involved in the production of chemicals useful for industries as a whole. 
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
 The observation of the Committee regarding the Government of 
Maharashtra has been conveyed to the Government of Maharashtra for 
appropriate necessary action.   HOCL  has also been conveyed the direction of the 
Committee for making arrangement of all inputs like power, land, water etc before 
hand in tandem with the State Government.  Regarding desisting from frequent 
change of economic policy by the Government, the same has been noted 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 32 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 

 -:36:- 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT  
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________   NIL ________________________ 
 
 

 -:37:- 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
(Recommendation Sl. No.11) 
 
 The Committee note that the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) is responsible for price fixation/revision of drugs and formulations.  It 
monitors the prices of decontrolled drugs and formulations and oversees the 
implementation of the p rovisions of Drugs (Prices Control) Order.  The planned 
expenditure has been increased from Rs.1.50 crore in 2006 -07 to Rs.11.50 crore 
in 2007-08 in order to restructure and strengthen the NPPA, as stipulated in the 
proposed National Pharmaceutical Policy,  2006, by setting up Drug Price 
Monitoring Cell in each State for monitoring of the drug prices in the concerned 
State.  The Committee hope that National Pharmaceutical Policy, 2006 would be 
finalized soon and the funds earmarked for NPPA would be utilized fully to achieve 
the objectives for which they are allocated. 
 Reply of the Government 
 
 National Pharmaceutical Policy,2006 was considered by the Union Cabinet 
at its meeting held on 11.1.2007.  The Cabinet has since constituted a Group of 
Ministers (GOM ) for considering the Policy at the first instance for its 
recommendations.  The first meeting of the GOM was held on 10.4.2007.  As soon 
as the National Pharmaceutical Policy is approved by the Cabinet, action would be 
initiated to set up Drug Monitoring Cell in each State for monitoring prices of drugs. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 -:38:- 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.3) 
 The Committee have been informed that the scheme -wise outlays for the 
11th Five Year Plan has been considered by the Plann ing Commission only for the 
year 2007-08 as the process of preparation of 11 th Plan was started but could not 
be crystallized before launching Annual Plan 2007 -08.  The Committee have also 
been informed that the Planning Commission has now received Reports  of 
Working Groups and Standing Committees and the work for preparation of 11 th 
Plan is in progress.  While appreciating the efforts made by the Department which 
has with a view to make the chemical sector an engine of higher economic growth, 
sought to imp ress upon the Planning Commission the desirability of making 
available a significantly enhanced budgetary support during the 11 th Plan, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should take up with the Planning 
Commission for early consideration and appr oval of 11 th Five Year Plan and in 
meantime all the formalities should be completed so that delay in plan formulation 
has no adverse impact on the medium and long term programmes of the 
Department. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Planning Commission has since  initiated the process of finalization of 
11th Plan Schemes and outlays.  Proposals of this Department have been 
submitted to the Planning Commission and they are scheduled to be discussed on 
24.5.2007 in the Planning Commission. 
 
 The Department would end eavor to complete the attendant formalities so 
that the delay in the Plan formulation has no adverse impact on the medium and 
long term programmes of Department. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 

 -:39:- 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education 
and Research (NIPER) seeks to promote excellence in the sphere of 
pharmaceutical education and to meet the current and future  needs of the 
pharmaceutical sector in India.  Keeping in view the importance of its objectives, 
the Plan budget for the Institute has been raised from Rs.13.00 crore in the RE 
2006-07 to Rs.28.66 crore in the BE 2007 -08 particularly to strengthen the 
infrastructure facilities of Institute and start new schemes in addition to completion 
of the on-going schemes. The Committee are happy to note that for the 11th Plan a 
proposal for setting up 5 more NIPER like Institutes in the country has been 
mooted and Pla nning Commission has accorded ‘in -principle’ approval for the 
same.  The Committee hope that as suggested by the Planning Commission, the 
Government would actively consider private -public partnership. Considering the 
fact that NIPER has been doing yeomen’s  service to the pharmaceutical sector, 
the Committee strongly recommend that Planning Commission finally approve the 
proposal expeditiously and Ministry of Finance accordingly allocate the money for 
the same. The Committee also recommend that new schemes/p rojects should be 
completed in a time bound manner so that desired objectives of the Plan funds are 
achieved.  In this regard, the Committee also desire that the Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals  also pursue the matter seriously with Planning 
Commission, Department of Expenditure and other concerned authorities. 
Reply of the Government 
 
For NIPER, Mohali, a total of Rs.28.66 crores have been earmarked as 
Plan Grant in the B.E. 2007 -08. This includes Rs.8.66 crores for ongoing activities 
and Rs.20 crores for New Schemes covering infrastructure upgradation, Teaching 
Programme, IT and R&D.  NIPER has been asked to send the detailed proposals 
for obtaining approvals of the concerned authorities so that the funds could be 
released at the earliest and work s on the projects/schemes could be started at the 
earliest.  

 -:40:- 
 
 Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, in consultation with the 
Planning Commission has proposed to set up six NIPERs during the 11 th Five 
Year Plan.  Presently, the proposal for setting up of four new NIPERs is at 
advanced stages of approval.  Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) has 
accorded its ‘in principle approval’ to start courses in four NIPERs at Ahmedabad 
(Gujarat), Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh), Hajipur (Bihar) and Kolkata (West 
Bengal) in its meeting held on 23.05.07.  Department is now in the process of 
obtaining approval from CCEA.   
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.14) 
 
The Committee note that an amount of Rs.15 crore has been earmarked in 
BE 2007-08 as interest subsidy to enable the units in the small scale to fulfill the 
stipulated criteria.  The Committee note that the amount though small shall assist 
small scale sector industries to large extent and help them to overcome the 
various problems.  The Committee desire that it is imperative in this regard that 
small sector industries be made aware  of such a scheme so that they can avail 
such facility or the Department at their own assist some of them on the basis of 
merit. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The scheme is presently under consideration of the planning commission 
for their approval.  As and whe n the scheme is approved by the planning 
commission necessary action would be taken by this department. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 

 -:41:- 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
The Committee are failed to understand that IDPL which had done 
pioneering work in the manufacturing of drugs and pharmaceutical is presently not 
viable. Many scientists have left the company due to one reason or the other. The 
Committee express their displea sure over such sorry state of affairs. The 
Committee are of the view that some concrete steps should be taken to stop the 
brain-drain. While appreciating the recommendation of BRPSE for revival of IDPL, 
the Committee hope that the recommendation of BRPSE w ill be   implemented 
soon and Government would do their best for the revival of IDPL keeping in view 
of its social obligation.  
Reply of the Government  
 
              The recommendation of BRPSE for revival of IDPL was placed before the 
Cabinet for consideration /decision. The Cabinet has since referred the proposal to 
Group of Ministers  (GoM) for its recommendations. The GoM  has since been 
constituted on 1.6.2007. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 35 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
Having gone through the facts in regard to PSUs under the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals, the Committee no te that the Government have 
approved the revival/rehabilitation proposals in respect of Hindustan Organic 
Chemicals Limited(HOCL), Hindustan Insecticides Limited(HIL), Hindustan 
Antibiotics Limited(HAL) and Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals 
Limited(BCPL). In case of Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), 
Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) at its meeting held 
on 09.03.2007 considered and recommended for its rehabilitation. In case of 

 -:42:- 
Bengal Immunity Limited (BIL), the report of the Committee appointed by the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals to look into the issue of taking over 
by other PSUs like BCPL is under examination. The Committee recommend that 
approved revival/rehabilitation proposals should be impleme nted within a time -
bound manner. The Committee desire that the Department should take urgent 
steps for getting revival/rehabilitation proposal in respect of IDPL approved by the 
Government and the report in case of BIL be examined without any further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) IDPL - The recommendation of BRPSE for revival of IDPL was placed before 
the Cabinet for consideration /decision. The Cabinet has since referred the 
proposal to Group of Ministers(GoM) for its recommendations. The GoM  has 
since been constituted on 1.6.2007. 
 
(ii) BIL - The Committee, constituted to explore the possibility of revival of Bengal 
Immunity Limited (BIL),  recommended revival of BIL through public private 
partnership mode. A meeting was held under the Chairpersons hip of 
Secretary(C&PC) on 20.2.2007 to hear the private companies. The proposals 
submitted by the private companies are still being evaluated to decide further 
course of action. 
[M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
O.M. No. 16(6)/2007-Fin. Dated 26.07.2007] 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI          ANANT GANGARAM GEETE,   
26 September, 2007           Chairman, 
4 Asvina, 1929 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers. 

 -:43:- 
Appendix-I 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2007-08) 
 
SECOND SITTING 
(12.09.2007) 
 
 
  The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  - Chairman  
 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Jaiprakash (Constituency – Mohanlal Ganj) 
3. Shri Sunil Khan 
4. Shri A. Narendra 
5. Shri Prasanta Pradhan 
6. Shri Ramswaroop Prasad 
7. Shri P. Chalapathi Rao 
8. Shri Anantha Venkata Rami Reddy 
9. Shri Narsingrao H. Suryawanshi  
Rajya Sabha 
10. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
11. Shri Surendra Lath 
12. Shri Dilip Singh Judev  
Secretariat 
  
 1. Shri A.K. Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Deputy Secretary-II 
 3. Smt. Balwant Kaur Saimbhi- Under Secretary  
  
 

 -:44:- 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** **      ** 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee considered the draft Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2007 -08) of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemical s and Petrochemicals).   The draft Report was 
adopted by the Committee without any amendment. 
  
4. ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** **  
 ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** ** 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes, if 
any, arising out of the factual verification of the Reports by the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals ** **   **) 
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament in the next Session. 
  
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
  
 
 
 
** Matters not related to this Report 

 -:45:- 
Appendix – II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations  
contained in the Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2006 -07) on Demands for Grants 
(2007-08) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 18 
 
II Recommendations/observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 
12, 13, 15 & 16) 
 
12 
 Percentage to Total 66.67% 
 
III Recommendations/observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s Replies  
 
Nil 
 Percentage of Total Nil 
 
IV Recommendations/observations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. No. 11)  
 
1 
 Percentage of Total 5.55% 
 
V Recommendations/observations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited  
(Vide Recommendations at Sl. Nos. 3, 9, 14, 17 & 18) 
  
5 
  
Percentage of Total 
 
27.78% 
 
 
 
 
 