1 
 
38 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 NATIONAL PHARMACEUTICALS PRICING AUTHORITY 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Twenty-Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals  
and Fertilizers (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2013/Shravana, 1935 (Saka) 


2 
 
(ii) 
CC&F No. 38 
THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
NATIONAL PHARMACEUTICALS PRICING AUTHORITY 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Twenty Ninth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13 .08.2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 .08.2013 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2013/Shravana, 1935 (Saka) 
  


3 
 
iii 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(2012-13) 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri S. Alagiri  
3. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
4. Shri P.P. Chauhan  
5. Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
6. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
7. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
8. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
9. Shri Paswan Kamlesh  
10. Shri Amarnath Pradhan 
11. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
12. Shri Tufani Saroj 
13. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
14. Shri Raju Shetti 
15. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
16. Shri D. Venugopal 
17.^ Shri Sai Prathap Annayyagari 
18.* Vacant 
19. # Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
24. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
26. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
27. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
28. %  Vacant 
29. ^ Vacant 
30. ^# Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
* Shri P. Balaram Naik appointed as a minister of state 
#Shri Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai (LS) has resigned w.e.f. 03 .01.2013 
^ Shri Sai Prathap Annayyagarin (LS) nominated w.e.f. 09.01.2013. 
% Dr. Vijay Mallya (RS) has resigned w.e.f. 26.02.2013  
^ Shri K.C. Tyagi (RS) nominated w.e.f. 07.03.2013. 
^ Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra (RS) has resigned w.e.f. 22.03.2013 
# Shri K.C. Tyagi (RS) has resigned w.e.f. 01.04.2013 
 
  

4 
 
iv 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12) ………………………………...  
Introduction. …………………………………………………..…………………………  
Chapter I Report ……………….…………………………………………………..  
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of Fourteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2012-13) held on 6 August 2013 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -Ninth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals &  Fertilizers (2012 -13) on ‘National 
Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority’ (NPPA) of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).  
 
 
  

5 
 
v 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2012 -13) having 
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf,  the Thirty -Eighth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) o f 
the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2012 -13) on 'National Pharmaceuticals 
Pricing Authority (NPPA)' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals).  
2. The Twenty -Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the St anding Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 17 December, 2012.  The Action 
Taken Replies of Government to all observations/recommendations contained in the Report 
were received on 3 June, 2013.  The Standing Committee on Chemi cals and Fertilizers (2012 -
13) considered the Action Taken Report and adopted the same at their sitting held on 6 August, 
2013. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/  
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
is given in Appendix-II.  
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
New Delhi; 
12  August, 2013  GOPINATH MUNDE 
 21 Shravana, 1935 (Saka) Chairman, 
Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject Report on National 
Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority  (2012-13) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals ) which was p resented to Lok Sabha on 17.12. 2012. The 
Report contained seven Observations / Recommendations. 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) were requested 
to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Ninth Report 
within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e., by 16.03.2013. The Action 
Taken Replies of the Go vernment in respect of all the seven  Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Report have be en received from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals) vide their O.M. No.31026/20/2013 -PI.I dated 03.06.2013. 
These have been categorized as follows:- 
 (i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government :- 
 Sl. Nos. 1, 2 and 3         (Total =3 )  
 This may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply :- 
 Sl. Nos. Nil              (Nil)  
 This may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report. 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
 Sl. Nos. 4,5, 6 and 7        (Total =4)  
 This may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are awaited:- 
 Sl. Nos. Nil             (Nil)  
These may be included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
  

7 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and the final replies in respect of 
the Observation / Recommendation s contained in Chapter IV which have  not been 
accepted by the Committee should be furnished expeditiously.  
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations / Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.2 
A  SCHEMES OF NPPA  
 
5. Emphasizing the early need for  implementation of all the  schemes of NPPA the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee note that during the Eleventh Five Year Plan period (2007-2012), NPPA 
had proposed five new schemes amounting to Rs. 4995.60 lakh. These schemes are (i) 
Building Robust and Responsive Statistical System for NPPA; (ii) Creation of NPPA 
Cells i n States; (iii) Scheme for Interaction with States; (iv) Proposal for Consumer 
Awareness and Publicity through Print, Electronic and other medium; and (v) Proposal 
for strengthening the existing Monitoring and Enforcement work. The Committee also 
note that  out of these five schemes, only one scheme viz Building Robust and 
Responsive Statistical System for NPPA has already been approved by the Planning 
Commission and implemented during the Eleventh Plan period. Further, in -principle 
approval in respect of th e scheme, namely Proposal for Consumer Awareness and 
Publicity through Print, Electronic and other medium was given in February, 2011 and in 
the budget allocation for the year 2012 -13, funds are allocated only for these two 
schemes. In this regard, this Co mmittee have time and again recommended that the 
Department should earnestly pursue the issue with the Planning Commission and make 
all out efforts towards getting in -principle approval for rest of the three schemes of 
NPPA. The Committee strongly feel tha t the above three schemes of NPPA are vital for 
fulfilling the mandate of the organization and again recommend that the Department 
should make earnest effort to get in -principle approval of these three schemes from 
Planning Commission. The Committee would like to be informed about follow up action 
taken in this matter”.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
6. In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“With the  notification of National Pharm aceutical Pricing Pol icy 2012 and Drugs (Price 
Control) Order, 2013 , (DPCO, 2013) the relevance of the S chemes has been reviewed 
in consultation with NPPA and the status of each scheme is as under : 
(i) Creation of NPPA Cells in States : In view of the changes in norms for pricing as 
envisaged in DPCO, 2013 , it is felt that separate cells in States may not be 
required.  
(ii) Scheme for Interaction with States : NPPA has already taken initiative in this 
regard by having regional meetings with States  on regular basis . It is felt that a 
special scheme for the purpose is not required. 

8 
 
(iii) Proposal for strengthening the existing Monitoring and Enforcement work : it has 
been decided to revisit the provisions of this scheme by NPPA and a view will be 
taken keeping in view the requirement under DPCO, 2013.  
 COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
7. The Committee had observed that out of five schemes proposed by NPPA during  
the Eleventh Five Year Plan, only one scheme namely Building Robust and Responsive 
Statistical System for NPPA has been implemented. Besides this, in-principle approval in 
respect of the scheme, namely Proposal for Consumer Awareness and Publicity through 
Print, Electronic and other medium was given in February, 2011 and in the budget 
allocation for the year 2012 -13, funds were  allocated only for these two schemes.  The 
remaining three schemes namely (i) Crea tion of NPPA Cells in States  (ii) Scheme for 
Interaction with States and (iii) Proposal for strengthening the existing  Monitoring and 
Enforcement work were to get in-principle approval of the Planning Commission.  
 In its Action Taken Replies, the Committee have now been informed that with the 
notification of National Pharm aceutical Pricing Pol icy, 2012 and Drugs (Price Control) 
Order, 2013, (DPCO, 2013) the relevance of the said three Schemes has been reviewed by 
the Department in consultation with NPPA and according to them, separate NPPA cells in 
the States are not required in view of the changes in norms for pricing as envisaged in 
DPCO, 2013. Similarly, special scheme for interaction with States  is also not required  as 
NPPA has already taken initiative in this regard by having regional meetings with States  
on regular basis . The Committee, however, still feel that  proposed schemes namely  
Creation of NPPA Cells in States  and the Scheme for Interaction with States  are well 
intended and the same  could be  an effective institutional mechanism  to carry out the 
mandate of the Department . The Committee, therefore, desire that the relevance of the 
proposed schemes  against the backdrop of DPCO, 2013  should be re -looked into . As 
regards the third scheme namely, Proposal for strengthening the existing Monitoring and 
Enforcement work , the Committee note that the provisions of this scheme will be 
revisited by NPPA and a view will be taken keeping in view the requirement under DPCO, 
2013. The Committee expect the Department to expedite the process and the relevance of 
the proposed scheme may be examined comprehensively keeping in view the 
requirement under DPCO, 2013. The Committee would like to be apprised of the final 
decision taken in the matter. 
B MONITORING OF PRICES OF SCHEDULED DRUGS  
 
RECOMMENDATION. NO.3 
 
8. Emphasizing the need for periodic monitoring of the prices of  Scheduled drugs the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 

9 
 
 “National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority fixes/revises the prices of 74 bulk drugs and 
the formulations containing any of the scheduled drugs under the provisions of the Drugs 
specified in the first schedule of the Drug (Prices Control) Order, 1995. The Committee 
find that scheduled drugs/formulations cannot be sold at a price higher than that fixed by 
NPPA/Government. According to the Department of Pharmaceuticals, non-submission of 
the requis ite data/information  by the manufacturing units particularly in cases of 
reduction in the input cost is the major difficulty being faced by NPPA. The Committee 
observe that NPPA endeavours to overcome this problem through interaction with State 
Drug Contro llers to impress upon the manufacturing units to submit the requisite 
data/information. The Committee are of the view that there is an urgent need for taking 
definite steps to encourage the manufacturing units to submit the data in time and desire 
that NPP A should chalk out mechanism in co-ordination with State Enforcement 
Agencies in this regard.  
 
 The Committee also note that the Pharma Companies frequently change, the 
composition/strength of their formulations to circumvent the provisions of DPCO, 1995.  
In order to escape the provisions of the DPCO, 1995 pharma companies are also using 
the via -media of Dietary Supplements under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 
1954 and flooding the retail market by medicines of dietary supplements. While 
expressing their concern over such strategy adopted by the pharma companies, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should expeditiously identify the concerned 
pharma companies and take up the issue strongly with the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare. The Committee also desire that NPPA should not hesitate to invoke the 
relevant provisions of the DPCO, 1995 to curb such alleged malpractices by the drug 
companies. Thus, the circumventing of the price control mechanism by some 
manufacturers by shifting schedu le drugs to the category of Food and Nutrition 
Supplement manufacture under Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 1954 should also 
be monitored by the NPPA. In this regard, NPPA cannot shirk away from its 
responsibility and leave the matter at the behest of the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. The 
Committee also desire that the list of companies indulged in such malpractices and 
action taken against them should be furnished to th e Committee within three months of 
presentation of the Report.  
 
 The Committee further note that the State Drugs Controllers help NPPA in monitoring 
the prices and enforcing the provisions of DPCO,1995. The State Governments are 
authorized to take action under Essential Commodities (EC) Act, 1995 for violation of the 
provisions of the DPCO, 1995. The Committee observe that prosecution under Essential 
Commodities Act, 1995 sometimes does not lead to stringent action against defaulters. 
The Committee find th at at present, there are no provisions of fine or penalties for the 
violation of the DPCO,1995 for non -submission of requisite data, price list and for not 
allowing officers of NPPA to visit and inspect manufacturing premises. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that DPCO, 1995 should be amended suitably to incorporate provisions 
for compounding offences by stringent fines or penalties therein”.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
9. In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“With change in pricing norms under DPCO, 2013  from the cost based pricing to market 
based pricing, the cost data will no more be required. Moreover, forms have been further 
simplified in DPCO, 2013 to make the process of collection easy. Para 16 of the said order 
provides for submission of information / data by the industry mandatorily in respect of 
revision of the prices within 15 days and it also provides that the company would be liable 
for an action under the said order if it fails to submit the same within 15 days’ time.  The 
provision has also been made with regard to monitoring of availability of scheduled 
formulations vide Para 21 of the said order. Manufactur ers are also required to file 

10 
 
quarterly production returns with the NPPA in Form-III. In respect of discontinuation of the 
production of the scheduled formulation manufacturers should file returns in Form IV of the 
said order. The companies are also required to file price list in Form-V with the NPPA.  
 
The issue of circumventing the price control mechanism through dietary supplements has 
already been taken up by this Department with the Ministry of Health &  Family Welfare 
and a reminder has also been sent on 29.4.2013.  
 
DPCOs are subordinate legislation and sufficient penal provision s already exist in the 
parent Act i.e. Essential Commodities Act, 1955”. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
10. The Committee noted that National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority fixes/revises 
the prices of 74 bulk drugs and the formulations containing any of the scheduled drugs 
under the provisions of the Drugs specified in the first schedule of the Drug (Prices 
Control) Order, 1995 . The Committee also note d that the Pharma Companies frequently 
change, the composition/strength of their formulations to circumvent the provisions of 
DPCO, 1995. In order to escape the provisions of the DPCO, 1995 pharma companies are 
also using the via -media of Dietary Supplements under the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act 1954  and flooding the retail market by medicines of dietary 
supplements. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the the Department should  
identify such pharma comp anies and take up the issue strongly with the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare.  
 In its Action Taken Replies, the Committee have been informed by the Department 
that the issue of circumventing the price control mechanism through dietary 
supplements has already been taken up by the  Department with the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare and a reminder has also been sent  to that Ministry  on 29.4.2013.  The 
Committee, however, desire that the Department should vigorously pursue the issue with 
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to its logical conclusion.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
 C MONITORING OF PRICES OF NON-SCHEDULED DRUGS  
  
RECOMMENDATION NO.4 
 
11. Stressing the need to make Department to take necessary steps  to make NPPA self-
sufficient and resourceful to carry out its activities regarding monitoring of prices  of non -
scheduled drugs independently and effectively the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
 “The Committee note that prices of non -scheduled drugs are fixe d by manufacturers 
themselves without seeking the approval of Government / NPPA. NPPA, however, 
regularly monitors the prices of non-scheduled formulations based on the data from IMS 
(Health). The Committee in this regard regret to point out that NPPA depends entirely on 
IMS (Health) data and does not have their own specific system for data collection. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Department should take necessary steps to 

11 
 
make NPPA self-sufficient and resourceful to carry out its activities rega rding monitoring 
of prices of non-scheduled drugs independently and effectively.  
 Regarding monitoring of the prices of non -scheduled drugs, the Committee note that a 
list of formulations and their manufacturers are short -listed where there is an increase in 
price of more than 10% in one year and the annual turnover of the formulation pack 
exceeds Rs.1 crore. Further, the share of formulations in that segment of the formulation 
is required to be at least 20% of the market or the medicine is one of the top 3 brands of 
that group. The manufacturer and / or distributor is asked to give justification for price 
increase of more than 10% per annum. If no information is received after the letter and 
reminder or the reply of the company is not satisfactory, show ca use notice is issued to 
the manufacturer stating as to why action should not be initiated for price fixation under 
para 10(b) of DPCO, 1995 in larger public interest. In this regard, Committee feel that 
such a process of monitoring of prices of non -schedule drugs is not satisfactory and 
deterrent as the manufacturers have the advantage of fixing the prices first provisionally. 
The present mechanism does not provide any relief to masses in case it is found that 
prices were arbitrarily fixed. Hence, the Commi ttee recommend that NPPA should 
devise a mechanism to proactively monitor the rise in prices of non -scheduled drugs so 
that the same does not go beyond the permissible limit”.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
12. In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
 “NPPA has already taken initiative to collect information directly from the 
manufacturers. Almost 7,000 manufacturers have already been addressed to submit 
required information. Moreover, making a provision for filing  of information online will 
further facilitate collection of information. This would definitely reduce dependence on 
IMS Health in long run.  
 
 In the new DPCO, 2013, there is a provision to amend the list of Scheduled 
Formulations based on the communicati on from the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare. Hence, para 10(b) of DPCO, 95 has lost its relevance”. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
13. The Committee had  noted that the  manufacturers have the advantage for fixing 
the prices of non -scheduled drugs  without seeking the approval of the Government / 
NPPA and this mechanism does not provide any relief to the public,  in case it was found 
that the prices of the drugs were fixed  arbitrarily. The Committee, therefore,  
recommended that NPPA should devise a mechanism  to proactively monitor the rise in 
prices of non -scheduled drugs so that the same does not go beyond the permissible 
limit. The Committee are not ful ly convinced with the reply given by  the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals that a provision has been made in D PCO, 2013 to amend the list of 
scheduled formulation based on the communication received from the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare. The Committee feel that though new list of scheduled drugs would 
empower NPPA to control the prices of some mo re drugs in the country even then  there 
will be a large number of drugs which may not be included in scheduled category for 
which no prices could  be fixed by NPPA  being non -scheduled drugs. It is, therefore, 
imperative that a mechanism may be evolved to regulate the prices of non -scheduled 
drugs at reasonable level. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in addition to 

12 
 
taking up the matter vigorously with Ministry  of Health and Family Welfare to amend  the 
list of scheduled formulation to the largest extent possible , the Department should also 
take initiative to evolve a price mechanism for non -scheduled drugs with a view to 
ensure the availability of all such drugs to the consumers at affordable prices. 
 
D AVAILABILITY OF DRUGS  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
 
14. Emphasizing the need to ensure regular and normal supply of medicines in all States, 
the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee are happy to note  that NPPA has been monitoring the availability of 
drugs in the country regularly and taking remedial steps whenever required. NPPA is 
carrying out this responsibility mainly through monthly field reports from the State Drugs 
Controllers and other availabl e information and whenever, there are reports of shortage 
of certain brands of drugs in some States, the concerned company is asked to rush the 
stock and to make the drugs available. The Committee, therefore, desire that to ensure 
regular and normal supply  of medicines in all States, specifically in remote and hilly 
regions, NPPA should devise effective distribution and delivery system in coordination 
with State Drugs Controllers. While devising such mechanism, NPPA should incorporate 
provisions for check o n availability of spurious / fake and sub -standard drugs in the 
market which is becoming health hazard for the common people. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter within three months  of presentation 
of this report”.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
15. In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 “Monitoring of spurious / fake and sub -standard drugs in the market is looked after by 
the Drugs Controller General (India) and State Drugs Controllers in the country. The 
concerns of the Hon’ble Committee have been communicated to Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare”. 
 
E. MONITORING OF QUALITY OF DRUGS  
  
 RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
 
16. Emphasizing the need regarding bringing the quality control and regulatory mechanism 
under one umbrella, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “Quality is an essential parameter while considering the pricing and availability of 
medicines. In this regard, the Committee are surprised to note that the quality of drugs 
and check on spurious drugs is monitored by Drugs Controller of India which is unde r 
the jurisdiction of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare whereas the pricing and 
availability of drugs fall within the purview of the Department of Pharmaceuticals. The 
Committee further note that the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) 
is within the purview of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. In this regard, the 
Committee strongly feel that monitoring the quality of drugs and check on spurious drugs 
are interlinked with pricing and availability of drugs and Department of Pharma ceuticals 
may not be able to do full justice to its role regarding pricing and availability of drugs if 

13 
 
the quality control set up does not come within its purview. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Department of Pharmaceuticals should take up the matter regarding 
bringing the quality control and regulatory mechanism under one umbrella i.e. the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 
 Regarding the menace of spurious drugs, Committee note that a survey to assess the 
extent of spurious drugs in the country was conducted in the year 2009 by the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare through Central Drugs Standard Control Organization and 
samples were drawn from different stratum in various regions in the country. The survey 
revealed that the extent of drugs found spurious was 0.046% only. In this regard, the 
Committee feel that such random surveys are not sufficient to monitor the extent and 
check the menace of spurious drugs in the country. Hence, the Committee recommend 
that Department of Pharmaceuticals along with the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare should conduct regular surveys along with random checks in different parts of 
the country an d ensure stringent and quick legal action against the manufacturers of 
spurious drugs so that common man’s life and health is not put into jeopardy”.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
17. In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
“The Department has taken up the matter in the year 2009 with the Cabinet Secretariat 
regarding transferring the subject matter pertaining to quality  control of medicines along 
with relevant infrastructure i.e. CDSCO to the Department of Pharmaceuticals. 
As regards the recommendation regarding checks on spurious drugs, the subject matter 
falls entirely within the jurisdiction of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare . The concerns 
of the Hon’bl e Committee have been communicated to Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare. Till such time the subject matter is transferred to this Department, it will not be 
feasible for this Department to intervene in the matters of quality control of medicines”.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
18 The Committee noted that NPPA has been monitoring the availability of drugs in 
the country regularly and taking remedial steps whenever required. NPPA is carrying out 
this responsibility mainly through monthly field reports from the State Drugs Controllers 
and other available information and whenever, shortage of certain brands of drugs  is 
reported in some States, the concerned company is asked to rush the stock and to make 
the drugs available. In its action taken replies, the Department has stated that Monitoring 
of spurious / fake and sub -standard drugs in the market is looked after by the Drugs 
Controller General (India) and State Drugs Controllers in the country . The Department in 
its reply to the Recommendation No.6,  have further stated that till the subject matter is 
transferred to the Department of Pharmaceuticals it will not be feasible for the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals to intervene in the matters of quality  control of 
medicines.. According to the Department, they have taken up the matter in the year 2009 
with the Cabinet Secretariat regarding transferring the subject matter pertaining to 
quality control of medicines along with relevant infrastructure to the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals. However, the Department is si lent about the present status of the 
matter and whether or not the matter is still being pursued by them.  The Committee 

14 
 
regret to observe that the  reply of the Department  in the matter is  evasive and 
unsatisfactory.  The Committee are of view that the Depa rtment of Pharmaceuticals,  
being the nodal authority for regulating the production and pricing of drugs,  cannot 
escape its responsibility to monitor the sale of spurious/fake drugs in the market.  In 
addition to this the Committee feel as it is mandatory for all the pharmaceutical company 
to fully adhere to the quality of drugs and no compromise can be made by them in 
maintaining the Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) since the issue regarding quality of 
drugs cannot be seen in isolation with the manufacturing of medicines.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate its recommendation that the Department should evolve a mechanism 
in cooperation with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare/Drugs Controller Gene ral of 
India and State Drugs Controller  to check sale of  spurious/sub-standard drugs  in the 
country. The Committee also reiterate that the  Department should also actively pursue 
the matter with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  and other departments 
concerned to bring the issue of quality control and regulatory mechanism under the 
control of the Department of Pharmaceuticals.   
 
F. RECOVERY OF OVERCHARGED AMOUNT  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
 
19. Expediting the process of pursuing  cases relating to overcharged amount and prompt 
recovery, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee note that NPPA, since its inception in August 1997, till November, 2012 
has issued demand notices in 902 cases involving total overcharged amoun t of 
Rs.2577.44 crore out of which an amount of Rs.233.99 crore has been recovered which 
also includes recovery through court orders . The Committee are, however, surprised to 
note that NPPA has been able to recover only an amount of Rs.233.99 crore against  the 
total demand notices of Rs.2577.44 crore and an amount of Rs.2267.75 crore is under 
litigation and thus locked up in courts. The Committee, therefore recommend that NPPA 
should vigorously pursue these cases and recover the dues promptly. The Committee  
desire to be apprised of the detailed action taken in this regard. The Committee also 
desire to be apprised about the way the recovered amount is utilized by the NPPA”.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
20. In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“The recov ery of the overcharged amount has been adversely affected due to orders 
passed by High Courts and the Hon’ble Supreme  Court in cases filed by the 
pharmaceutical c ompanies challenging the price fixation / notifi cation issued by the 
NPPA / Government. Inclusion of some bulk drugs under price control (schedule 1 of 
DPCO’95) has also been challenged by the a few p harma companies. In some cases , 
the High Courts and Supreme Court h ave restrained the Govt. / NPPA  to recover the 
overcharged amount or directed the companies to make part payment of the 
overcharged amount until the matter is finally decided by them. This has led to an 
increase in the long outstanding overcharged amount alongwith interest thereon from the 

15 
 
companies. In some cases, the Hon’ble Courts have also directed not to take coercive 
action for recovery of amount.  
 
 NPPA / Government is defending all these cases which are under litigation in the 
various Courts through Central Agency /Branch Secretariat, Department of Legal Affairs. 
Urgent applications for vacation of interim orders and also for early hearing / disposal of 
the case are also filed  in various courts . Further, matters are pursued with the District 
Collectors for initiating action for early recovery of the outstanding dues from the Pharma 
companies. Besides, the Pharma companies are also insisted through regular follow up 
to pay the demanded amount.  
 
Presently, the amount recovered from the Pharmaceutical companies for overcharging in 
normal course is deposited in the ‘Consolidated Fund of India’.” 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
21  The Committee also note from the action taken replies of the Department that  the 
recovery of the overcharged amount has been adversely affected due to orders passed 
by the High Courts and the Hon’ble Supreme  Court in cases filed by the pharmaceutical 
companies challenging the price fixation / notification issued by the NPPA / Government. 
Inclusion of some bulk drugs under price control (schedule 1 of DPC O’95) has also been 
challenged by a few p harma companies. In some cases , the High Courts and Supreme 
Court h ave restrained the Government / NPPA  to recover the overcharged amount or 
directed the companies to make part payment of the overcharged amount until the matter 
is finally decided by them.  The Committee strongly feel that the above situation would 
not have arisen in the first place if a mechanism for proactively monitoring the prices of 
drugs had been devised by the NPPA  before the introduction of dru gs in the market and 
had ensured that the prices of drugs were not arbitrarily fixed by the pharma companies. 
The mechanism to first allow the pharma companies to fix the price and recover the 
enhanced price if the same was found arbitrarily  high was not a  sound proposition 
enunciated by the NPPA  as in the whole process the consumer was put at a 
disadvantageous position such he would not have the benefit of recovery of overcharged 
amount. The Committee , therefore, recommend that a mechanism for proactively 
monitoring the prices of drugs should be devised by NPPA before the introduction of 
drugs in the market.  Besides these alternate dispute resolution method like arbitration 
should be adopted also to mitigate the litigation cases. 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1 
 
 National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) has been constituted as an 
independent body of experts in the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) by Gazette Notification with the task of price fixation/revision of prices of 74 
scheduled bulk drugs/ formulation under the Drugs (Price Control) Order 1995 and other related 
matters. The Committee note that NPPA provides inputs to the Government for policy 
formulation and on other specific issues concerning affordable medicines  to the consumers and 
also monitors availability of drugs, identifies shortage and takes remedial steps accordingly. The 
Committee observe that NPPA has fixed/revised the prices of scheduled bulk drugs in 532 
cases, which includes 342 bulk drugs and 190 de rivatives of scheduled bulk drugs and also 
fixed/revised the prices of 12137 formulation packs since its inception. The Committee are 
concerned to note that NPPA's mandate regarding fixing of prices is limited to only 74 bulk 
drugs/ formulations. The Commi ttee strongly feel that the present mandate of NPPA is narrow 
and hence the Committee recommend that the mandate of NPPA regarding fixing / revision of 
pricing of drugs should be broadened to include all the 348 essential drugs and medicines listed 
by the Department of Pharmaceuticals. As per the latest reply to the Unstarred Question 
No.2163 dated 6.12.2012 whereby the Department of Pharmaceuticals has informed that the 
Cabinet has approved the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy -2012 (NPPP -2012) with 
certain modifications. Also it is stated that NPPP -2012 has not yet been notified. Therefore, in 
view of the above, the Committee desire to know about the ‘Certain modifications’ carried out in 
NPPP-2012. Further, the Committee also recommends that the Depa rtment of Pharmaceuticals 
should expedite the process of notification of NPPP -2012. Further, the Committee recommend 
that the prices fixed/ revised by NPPA should be printed on the medicine packet bottle alongwith 
the Maximum Retail Price (MRP) of the medi cines so that common man may know if there is 
any over pricing by the manufacturers. The Committee would like to be apprised of steps taken 
in this regard within three months of presentation of Report.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
“The Cabinet in its meeting held on 22.11.2012 approved the proposal regarding 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy  covering essential medicines with the following 
modification in paragraph 3.1(c) of the supplementary note dated 21.11.2012 which read as 
under: 
 
“If a manufacturer of a NLEM drug with dosages and strengths as specified in NLEM, 
launches a new drug by combining the NLEM drug with another NLEM drug or by 
changing the strength and dosages of the same NLEM drug, such manufacturers shall 
be required to seek price approval from the Government before launching the new drug.” 
 
that the words “or a non-NLEM drugs” be inserted after the words “another NLEM drug”.  
 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy -2012 (NPPP -2012) has been notified on 
07.12.2012. The new Drug s (Prices Control) Order, 2013 has been notified vide S.O.122(E) 
dated 15th May, 2013.  
Printing of MRP on packaging is regulated as per Weights and Measures Act , which 
does not provide for printing of MRP on medicine strips . Therefore, a special provision for 
compulsory printing of MRP on medicine strips was made under DPCO, 1995. Further, Para 24 
(2) of the DPCO, 2013 also provides for printing of Maximum Retail Price (MRP) of a 

17 
 
formulation based on the ceiling price notified in the official Gazette or ordered by the 
Government in this behalf”. 
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.31026/20/2013-PI.I dated 3.06.2013] 
RECOMMENDATION NO.2 
 
 The Committee note that during the Eleventh Five Year Plan period (2007 -2012), NPPA 
had proposed five new schemes amounting to Rs. 4995.60 lakh. These schemes are (i) Building 
Robust and Responsive Statistical System for NPPA; (ii) Creation of NPPA Cells i n States; (iii) 
Scheme for Interaction with States; (iv) Proposal for Consumer Awareness and Publicity 
through Print, Electronic and other medium; and (v) Proposal for strengthening the existing 
Monitoring and Enforcement work. The Committee also note that  out of these five schemes, 
only one scheme viz Building Robust and Responsive Statistical System for NPPA has already 
been approved by the Planning Commission and implemented during the Eleventh Plan period. 
Further, in -principle approval in respect of th e scheme, namely Proposal for Consumer 
Awareness and Publicity through Print, Electronic and other medium was given in February, 
2011 and in the budget allocation for the year 2012 -13, funds are allocated only for these two 
schemes. In this regard, this Co mmittee have time and again recommended that the 
Department should earnestly pursue the issue with the Planning Commission and make all out 
efforts towards getting in -principle approval for rest of the three schemes of NPPA. The 
Committee strongly feel tha t the above three schemes of NPPA are vital for fulfilling the 
mandate of the organization and again recommend that the Department should make earnest 
effort to get in -principle approval of these three schemes from Planning Commission. The 
Committee would like to be informed about follow up action taken in this matter”.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  With the  notification of National Pharm aceutical Pricing Pol icy 2012  and Drugs (Price 
Control) Order, 2013 , (DPCO, 2013) the relevance of the S chemes has been reviewed in 
consultation with NPPA and the status of each scheme is as under : 
(i) Creation of NPPA Cells in States: In view of the changes in norms for pricing as 
envisaged in DPCO, 2013 , it is felt that separate cells in States may not be 
required.  
(ii) Scheme for Interaction with States : NPPA has already taken initiative in this 
regard by having regional meetings with States  on regular basis . It is felt that a 
special scheme for the purpose is not required. 
(iii) Proposal for strengthening the existing Monitoring and Enforcement work: it has 
been decided to revisit the provisions of this scheme by NPPA and a view will be 
taken keeping in view the requirement under DPCO, 2013.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION. NO.3 
 
 National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority fixes/revises the prices of 74 bulk drugs and 
the formulations containing any of the scheduled drugs under the provisions of the Drugs 
specified in the first schedule of the Drug (Prices Control) Order, 1995. The C ommittee find that 
scheduled drugs/formulations cannot be sold at a price higher than that fixed by 
NPPA/Government. According to the Department of Pharmaceuticals, non-submission of the 
requisite data/information by the manufacturing units particularly in  cases of reduction in the 
input cost is the major difficulty being faced by NPPA. The Committee observe that NPPA 
endeavours to overcome this problem through interaction with State Drug Controllers to impress 
upon the manufacturing units to submit the requisite data/information. The Committee are of the 
view that there is an urgent need for taking definite steps to encourage the manufacturing units 

18 
 
to submit the data in time and desire that NPPA should chalk out mechanism for co -ordination 
with State Enforcement Agencies in this regard.  
 
 The Committee also note that the Pharma Companies frequently change, the 
composition/strength of their formulations to circumvent the provisions of DPCO, 1995. In order 
to escape the provisions of the DPCO, 1995 pharma companies are also using the via-media of 
Dietary Supplements under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 1954 and flooding the retail 
market by medicines of dietary supplements. While expressing their concern over such strategy 
adopted by the pharma compa nies, the Committee recommend that the Department should 
expeditiously identify the concerned pharma companies and take up the issue strongly with the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee also desire that NPPA should not 
hesitate to invoke the relevant provisions of the DPCO, 1995 to curb such alleged malpractices 
by the drug companies. Thus, the circumventing of the price control mechanism by some 
manufacturers by shifting schedule drugs to the category of Food and Nutrition Supplement 
manufacture under Prevention of Food Adulteration Act 1954 should also be monitored by the 
NPPA. In this regard, NPPA cannot shirk away from its responsibility and leave the matter at the 
behest of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the action taken in the matter. The Committee also desire that the list of companies indulged in 
such malpractices and action taken against them should be furnished to the Committee within 
three months of presentation of the Report.  
 
 The Committee further note that the State Drugs Controllers help NPPA in monitoring 
the prices and enforcing the provisions of DPCO,1995. The State Governments are authorized 
to take action under Essential Commodities (EC) Act, 1995 for violation of th e provisions of the 
DPCO, 1995. The Committee observe that prosecution under Essential Commodities Act, 1995 
sometimes does not lead to stringent action against defaulters. The Committee find that at 
present, there are no provisions of fine or penalties fo r the violation of the DPCO,1995 for non -
submission of requisite data, price list and for not allowing officers of NPPA to visit and inspect 
manufacturing premises. The Committee, therefore, desire that DPCO, 1995 should be 
amended suitably to incorporate provisions for compounding offences by stringent fines or 
penalties therein.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 With change in pricing norms under DPCO, 2013  from the cost based pricing to market 
based pricing , the cost data will no more be required. Moreover, forms have been further 
simplified in DPCO, 2013  to make the process of collection easy . Para 16 of the said order 
provides for submission of information / data by the industry mandatorily in respect of revision of 
the prices within 15 days and it also provides that the company would be liable for an action 
under the said order if it fails to submit the same within 15 days’ time.  The provision has also 
been made with regard to mo nitoring of availability of scheduled formulations vide Para 21 of 
the said order. Manufactur ers are also required to file quarterly production return s with the 
NPPA in Form -III. In respect of discontinuation of the production of the sche duled formulation 
manufacturers should file returns in Form IV of the said order. The companies are also required 
to file price list in Form-V with the NPPA. 
The issue of circumventing the price control mechanism through dietary supplements 
has already been taken up by this Department with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and 
a reminder has also been sent on 29.4.2013.  
 
DPCOs are subordinate legislation and sufficient penal provision s already exist in the 
parent Act i.e. Essential Commodities Act, 1955”. 
 
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.31026/20/2013-PI.I dated 3.06.2013] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)  

19 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.4 
 
 The Committee note that prices of non -scheduled drugs are fixed by manufacturers 
themselves without seeking the approval of Government / NPPA. NPPA, however, regularly 
monitors the prices of non -scheduled formulations ba sed on the data from IMS (Health). The 
Committee in this regard regret to point out that NPPA depends entirely on IMS (Health) data 
and does not have their own specific system for data collection. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Department should take necessary steps to make NPPA self -sufficient and 
resourceful to carry out its activities regarding monitoring of prices of non -scheduled drugs 
independently and effectively.  
 
 Regarding monitoring of the prices of non -scheduled drugs, the Committee note that a 
list of formulations and their manufacturers are short-listed where there is an increase in price of 
more than 10% in one year and the annual turnover of the formulation pack exceeds Rs.1 crore. 
Further, the share of formulations in that segmen t of the formulation is required to be at least 
20% of the market or the medicine is one of the top 3 brands of that group. The manufacturer 
and / or distributor is asked to give justification for price increase of more than 10% per annum. 
If no informatio n is received after the letter and reminder or the reply of the company is not 
satisfactory, show cause notice is issued to the manufacturer stating as to why action should not 
be initiated for price fixation under para 10(b) of DPCO, 1995 in larger public  interest. In this 
regard, Committee feel that such a process of monitoring of prices of non -schedule drugs is not 
satisfactory and deterrent as the manufacturers have the advantage of fixing the prices first 
provisionally. The present mechanism does not p rovide any relief to masses in case it is found 
that prices were arbitrarily fixed. Hence, the Committee recommend that NPPA should devise a 
mechanism to proactively monitor the rise in prices of non -scheduled drugs so that the same 
does not go beyond the permissible limit.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 NPPA has already taken initiative to collect information directly from the 
manufacturers. Almost 7,000 manufacturers have already been addressed to submit required 
information. Moreover, making a provision for filing o f information online will further facilitate 
collection of information. This would definitely reduce dependence on IMS Health in long run.  
 
 In the new DPCO, 2013, there is a provision to amend the list of Scheduled 
Formulations based on the communication  from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. 
Hence, para 10(b) of DPCO, 95 has lost its relevance. 
 [Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.31026/20/2013-PI.I dated 3.06.2013] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No.13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that NPPA has been monitoring the availability of 
drugs in the country regularly and taking remedial steps whenever required. NPPA is carrying 
out this responsibility mainly through monthly field reports from the State Drugs  Controllers and 
other available information and whenever, there are reports of shortage of certain brands of 
drugs in some States, the concerned company is asked to rush the stock and to make the drugs 
available. The Committee, therefore, desire that to e nsure regular and normal supply of 
medicines in all States, specifically in remote and hilly regions, NPPA should devise effective 
distribution and delivery system in coordination with State Drugs Controllers. While devising 

21 
 
such mechanism, NPPA should inc orporate provisions for check on availability of spurious / 
fake and sub -standard drugs in the market which is becoming health hazard for the common 
people. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter within three 
months of presentation of this report.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Monitoring of spurious / fake and sub-standard drugs in the market is looked after by the 
Drugs Controller General (India) and State Drugs Controllers in the country. The concerns of the 
Hon’ble Committee have been communicated to Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. 
 [Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.31026/20/2013-PI.I dated 3.06.2013] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
 
 Quality is an essential parameter while considering the pricing and availability of 
medicines. In this regard, the Committee are surprised to note that the quality of drugs and 
check on spurious drugs is monitored by Drugs Controller of India which is under the jurisdiction 
of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare whereas the pricing and availability of drugs fall within 
the purview of the Department of Pharmaceuticals. The Committee further note that the Central 
Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) is within the purview of the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare. In this regard, the Committee strongly feel that monitoring the quality of 
drugs and check on spurious drugs are interlinked with pricing and availability of drugs and 
Department of Pharma ceuticals may not be able to do full justice to its role regarding pricing 
and availability of drugs if the quality control set up does not come within its purview. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department of Pharmaceuticals should take up the matter 
regarding bringing the quality control and regulatory mechanism under one umbrella i.e. the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 
 Regarding the menace of spurious drugs, Committee note that a survey to assess the 
extent of spurious drugs in the country was conducted in the year 2009 by the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare through Central Drugs Standard Control Organization and samples w ere 
drawn from different stratum in various regions in the country. The survey revealed that the 
extent of drugs found spurious was 0.046% only. In this regard, the Committee feel that such 
random surveys are not sufficient to monitor the extent and check the menace of spurious drugs 
in the country. Hence, the Committee recommend that Department of Pharmaceuticals along 
with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should conduct regular surveys along with 
random checks in different parts of the country an d ensure stringent and quick legal action 
against the manufacturers of spurious drugs so that common man’s life and health is not put 
into jeopardy.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department has taken up the matter in the year 2009 with the Cabinet Secretariat 
regarding transferring the subject matter pertaining to quality  control of medicines along  with 
relevant infrastructure i.e. CDSCO to the Department of Pharmaceuticals. 
 
As regards the recommendation regarding checks on spurious drugs, the subject matter 
falls entirely within the jurisdiction of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare . The concerns of the 
Hon’ble Committee have been communicated to Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. Till such 
time th e subject matter is transferred to this Department , it will not be feasible for this 
Department to intervene in the matters of quality control of medicines.  
   
 [Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.31026/20/2013-PI.I dated 3.06.2013] 
 

22 
 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
 
 The Committee note that NPPA, since its inception in August 1997, till November, 2012 
has issued demand notices in 902 cases involving total overcharged amount of Rs.2577.44 
crore out of which an amount of Rs.233.99 crore has been recovered which also includes 
recovery through court orders . The Committee are, however, surprised to note  that NPPA has 
been able to recover only an amount of Rs.233.99 crore against the total demand notices of 
Rs.2577.44 crore and an amount of Rs.2267.75 crore is under litigation and thus locked up in 
courts. The Committee, therefore recommend that NPPA shou ld vigorously pursue these cases 
and recover the dues promptly. The Committee desire to be apprised of the detailed action 
taken in this regard. The Committee also desire to be apprised about the way the recovered 
amount is utilized by the NPPA.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The recov ery of the overcharged amount has been adversely affected due to orders 
passed by High Courts and the Hon’ble Supreme  Court in cases filed by the pharmaceutical 
companies challenging the price fixation / notification issued by the NPPA / Government. 
Inclusion of some bulk drugs under price control (schedule 1 of DPCO’95) has also been 
challenged by the a few p harma companies. In some cases , the High Courts and Supr eme 
Court h ave restrained the Govt. / NPPA  to recover the overcharged amount or directed the 
companies to make part payment of the overcharged amount until the matter is finally decided 
by them. This has led to an i ncrease in the long outstanding overcharged amount alongwith 
interest thereon from the companies. In some cases, the Hon’ble Courts have also directed not 
to take coercive action for recovery of amount.  
 NPPA / Government is defending all these cases which are under litigation in the 
various Courts through Central Agency/Branch Secretariat, Department of Legal Affairs . Urgent 
applications for vacation of interim orders and also for early hearing / disposal of the case are 
also filed in various courts. Further, matters are pursued with the Distric t Collectors for initiating 
action for early recovery of the outstanding dues from the Pharma companies. Besides, the 
Pharma companies are also insisted through regular follow up to pay the demanded amount.  
 
Presently, the amount recovered from the Pharmaceutical companies for overcharging in 
normal course is deposited in the ‘Consolidated Fund of India’. 
 [Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.31026/20/2013-PI.I dated 3.06.2013] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No.21 of Chapter I of the Report) 

23 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE 
 NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        GOPINATH MUNDE 
12 AUGUST, 2013                            CHAIRMAN; 
21 SHRAVANA,1935 (SAKA)      STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
            CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 
  

24 
 
APPENDIX I 
MINUTES 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 06 August, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
   Shri  Gopinath Munde -    Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
3. Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
5. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
6. Shri Tufani Saroj 
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Smt. Naznin Faruque 
9. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  Smt. Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary  
Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
I. XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
 
II. Draft Action Taken Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/ recommendations contained in the Twenty-ninth report (15th LS) 
on 'National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority' (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
4. Both the reports were adopted by the Committee without any amendment. 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the same to both the Houses of 
Parliament.  
 
6. It was decided that the following Members would present/lay the Reports in Lok Sabha/ 
Rajya Sabha on 13.08.2013.  
  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XXXXX   Matters not related to this Report 
In Lok Sabha In Rajya Sabha 
Shri Gopinath Munde Shri A.A. Jinnah 
Shri Shakti Mohan Malik Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 

25 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
(Vide Para 3 Of The Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONT AINED IN THE TWENTY -NINTH REPORT (FIFTEE NTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE ST ANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTIL IZERS 
(2012-13) ON NATIONAL PHARMACEUTICALS PRICING AUTHORITY (NPPA)’ OF THE 
MINISTRY OF CHEMI CALS AND FERTILIZERS  (DEPARTMENT OF 
PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 7 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos.1,2 and 3)  
 
3 
Percentage of Total 43% 
III Observation / Recommendation which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
NIL  
0 
Percentage of Total NIL 
IV Observation / Recommendation in respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:-  
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 4,5,6 and 7)  
4 
Percentage of Total 57% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are awaited:-  
NIL   
0 
Percentage of Total NIL 
 
  
  
 