  
   
5 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2009-10) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA  
  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
PRODUCTION AND AVAILABILITY OF MEDICINES  
TO DEAL WITH SWINE FLU 
  
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2009/ Agrahayana 1931, (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 


CC&F No.5 
 FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2009-10) 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
PRODUCTION AND AVAILABILITY OF MEDICINES 
TO DEAL WITH SWINE FLU 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.12.2009 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.12.2009 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2009/ Agrahayana 1931(Saka) 

CONTENTS 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-10) …………… 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………… 
 
REPORT 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Government laboratories for influenza A H1N1 testing attached to various 
States/UT Administration.   
 
II. Deadlines issued by Government of India 
 
III. Status Report on H1N1 (2009) vaccine  
 
IV. Extract of the Minutes of the second sitting of the Committee held on 16 
September, 2009 
 
V. Extract of the Minutes of the tenth sitting of the Committee held on 10 
December 2009.  
VI. Statement of Recommendations/Observations of the Committee 
  
  

COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2009-10) 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar  -  Chairman 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2 Smt. Sushmita Bauri 
3 Shri Prabhatsinh P. Chauhan 
4 Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
5 Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
6 Shri Madhu Koda 
7 Shri N. Peethambara Kurup 
8 Shri Baidyanath Prasad Mahato 
9 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
10 Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
11. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
12 Shri Ajit Singh 
13 Shri N. Cheluvaraya Swamy 
14 Shri Narendra Singh Tomar 
*15 Vacant 
16 to 
21  
Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri J.D. Seelam 
23 Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
24 Dr. C.P. Thakur 
25 Shri Brijlal Khabri 
26 Shri A.A. Jinnah 
27 Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
28 Shri Biswajit Daimary 
#29 Vacant 
30 to  
31 
Vacant 
                      *Consequent upon nomination to the Committee on Information Technology Shri Tufani Saroj, MP (LS)  
                                  ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f. 13.10.2009. 
            #Vacancy arisen due to demise of Shri Mahendra Sahni, MP (RS)  w.e.f. 6 November 2009.  
 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Shri N. K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Sarin   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.K.Srivastava   - Deputy Secretary  

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chem icals and Fertilizers (2009 -10) 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf present 
this Fifth Report on the subject „Production and Availability of Medicines to deal with 
Swine Flu‟.  
 
2. The Committee examined the subject  material furnished by the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).  The Committee were 
orally briefed by the representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals) and the Ministry of Hea lth and Family Welfare at 
their sitting held on 16 September 2009.    
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 10 
December 2009. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) and Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare for furnishing the material and other information, which they desired in 
connection with the examination of the subject and briefing  the Committee. 
 
5. For facility  of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
10 December, 2009                                  ANANTH KUMAR 
19  Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka)                                Chairman, 
         Standing Committee on 
         Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 

REPORT 
I INTRODUCTORY 
 
The outbreak of Influenza pandemic dates back to the year  1918 which was 
known as “Spanish Flu”.  The virus responsible for t hat pandemic was influenza A 
H1N1.   An estimated 50 million deaths took place during that pandemic, including an 
estimated seven million deaths in India.   About 25 per cent of the population was 
affected. 
 
2 In India, the „Spanish Flu Pandemic” came in t wo waves.  The first wave came 
in June -July 1918 was a mild wave.   The second wave that came in September -
October 1918 was much more lethal.   There was a substantial requirement of hospital 
beds.   Most of the affected countries established temporary hos pitals in schools, 
stadiums, and other civic facilities.   There were no proven drugs or vaccine available 
at that point  of time.   The mainstay of public health interventions used to be non 
pharmaceutical interventions at individual level (hand wash, cov ering mouth while 
coughing and sneezing and staying away) and at community level (social distancing 
measures such as closure of schools, colleges, work place etc; avoiding public 
gatherings and limitations of movements of public transport etc.). 
 
3. Recently the influenza A H1N1 known as Swine Flu has assumed serious 
proportions all over the world after reportedly having originated from North America.   
Many countries including India have been seriously affected and Governments and 
WHO are keeping a close w atch on the situation.   The Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare in the Government of India being the nodal Ministry to handle this issue is 
taking all the preventive and remedial steps.   The Department of Pharmaceuticals 
(DoP) is responsible for producti on and availability of medicines including those used 
for management of Influenza  A H1N1  commonly referred as Swine Flu. 
 
4. As per the information received from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the 
Consolidated Status of Influenza  A H1N1 cases as on 8 October 2009 is as under:- 
Consolidated Status of Influenza A H1NI 
(As on 8 October 2009) 
Sl State 
Lab confirmed 
cases reported 
on 8 October 
2009 
Lab confirmed 
cases cumulative 
Death of Lab 
confirmed 
cases on 8 
October 2009 
Death of Lab 
confirmed cases 
cumulative 
1 Delhi 44 2,941 0 15 
2 Andhra Pradesh 9 698 0 38 
3 Karnataka 13 1,179 1 106 
4 Tamil Nadu 10 1,356 0 4 
5 Maharashtra 35 3,187 3 153 
6 Kerala 18 448 0 9 

(As on 8 October 2009) 
Sl State 
Lab confirmed 
cases reported 
on 8 October 
2009 
Lab confirmed 
cases cumulative 
Death of Lab 
confirmed 
cases on 8 
October 2009 
Death of Lab 
confirmed cases 
cumulative 
7 Punjab 1 38 0 0 
8 Haryana 12 645 0 4 
9 Chandigarh (UT) 1 51 0 0 
10 Goa 0 40 0 3 
11 West Bengal 1 126 0 0 
12 Uttarakhand 0 64 0 2 
13 Himachal Pradesh 0 3 0 0 
14 Jammu & Kashmir 0 41 0 0 
15 Gujarat 0 203 0 36 
16 Manipur 0 1 0 0 
17 Meghalaya 0 6 0 0 
18 Mizoram 0 3 0 0 
19 Assam 0 45 0 0 
20 Jharkhand 0 1 0 0 
21 Rajasthan 1 32 0 1 
22 Bihar 0 5 0 0 
23 Uttar Pradesh 1 349 0 2 
24 Puducherry 0 10 0 0 
25 Chattishgarh 0 16 0 1 
26 Madhya Pradesh 0 6 0 0 
27 Daman & Diu 0 1 0 0 
28 Orissa 0 3 0 0 
29 Nagaland 0 2 0 0 
30 Andaman & 
Nicobar 
0 7 0 0 
 Total 146 11,507 4 374 
Notes 
1. On 7 October 2009, 39,485 passengers have been screened at 22 Airports with 83 counters 
manned by 225 doctors and 172 paramedics.   Total passengers screened till date are 
6,869,505. 
2. Till date, samples from 48,355 persons have been tested for Influenza A H1N1 in Government 
Laboratories and a few private Laboratories across the country and 11,507 (23.8%) of them 
have been found positive 
3. Of the 146 cases reported  on 8 October 2009, four are imported and the rest are indigenous 
cases 
4. Four deaths have been reported on 8 October 2009  (Maharashtra 3, Karnataka 1) 
5. Laboratory confirmation of 2 deaths from Maharashtra and 2 deaths from Karnataka have been 
received from the respective State Health departments, and are now reflected in the cumulative 
total 
6. Andaman & Nicobar has reported 7 positive cases on 30 september 2009, and are now 
reflected in the cumulative total. 
 

II ROLE OF DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS 
5. The Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) is responsible for R&D, production 
and availability of drugs and pharmaceuticals including those used for management of 
H1N1 Flu, commonly referred as Swine Flu. 
6 Management of Swine flu and treatment: As per available information, Swine flu 
is curable through:  
(a) Antiviral medications: Following medicines are curre ntly in the retail 
market: 
(i) Tamiflu (Oseltamivir)  capsules: This medicine  produced/marketed  by 
Roche and some other generic companies is used worldwide and is by 
far reportedly  considered very effective.  A very limited number of cases, 
with resista nce to Oseltamivir capsules, have come to light worldwide.  
The Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) for this formulation is 
Oseltamivir which in India is produced using Shikimic acid, that is 
imported mostly from China.  
(ii)  Zanamavir Rotacaps: This i s reportedly being used in various countries 
as second line of treatment. Glaxo is selling this product as “Relenza”. 
So far they have not commenced its sale in India. M/s Cipla have 
recently launched its generic version “Virenza” in the form of packs of 2 0 
rotacaps suitable for use @ 4 Rotacaps per day (for a 5 day course) 
alongwith an applicator (Revolizer).   
(b)  Vaccines:  Efforts to develop vaccine for H1N1 Flu are underway and 1 
MNC and few Indian companies are in the fray.  First indigenously develo ped 
H1N1 Flu vaccine is expected to be in the market by April 2010. There are 
reports that vaccines are likely to be introduced in USA by December this year.  
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may resort to import the vaccine in 
case the post marketing reports of vaccines in USA are found satisfactory.  It is 
also to be mentioned that before allowing marketing of imported vaccines by 
DCG(I), clinical evaluation is necessary.  
(c) Diagnosis:  The Kits being used to diagnose H1N1 Flu are currently 
imported and a few companies in India are trying to make indigenous kits.   
7. Stocks of Oseltamivir capsules: Being responsible for healthcare delivery, 
Ministry of Health had initially made a stockpile of 10 million (mn) Oseltamivir capsules 
sufficient to t reat nearly one million patients. Subsequently, in view of rising numbers 
of confirmed cases, the Ministry of Health has additionally procured over 20 million 
Oseltamivir capsules.  

As pointed out above DoP is regularly monitoring the availability position  of 
Shikimic acid, Oseltamivir API and Oseltamivir capsules in the country. It is monitoring 
the situation in close cooperation with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and has 
advised the Pharma Industry to be ready to meet the procurement targets of the 
Government. In view of serious situation, the Committee of Secretaries (COS) is 
regularly monitoring the matter.                                                                                      
8. Banking arrangement: Besides the stocks procured by  Ministry of Health, at the 
instance of DoP all the 6 concerned Pharma companies volunteered to maintain a 
stockpile of 100 kg Oseltamivir API or equivalent number (one million) Oseltamivir 
capsules for supply to the Government as and when needed. Out of t his stock, Roche 
recently donated half of this committed stock to the Ministry of Health. As on 13 
October 2009, 700 kg Oseltamivir API and 0.55 mn Oseltamivir capsules were 
available under the banking arrangement.  
9. Facilitation by DoP: In order to faci litate the production and availability of 
Oseltamivir capsules, the DoP took up the cause of the Industry at the Committee of 
Secretaries (CoS) and secured assistance to the concerned manufacturers of 
Oseltamivir capsules through various fiscal and non -fiscal measures. Such measures 
included restoration of regular power supply to M/s Hetero Drugs Ltd. –the single 
largest manufacturer of Oseltamivir capsules from basic stage of Shikimic acid and 
waiver of customs and excise duties applicable to the raw materi al or finished goods 
relevant for Oseltamivir capsules meant for banking arrangement in certain cases.    
10. Retail sale of Oseltamivir capsules: The Ministry of Health has permitted 
retail sale of Oseltamivir capsules w.e.f. 19 September 2009. After perm ission by the 
Government only two companies; Natco Drugs  & Hetero Drugs have launched their 
product in the market.  
11. Price Control: Oseltamivir or its capsules are not covered under DPCO‟1995. 
As such there is no price control for these products. The G overnment does not intend 
to intervene in the market at this stage.  The Secretary (Pharma) has requested  the 
Industry to act in a responsible manner by keeping the price -line of Oseltamivir 
capsules within a reasonable range.  
12. On being asked as to what further action is contemplated by the Department in 
respect of production and availability of medicines, the Department in their reply 
submitted as under:- 
“Considering the comfortable availability situation for the time being the 
Department of Pharmace uticals do not intend to take any specific action to 
augment the availability.   However, in case Swine flu spreads further, 
production of Oseltamivir capsules by the Pharma PSUs may be considered. 
Depending upon the developments in retail market, price co ntrol on Oseltamivir 
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) & Oseltamivir capsules might be 

considered in case the prices become unreasonably high.  Development of 
alternate indigenous sources for getting Shikimic acid is also being explored. 
The   DoP is regularly monitoring the availability position of medicines in the 
country.” 
 
 
13. The following suggestion has been furnished by the Department in their written 
note:- 
“In order to ensure cheaper availability of medicine for H1N1 Flu, the DoP has 
taken up  issue of Customs Duty exemption on Oseltamivir (both API & 
capsules) and Shikimic acid with the Ministry of Finance. At the same time 
excise duty exemption for indigenously produced Oseltamivir API and capsules 
has also been recommended to Ministry of Fin ance. The decisions in these 
matters are awaited.” 
 
14. Regarding the cost implications of the medicines to deal with Swine flu on 
account of production/ import/ import of raw materials  it was stated by the Department 
in their written reply that considering the current level of indigenous production, 
availability of sizeable stockpile with the Ministry of Health, stockpile of over 7 mn 
capsules or equivalent API as banking arrangement for Department of 
Pharmaceuticals and competition between the local manuf acturers, the cost level is 
expected to be within reasonable limits. It was also mentioned by them that the high 
volatility of the prices of raw material  is an issue  of concern. 

 
III PREVENTIVE MEASURES TO CONTAIN THE SPREAD OF  SWINE FLU 
 
15. As per the written replies furnished by the Department of  Pharmaceuticals,  the 
following preventive measures have been taken by the Government to check the 
spread of Swine Flu. 
(a) Screening at Airports 
Entry screening of passengers from affected countries is a non p harmaceutical 
intervention for detecting cases at the point of entry, subsequent follow up, isolation 
and treatment.   It has a limitation in that the passengers in the incubation period 
cannot be detected. 
The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, due to t his limitation,  decided to start 
entry screening at all its 22 international airports, sea ports and six international check 
points (border crossing).   As on 8 October 2009 cumulative 68,69,505 passengers 
have been screened.   Till the last week of July about 500 imported cases were 
detected directly/indirectly (follow up reporting) through entry screening.  All of them 
were isolated and put on treatment and got cured.   All these contacts (contacts sitting 
in close proximity in the aircraft; family conta cts and social contacts) were traced and 
put on Chemoprophylaxis.   By these concerted efforts the community spread of 
Pandemic influenza was delayed for almost three months. 
(b) Early detection  
 As per World Health Organisation, the pandemic as of now is  of mild to 
moderate severity implying the large number of cases exhibiting mild symptoms need 
only symptomatic treatment.  Early detection and treatment would prevent 
complications and death.  Analysis of about 150 deaths that took place in India 
showed that on an average, patients reported to the designated health facility after 5 
days.  On the other hand all the cases detected through airport screening, early in 
their illness, got cured with treatment.   Hence, the Government of India in their 
guidelines have advocated opening of large number of screening and follow up of 
such patients. 
(c) Quarantine 
 Quarantine is applied to healthy individuals who are suspected to be exposed 
to the ineffective agent.   Individual quarantine of exposed individuals are 
recommended.  Community -wise quarantine (quarantine of affected/exposed 
population) in defined geographical area has limited role for containment of the 
outbreak.   Similarly, quarantine can be applied to international passengers at  sea 
ports (maritime qua rantine) at airports (airport quarantine).   There is limited scientific 
evidence to support community based quarantine measures. 

 
III  PREPAREDNESS TO HANDLE THE SWINE FLU 
 
16. The following measures have been taken up by the Government of India to 
handle the Swine Flu: 
 (a) Availability of laboratories – Proposal regarding new laboratories for screening 
the virus 
 Initially, there were two apex laboratories, National Institute of Virology, Pune 
and National Centre of  Disease Control, Delhi.   With the sp read of the virus in 
the State of Maharashtra and Delhi there were increasing demands for 
laboratory testing of clinical samples.   A number of laboratories were identified 
and strengthened.   Of the 53 laboratories identified (31 in Government Sector 
and 22 in private sector), 35 are operational (23 in Government sector and 12 in 
private sector).   Guidelines have been formulated and sent to all the States to 
identify laboratories fulfilling these norms.   The list of operational laboratories is 
given at Appendix I. 
 
(b) Preparedness of the hospitals in the country to handle the challenge 
 All the States with International Airports have identified isolation hospitals.   The  
Minister of Health and Family Welfare has written to  Chief Ministers of all the 
States to  gear up their machinery and strengthen isolation facilities including 
critical care facilities at district level.   Guidelines for setting up isolation facilities 
were issued.   All States have since identified hospitals for isolation facility and  
are being strengthened.   For better accessibility and to detect cases early, the 
States have been requested to open up a number of screening centres.   
Guidelines have been issued for categorization of cases during screening for 
home care,  testing, treatment and hospitalization. 
 
(c) Making available on the website the list of shops in various parts of the country 
from where medicines could be obtained 
The Central Government has on 15 September 2009 issued a notification under 
Section 26B of the Drugs an d Cosmetics Act for the regulated retail sale of 
Oseltamivir and Zananmivir.   Both these drugs would henceforth be  available 
with chemists holding schedule X license under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act.   
The State Governments have been advised to issue Sc hedule X licenses on 
fast track basis.   The drug is available in some of the retail outlets and others 
would commence shortly.   The list would be compiled and made available on 
the website as and when information is received from the State Governments. 
 

(d) Need for launching awareness drive 
A Task Force has been set up in Information and Broadcasting Ministry to fast 
track awareness campaign.   Short term media campaign was started 
immediately when WHO declared the Pandemic.    The materials prepared by 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare with assistance from  United Nations 
Children‟s Emergency Fund (UNICEF), after approval of the Task Force are 
appearing in print and visual media.    Travel advisory, Do‟s and Don‟ts and 
simple public health measur es required to prevent/mitigate the outbreak have 
been widely publicized in Hindi, English and various regional languages.   Press 
briefing is being done by identified authority.   Daily press releases are issued. 
 
 
(e) Guidelines issued by the Government of India 
 The Government of India has issued various Guidelines to educational 
institutions, laboratories, hospitals etc., to prevent the spread of pandemic in 
the country.   A copy each of these Guidelines is given at Appendix II. 

 
IV PRODUCTION AND IMPORT OF OSELTAMIVIR API (TAMIFLU) 
 
17 As per the brief note furnished by the Department, the production of Oseltamivir 
is only possible through Shikimic acid route which is currently available only from 
China.   As such, the prices of Shikimic acid have been highly volatile and have moved 
between $ 45 and $ 475 per kg.  The present price is $ 400 per kg.  The  possibility of 
ban on export of Shikimic acid from China has also been apprehended.   Regarding 
the strategy of Government of India to obtain Shikimic acid from China in future for its 
continuous uninterrupted supply the Department in their written reply stated as under:- 
 
 “At present the Government do not have any plan to get into the  production of 
Oseltamivir API through Central Public Sector Enterpr ises (CPSEs).   This 
issue has been examined by the Department of Pharmaceuticals and certain 
central public sector enterprises and it was decided that it may not be 
economically viable for Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) at this stage to enter 
into production.  Being dependant on the agricultural resource, the availability of 
Shikimic Acid depends upon the seasonal output of star anise crop. 
Considering limited usage of Shikimic Acid any long term commitment in the 
matter need to be taken based upon vari ous factors including the actual 
production and requirement of oseltamivir as also the spread of H1 N1 Flu 
pendamic.  At the same time, the Government is exploring the possibility of 
development of alternate sources of getting Shikimic Acid or Oseltamivir API.  
Department of Pharmaceuticals is closely monitoring the availability position of 
Shikmic Acid and Oseltamvir API.” 
 
18. On being asked whether any other source of production of Oseltamivir in 
addition to Shikimic acid route has been explored by NIPER  or any other research 
institution or the pharmaceutical industry, the Department in their written reply 
submitted as under:- 
 
 “ Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) is produced in India by several manufacturers, for which 
shikimic acid serves as a starting material tha t is extracted from the seeds of 
Star anise (Illicium vernum), an evergreen Chinese plant.  Besides Star anise, 
Shikimic acid is also produced form the leaves of Ginkgo biloba tree.  Since 
both raw materials are in short supplies, an alternate and sustaina ble source is 
being explored and ICMR is  conducting a research to produce this drug in the 
country indigenously through non – Shikmic Acid route. This includes 
exploration of other sources for production of Shikimic acid viz. microbial 
fermentation proces s, identification of Indian plants and optimization of 
extraction process, use of plant tissue/hairy root culture, development of 
enzymatic biotransformation process, production of Shikimic acid using 
recombinant E. Coli as host. Research proposal entailin g the above 
processes/sources for production of Oseltamivir are being evaluated by Indian 
Council of Medical Research (ICMR) for financial support, including one 
proposal from NIPER, Mohali.  Proposals have been technically approved and 
are being processed for release of grant”.  
 

19. Regarding other chemical routes available for production of Oseltamivir, the 
Department in their written  note stated that  there are more than one chemical routes 
available for production of Oseltamivir. The patent holder Roc he has licensed the 
production to Hetero Drugs based on use of Shikimic acid.  Details of producers in 
USA & Mexico are not readily available with them. 
20 As per brief note furnished by the Department, Shikimic acid is under Open 
General Licence (OGL) and , therefore, the possibility of hoarding by traders in India 
and elsewhere cannot be denied.  On being asked as to why no restriction has been 
made on its import in view of its possible hoarding, the Department has stated as 
under:- 
“The Department of Phar maceuticals is regularly monitoring the stock of 
Shikimic acid in the country. It is also trying to gather details of traders if any in 
the country that are engaged in trading of Shikimic acid. Based on the position 
reviewed in the department, the Director ate General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) 
has been advised to have closer monitoring of the import of this commodity.  
Government of India has no control, if hoarding of Shikimic acid is done outside 
India.  Once an item is under OGL, all importers willing to im port may do so.  
This open policy, prima facie, will prevent any monopolistic practice such as 
hoarding.  Any restriction on import may, in fact, lead to hoarding and monopoly 
by the license holder”. 
 
21. The Department further added that the retail sale o f Tamiflu has already been 
allowed and the hoarders, if any, may get benefitted due to volatility of the prices and 
availability of this medicine and  there are provisions in the existing Foreign Trade 
Policy to impose anti-dumping, duties etc. in appropriate cases. 
22. During briefing by the representatives of Department of Pharmaceuticals, the 
Committee were informed that Shikimic acid is a plant based material produced in 
laboratory.  The plant is grown in China.   On being enquired whether Department of  
Pharmaceuticals  has taken up the issue with Ministry of Agriculture / Indian Botanical 
Research Institute so that the plant from which Shikimic acid is derived, can be grown 
in the country  the Department stated in a written reply that they had not taken  up this 
issue  with Indian Botanical Research Institute so far.   
23. Further in their written reply furnished by the Department of Pharmaceuticals it 
has been mentioned that  there is no specific code for Swine Flu in the classification 
system,  as such no details are available indicating  the quantity and value of 
medicines and Shikimic acid imported/  available with Directorate General of 
Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (DGCIS), Kolkata.   It was also informed by the 
Department that  efforts were made to collect import data form DGCIS, Kolkata, for the 
period 1.4.08 to 31.3.09 and 1.4.09 to 31.7.09.  E -mails were also sent to 
Commissioner (Imports), Mumbai Ports and Chennai Ports requesting them to furnish 
the import data for the above period.  Fu rther, e-mail was also sent to Commissioner 

(Cus.& EP), CBEC, DOR, New Delhi for sending import data for the period 1.5.09 to 
9.9.09.  However,  no import data has been  received from any of the above offices so 
far.    
24. Regarding  indigenous production of different medicines to deal with Swine Flu, 
the Department in their written reply stated that there are six Pharma companies 
engaged in supply of Oseltamivir 75 mg capsules in the country.  Four of these  
(namely Hetero Drugs, Cipla, Ranbaxy and Stride s Arcolab) have facilities for 
indigenous production of Oseltamivir from its raw material: Shikimic acid.  Roche has 
no local production in India and is supplying Oseltamivir capsules by importing from 
their corporate set up. The remaining Indian company N ATCO has only formulation 
capability for the capsule based on Oseltamivir API. 
 The Department in their Brief note submitted as under:- 
“Influenza A H1N1 is treated through antiviral medications.   One particular 
remedy, used worldwide, is Tamiflu (Oseltam ivir Phosphate) 75/45/30 mg 
capsules.   Supplied by Roche, is considered very effective against the disease.   
Oseltamivir/Tamiflu is the most preferred treatment and Prophylaxis globally as 
well as in India. 
 
Other anti-viral medicine Zanamivir sold by GSK globally as “Relenza” is also in 
the market as second line of treatment.   Cipla has also recently launched its 
generic version “Viranja” in the form of packs of 20 capsules suitable for use @ 
4 Rotacaps per day (for a 5 day course) alongwith an applicator (Rotahaler).” 
 
25. On being asked whether the Department of Pharmaceuticals intend to promote 
all the medicines at equal footing, the Department in their written reply submitted as 
under:- 
“At present only Oseltamivir capsules are permitted for sale in the country by  
Drug Controller General of India (DCGI). As soon as other medicines are 
approved, the DoP would render all possible assistance to the Pharma Industry 
to go ahead with the production/ supply of the same”. 
 
26. On being asked about the effica cy of the medicines other than Tamiflu 
(Oseltamivir), the Department in their written reply submitted as under :- 
 “Relenza & Virenza are based on the API: Zanamivir. This medicine is 
reportedly not as effective as Tamiflu and it is reportedly used as seco nd line 
treatment. According to Cipla company who have launched their product 
recently, the response has not been very encouraging. Globally, Tamiflu 
(Oseltamivir) is considered as the most effective medicine”. 
 
27. It has also been submitted by the Depart ment of Pharmaceuticals that neither 
the Department nor the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education Research  
(NIPER)  has made any study to develop any Swine Flu medicine with the  Private 
Sector. 

 
V STOCK, DISTRIBUTION AND SALE OF MEDICINE TO DEA L WITH SWINE 
FLU 
 
28. During the briefing, the representatives of Department of Health submitted 
before the Committee that they are maintaining a stockpile of four crore capsules of 
Oseltamivir and four lakh bottles of pediatric syrup  out of which one cro re has been 
distributed to all States and Union territories to ensure that there is a stockpile 
available in each district.   When asked whether stockpile is commensurate with the 
demand, the Department in their written reply stated that  ten thousand caps ules of 
Oseltamivir have been provided to each district. (Maharashtra, Karnataka, and Delhi) 
which are reporting community spread including rural community have been provided 
additional quantity as per demand.  
29. The Department in their written  note als o submitted that  sufficient quantities of 
the drug have been given to the State Government to ensure its availability in all 
treatment centres.  
30. As regards State-wise database indicating the probable availability of medicines 
the Department informed t hat  the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are having 
enough quantity of medicines to meet any eventualities and till date no shortage has 
been reported from any part of the company for treatment of this disease. 
31. When asked as to how the unused dru gs should be utilized, the Department in 
their written note stated that   “The drug Oseltamivir has a shelf life of five years.  
Apart from this pandemic, the drug could be used for avian influenza and seasonal 
Influenza.” 
32. Stock  position of Oseltamivi r Formulation, Oseltamivir API and Shikimic Acid 
under voluntary banking arrangement made by Department of Pharmaceuticals as on 
13.10.2009 is as under: 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of  
Company 
Latest 
committed  
stocks to DoP 
under Banking 
Arrangment 
Total stocks available 
Comments API 
( Kgs) 
Shikimic 
Acid (Kgs) 
Shikimic 
acid (under 
process) 
2-3 weeks 
reqd. 
Capsules 
Nos. in 
Million 
Total 
(Equivalen
t to million 
Capsules) 
1 Hetero 200 kg. + 
100 kg  
85 kg. 
1640 
 
 
20 t 
(Eq.to 5t 
API) 
  
 
NIL 1.70  71.1 Total stocks 
including 200 
Kgs committed 
for DoP plus 85 
kgs on behalf of 
NATCO(*) and 
100 kg on behalf 
of Roche. 
2 Cipla 100 kg. 279.50 Nil   Nil  7.19 10.98  
 
3 Ranbaxy 100 kg. 183 750 t 
(Eq.to 
187.5 Kg. 
API) 
 
1950 Kg. 
(equivalent 
to 487.5 kg 
API) 
NIL 9.57  
4 Roche 5,52,660 
capsules. 
 
-- --   0.55  
5. Strides 100 kg. 704 NIL Nil 2.34 10.38  
 
6. Natco 15 Kg. + 85 Kg. 85 --  0.39 2.24 **M/s Hetero 

Sl. 
No. 
Name of  
Company 
Latest 
committed  
stocks to DoP 
under Banking 
Arrangment 
Total stocks available 
Comments API 
( Kgs) 
Shikimic 
Acid (Kgs) 
Shikimic 
acid (under 
process) 
2-3 weeks 
reqd. 
Capsules 
Nos. in 
Million 
Total 
(Equivalen
t to million 
Capsules) 
of API* Drugs have 
committed to 
keep Buffer 
stock of 85 kgs. 
on behalf of 
Natco Pharma   
Total 700 Kg. API + 
0.55 million 
Caps  
2891.5 5187.5 Kg 
API Eq. 
487.5 Kg. 11.62 104.82 
 
33. It has also been mentioned by the Department that  Hospitals in private Sector 
identified by the State Governments are being provided Oseltamivir by the concerned 
State Governments and  as a public health intervention.  Oseltamivir is also given to 
close contacts of a patient, then it not only breaks the transmission cycle, but also 
provides protection to the individual till such time he takes Oseltamivir 
(Chemoprophylaxis) thereby preventing its fur ther spread.  This intervention is only 
done through the public health system using the tool of contact tracing.   As regards 
the purchase of medicine from open market, that can only be purchased on the basis 
of a doctor‟s prescription.  
34. When asked whe ther the Department of Pharmaceuticals has made any study 
to evaluate the number of patients affected by H1N1 and the requisite quantity of 
Tamiflu and other medicines for the treatment of disease, the Department informed the 
Committee that healthcare delivery is within the purview of Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare, which regularly studies the    H1 N1 Flu cases to evaluate the demand and 
availability of Tamiflu.   They also informed that no gap in demand and supply has 
come to the notice of Department of Pharmaceuticals.   

 
VI MONITORING BY THE DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS AND ROLE 
OF NATIONAL PHARMACEUTICAL PRICING  AUTHORITY ON THE 
AVAILABILITY OF MEDICINE 
 
35. During the presentation made by the Department before the Committee on 16 
September 2009 , it was informed that as a proactive step, the following measures 
have been initiated by Department of Pharmaceuticals:- 
 Daily Compulsory reporting of Stock position to NPPA under EC Act -  
Introduced by Department of Pharmaceuticals 
 Weekly reporting of exports also introduced. 
 Weekly meeting by Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals with the 
manufacturers to assess stocks, assist Industry in their manufacturing/ 
supply problems & monitor relevant parameters. 
 Voluntary stockpile of API equivalent to 7.57  million capsules created 
with the companies  at no cost to Government of India.   
 Stockpile replenished subsequently to compensate supplies to 
Government procurement. 
 Secured import duty exemption  for import for banking arrangements. 
 Interventions made f or issues relating to supplies/ production of 
medicines. 
 Assessment of preparedness of CPSUs to undertake manufacture of 
Oseltamivir formulation if required.  
  
36. The Department in their written reply submitted that o n the advice of the 
Department of Pha rmaceuticals, NPPA has issued an order under the Essential 
Commodities Act directing the six known manufacturers and any other company 
providing Oseltamivir based formulation packs, to provide a daily report on the 
quantitative details of Oseltamivir API a nd Oseltamivir based formulation packs 
covering opening/closing stocks/purchases/sales of Oseltamivir API and formulations. 
The six companies are: 
1. M/s Hetero Drugs Private Limited 
2. M/s Cipla Limited 
3. M/s Ranbaxy  Limited 
4. M/s Roche 
5. M/s Strides Arcolab Limited 
6. M/s Natco Pharma Limited 
 
The six known manufacturers are keeping a buffer stock of 100 kg/each of API 
on behalf of the Department of Pharmaceuticals. This stock is committed to the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals irrespective of their other commitments. 

NPPA is receiving daily reports from the six manufacturers since the date of 
issue of order, i.e. 11 May 2009. The weekly reports regarding exports are being 
received in the Office of DGFT. 
As per the the reports received upto 7 October 2009, M/s Hetero Drug s has put 
5 million capsules and M/s Natco has put 2,42,960 capsules for sale in the retail 
market. 
As per latest report dated 21.10.2009, the six manufacturers are maintaining 
the buffer stock committed by them. 
37. It has been stated in the note furnishe d by the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
that  Director General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) is regularly monitoring on weekly basis 
the exports of medicines being carried out by the manufacturers.   The imports are 
being made as per existing Foreign Trade Policy . At present DGFT and DoP are 
closely monitoring the export/production/availability position of Oseltamivir API, 
formulation and Shikimic Acid.  Indian companies are exporting Oseltamvir 
formulations & API to countries like Guyana, Honduras, Panama, Peru, Colombia, 
South Africa, Ecuador, Korea, South Africa, Maldives, Venezuela, France, 
Netherlands, Mauritius, Iran, Uruguay, Guyana, Korea, Cuba, Yemen, Afghanistan, 
Nicaragua, Cost Rica, Bangaladesh,  etc. 
 

 
VII VACCINE FOR  PREVENTION OF SWINE FLU 
38. During the course of oral evidence, a representative of the  Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare informed the Committee that a vaccine for prevention from swine 
flu shall be introduced in the market soon.  In India, three companies, viz. Serum 
Institute, Pan acea Bio Tech and Bharat Bio -Tech have been identified to promote 
indigenously manufactured vaccine.  He also informed that the vaccine would be 
available in the market by March 2010.  Before that international manufacturing 
companies may launch their vacc ine.  The Government of India is in dialogue with all 
the international manufacturing companies for procuring interim quota for our front line 
health workers.  WHO may also render some assistance in this regard.    The latest 
position is given at Appendix III. 
39. The Department of Pharmaceuticals has further informed that as per the 
information  received from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare vaccine would only 
be introduced after the laid down protocol of clinical trial and approval of the regulatory 
authority. 

 
VIII STRATEGY FOR FUTURE AND CO-ORDINATION WITH OTHER 
MINISTRIES/ DEPARTMENTS     
40. During the course of briefing the representative of the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare expressed his apprehension over the possibility of mutations of   H1N1 
virus in the coming winter season.   He was of the opinion that if virus mutates, the 
current  American Vaccine will also become useless and the current  Indian Vaccine 
would also become useless. 
41. On being asked whether any study has been done by  ICMR/ Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare on the possibility of mutation of H1N1 Virus in the coming winter 
and whether any preventive measures/ strategy has been adopted by Department of 
Pharmaceuticals to meet such a contingency in case H1N1 Virus mutate in the coming 
months, the Department in their written reply stated that  studies to see mutation of 
H1N1 virus are being conducted by ICMR‟s National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune.  
Whole genome sequencing has been carried out for eight isolates. S o far, no mutation 
has been noted.  The information on preventive measures/strategy to meet such a 
contingency in case H1N1 virus mutates in coming months would be available with the 
EMR, Division of DGHS, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.  
 The Department of Health Research is conducting  virological surveillance and 
studying the character of the virus to detect possible mutations. 
42. During briefing, the representative of the Ministry of Health and Family  Welfare 
expressed apprehensions of a possib le combination of Swine Flu virus and Bird Flu 
Virus.   On being enquired about the preventive measures proposed to be taken by the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to ward off catastrophe which may happen in 
case virus of Bird Flu (H5N1) which has mo rtality rate of more than 50 per cent mix 
with Swine Flu (H1N1) virus, the following submission was made by the Department in 
their written reply :- 
“If there is a possible combination of swine flu virus and bird flu virus, constant 
monitoring of this has to be done in collaboration with Department of Animal 
Husbandry, Ministry of Agriculture.  Preventive measures are required to be 
taken to ward off catastrophe which may happen in case virus of Bird 
Flu(H5N1) which has mortality rate of more than 50 per ce nt mix with Swine flu 
(H1N1) virus. 
 
 There is a possibility of the Avian and Human virus combining to form a 
novel virus. This could be prevented by stamping out Avian Influenza out 
breaks and minimizing contact of humans with infected birds. Department o f 
Animal Husbandry is keeping a watch through ongoing surveillance to detect 
outbreaks in birds early to contain them”.  
 
43.  As regards coordination with other Ministries/ Departments, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals in their written note stated that a s on date the healthcare system to 

deal with pandemic disease of Swine Flu has multiplicity of stakeholders.  These 
include Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (responsible for medical education 
including healthcare delivery and regulation of medicines), D epartment of 
Pharmaceuticals (responsible for R&D, production and availability of medicines), 
DGFT (for import and export of medicines), etc. In spite of above cited different roles, 
there is some overlapping in the allocation of subjects.  On being asked about the  
mechanism  presently available in the Government to interact and co -ordinate various 
activities in the matter of production and availability of Swine flu,   the Department 
stated that  considering the gravity of the current Swine Flu pandemic, e ffective 
coordination is being done through regular meetings of the Committee of Secretaries 
under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary.  The Departments also interact 
amongst each other for coordination and follow up. 

44. The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals’ are engaged 
in the production and availability of drugs for the treatment of Swine flu.  With 
the cooperation of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, they are regularly 
monitoring the availability position of Shikimic acid  and Oseltamivir API which 
are used for the production of drug i.e. Oseltamivir or Tamiflu and Oseltamivir 
capsules.  The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have also procured stocks 
of drugs at the instance of the Department of Pharmaceuticals. Six pha rma 
companies have volunteered to maintain adequate quantity of drugs to deal with 
Swine flu.  The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have also permitted the 
retail sale of Oseltamivir capsules w.e.f. 19 September 2009.  However, 
regarding the price control of the drug meant for the treatment of Swine flu, the 
Committee observe that the Pharmaceutical Companies have been given liberty 
to sell the medicine at a price decided by them though within a “reasonable 
limit”.  The Committee feel that reasonable l imit is too broad and vague a term 
which could be conveniently manipulated by the Pharmaceutical Companies for 
their own gain and at the cost of the common man.  Further, chances of 
medicines for the treatment of Swine flu becoming costlier can not be rule d out 
in view of the high volatility of the prices of raw material, especially when these 
are imported from China.  Thus, in such a scenario, leaving the pharma industry 
to fix the price of the medicines on their own, albeit within a reasonable limit, 
does not seem to be an appropriate decision.  While appreciating the initiatives 
taken by the Department in persuading the Ministry of Finance for exemption of 
Customs Duty on Oseltamivir and Shikimic acid and Excise Duty on 
indigenously produced Oseltamivir A PI and capsules, the Committee 
recommend that the Government should initiate immediate appropriate 
measures to ensure easy availability as well as affordability of the medicines for 
effective treatment of Swine flu, particularly in view of increase in cases with the 
onset of winter. 
 
(Recommendation No.1) 
 

45. The Committee note that three types of preventive measures have been 
taken by the Government to check the spread of Swine flu.  These are: 
(i)screening at Airports, sea ports and six international ch eck points (ii) Early 
detection – issuing guidelines for opening large number of screening centres 
and (iii) Quarantine measures.  However, most of the centres/agencies which 
are supposed to implement the above measures fall under the purview of the 
Ministry of Health and family Welfare.  The role of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals in this regard is confined only to make available medicines for 
quarantine purpose.  Thus, the overall responsibility of the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare increases man ifold to ensure meaningful and effective 
implementation of the measures adopted to prevent the spread of Swine flu.  
Nevertheless, the role and responsibilities of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals in this regard are no less important as they have been 
entrusted with the task of making available medicines for quarantine purpose 
which is meant for the medical and para -medical staff who are prone to be 
affected by the H1N1 virus.  Needless to say, both the Ministries should, 
therefore, act in unison so that t he objectives of the measures initiated to 
contain the spread of Swine flu are truly achieved. 
 
(Recommendation No.2) 
 

46. The Committee are highly concerned to note that although Maharashtra 
has reported maximum number of Swine flu cases, it has only thr ee 
Laboratories to detect such cases.  In this regard the Committee find that Delhi 
which ranks number two in reported Swine flu cases and Tamil Nadu which has 
reported fewer cases of Swine flu has seven Laboratories each whereas other 
States have either o ne or two Laboratories.  The Committee feel that several 
cases of Swine flu in various States might have remained undetected for want of 
adequate Laboratories/detection centres.  They, therefore, impress upon the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers to ta ke up the matter at the appropriate 
level urgently so that sufficient number of Laboratories are set up especially in 
Swine flu vulnerable States/UTs, for early detection and timely treatment of such 
pandemic disease.  As some States have only one or two L aboratories, the 
Committee recommend that Private Laboratories may be appropriately 
encouraged to supplement the efforts of the Government for detection of Swine 
flu cases. 
 
(Recommendation No.3) 
 
 

47. The Committee note that though the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
have issued Guidelines to the educational institutions, laboratories and 
hospitals to take adequate preventive measures against the spread of Swine flu 
pandemic in the country, the moot point is whether such Guidelines are being 
followed in letter and spirit.  The Committee are apprehensive of their proper 
adherence since the Ministry have nowhere mentioned any mechanism to 
monitor effective implementation of the Guidelines.  They are, therefore, of the 
view that mere issuance of Guideli nes will serve no purpose unless a system is 
developed to get appropriate feedback on the implementation aspect based on 
which further follow up action can be taken.  Since there has been a rapid 
increase in Swine flu cases recently, the Committee would li ke the Ministry of 
Health to examine whether the issued Guidelines need a revision.  For instance, 
instead of discouraging people not affected with the H1N1 virus to visit crowded 
places like Cinema Halls and Shopping Malls appeal could be made to the 
people affected with or having symptoms of Swine flu to exercise self -restraint 
in not visiting crowded places/offices/schools/colleges in the interest of their 
fellow citizens. 
 
(Recommendation No.4) 
 
 

48. The Committee note that Oseltamivir is also given to family members who 
come into contact with a patient to break the transmission cycle and to provide 
protection to the individual.  To effectively combat the menace of Swine Flu in 
the country, more so during the recent spurt of the disease in the national 
capital, the Committee would urge upon all the concerned agencies to ensure 
that the system of giving Oseltamivir to the close contacts of the Swine flue 
affected individuals is encouraged proactively so that the transmission cycle of 
the H1N1 virus is countered. 
 
(Recommendation No.5) 
 
 
 
 

49. The Committee note that the medicine for the treatment of Swine flu is 
made from Shikimic Acid which is extracted from the seeds of Star Anise 
(illicium vernum) an evergreen Chinese plant.  Besides Star Anise, Shikim ic 
Acid is also produced from the leaves of Ginkgo Biloba tree.  For Shikimic acid 
India is dependent on China because plants from which Shikimic Acid is 
extracted grow in China.  Moreover, availability of Shikimic Acid depends upon 
the seasonal output of Star Anise crop.  What concerns the Committee is the 
fact that both the raw materials i.e. Star Anise and leaves of Ginkgo Biloba tree 
are in short supplies, as admitted by the Department.  However, they draw 
consolation from the Department’s statement tha t some alternate and 
sustainable sources are being explored to produce medicines for the treatment 
of Swine flu.  As a result, ICMR is conducting research to produce this drug in 
the country through non -Shikimic route.  NIPER, Mohali has also submitted a 
Research proposal for producing Oseltamivir from an alternate route.  The 
Committee recommend that the Government should extend all possible help to 
these Research Organisations in their endeavour besides encouraging other 
similar premium institutions to fo llow suit so that any crisis in future regarding 
the availability of medicines for the treatment of Swine flu is averted.   
 
(Recommendation No.6) 
 
 
 

50. It is a matter of serious concern that the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
has not kept track of the means adopted by other countries like USA and Mexico 
to cope with the availability of Shikimic Acid or measures taken by them to find 
alternate route for production of Oseltamivir.  As it has been established that 
the H1N1 virus has penetrated India from for eign land, it would have been 
prudent on the part of the Department to maintain appropriate international data 
with regard to their efforts towards availability/production of Oseltamiviror or 
alternatives thereto.  However, even now it is not too late. The  Committee 
impress upon the Department to urgently initiate a study to gauge the 
dependency of other countries upon China for Shikimic Acid and the alternate 
route, if any, adopted by them to produce Oseltamivir.  The Committee are 
confident that  a compar ative assessment would immensely help the Research 
Organisations like ICMR and NIPER in their endeavours towards making India 
self-sufficient  in producing Oseltamivir medicine to counter Swine flu. 
 
(Recommendation No.7) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

51. The Committee express their displeasure over the fact that details are 
reportedly not available with the Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence 
(DGCIS), Kolkata regarding the quality and value of medicines and Shikimic 
Acid imported on the plea that there is no specific  code for Swine Flu in the 
classification system.  They also express their unhappiness since similar 
information which was also sought from the Department of Revenue by the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has not been furnished.  The Committee would 
like to point out that when so many Ministries/Departments have been entrusted 
with the responsibility to check the spread of Swine Flu, there must be a proper 
coordination and cooperation amongst themselves to perform the respective 
assigned task effectively.  Bu t, in the instant case, despite the efforts of the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals to get relevant information, the other concerned 
Ministries/Departments did not oblige.  The Committee take a strong exception 
to the callouness on the part of the Department of Revenue on such an 
important issue and recommend that henceforth any information sought by one 
Department from the other should invariably be furnished in a time bound 
manner in order to facilitate further follow up action for dealing with Swine Flu. 
The Committee direct the Department of Revenue to institute an internal enquiry 
to fix the responsibility for this negligence and take punitive action against the 
erring officials.  The Committee advocate the need for a close coordination and 
cooperation at sufficiently high level amongst all the concerned 
Ministries/Departments and desire the Department of Pharmaceuticals to play a 
proactive role in the process. 
 
(Recommendation No.8) 
 
 
 

52. The Committee are perturbed to note the self contradictory reply g iven by 
the Department of Pharmaceuticals in respect of the hoarding of Shikimic Acid 
by the traders.  At one place it has been stated that the possibility of hoarding of 
Shikimic Acid cannot be ruled out in view of it being under the Open General 
Licence (OGL) policy whereas, elsewhere it has been mentioned that the Open 
Licence Policy would prevent any monopolistic facilities such as hoarding.  The 
two statements need to be reconciled.  The Committee desire that if according 
to the Department of Pharmaceuticals, there is any loophole in the existing OGL 
policy which might be taken advantage of by the traders to hoard Shikimic Acid, 
they should take up the matter with the Department of Commerce to revise the 
Licence Policy so as to make it transparent and f oolproof in order to ward off 
any possibility of hoarding of Shikimic Acid.   
 
(Recommendation No.9) 
 
 
 
 
 

53. The Committee note that at present the Government do not have any plan 
to get into the production of Oseltamivir API through Central Public Secto r 
Enterprises (CPSE) for the reason that they have not found it economically 
viable for the PSUs at this stage to enter into production of the drug.  In this 
context, the Committee find that six private Pharmaceutical Companies are 
engaged in the supply of  Oseltamivir 75 mg capsules in the country.  Four of 
these companies, viz. Hetero Drugs, Cipla, Ranbaxy and Strides Areolab have 
facilities for indigenous production of Oseltamivir from its raw material i.e. 
Shikimic Acid.  Out of the remaining two Compani es, Roche has no local 
production in India and is supplying Oseltamivir capsules by importing the 
same from their corporate set up.   The other Company, viz. NATCO has only 
formulation capability of the capsules based on Oseltamivir API.  The 
Committee ack nowledge the efforts made by the Private Sector in 
producing/supplying medicines for the treatment of Swine flu.  They are, 
however,  disappointed to find that there is no move on the part of the 
Government to produce the Oseltamivir medicine through their  PSUs on the 
plea of it being not economically viable.  The Committee are not convinced by 
the Government’s, logic since production of one specific thing which is 
commercially/economically viable for one Sector cannot be otherwise for 
another Sector, more so when the Private Sector does not opt for anything that 
is economically un -viable.  In Committee’s view, cost alone cannot be always 
the prime factor particularly when dealing with a pandemic situation like Swine 
Flu which has taken so many precious live s.  Moreover, the Committee dread a 
situation where the Private Sector, for some unforeseen circumstances, is not 
able to produce Oseltamivir at all or curtail its production and the Government 
have no contingency plan in place to deal with the situation.  Prudence,  
therefore, requires the Government to gear up their preparedness to ensure 
availability of Oseltamivir medicine in any eventuality, notwithstanding the 
commercially viability factor. As it is life saving drug, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals should entrust to one of its PSUs the job of production of 
Oseltamivir despite the same being unviable.  Such company should be 
compensated suitably, if necessary, through budgetary grant.  
 
(Recommendation No.10) 
 

54. The Committee note that sufficient q uantities of the Tamiflu drug have 
been given to the State Governments to ensure its availability in all the 
treatment centres and there is reportedly no gap in the demand and supply of 
the medicine.  However, in  view of the rare nature of the raw materia l used to 
produce Tamiflu, the Committee would like the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
to initiate a survey on their own to assess the situation instead of waiting for the 
State governments to bring to the Department’s notice any gap in the demand 
and supply of Tamiflu. This is all the more necessary to avert the wastage of the 
precious medicine in view of having adequate buffer stock in anticipation. 
 
(Recommendation No.11) 
 
 
 
 

55. The Committee have been given to understand that the medicine (Tamiflu) 
can also be used for the treatment of avian/seasonal influenza/flu.  Hence, the 
possibility of Tamiflu drug being administered to the patients having Swine Flu 
like symptoms without waiting for the confirmation of the presence of the H1N1 
virus in them cannot be entirely ruled out.  In such a situation, onus lies with the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to 
take suitable measures to ensure that the drug meant for the treatment of Swine 
flue is used appropriately only after confirming the presence of H1N1 virus in 
the flu/influenza affected people.   
 
(Recommendation No.12) 
 
 
 
 

56. The Committee observe that the NPPA have issued an order under the 
Essential Commodities Act directing the six known manufacturers and any 
other company providing Oseltamivir based formulation packs, to furnish a 
daily report on the quantitative details of Oseltamivir API and Oseltamivir based 
formulation packs to which the manufacturers are complying.  The Committee 
wish that this order is being complied with in letter and spirit.  While India is not 
only stated to be  self sufficient in the production  of Oseltimivir capsule but 
also exporting the same to various developing countries as well as to France, a 
developed country.  According to t he Department of Pharmaceuticals, the 
Directorate General of Foreign Trade monitors the export of medicines on 
weekly basis. The Committee, however, would like the Government to ensure 
that the export of such vital medicine does not affect the easily avail ability for 
indigenous consumption. 
 
(Recommendation No.13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

57. The Committee understand that an indigenous vaccine for prevention of 
Swine Flu is likely to be introduced in the market by March 2010.  Before that 
some international manufacturing com panies may launch their own  vaccines 
for which the Government are in dialogue with all the international 
manufacturing companies for procuring interim quota for front line health 
workers to protect them against Swine Flu.  The Committee are of the 
considered view that the steps taken by the Department of Health Research and 
ICMR for indigenous production of vaccine as well as for procuring ad hoc  
quota with the international manufacturers especially for front line health 
workers are measures in the right d irection and should be expeditiously 
persisted with.  The Committee further desire that the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, the Department of Health Research, ICMR and Department of 
Biotechnology should make concerted efforts to make the indigenous 
production of Swine Flu vaccine a big success to nip the disease in the bud. 
 
(Recommendation No.14) 
 

58. The Committee have been informed by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals and the Department of Health and Family Welfare that Swine 
Flu cannot be combated in isolation as prevention and treatment of Swine Flu is 
a multidisciplinary approach.  In this context, the Committee find that while the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are closely associated with the prevention 
and treatment of Swine Flu, the productio n and the availability of Tamiflu is the 
concern of the Department of Pharmaceuticals.  The Ministries of Commerce 
and Industry and Finance are also closely associated with the import and export 
of Shikimic  Acid used for the finished product, i.e. Oseltamivir.  Further, the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development have also been entrusted with the 
responsibility to ensure that the Guidelines issued by the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare in schools are properly implemented.  The Committee also note 
that the role of the Department of Animal Husbandry is also solicited to ward off 
any possibility of bird flu being contrued as Swine Flu.  However, what concerns 
the Committee is the admission of the Department of Pharmaceuticals that there 
is some overlappin g in the allocation of the role and responsibilities to the 
different Ministries/Departments.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that there 
should be proper coordination and cooperation among various 
Ministries/Departments while pursuing a common cause.  The Committee would 
again like the Government to ensure that all the concerned 
Ministries/Departments work in tandem so that the multidisciplinary task 
assigned to them to combat Swine Flu are performed with utmost finesse.  They, 
therefore, recommend that a task force comprising senior representatives of all 
the concerned ministries / departments / organizations / research agencies 
should meet periodically and monitor such pandemic situation continuously to 
ensure easy and affordable medicines to all thos e who need it.  Appropriate 
urgent attention is also required with a view to taking suitable steps as there are 
reports of mutation of H1N1 virus. 
(Recommendation No.15) 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                   ANANTH KUMAR 
10 December 2009                    Chairman,  
19 Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on  
               Chemicals & Fertilizers. 

 
APPENDIX-IV 
EXTRACT OF MINUTES 
 
SECOND SITTING 
 
(16.09.2009) 
 
 The Committee sat from 1430 hours to 1700 hours. 
Present 
 
Shri Ananth Kumar  - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Smt. Sushmita Bauri  
3. Shri Prabhatsinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri K. D. Deshmukh 
5. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
6. Shri Madhu Koda 
7. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup 
8. Shri Baidyanath Prasad Mahato 
9. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar 
10. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
11. Shri Tufani Saroj 
12. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
13. Shri N. Cheluvaraya Swamy 
14. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri J. D. Seelam 
16. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
17. Dr. C. P. Thakur 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
Shri Brijlal Khabri 
Shri Mahendra Sahni 
Shri Raj Mohinder Singh Majitha 
Shri Biswajit Daimary 
 
 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Shri N. K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P. Sreedharan   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri C. S. Joon   - Director 
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava   -   Deputy Secretary 
5. Smt. Balwant Kaur Saimbhi - Deputy Secretary 
 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
1. Shri Ashok Kumar,   Secretary 
2. Shri Mathew C. Kunnumkal, Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser 
3. Shri Devendra Chaudhry,  Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Arun Jha,   Joint Secretary 
 

II. MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE 
 
1. Sh. Vineet Chaudhry,  Joint Secretary 
 
III. REPRESENTATIVES OF NATIONAL PHARMACEUTICAL PRICING 
AUTHORITY (NPPA) 
 
1. Shri A.K. Banerjee,  Chairman 
2. Shri  Om Prakash,   Member Secretary 
3. Sh. A.K Singhal,   Adviser (Pricing) 
4. Shri P. V. Rajeev Sebastian, Economic Adviser 
5. Dr. A. K. Vishandass,  Deputy Director General 
 
IV. REPRESENTATIVES  OF PSUS / AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTION 
 
1. Shri T. K. Ranganathan,  Managing Director, 
Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. 
 
2. Dr. Ms. Jayshree Gupta,  Chairman & Mg. Director, 
Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 
 
3. Shri S. Kundu,   Managing Director, 
Bengal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 
 
4. Shri R. K. Vashistha,  Managing Director, 
Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 
 
5. Shri S.L. Phadke,   Chairman & Mg. Director, 
Karnataka Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 
 
6. Dr. P. Ramarao,   Director, 
National Institute of Pharmaceuticals 
Education & Research 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. 
3. Thereafter, he called the officials of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals), the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and the 
Public Sector Undertakings and invited their attention to the provisions contained in 
Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of the 
Committee‟s proceedings. 
4. Then the officials of the Ministries and the PSUs introduced themselves. 
Thereafter, the Joint Secretaries of the Department of Pharmaceuticals gave au dio-
visual presentations on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) as well as on the subject 
`Production and availability of medicines to deal with Swine Flu‟.  During the audio -
visual presentations, the Chairman raised certain queries which were replied to by the 
Secretary and other officials of the Department of Pharmaceuticals.   
 

5. Subsequent to the power-point presentations, the Chairman and members of the 
Committee raised some questions which were answered by the Secretary (Department 
of Pharmaceuticals), Join t Secretary (M/O Health & Family Welfare) and Chairman 
(NPPA). They also promised to furnish the requisite information in writing which was 
not readily available with them.  Apart from various aspects concerning Swine Flu, the 
following issues related to the Department of Pharmaceuticals were discussed :- 
XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX 
 
6.  XX   XX   XX 
XX   XX   XX 
7. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
XX Matters not related to this Report 

APPENDIX-V 
 
EXTRACT OF MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2009-10) 
 
 
TENTH SITTING 
(10.12.2009) 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1600 hours. 
Shri Ananth Kumar  - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Smt. Sushmita Bauri 
3. Shri Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar 
4. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup 
5. 
6. 
Shri Poonam Prabhakar 
Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Ashok Sarin - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C. S. Joon - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava - Deputy Secretary 
   
2. At the outset Hon‟ble Chairman welcome the members to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following draft Reports 
on: 
(i) xxx xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx 
(ii) Production and Availability of Medicines to deal with Swine Flue.  
4. The draft Reports were adopted by the Committee with minor amendments. 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes, if 
any, arising out of the factual verification of the Reports by the Ministry of Chem icals 
and Fertilizers   xxx   xxx     xxx and (Department of Pharmaceuticals) and present the 
same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
   The Committee then adjourned. 

APPENDIX-VI 
 
 
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
Reco. 
No. 
Para 
No. 
Recommendations/ observations 
1 44 The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals‟ are 
engaged in the production and availability of drugs for the treatment of 
Swine flu.  With the cooperation of the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, they are regularly monitoring the availability position of Shikimic 
acid and Oseltamivir API which are used for the production of drug i.e. 
Oseltamivir or Tamiflu and Oseltamivir capsules.  The Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare have also procured stoc ks of drugs at the instance of 
the Department of Pharmaceuticals. Six pharma companies have 
volunteered to maintain adequate quantity of drugs to deal with Swine flu.  
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have also permitted the retail 
sale of Oseltam ivir capsules w.e.f. 19 September 2009.  However, 
regarding the price control of the drug meant for the treatment of Swine 
flu, the Committee observe that the Pharmaceutical Companies have 
been given liberty to sell the medicine at a price decided by them though 
within a “reasonable limit”.  The Committee feel that reasonable limit is 
too broad and vague a term which could be conveniently manipulated by 
the Pharmaceutical Companies for their own gain and at the cost of the 
common man.  Further, chances of m edicines for the treatment of Swine 
flu becoming costlier can not be ruled out in view of the high volatility of 
the prices of raw material, especially when these are imported from 
China.  Thus, in such a scenario, leaving the pharma industry to fix the 
price of the medicines on their own, albeit within a reasonable limit, does 
not seem to be an appropriate decision.  While appreciating the initiatives 
taken by the Department in persuading the Ministry of Finance for 
exemption of Customs Duty on Oseltamivir  and Shikimic acid and Excise 
Duty on indigenously produced Oseltamivir API and capsules, the 
Committee recommend that the Government should initiate immediate 
appropriate measures to ensure easy availability as well as affordability of 
the medicines for e ffective treatment of Swine flu, particularly in view of 
increase in cases with the onset of winter. 
 
2 45  The Committee note that three types of preventive measures have 
been taken by the Government to check the spread of Swine flu.  These 
are: (i)screening at Airports, sea ports and six international check points 
(ii) Early detection – issuing guidelines for opening large number of 
screening centres and (iii) Quarantine measures.  However, most of the 
centres/agencies which are supposed to implement th e above measures 
fall under the purview of the Ministry of Health and family Welfare.  The 
role of the Department of Pharmaceuticals in this regard is confined only 
to make available medicines for quarantine purpose.  Thus, the overall 
responsibility of th e Ministry of Health and Family Welfare increases 
manifold to ensure meaningful and effective implementation of the 
measures adopted to prevent the spread of Swine flu.  Nevertheless, the 
role and responsibilities of the Department of Pharmaceuticals in th is 
regard are no less important as they have been entrusted with the task of 
making available medicines for quarantine purpose which is meant for the 
medical and para-medical staff who are prone to be affected by the H1N1 

virus.  Needless to say, both the Ministries should, therefore, act in unison 
so that the objectives of the measures initiated to contain the spread of 
Swine flu are truly achieved. 
 
3 46  The Committee are highly concerned to note that although 
Maharashtra has reported maximum number of Swine flu cases, it has 
only three Laboratories to detect such cases.  In this regard the 
Committee find that Delhi which ranks number two in reported Swine flu 
cases and Tamil Nadu which has reported fewer cases of Swine flu has 
seven Laboratories each wh ereas other States have either one or two 
Laboratories.  The Committee feel that several cases of Swine flu in 
various States might have remained undetected for want of adequate 
Laboratories/detection centres.  They, therefore, impress upon the 
Ministry of  Chemicals and Fertilisers to take up the matter at the 
appropriate level urgently so that sufficient number of Laboratories are set 
up especially in Swine flu vulnerable States/UTs, for early detection and 
timely treatment of such pandemic disease.  As so me States have only 
one or two Laboratories, the Committee recommend that Private 
Laboratories may be appropriately encouraged to supplement the efforts 
of the Government for detection of Swine flu cases. 
 
4 
 
47  The Committee note that though the Ministr y of Health and Family 
Welfare have issued Guidelines to the educational institutions, 
laboratories and hospitals to take adequate preventive measures against 
the spread of Swine flu pandemic in the country, the moot point is 
whether such Guidelines are be ing followed in letter and spirit.  The 
Committee are apprehensive of their proper adherence since the Ministry 
have nowhere mentioned any mechanism to monitor effective 
implementation of the Guidelines.  They are, therefore, of the view that 
mere issuance  of Guidelines will serve no purpose unless a system is 
developed to get appropriate feedback on the implementation aspect 
based on which further follow up action can be taken.  Since there has 
been a rapid increase in Swine flu cases recently, the Committ ee would 
like the Ministry of Health to examine whether the issued Guidelines need 
a revision.  For instance, instead of discouraging people not affected with 
the H1N1 virus to visit crowded places like Cinema Halls and Shopping 
Malls appeal could be made to the people affected with or having 
symptoms of Swine flu to exercise self -restraint in not visiting crowded 
places/offices/schools/colleges in the interest of their fellow citizens. 
 
5 48 The Committee note that Oseltamivir is also given to family members who 
come into contact with a patient to break the transmission cycle and to 
provide protection to the individual.  To effectively combat the menace of 
Swine Flu in the country, more so during the recent spurt of the disease in 
the national capital, the  Committee would urge upon all the concerned 
agencies to ensure that the system of giving Oseltamivir to the close 
contacts of the Swine flue affected individuals is encouraged proactively 
so that the transmission cycle of the H1N1 virus is countered. 
 
6 49  The Committee note that the medicine for the treatment of Swine 
flu is made from Shikimic Acid which is extracted from the seeds of Star 
Anise (illicium vernum) an evergreen Chinese plant.  Besides Star Anise, 
Shikimic Acid is also produced from the leaves of Ginkgo Biloba tree.  For 
Shikimic acid India is dependent on China because plants from which 
Shikimic Acid is extracted grow in China.  Moreover, availability of 
Shikimic Acid depends upon the seasonal output of Star Anise crop.  

What concerns the Committee is the fact that both the raw materials i.e. 
Star Anise and leaves of Ginkgo Biloba tree are in short supplies, as 
admitted by the Department.  However, they draw consolation from the 
Department‟s statement that some alternate and sustainable sou rces are 
being explored to produce medicines for the treatment of Swine flu.  As a 
result, ICMR is conducting research to produce this drug in the country 
through non -Shikimic route.  NIPER, Mohali has also submitted a 
Research proposal for producing Oselt amivir from an alternate route.  
The Committee recommend that the Government should extend all 
possible help to these Research Organisations in their endeavour besides 
encouraging other similar premium institutions to follow suit so that any 
crisis in futu re regarding the availability of medicines for the treatment of 
Swine flu is averted.   
 
7 50 . It is a matter of serious concern that the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has not kept track of the means adopted by other 
countries like USA and Mexico to cope  with the availability of Shikimic 
Acid or measures taken by them to find alternate route for production of 
Oseltamivir.  As it has been established that the H1N1 virus has 
penetrated India from foreign land, it would have been prudent on the part 
of the D epartment to maintain appropriate international data with regard 
to their efforts towards availability/production of Oseltamiviror or 
alternatives thereto.  However, even now it is not too late. The Committee 
impress upon the Department to urgently initiat e a study to gauge the 
dependency of other countries upon China for Shikimic Acid and the 
alternate route, if any, adopted by them to produce Oseltamivir.  The 
Committee are confident that  a comparative assessment would 
immensely help the Research Organis ations like ICMR and NIPER in 
their endeavours towards making India self -sufficient  in producing 
Oseltamivir medicine to counter Swine flu. 
 
8 51  The Committee express their displeasure over the fact that details 
are reportedly not available with the Di rectorate General of Commercial 
Intelligence (DGCIS), Kolkata regarding the quality and value of 
medicines and Shikimic Acid imported on the plea that there is no specific 
code for Swine Flu in the classification system.  They also express their 
unhappiness since similar information which was also sought from the 
Department of Revenue by the Department of Pharmaceuticals has not 
been furnished.  The Committee would like to point out that when so 
many Ministries/Departments have been entrusted with the respo nsibility 
to check the spread of Swine Flu, there must be a proper coordination 
and cooperation amongst themselves to perform the respective assigned 
task effectively.  But, in the instant case, despite the efforts of the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals to g et relevant information, the other 
concerned Ministries/Departments did not oblige.  The Committee take a 
strong exception to the callouness on the part of the Department of 
Revenue on such an important issue and recommend that henceforth any 
information sought by one Department from the other should invariably be 
furnished in a time bound manner in order to facilitate further follow up 
action for dealing with Swine Flu. The Committee direct the Department 
of Revenue to institute an internal enquiry to fix the responsibility for this 
negligence and take punitive action against the erring officials.  The 
Committee advocate the need for a close coordination and cooperation at 
sufficiently high level amongst all the concerned Ministries/Departments 
and desire the Department of Pharmaceuticals to play a proactive role in 
the process. 

 
9 52  The Committee are perturbed to note the self contradictory reply 
given by the Department of Pharmaceuticals in respect of the hoarding of 
Shikimic Acid by the traders.  At on e place it has been stated that the 
possibility of hoarding of Shikimic Acid cannot be ruled out in view of it 
being under the Open General Licence (OGL) policy whereas, elsewhere 
it has been mentioned that the Open Licence Policy would prevent any 
monopolistic facilities such as hoarding.  The two statements need to be 
reconciled.  The Committee desire that if according to the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, there is any loophole in the existing OGL policy which 
might be taken advantage of by the traders to  hoard Shikimic Acid, they 
should take up the matter with the Department of Commerce to revise the 
Licence Policy so as to make it transparent and foolproof in order to ward 
off any possibility of hoarding of Shikimic Acid.   
 
10 53  The Committee note th at at present the Government do not have 
any plan to get into the production of Oseltamivir API through Central 
Public Sector Enterprises (CPSE) for the reason that they have not found 
it economically viable for the PSUs at this stage to enter into production of 
the drug.  In this context, the Committee find that six private 
Pharmaceutical Companies are engaged in the supply of Oseltamivir 75 
mg capsules in the country.  Four of these companies, viz. Hetero Drugs, 
Cipla, Ranbaxy and Strides Areolab have fac ilities for indigenous 
production of Oseltamivir from its raw material i.e. Shikimic Acid.  Out of 
the remaining two Companies, Roche has no local production in India and 
is supplying Oseltamivir capsules by importing the same from their 
corporate set up.   The other Company, viz. NATCO has only formulation 
capability of the capsules based on Oseltamivir API.  The Committee 
acknowledge the efforts made by the Private Sector in 
producing/supplying medicines for the treatment of Swine flu.  They are, 
however,  disappointed to find that there is no move on the part of the 
Government to produce the Oseltamivir medicine through their PSUs on 
the plea of it being not economically viable.  The Committee are not 
convinced by the Government‟s, logic since production of one specific 
thing which is commercially/economically viable for one Sector cannot be 
otherwise for another Sector, more so when the Private Sector does not 
opt for anything that is economically un -viable.  In Committee‟s view, cost 
alone cannot be alwa ys the prime factor particularly when dealing with a 
pandemic situation like Swine Flu which has taken so many precious 
lives.  Moreover, the Committee dread a situation where the Private 
Sector, for some unforeseen circumstances, is not able to produce 
Oseltamivir at all or curtail its production and the Government have no 
contingency plan in place to deal with the situation.  Prudence,  therefore, 
requires the Government to gear up their preparedness to ensure 
availability of Oseltamivir medicine in any e ventuality, notwithstanding the 
commercially viability factor. As it is life saving drug, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals should entrust to one of its PSUs the job of production of 
Oseltamivir despite the same being unviable.  Such company should be 
compensated suitably, if necessary, through budgetary grant.  
 
11 54  The Committee note that sufficient quantities of the Tamiflu drug 
have been given to the State Governments to ensure its availability in all 
the treatment centres and there is reportedly no  gap in the demand and 
supply of the medicine.  However, in  view of the rare nature of the raw 
material used to produce Tamiflu, the Committee would like the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals to initiate a survey on their own to assess 

the situation instead o f waiting for the State governments to bring to the 
Department‟s notice any gap in the demand and supply of Tamiflu. This is 
all the more necessary to avert the wastage of the precious medicine in 
view of having adequate buffer stock in anticipation. 
 
12 55  The Committee have been given to understand that the medicine 
(Tamiflu) can also be used for the treatment of avian/seasonal 
influenza/flu.  Hence, the possibility of Tamiflu drug being administered to 
the patients having Swine Flu like symptoms withou t waiting for the 
confirmation of the presence of the H1N1 virus in them cannot be entirely 
ruled out.  In such a situation, onus lies with the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to take 
suitable measures to ensure that the drug meant for the treatment of 
Swine flue is used appropriately only after confirming the presence of 
H1N1 virus in the flu/influenza affected people.   
 
13 56  The Committee observe that the NPPA have issued an order 
under the Essential Commodi ties Act directing the six known 
manufacturers and any other company providing Oseltamivir based 
formulation packs, to furnish a daily report on the quantitative details of 
Oseltamivir API and Oseltamivir based formulation packs to which the 
manufacturers are complying.  The Committee wish that this order is 
being complied with in letter and spirit.  While India is not only stated to 
be  self sufficient in the production  of Oseltimivir capsule but also 
exporting the same to various developing countries as well as to France, 
a developed country.  According to the Department of Pharmaceuticals, 
the Directorate General of Foreign Trade monitors the export of 
medicines on weekly basis. The Committee, however, would like the 
Government to ensure that the export of such vital medicine does not 
affect the easily availability for indigenous consumption. 
 
14 57  The Committee understand that an indigenous vaccine for 
prevention of Swine Flu is likely to be introduced in the market by March 
2010.  Before that some in ternational manufacturing companies may 
launch their own  vaccines for which the Government are in dialogue with 
all the international manufacturing companies for procuring interim quota 
for front line health workers to protect them against Swine Flu.  The  
Committee are of the considered view that the steps taken by the 
Department of Health Research and ICMR for indigenous production of 
vaccine as well as for procuring ad hoc  quota with the international 
manufacturers especially for front line health workers are measures in the 
right direction and should be expeditiously persisted with.  The Committee 
further desire that the Department of Pharmaceuticals, the Department of 
Health Research, ICMR and Department of Biotechnology should make 
concerted efforts to make the indigenous production of Swine Flu vaccine 
a big success to nip the disease in the bud. 
 
15 58  The Committee have been informed by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals and the Department of Health and Family Welfare that 
Swine Flu cannot be combated in isolation as prevention and treatment of 
Swine Flu is a multidisciplinary approach.  In this context, the Committee 
find that while the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare are closely 
associated with the prevention and treatment of Swine Flu, the p roduction 
and the availability of Tamiflu is the concern of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals.  The Ministries of Commerce and Industry and Finance 
are also closely associated with the import and export of Shikimic  Acid 

used for the finished product, i.e. Oseltamivir.  Further, the Ministry of 
Human Resource Development have also been entrusted with the 
responsibility to ensure that the Guidelines issued by the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare in schools are properly implemented.  The 
Committee also note that the role of the Department of Animal Husbandry 
is also solicited to ward off any possibility of bird flu being contrued as 
Swine Flu.  However, what concerns the Committee is the admission of 
the Department of Pharmaceuticals that there is some ov erlapping in the 
allocation of the role and responsibilities to the different 
Ministries/Departments.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that there 
should be proper coordination and cooperation among various 
Ministries/Departments while pursuing a common  cause.  The Committee 
would again like the Government to ensure that all the concerned 
Ministries/Departments work in tandem so that the multidisciplinary task 
assigned to them to combat Swine Flu are performed with utmost finesse.  
They, therefore, recom mend that a task force comprising senior 
representatives of all the concerned ministries / departments / 
organizations / research agencies should meet periodically and monitor 
such pandemic situation continuously to ensure easy and affordable 
medicines to all those who need it.  Appropriate urgent attention is also 
required with a view to taking suitable steps as there are reports of 
mutation of H1N1 virus. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on sale at the 
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 
23034496), Agents appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications  Division, 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi (Tel. 
Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets.  The said information is available on 
website „www.parliamentofindia.nic.in‟.   
 
The Souvenir items with logo of Parli ament are also available at Sales Counter, 
Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi.  The Souvenir items with Parliament 
Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No.23035323), Parliament 
Museum, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.  List of these items are available on 
the website mentioned above.” 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
 
 