1 
 
 
  
 
43 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
OF THE COMMITTEE ON  
‘PRODUCTION AND AVAILABILITY OF PESTICIDES'   
OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS)] 
 
 
FORTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December, 2013 / Agrahayan 1935, (Saka) 
  


2 
 
 
CC&F No. -43 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
OF THE COMMITTEE ON  
‘PRODUCTION AND AVAILABILITY OF PESTICIDES'   
OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2013 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  18.12.2013 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayan 1935, (Saka)  


3 
 
 
iii 
CONTENTS 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-14) …………… 
INTRODUCTION 
Chapter I Report 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply  of the 
Government have not been accepted by the committee and which require 
reiteration 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2013-14) held on 11 December, 2013. 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Sixth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2013 -14) on ‘ Production and 
Availability of Pesticides ’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertil izers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
 
  

4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri S. Alagiri  
3. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
4. Shri P.P. Chauhan  
5. Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
6. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
7. Shri S.K. Nurul Islam 
8. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
9. Shri Paswan Kamlesh  
10. Shri  Amarnath Pradhan 
11. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
12. Shri Tufani Saroj 
13. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
14. Shri Raju Shetti 
15. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
16. Shri  D. Venugopal 
17. Shri Sai Prathap Annayyagari 
18. Vacant 
19.  Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
24. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
26. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
27. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
28.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
29.  Vacant 
30.  Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Nishant Mehra   - Committee Officer 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  

5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (201 3-14) having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present the Forty-Third  
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Gove rnment on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the T hirty-Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (201 3-14) on ' Production and Availability of 
Pesticides'  of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertiliz ers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals).  
 
2. The T hirty-Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 6 August, 2013.   The Action 
Taken Replies of Government to all observ ations/recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 6 November , 2013.   The Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (201 3-14) considered the Action Taken Report and adopted the same at 
their sitting held on 11 December, 2013. 
 
3. An ana lysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommen dations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
   11 December, 2013                                                    GOPINATH MUNDE 
   20 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                                          Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

6 
 
 
REPORT       
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2012-13) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
‘Production and Availability of Pesticides’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and  Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
6.8.2013. In all, the Committee made seven Observations / Recommendations in the said 
Report. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish replies to the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Sixth Report within three months from the date 
of presentation of the Report, i.e. by 7.11.2013. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the seven Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received from  the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals vide their O.M. No. 25016/1/2011-CH-1 
dated 6.11.2013.  Accordingly, the Action Taken  Replies of the Government  have been 
examined and categorized as follows:-  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government- 
 Rec. No. 4                                                          (Total =1) 
            Chapter-II  
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply-  
Rec. No. Nil         (Total =0) 
            Chapter-III  
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration-  
      Rec. No. 3                  (Total=1) 
            Chapter-IV  
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  final replies of the 
Government are still awaited- 
Rec. Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6 and 7.               (Total =5) 
            Chapter-V  

7 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the                    
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter - I   and Final Action Taken 
Replies  to the Observations/Recommendations contained in  Chapter V of this 
Report be furnished expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. Comprehensive legislation for the pesticides sector. 
 
Recommendation No.1 
5. Emphasizing the urgent need for a comprehensive legislation to govern all issues 
relating to pesticides, the Committee had recommended as under:   
                     
“The Committee note that pesticides have played a very important role in enabling 
the Green Revolution thereby making the country self-reliant in food.  However, the 
availability of safe and effective pesticides and their judicious use by the farming 
community is critical to a sustained increase in agricultural production and 
productivity. According to t he Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
(DCPC), they play the role of facilitator for the growth of the industry. Presently, the 
country is self -sufficient in the production of technical pesticides and their 
formulations. The Committee further note that  there is a demarcation of 
responsibilities between DCPC and the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation 
(DAC) with regard to pesticides. While protection against pests and prevention of 
plants diseases and administration of the Insecticides Act, 1968 ar e subjects 
assigned to DAC, the DCPC’s responsibilities confine to issues relating only to the 
production of pesticides. All the  vital issues of pesticides industry such as 
prevention of use of spurious pesticides, quality standards, testing, review of use of 
pesticides, creating awareness about judicious use of pesticides among the farmer 
community and setting up of new testing laboratories in the country and to fix 
maximum residue limits (MRL) are also handled by DAC.  Apart from these two 
Central Departments, enforcement of the Act is also carried out by the respective 
State Governments. According to DCPC, the present division of responsibility is 
appropriate and is working well.   
  The Committee further note that DAC has prepared Pesticides Management 
Bill replacing the Insecticides Act, 1968, to address various issues affecting growth 
of pesticides sector. However, the Committee  regret  to note that   the Bill is yet to 

8 
 
 
be passed by the Rajya Sabha which is under their consideration since October, 
2008. The very fact that the Bill is pending for over a period of 4 years, clearly 
shows the lack of will and the concerted and coordinated efforts on the part of all 
concerned including D CPC.  Needless to say, there is  a rising   public concern in 
recent tim es over the unrestricted use of pesticides in agriculture sector and its 
impact on human beings, animals and the surrounding environment. The 
Committee are of the view that there is an urgent and imperative need for a 
comprehensive legislation to govern all issues relating to pesticides effectively. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should take up the initiative 
and coordinate with DAC and other concerned authorities to bring out a 
comprehensive legislation to govern all issues relatin g to pesticides. The 
Committee would like to know the efforts made by DCPC in this regard.” 
  
Reply of the Government 
  
6. In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, in consultation with the concerned 
Ministries/Departments including DCPC, has already prepared a comprehensive 
Bill titled “Pesticides Management Bill 2008” to address all issues relating to 
pesticides. The Bill has been introduced and under consideration of Parliament.” 
   
Comments of the Committee 
7.  In their report, the Committee had  noted that the Pesticides Management 
Bill prepared by  the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) is still 
pending  for passage in the Rajya Sabha since October, 2008. In this regard, the 
Committee had emphasized the urgent and imperative need for a comprehensive 
legislation to govern all issues relating to pesticides effectively and had 
accordingly recommended that th e Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
should take up the initiative and coordinate with DAC and other concerned 
authorities to bring out a comprehensive legislation to govern all issues relating 
to pesticides.  However, i n its  Action Taken  reply, t he Department has simply 
stated that  the DAC in consultation with the concerned Ministries/Departments 
including DCPC has  already prepared the Pesticides Management Bill 2008  to 
address all issues relating to pesticides and that the Bill has been introduced and 
is under consideration of Parliament.  However, the  Department has  not spelled  

9 
 
 
out the efforts  made  or being made by  them to expedite the process of passage 
of the said Bill which has been pending for the last five years in Rajya Sabha. The  
Committee, therefore, would like to  reiterate their earlier recommendation for 
early passage of the said  legislation on pesticides and  accordingly,  expect the 
Department to  make concerted and coordinated efforts to expedite the passage 
of the Bill . The Committee would like to be apprised of the efforts made or being 
made by the Department in this regard.     
B.      Effective mechanism to assess demand and availability of pesticides. 
Recommendation No. 2 
8.  While emphasizing the need to devise  an effective mechanism to assess demand 
and availability of pesticides, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
“The Committee note that indigenous production of pesticides is more than the 
domestic consumption and a large quantity of pesticides is bei ng exported to 
foreign countries.  However, the consumption of chemical pesticides has declined 
from 75,033 metric tonnes in terms of technical grade in 1990 -91 to 50583 metric 
tonnes in 2011-12 and the use of bio -pesticides in the country has increased fr om 
123 metric tonnes in 1994 -95 to 8110 metric tonnes in 2011 -12. According to the 
Department, managing the pest problem with less number of pesticides is a good 
sign and efforts are being made to encourage introduction of more low volume and 
high efficiency pesticides. The Committee also note that there are wide inter -state 
disparities in the consumption of pesticides. While States like Andhra Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra recorded high consumption of pesticides during 
the year 2011 -12, states lik e  Jharkhand, Odissa, Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal 
and the north eastern states recorded very low consumption of the same during 
the said period. Though the consumption figures for States like Jharkhand and 
Uttaranchal showed improvement in recent times, the total quantity of pesticides 
consumed is still very less. Further, there are wide variations in consumption of  
pesticides in respect of certain states from year to year. For example, while Andhra 
Pradesh recorded a consumption of 1541 metric tonnes of  technical grade 
pesticides during 2007 -08, the same  declined to 1015 MT during 2009 -10. The 
State recorded a huge rise in consumption during 2010 -11 at 8869 MT but 
declined a bit to 8529 MT during 2011 -12. Rajasthan’s consumption figure of 3804 
MT during  2007-08 came down to 1652 MT for 2011 -12. Similarly, states like 
Odisha witnessed a steady decline of consumption of pesticides over the years, 

10 
 
 
from a peak of 1588 MT in 2009 -10 to 491 MT in 2011 -12.  In view of the 
foregoing, the Committee feel that ther e is a need to devise an effective 
mechanism to assess the demand and availability of pesticides in the States in 
terms of formulations so that the accurate and complete data is available with the 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) and thereby  to the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC). There is also a need to analyse 
consumption pattern. This would help the DCPC to plan their production targets for 
pesticides in advance. The Committee, therefore, recommend that initiatives may 
be taken by the DCPC in this direction. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard.” 
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
9.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The demand, availability and consumption of pesticides in the states is being 
assessed by the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) on the basis of 
the information, received from the officers of the State Governments in the Zona l 
Conferences on agricultural inputs, organized by DAC, for Rabi and Kharif 
seasons.” 
   
Comments of the Committee 
10.  The  Committee had  noted  that there is not only wide inter-state disparities 
in the consumption of pesticides but also there is wide variations in consumption 
of  pesticides from year to year  in respect of certain states . The Committee were, 
therefore,  of the view that  an effective mechanism need to be devised  to assess 
the demand and availability of pesticides in the States in terms of formulations so 
that an accurate and complete data is available with the Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation (DAC) and thereby to the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals (DCPC). The Committee had also felt a need to analyse 
consumption pattern. This would help the DCPC to plan their production targets 
for pesticides in advance. The Committee, therefore, recommended that initiatives 
may be taken by the DCPC in this di rection. In its Action Taken Reply , the  
Committee regret to note that  Department has  simply reiterated the existing 
mechanism which is being used to assess the demand, availability and 
consumption of pesticides in the country. It has not elaborated the i nitiatives 

11 
 
 
taken by them in coordination  with   DAC and State Governments to work out an 
effective  mechanism to assess the demand and availability of pesticides in the 
States in terms of formulations . The Committee, therefore,  reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that the Department should take the necessary 
initiatives in pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation in the matter.  
C.  Need for effective oversight and review of price of pesticides.  
Recommendation No. 3 
11.  While noting the absence of any Act or  legal provision for controlling the price of 
pesticides in India , the Committee had emphasised  the need to put in place  a 
mechanism by the Department to regulate and monitor the prices of pesticides  and  
recommended as under:-  
 “The Committee note that the Government do not have any mechanism to 
regulate the  prices of pesticides and the same are determined by market forces of 
demand and supply.  According to the Department, the Insecticides Act contains 
significant provisi ons which facilitate the registration of a large number of 
pesticides manufacturers and formulators, thereby enhancing competition in 
production and prices. However, there is no Act  or legal provision for controlling 
the price of pesticides. The Committee are not convinced with the contention  of 
the Department that the competitive market itself acts as a self -regulating 
mechanism against overcharging. The Committee feel that India bein g a 
agricultural country, the endeavour of the Government should be to supply  the 
farmers with  good quality of pesticides at reasonable price and therefore, the 
determination of prices of pesticides cannot always be left to the market forces of 
demand an d supply. In fact, there is a need for a system whereby effective 
oversight is maintained and the price of pesticides is reviewed by the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals from time to time. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that a mechanism shou ld be put in place by the Department to 
regulate and monitor the prices of pesticides to enable them to supply the same  to 
the farmers at affordable prices. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken by the Department in this regard.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
12.  In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 

12 
 
 
 “The Insecticides Act, 1968, which is administered by the Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC),  regulates the import, manufacture, sale, 
transport, distribution and use of insecticides with a view to prevent risk to human 
beings or animals, and fo r matters connected therewith. There is no provision in 
the Act to regulate and monitor the prices of pesticides.   
 The prices of pesticides are best controlled through competition.  The Act already 
provides for “me -too” registration which increase competition and drives down 
prices of pesticides to reasonable levels.” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
13.   The  Committee had  noted  the fact that the there is no   mechanism to 
regulate the  p rices of pesticides and the same are determined purely by market 
forces of demand and supply. However,  t he Committee were not convinced with 
the contention of the Department that the competitive market itself acts as a self -
regulating mechanism against overcharging. Accordingly, the  Committee had 
recommended that a mechanism should be put in place by the De partment to 
regulate and monitor the prices of pesticides to enable them to supply the same  
to the farmers at affordable prices.  However, the response of the Department in  
its Action Taken Reply  does not reflect their resolve to regulate and monitor the 
prices of pesticides in the country.  According to the Department, the  Act already 
provides for “me -too” registration which increase competition and drives down 
prices of pesticides to reasonable levels. The Committee regret to note that the  
Department has simply repeated their submission  that the   prices of pesticides 
are best controlled through competition instead of  spelling  out their  initiative to 
regulate and monitor the  prices of pesticides. The  Committee, therefore,  
reiterate their   contention that the  determination of prices of pesticides can not 
always be left to the market forces of demand and supply and there is a need for 
an effective system  to maintain an oversight over the price of pesticides . In view 
of this, the  Committee expect from  the   Department  to work out an effective    
mechanism with a view  to regulate and monitor the price of pesticides . The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the 
Department in this regard. 
 
 

13 
 
 
D.  Need for establishmen t of m ore well equipped  pesticides testing 
laboratories.   
Recommendation No. 5 
14.  While noting  that existing pesticides testomg  laboratories at the State and Central 
levels are highly inadequate and there is an  urgent need to establish well equipped 
pesticides testing laboratories  in adequate numbers  all over the country  keeping in view 
the crops grown in the region, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
  “The Committee note  that there are  a total of 71 pesticides testing laboratories in 
the country  which includes 68 State Pesticides Laboratories in 21 States and one  
Union Territory, two  Regional Pesticides Testing  Laboratories at Chandigarh and 
Kanpur  and one  Central Insecticides Laboratory in  Faridabad. The  Committee 
also  note that while the  State like Tamil Nadu have 15 laboratories, other States 
like Assam, Bihar, Kerala, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal  have only one 
laboratory each and t he States like Jharkhand and Meghalaya do not have any 
such  facility at all. The Committee were also informed  that a number of small 
player play a very important role in respect of formulation  and production of 
pesticides in the country. While that brin gs down the cost of pesticides, the same 
increases the incidents of usage of spurious and ineffective pesticides in the 
country.  In fact, the Department have admitted that a large scale usage of 
spurious pesticides is the main issue of concern, which happ ens primarily due to 
inadequate number of accredited pesticides testing laboratories.  
  The Committee, therefore, feel that the existing Pesticides Laboratories at 
the State and Central levels are highly inadequate and  there is an imperative need 
to esta blish well equipped pesticide testing laboratories in adequate numbers in 
each State across the country keeping in view the needs of the crops  grown in the 
region and manned by well trained staff. Accordingly, the Committee recommend 
that the Department s hould initiate appropriate action to get establish well 
equipped pesticide testing laboratories in adequate numbers in each State across 
the country. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Department  in this regard.”    
Reply of the Government 
 
15.  In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 

14 
 
 
“As on date, 68 State Pesticides Testing Laboratories (SPTLs) are working in 
different States with analys is capacity of 71315 samples per annum.  In addition, 
two Regional Pesticides Testing Laboratories (RPTLs) each with a testing 
capacity of 1100 samples per annum, have been established by the Central 
Government to supplement the resources of the State Labs .  One referral lab the 
Central Insecticides Laboratory (CIL) has been established under section 16 of 
the Insecticides Act, 1968 with a testing capacity of 1600 samples per-annum. 
 Funds are provided to states under Central sector scheme ‘Strengthening 
and Modernization of Pest Management Approach in India’ to set up SPTLs and 
State Bio -pesticides Testing Laboratories.  Besides, several States have 
accessed funds under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana to set up pesticides testing 
laboratories.” 
Comments of the Committee 
16.  In their Report, the Committee had observed while some States like Tamil 
Nadu have 15 laboratories, there are many other States that do not have even one. 
Further, a number of small player play a very important role in respect of 
formulation  and production of pesticides in the country. While that brings down 
the cost of pesticides, the same increases the incidents of usage of spurious and 
ineffective pesticides in the country .  The  Committee, therefore,  had felt that the 
existing Pesticides Laboratories at the State and Central levels are highly 
inadequate and  there is an imperative need to establish well equipped pesticide 
testing laboratories in adequate numbers in each State across the country  
keeping in view the needs of the  crops  grown in the region and manned by well 
trained staff. Accordingly, the Committee had recommended that the Department 
should initiate appropriate action to get establish well equipped pesticide testing 
laboratories in adequate numbers in each State across the country. In its Action 
Taken Reply, the Department has stated that funds are provided to states under 
Central sector scheme ‘Strengthening and Modernization of Pest Management 
Approach in India’ to set up State Pesticides Testing Laboratories (S PTLs)  and 
State Bio-pesticides Testing Laboratories.  Besides, several States have accessed 
funds under Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana to set up p esticides testing 
laboratories. However,  the Committee regret to note that  the response of the 
Department  is academic in nature and  highly  inadequate and  unsatisfactory as  
the Department is silent about  the initiatives undertaken by the m in response to 
the recommendation of the Committee .  It has not spelled out the  number of 
additional laboratories set up under the schemes and the States where these have 

15 
 
 
been set up.  Whether all the laboratories are manned by well trained staff  and 
meet the needs of the crops grown in the region. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Department should elaborate the i nitiatives undertaken by them  in 
pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation  and   the  achievements made as 
a result thereof indicating inter-alia the number of STPLs added and the States  
where these have been set up and whether these STPLs meet the req uirement of 
the crops of the region or not.  
E.  Compulsory testing of pesticides.  
Recommendation No. 6 
17.  Expressing deep concern over the fact that under the present arrangement, there 
is no mandatory requirement for checking of pesticides for their spurious content or 
‘misbranding’ at the factory or manufacturers’ level  in the country,   the Committee had 
recommended as under:-   
 “The Committee observe that under the present arrangement, there is no 
mandatory requirement for checking of pesticides fo r their spurious content or 
‘misbranding’ at the factory or manufacturers’ level. The Committee regret to note 
that normally the process to test and inspect pesticides is initiated on the basis of 
complaints from farmers, by which time the pesticides are a lready in the market. 
The very fact that a sizeable number of samples were found spurious during 
testing, clearly shows that the  existing system is  either grossly inadequate or is 
not  strong enough  to monitor and check the quality control  of  pesticid es 
effectively  at every level till it reaches to the farmers for usage.  In fact, during the 
course of evidence, the Secretary of the Department was candid enough to accept 
that there is absence of quality checking mechanism even for major manufacturers 
of pesticides and that they sh ould have looked in to it being  responsible for 
production of pesticides.  Since safe use of pesticides is crucial not only for the 
farmers  in view of increased soil stress due to over use of chemical pesticides but 
for the  s afety of human beings, animals  and  environmental sustainability, the 
Committee are, therefore,  of the firm opinion that existing mechanism needs to  be 
strengthened and made effective and   more vigilant to check any spread of 
spurious  and ineffective pesticide. The Committee, therefore,  recommend that the 
Government should work out a mechanism to make testing of pesticides 
mandatory  at every possible level right from  the factory level till it reach to the 
farmers. Since this would require adequate n umber of testing laboratories and well 
trained Inspectors, the Committee desire that adequate funds may be provided for 

16 
 
 
the purpose. The Committee also feel that there should be   an authority on the 
lines of Drug Controller General of India to oversee  and monitor the manufacturing 
practices of all pesticides plants across the country including those in private 
sector and the  Committee accordingly recommend to constitute such an authority 
for the purpose.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the in itiatives taken 
by the Government  in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
18.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 “Enough provisions exist in the “Insecticides Act, 1968” to control the quality of 
pesticides.  These need to be enforced rigorously.  Central Insecticides Inspectors 
and States Insecticides Inspectors notified under the Insecticides Act draw 
samples on regular basis from manufacturing s ites to retail outlets for testing the 
quality of pesticides. Manufacturing facilities are inspected by state licensing 
authorities before granting license to a company. 
  Further, the “Pesticides Management Bill 2008”, which is under consideration 
of Parl iament, addresses all issues relating to pesticides in a holistic and 
comprehensive manner.”  
 
Comments of the Committee 
19.  The  Committee had noted that  a sizeable number of samples wer e found 
spurious during testing which  clearly shows that the  existing system is  either 
grossly inadequate or is not  strong enough  to monitor and check the quality 
control  of  pesticides effectively  at every level till it reaches to the farmers for 
usage. The  Committee had  also noted th at  the process to test and inspect 
pesticides is initiated only on the basis of complaints from farmers, by which time 
the pesticides are already in the market  for usage. The Committee had, therefore, 
recommended that the Government should work out a mechanism to make testing 
of pesticides mandatory  at every possible level right from  the factory level till it 
reach to the farmers for usage. The  Committee had  also felt  that there should be   
an authority on the lines of  Drug Controller General of Indi a to oversee  and 
monitor the manufacturing practices of all pesticides plants across the country 
including those in private sector . However, the Committee regret to note the 
casual response of the Department in   its A ction Taken Reply  which  does not 

17 
 
 
reflect its  action plan   or the measures taken  or being undertaken  to effectively 
enforce even  the provisions that  exist in the “Insecticides Act, 1968” to control 
the quality of pesticides. The Department is also silent over the Committee’s 
recommendation regarding constitution of  an authority on the lines of Drug 
Controller General of India   to  oversee  and monitor the manufacturing practices 
of all pesticides plants across the country including those in private sector . This 
only  shows the  lackadaisical attitude of the Department  on an important issue   
concerning testing of spurious pesticides rigorously.  The Department  has also 
stated that the “Pesticides Management Bill 2008”, which is under consideration 
of Parliament, addresses all is sues relating to pesticides in a holistic and 
comprehensive manner. However, the Department has not elaborated as to what 
initiatives it has taken to get  expedite the passage of  the Pesticides Management 
Bill 2008 which is pending  in Rajya Sabha for the past several  years. Thus, the 
response of  the  Department   is grossly inadequate and highly unsatisfactory. In 
view of the foregoing, the  Committee, therefore,  reiterate its recommendation to 
work out an effective mechanism to make testing of pesticid es mandatory at 
every possible level and to constitute an authority on the lines of Drug Controller 
General of India to oversee and monitor the manufacturing practices of all 
pesticides plants across the country. The Committee  would like to be  apprised of 
the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard.  
F.  Awareness training programme on use of pesticides.   
Recommendation No. 7 
20.  Expressing the urgent need to frame a policy for periodic checks to detect 
pesticides residue in vegetables and fruits and the need to create awareness amongst  
the farmers regarding judicious use of pesticides,  the Committee had recommended as 
under:-  
  “The Committee observe that there are certain pesticides which are banned in some 
 countries but are used in Indi a. On the other hand, there are also pesticides which are 
 banned in India but their consumption is allowed in countries like Japan or USA.  
 According to the Department, the requirement of pesticides vary from country to country 
 depending upon climate an d crops grown and therefore, what is needed in one country 
 may not be required at all in other  countries. Further, the Committee were informed that 
 DAC are regularly monitoring the pesticide residues in food commodities and 
 environmental samples under the Central sector scheme “Monitoring of Pesticide 
 Residues at National Level” which was initiated during 2005 -2006. Since the inception of 
 the scheme, a large  number of   samples of vegetables and fruits were collected and 

18 
 
 
 analysed for the possible pr esence of pesticide residues across various parts of the 
 country and detected pesticide residues in significant numbers of samples out of which 
 certain samples contained residues above their Maximum Residue Limit (MRL).  It was 
 also informed that the Central Government  have also constituted a committee in June, 
 2012 under the Chairmanship of a Deputy Director General of Ministry of Health to frame 
 a policy for periodic check to detect pesticides residues in vegetables and frui ts. The 
 Committee would like that the formulation of the said policy framework may be expedited 
 for which DCPC may coordinate with DAC, Ministry of Health and other stakeholders.  
 Further, the findings of some research studies indicate the relationship between extent of 
 pesticide use and signs and symptoms of illness. Apprehensions were also raised about 
 the adverse effect of Endosulfan on human beings. Accordingly to DCPC, pesticides 
 should be used by the farmers judiciously and strategically in less er quantity and as far 
 as possible they should use bio -pesticides and chemical pesticides should be used only 
 as a last resort. The Committee also note that the DCPC as such does not directly play 
 any role in educating the farmers regarding application of pesticides and the same is 
 assigned to the Agriculture Department, particularly of the States. However, PSUs (such 
 as HIL) and Autonomous Bodies (such as IPFT), on their own organise programmes on 
 safe and judicious use of pesticides.  However, the C ommittee are of the view that the 
 Department cannot absolve themselves of their responsibilities in this regard and they 
 should accordingly involve themselves in coordinating and organizing events to educate 
 the farmers regarding proper and safe use of pesticides on various crops. The farmers 
 should also be educated about the possible ill effects on human beings and surrounding 
 environment as a result of improper usage and handling of pesticides. In this context, 
 farmers should also be given intensive  training on regular basis.  The Committee, 
 therefore, recommend that intensive awareness, training and educational programmes 
 amongst the farmers about the safe and  judicious use of pesticides for their crops  
 should be launched by the Department in co ordination with all concerned.  The 
 Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 Reply of the Government 
 
21.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 “Training programmes on safe and judicious use of pesticides are being organized 
by Central Integrated Pest Management Centres and State Government s to 
educate farmers. DCPC, in association with industry stakeholders l ike Crop Care 
Federation etc., organizes seminars about safe practices about judicious use of 
pesticides. 

19 
 
 
  Further, Hindustan Insecticides Ltd.,(HIL), a CPSE of DCPC, also regularly 
organizes such programmes. During the last two years, HIL conducted programmes 
in 5 districts in Assam, 2 districts in Meghalaya, 3 districts in Odisha, 5 districts in 
West Bengal, and 10 districts in Chhatisgarh, apart from Patna in Bihar.” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
22.  The Committee had noted the possible presence of pesticides residues in 
fruits and vegetables and their ill effects on human beings and had recommended 
that intensive awareness, training and educational programmes amongst the 
farmers about the safe and  judicious use of pesticides for their crops  should be 
launched by the Department in coordination with all concerned. The Committee 
had also noted that   the C entral Government  have constituted a committee in 
June, 2012 under the Chairmanship of a Deputy Director General of Ministry of 
Health to frame a policy for periodic check to detect pesticides residues in 
vegetables and fruits. In this regard, the Committ ee had desired the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals to coordinate with the DAC, Ministry of Health and 
other stakeholders for expediting the said policy framework.  In its A ction Taken 
Reply, the Department explained that training programmes on sa fe and judicious 
use of pesticides are being organized by Central Integrated Pest Management 
Centres and State Governments to educate farmers.  DCPC, in association with 
industry stakeholders like Crop Care Federation etc., also organizes seminars 
about saf e practices and  judicious use of pesticides.  Further, Hindustan 
Insecticides Ltd. (HIL), a CPSE of DCPC, also regularly organizes such 
programmes. The Department has also stated that d uring the last two years, HIL 
conducted programmes in 5 districts in Assam, 2 districts in Meghalaya, 3 districts 
in Odisha, 5 districts in West Bengal, and 10 districts in Chhatisgarh, apart from 
Patna in Bihar . However, the Committee note that the Department has not 
elaborated the role played by them in organizing such semin ars and the response 
of the farmers of  the area  to such programmes/seminars . Further, the number of 
such programmes/seminars  organised by  HIL and others seem to be significantly 
very low limited to certain parts of the Country. The Committee , therefore,  feel 
that such programmes or seminars should be  organ ised in large numbers  to 
cover the entire length and breadth of the country. Further, efforts should be made 
to encourage every farmers of the area  to attend such programmes/seminars with 
a view to educate themselves about the judicious use of pesticides. The 
Committee also note that the  Department is  silent about the status of the policy 

20 
 
 
framework  to be framed by the committee constituted in June 2012 for periodic  
check to detect pesticides residues in vegetables and fruits . In view of the 
foregoing, the C ommittee expect from the Department  to act accordingly and the 
Committee may be apprised of the initiatives  taken by them in organizing 
programmes/seminars to create awareness about  the judicious use of pesticides 
amongst the farmers  across the country and  about the present status of the 
policy framework  as mentioned above at the earliest.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
  The Committee note that the Hindustan Insecticides Ltd. (HIL)  is the only public 
sector undertaking which makes pesticides in the country and 40% of their turn over 
cover from the DDT which is sold to the Ministry  of Health for malaria eradication 
programme known as National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme. According to 
the Department, the facility of DDT plant can not be utilized for manufacturing any other 
product. The Committee also note that  DDT manufacturing plant are lying idle for most of 
the time as there is only limited order for DDT from the Ministry of Health which is the only 
customer in the country.  However, the additional capacity of the DDT plant is utilized to 
export to Africa and other coun tries. HIL have also undertaken the Research and 
Development activities to  bring down the cost of production by using cheaper alternatives 
with out sacrificing the quality. HIL has also ventured in to alternative methods of disease 
vector control  like ma nufacture of synthetic  pyrethroids etc. apart from looking at other 
emerging options like Long Lasting Insecticidal  treated mosquito nets (LLIN)  and 
appropriate  technology for its production. The Committee further note that as per the 
direction of the Apex Court, HIL has stopped the production of Endosulfan on the ground 
that Endosulfan is health hazard to human beings as well as causing   environmental 
pollution.  While the production of Endosulfan rests with in the scope and purview of 
DCPC, the searc h for alternatives to the banned pesticide comes under the scope of 
DAC. The Committee also note that Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT), 
is primarily engaged in R&D activities. While welcoming the efforts made by HIL, to bring 
down the c ost of production by using cheaper but quality alternatives, the Committee 
recommend that HIL should augment its efforts for development and  production of safe, 
economical and environment friendly  alternatives in a time bound manner in coordination 
with all concerned including IPFT and if felt necessary, adequate funds should be 
allocated and invested  in Research and Development (R&D) activities  and technological 
innovation  by the Department in order to achieve the desired results expeditiously. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
   
Reply of the Government 
 
  (i) HIL has informed that new formulations are getting registered in India in the 
form of    water dispersible granules/suspension concentrates/ capsulated suspension 

22 
 
 
which are safe and environment friendly.  Besides this, many existing generic pesticides 
molecules are also getting converted to safer and eco -friendly formulations.  HIL has 
already taken action to put up a suspension concentrate manufacturing facility for which 
funds have been sought from the Ministry.  This proposal has also been approved b y the 
Board.  The feasibility for putting up own manufacturing facility for water dispersible 
granule and capsulated suspension is being explored. 
 
  (ii) IPFT has taken up a project entitled “Development of user and environment 
friendly Water Dispersible Granule (WDG) Formulations of highly toxic, broad spectrum 
& effective pesticides to reduce their toxicity for continuation of use and prevention from 
ban” from the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals at a cost of Rs. 65.46 lakhs in 
XII Five Year Plan. The project will help in reducing the mammalian toxicity compared to 
commonly used Emulsifiable Concentrate / Soluble Concentrate (EC/SL) formulations of 
these pesticides. By developing new, safer formulations and reducing the toxicity on non-
target  organism, these molecules, which are very effective in pest management, may be 
saved and protected from ban.   
  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No. 25016/1/2011-CH-1-Vol.II dated 6.11.2013 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT WANT 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
-- NIL-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
  
Recommendation No. 3 
 The Committee note that the Government do not have any mechanism to regulate 
the  p rices of pesticides and the same are determined  by market forces of demand and 
supply.  According to the Department, the Insecticides Act contains significant provisions 
which facilitate the registration of a large number of pesticides manufacturers and 
formulators, thereby enhancing competition in pro duction and prices. However, there is 
no Act or  legal provision for controlling the price of pesticides. The Committee are not 
convinced with the contention  of the Department that the competitive market itself acts as 
a self-regulating mechanism against overcharging. The Committee feel that India being a 
agricultural country, the endeavour of the Government should be to supply  the farmers 
with  good quality of pesticides at reasonable price and therefore, the determination of 
prices of pesticides cannot always be left to the market forces of demand and supply. In 
fact, there is a need for a system whereby effective oversight is maintained and the price 
of pesticides is reviewed by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals from time 
to time. The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that a mechanism should be put in place 
by the Department to regulate and monitor the prices of pesticides to enable them to 
supply the same  to the farmers at affordable prices. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard.  
Reply of the Government  
            The Insecticides Act, 1968, which is administered by the Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC),  regulates the import, manufacture, sale, transport, 
distribution and use of insecticides with a view to prevent risk to human beings or 
animals, and for matters connected therewith. There is no provision in the Act to regulate 
and monitor the prices of pesticides.   
 The prices of pesticides are best controlled through comp etition.  The Act already 
provides for “me -too” registration which increase competition and drives down prices of 
pesticides to reasonable levels. 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No. 25016/1/2011-CH-1-Vol.II dated 6.11.2013 
   
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

25 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
  
Recommendation No. 1 
   The Committee note that pesticides have played a very important role in enabling 
the Green Revolution  thereby making the country self -reliant in food .  However, the 
availability of safe and effective pesticides and their judicious use by the farming 
community is critical to a sustained increase in agricultural production and productivity. 
According to t he Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC), they play the 
role of facilitator for the growth of the industry. Presently, the country is self -sufficient in 
the production of technical pesticides and their formulations. The Committee further note 
that there is a demarcation of responsibilities between DCPC and the Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) with regard to pesticides. While protecti on against 
pests and prevention of plants diseases and administration of the Insecticides Act, 1968 
are subjects assigned to DAC, the DCPC’s responsibilities confine to issues relating only 
to the production of pesticides. All the  vital issues of pesticid es industry such as 
prevention of use of spurious pesticides, quality standards, testing, review of use of 
pesticides, creating awareness about judicious use of pesticides among the farmer 
community and setting up of new testing laboratories in the country  and to fix maximum 
residue limits (MRL) are also handled by DAC.  Apart from these two Central 
Departments, enforcement of the Act is also carried out by the respective State 
Governments. According to DCPC, the present division of responsibility is approp riate 
and is working well.   
 
 The Committee further note that DAC has prepared Pesticides Management Bill 
replacing the Insecticides Act, 1968, to address various issues affecting growth of 
pesticides sector. However, the Committee  regret  to note that   the Bill is yet to be 
passed by the Rajya Sabha which is under their consideration since October, 2008. The 
very fact that the Bill is pending for over a period of 4 years, clearly shows the lack of will 
and the  concerted and coordinated efforts on the part of all concerned including DCPC.  
Needless to say, there is  a rising   public concern in recent times over the unrestricted 
use of pesticides in agriculture sector and its impact on human beings, animals and the 
surrounding environment. The Committee are of the view that there is a n urgent and 
imperative need for a comprehensive legislation to govern all issues relating to pesticides 
effectively. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should take up 

26 
 
 
the initiative and coordinate with DAC and other concerned authorit ies to bring out a 
comprehensive legislation to govern all issues relating to pesticides. The Committee 
would like to know the efforts made by DCPC in this regard.  
  
Reply of the Government 
 Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, in consultation with the concerned 
Ministries/Departments including DCPC, has already prepared a comprehensive Bill titled 
“Pesticides Management Bill 2008” to address all issues relating to pesticides. The Bill 
has been introduced and under consideration of Parliament.  
 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No. 25016/1/2011-CH-1-Vol.II dated 6.11.2013 
    
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation No. 2 
 The Committee note that indigenous production of pesticides is more than the 
domestic consumption and a large quantity of pesticides is being exported to foreign 
countries.  However, the consumption of chemical pesticides has declined from 75,033 
metric tonnes in terms of technical grade in 1990 -91 to 50583 metric tonnes in 2011 -12 
and t he use of bio -pesticides in the country has increased from 123 metric tonnes in 
1994-95 to 8110 metric tonnes in 2011 -12. According to the Department, managing the 
pest problem with less number of pesticides is a good sign and efforts are being made to 
encourage introduction of more low volume and high efficiency pesticides. The 
Committee also note that there are wide inter -state disparities in the consumption of 
pesticides. While States like Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra recorded 
high consumption of pesticides during the year 2011 -12, states like  Jharkhand, Odissa, 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal and the north eastern states recorded very low 
consumption of the same during the said period. Though the consumption figures for 
States like Jharkhand and Uttaranchal showed improvement in recent times, the total 
quantity of pesticides consumed is still very less. Further, there are wide variations in 
consumption of  pe sticides in respect of certain states from year to year. For example, 
while Andhra Pradesh recorded a consumption of 1541 metric tonnes of technical grade 
pesticides during 2007 -08, the same  declined to 1015 MT during 2009 -10. The State 
recorded a huge ri se in consumption during 2010 -11 at 8869 MT but declined a bit to 
8529 MT during 2011 -12. Rajasthan’s consumption figure of 3804 MT during 2007 -08 

27 
 
 
came down to 1652 MT for 2011 -12. Similarly, states like Odisha witnessed a steady 
decline of consumption of pesticides over the years, from a peak of 1588 MT in 2009 -10 
to 491 MT in 2011-12.  In view of the foregoing, the Committee feel that there is a need to 
devise an effective mechanism to assess the demand and availability of pesticides in the 
States in term s of formulations so that the accurate and complete data is available with 
the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) and thereby to the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC). There is also a need to analyse consumption 
pattern. This w ould help the DCPC to plan their production targets for pesticides in 
advance. The Committee, therefore, recommend that initiatives may be taken by the 
DCPC in this direction. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
           The demand, availability and consumption of pesticides in the states is being 
assessed by the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) on the basis of the 
information, received from the officers of the State Governments  in the Zonal 
Conferences on agricultural inputs, organized by DAC, for Rabi and Kharif seasons.   
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No. 25016/1/2011-CH-1-Vol.II dated 6.11.2013 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 The Committee note  that there are  a total of 71 pesticides testing laboratories in 
the country  which includes 68 State Pesticides Laboratories in 21 States and one  Union 
Territory, two  Regional Pesticides Testing  Laboratories at Chandigarh and Kanpur   and 
one  Central Insecticides Laboratory in  Faridabad. The  Committee also  note that while 
the  State like Tamil Nadu have 15 laboratories, other States like Assam, Bihar, Kerala, 
Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal  have only one laboratory each and t he States 
like Jharkhand and Meghalaya do not have any such  facility at all. The Committee were 
also informed  that a number of small player play a very important role in respect of 
formulation  and production of pesticides in the country. While that brin gs down the cost 
of pesticides, the same increases the incidents of usage of spurious and ineffective 
pesticides in the country.  In fact, the Department have admitted that a large scale usage 
of spurious pesticides is the main issue of concern, which happ ens primarily due to 
inadequate number of accredited pesticides testing laboratories.  

28 
 
 
 
 The Committee, therefore, feel that the existing Pesticides Laboratories at the 
State and Central levels are highly inadequate and  there is an imperative need to 
establish well equipped pesticide testing laboratories in adequate numbers in each State 
across the country keeping in view the needs of the crops  grown in the region and 
manned by well trained staff. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that the 
Department s hould initiate appropriate action to get establish well equipped pesticide 
testing laboratories in adequate numbers in each State across the country. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department  in this regard.    
  
Reply of the Government 
  As on date, 68 State Pesticides Testing Laboratories (SPTLs) are working in 
different States with analysis capacity of 71315 samples per annum.  In addition, two 
Regional Pesticides Testing Laboratories (RPTLs) each with a testing capac ity of 1100 
samples per annum, have been established by the Central Government to supplement 
the resources of the State Labs.  One referral lab the Central Insecticides Laboratory 
(CIL) has been established under section 16 of the Insecticides Act, 1968 wi th a testing 
capacity of 1600 samples per-annum. 
 
 Funds are provided to states under Central sector scheme ‘Strengthening and 
Modernization of Pest Management Approach in India’ to set up SPTLs and State Bio -
pesticides Testing Laboratories.  Besides, seve ral States have accessed funds under 
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana to set up pesticides testing laboratories. 
  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No. 25016/1/2011-CH-1-Vol.II dated 6.11.2013 
   
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 6 
  The Committee observe that under the present arrangement, there is no 
mandatory requirement for checking of pesticides for their spurious content or 
‘misbranding’ at the factory or manufacturers’ level. The Committee regret to note that 
normally the process to test and inspect pesticides is initiated on the basis of complaints 
from farmers, by which time the pesticides are already in the market. The very fact that a 
sizeable number of samples were found spurious during testing, clearly shows that the  
existing system is  either grossly inadequate or is not  strong enough  to monitor and 

29 
 
 
check the quality control  of  pesticides effectively  at every level till it reaches to the 
farmers for usage.  In fact, during the course of evidence, the Secretary of the 
Department was candid enough to accept that there is absence of quality checking 
mechanism even for major manufacturers of pesticides and that they should have looked 
in to it being  responsible for production of pesticides.  Since safe use of pesticides i s 
crucial not only for the farmers  in view of increased soil stress due to over use of 
chemical pesticides but for the  safety of human beings, animals  and  environmental 
sustainability, the Committee are, therefore,  of the firm opinion that existing me chanism 
needs to  be strengthened and made effective and   more vigilant to check any spread of 
spurious  and ineffective pesticide. The Committee, therefore,  recommend that the 
Government should work out a mechanism to make testing of pesticides mandator y  at 
every possible level right from  the factory level till it reach to the farmers. Since this 
would require adequate number of testing laboratories and well trained Inspectors, the 
Committee desire that adequate funds may be provided for the purpose. T he Committee 
also feel that there should be   an authority on the lines of  Drug Controller General of 
India to oversee  and monitor the manufacturing practices of all pesticides plants across 
the country including those in private sector and the  Committe e accordingly recommend 
to constitute such an authority for the purpose.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the initiatives taken by the Government  in this regard.  
  
Reply of the Government 
  Enough provisions exist in the “Insecticides Act, 196 8” to control the quality of 
pesticides.  These need to be enforced rigorously.  Central Insecticides Inspectors and 
States Insecticides Inspectors notified under the Insecticides Act draw samples on 
regular basis from manufacturing sites to retail outlets for testing the quality of pesticides. 
Manufacturing facilities are inspected by state licensing authorities before granting 
license to a company. 
 
 Further, the “Pesticides Management Bill 2008”, which is under consideration of 
Parliament, addresses all issues relating to pesticides in a holistic and comprehensive 
manner.  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No. 25016/1/2011-CH-1-Vol.II dated 6.11.2013 
   
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

30 
 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
  The Committee observe that there are certain pesticides which are banned in 
some countries but are used in India. On the other hand, there are also pesticides which 
are banned in India but their consumption is allowed in countries like Japan or USA.  
According to the Department, the requirement of pesticides vary from country to country 
depending upon climate and crops grown and therefore, what is needed in one country 
may not be required at all in other  countries. Further, the Committee were informed that  
DAC are regularly monitoring the pesticide residues in food commodities and 
environmental samples under the Central sector scheme “Monitoring of Pesticide 
Residues at National Level” which was initiated during 2005 -2006. Since the inception 
scheme, a larg e  number of   samples of vegetables and fruits were collected and 
analysed for the possible presence of pesticide residues across various parts of the 
country and detected pesticide residues in significant numbers of samples out of which 
certain samples c ontained residues above their Maximum Residue Limit (MRL).  It was 
also informed that the Central Government  have also constituted a committee in June, 
2012 under the Chairmanship of a Deputy Director General of Ministry of Health to frame 
a policy for pe riodic check to detect pesticides residues in vegetables and fruits. The 
Committee would like that the formulation of the said policy framework may be expedited 
for which DCPC may coordinate with DAC, Ministry of Health and other stakeholders.  
Further, the findings of some research studies indicate the relationship between extent of 
pesticide use and signs and symptoms of illness. Apprehensions were also raised about 
the adverse effect of Endosulfan on human beings. Accordingly to DCPC, pesticides 
should be used by the farmers judiciously and strategically in lesser quantity and as far as 
possible they should use bio-pesticides and chemical pesticides should be used only as a 
last resort. The Committee also note that the DCPC as such does not directly play any 
role in educating the farmers regarding application of pesticides and the same is assigned 
to the Agriculture Department, particularly of the States. However, PSUs (such as HIL) 
and Autonomous Bodies (such as IPFT), on their own organise programmes on safe and 
judicious use of pesticides.   
 
 However, the Committee are of the view that the Department cannot absolve 
themselves of their responsibilities in this regard and they should accordingly involve 
themselves in coordinating and organizing events to educate the farmers regarding 
proper and safe use of pesticides on various crops. The farmers should also be educated 
about the possible ill effects on human beings and surrounding environment as a result of 
improper usage and handling of pesticides. In th is context, farmers should also be given 

31 
 
 
intensive training on regular basis.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that intensive 
awareness, training and educational programmes amongst the farmers about the safe 
and  judicious use of pesticides for their c rops  should be launched by the Department in 
coordination with all concerned.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard.  
   
Reply of the Government 
  Training programmes on safe and judicious use of pesticides are being organized 
by Central Integrated Pest Management Centres and State Governments to educate 
farmers. DCPC, in association with industry stakeholders like Crop Care Federation etc.,  
organizes a seminars about safe practices about judicious use of pesticides. 
 
  Further, Hindustan Insecticides Ltd.,(HIL), a CPSE of DCPC, also regularly 
organizes such programmes. During the last two years, HIL conducted programmes in 5 
districts in Assam, 2 districts in Meghalaya, 3 districts in Odisha, 5 districts in West Benga l, 
ands 10 districts in Chhatisgarh, apart from Patna in Bihar. 
   
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No. 25016/1/2011-CH-1-Vol.II dated 6.11.2013 
   
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;              Gopinath Munde 
 11 DECEMBER  2013       CHAIRMAN  
20 AGRAHAYANA, 1935 (SAKA)   STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
            CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
 
 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
 
Appendix - III 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 11 December, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 
hrs. in Committee Room – B, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri A. A. Jinnah     - In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
3. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
4. Shri SK. Nurul Islam 
5. Shri Tufani Saroj 
6. Shri Raju Shetti 
7. Shri D. Venugopal 
8. Shri Sai Prathap Annayyagari 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
10. Smt. Naznin Faruque 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Additional Director 
 
2. As the Chairman could not attend the sitting due to pre -occupation, the members 
chose Shri A.A Jinnah, MP and a member of the Committee, to act as the Chairman.  The 
Acting Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the following 
draft Reports : 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-third Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2013-14) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers) and  
(ii) Draft Report on Action  Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty -sixth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
'Production and Availability of Pesticides'  pertaining to the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 

33 
 
 
4. After some discussion, the above two draft Reports were adopted by the 
Committee without any amendment.  
5. The Committee also decided to take oral evidence of some of the 
representationists in January 2014 who have desired to appear before the Comm ittee in 
connection of Jan Aushadhi Scheme for which the Committee had given advertisements 
in the newspapers and electronic media. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

34 
 
 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
  
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT (15 TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2012-13) 
ON ‘PRODUCTION AND AVAILABILITY OF PESTICIDES’ OF THE MINISTRY OF 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND 
PETROCHEMICALS).  
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 7 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation No. 4)   
1 
Percentage of Total 14.3% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation  No. Nil)  
 
0 
Percentage of Total 0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation No. 3)  
1 
Percentage of Total 14.3%  
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are still awaited:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6 and 7) 
 
5 
Percentage of Total 71.4% 
 
 