1 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
    
23 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2011-12) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
March, 2012/Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) 


2 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
CC&F No. 23 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2011-12) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  15.03.2012 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  15.03.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2012/Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) 


3 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
                                                               
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12) ………………………………... 4 
Introduction. …………………………………………………..………………………… 5 
Chapter I Report ……………….………………………………………………….. 5-10 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
11-19 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
20 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
21 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature 
17-18 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2011-12) held on 05 March 2012 
22-23 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals &  Fertilizers 
(2010-11) on „Demands for Grants (2011 -2012)‟ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).  
27 
 

4 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2011-12) 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Prabhatsinh  Pratapsinh Chauhan 
3. Shri K. D. Deshmukh 
4. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
5. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
6. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
7. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
8. Shri O.S. Manian 
9. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
10. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup 
11. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
12. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
13. Shri Sivakumar alias Ritheesh 
14. Shri Tufani Saroj 
15. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
16. Shri Raju Shetti 
17. Shri Adagooru Viswanath 
18. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
24. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
26. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
27. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani 
28. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
29. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
30. & Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
31.# Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri  C.S.Joon   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajit Kumar Sahu  - Committee Officer 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
&  Nominated w.e.f. 17.09.2011. 
 # Vacancy arisen due to demise of Shri Silvius Condpan, MP (RS)  w.e.f. 10 October 2011  

5 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman , Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2011 -12) 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf 
present this Twenty Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations / recomme ndations contained in the Nineteenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(2011-12) on „Demands for Grants (2011 -12)‟ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).  
 
2. The Nine teenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 04 August, 2011.  The 
Action Taken Replies of Government to all observations / recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on  09 November, 2011.  The Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2011 -12) considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on 05 March 2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contain ed in the Nineteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
13 March, 2012                                                 GOPINATH MUNDE 
23 Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)                                            Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
  

6 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Commi ttee on 
Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department 
of Pharmaceuticals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 4.08 .2011.  The Report 
contained 8 Observations / Recommendations. 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertil izers (Department of Pharmaceuticals ) were 
requested to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Nineteenth Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, 
i.e., by 3 November 2011. The Action Taken Replies of the Gov ernment in respect of 
all the 8  Observations / Recommendations  contained in the R eport have been 
received from the Minist ry of Chemicals and Fertilizers  (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) vide their O.M. No. 16(7)/2011-Fin.II, dated 9 November 2011 .  
These have been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
 Sl.Nos.1,2,4,5 and 8                                               (Total=5)   
                                                 Chapter II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:- 
 Sl.No.  6                   (Total = 1) 
  Chapter III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:- 
 Sl.No. 7                                      (Total = 1) 
  Chapter IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature:- 
 Sl.No.   3                            (Total =1)  
                                                                                                  Chapter V 
 

7 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and the final replies in 
respect of the Observation / Recommendation contained in Chapter V for which 
only interim reply  has been f urnished by the Ministry shou ld be furnished 
expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action  taken by the Government on some  of 
their Observations / Recommendation s which still  require reiteration or merit 
comments.  
 
A REVIVAL PLAN FOR  BCPL 
 
Recommendation No.5  
  
5.     Emphasizing the need for periodical monitoring of the  implementation of the 
Revival Plan for Bengal  Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) , the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note  that Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited 
(BCPL) was declared sick by Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction 
(BIFR) on 14 January 1993.  Since the Company incurred continued losses 
since 1980, a Revival Package was prepared and approved by BIFR on 4  April 
1995.  The package was reviewed by BIFR from time to time,  based on which 
a Modified Revised Rehabilitation Scheme was prepared and approved by 
BIFR on 14 January 2004.  Further, based on the requirements for 
modernization of plants and machinery a nd taking into account the earlier 
schemes, the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) 
recommended a 'Modified Revival Plan' for revival of BPCL on    25 August 
2006.  The recommendations of BPRSE were confirmed by the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) which approved the BPRSE scheme 
on 21 December 2006.  The revival scheme included writing off/ waiver of 
loans/ interests of Rs.233.41 crore and cash infusion of Rs.207.19 crore by 
Government of India out of which, Rs.201.59 crore have since been released.  
BCPL is stated to have appointed Consultants for undertaking the work of 
upgradation and modernization of plant and machinery including compliance 
with schedule 'M/WHO GMP/ Standard.  The Committee are constrained to 
point out that BCPL which was declared sick in 1993 is yet to be revived and a 
considerable time has been lost in the process.  At this stage the Committee 

8 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
cannot but overemphasise the need for periodical monitoring of the 
implementation of the revival plan at t he highest level so that the Company 
could carry out its operation at the earliest and is able to achieve its objectives.   
The Committee expect concrete action in a time bound framework b y the 
Department in this behalf”. 
 
6.         In reply to the aforesaid para, the Department of Pharmaceuticals have stated 
as under:- 
 
 “Out of total cash infusion of Rs. 207.19 crore envisaged in the Revival 
Scheme of BCPL, Rs. 206.59 crore has been sanctioned to BCPL till 2010 -11 
and balance will be released during this  financial year as per the requirement 
and utilization status of BCPL.  Out of total release of Rs. 206.59 till 2010 -11, 
BCPL has reported that only Rs. 6.70 crore is unspent. 
  The company appointed Consultants for undertaking the work of up 
gradation & m odernization of plant & machinery including compliance with 
Schedule „M‟/WHO GMP standard.  The civil construction, commissioning of 
plant & machinery/utilities & ETP in Panihati has been completed and 
commercial production has been commenced.  In Maniktal a Factory, Store 
Building, Utilities, ETP, Roads and drains have been completed and 
installation & commissioning of Betalactum & CEPHALOSPORIN Block and 
Progress.  ASVS and Liquid Block, Power block as reported by BCPL have 
been held up due to Court Case, Tablet, ORS, renovation/upgration of existing 
block, sterile block etc in Kanpur Factory (as reported by BCPL) are in 
progress.  Monitoring of the implementation of the revival plan of BCPL is 
being done through inspection visits of senior officers of this Department”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. The Committee  in their  earlier recommendation noted that  Bengal 
Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) was declared sick by Board for 
Industrial and Financia l Reconstruction (BIFR) in 1993 but it had not  been 
revived and this has led to considerable loss of time in the process.   Therefore, 
the Committee had , in their earlier recommendation, had emphasized the need 
for periodical monitoring of the Revival  Plan at the highest level.  In this 
regard, the Committee are now happy to note that out of total cash infusion of 
Rs.207.19 crore envisaged in the Revival Plan of the BCPL, Rs.206.59 crore has 

9 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
been sanctioned and released to BCPL till 2011 -12, out of which  only Rs.6.70 
crore is unspent.  The Committee are worried that the total sanctioned amount 
has not been spent.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that the remaining 
amount of unspent money should be spent at the earliest for revival of BCPL 
 The Committee are happy to  note that commercial production at Panihati 
Factory has  been commenced.   However, the Committee express unhappiness 
with the fact that the revival process at Man iktala and Kanpur Factories  are yet 
to be completed.   The Committee , therefore,  expect that the Department will 
make serious efforts to periodically monitor the implementation of the Revival 
Plan and apprise the Committee regarding further progress in this direction.       
 
B EXPEDITING CABINET  NOTE FOR REVIVAL OF IDPL 
 
Recommendation No.7  
 
 8.       Emphasizing the  need for expeditious action regarding  preparation of a  
Cabinet Note for  Revival of Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited  (IDPL) , the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
  
“Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited  (IDPL)  incorporated  in 1961  with 
the primary objective of creating self -sufficiency in essential life saving drugs 
and medicines was formally declared sick by the Board for Industrial & 
Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) in 1992.  The Company is yet to be revived 
even though a revival package for the same was formulated and approved by 
BIFR in February 1994.  From the facts placed before the Committee it is 
evident that the matter kept shuttling between the various Organizations such 
as BIFR, Expert Committee, NIPER, Board fo r Reconstruction and Public 
Sector Enterprises and Group of Ministers.  It was eventually decided after the 
formation of new Government that the matter would be placed before the 
Cabinet.  The Committee regret to observe that the draft Cabinet Note for 
revival of IDPL is stated to be still under submission to the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers.  The fact that the Department has taken too long a 
time to revive the Company is just regrettable.  The Committee would like to be 
informed about the precise reasons as to why it has taken so much time in 
submission of the requisite draft note to the Cabinet.  While emphasizing the 

10 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
need for expeditious action in this regard the Committee desire that the revival 
plan should be formulated and implemented without any further delay”. 
 
9.         In reply to the aforesaid para, the Department of Pharmaceuticals have stated 
as under:- 
  
“The modified revival plan submitted by IDPL is being examined in the 
Department for preparation of a Cabinet Note. Further Rs. 4.45 Crore was 
released during 2010-11 to make three plants: Rishikesh, Gurgaon & Chennai 
plants of IDPL become Schedule M /WHO GMP compliant. IDPL has intimated 
that Rs. 1.07 crore has been utilized till September, 2011 and all efforts are 
being made to fully utilize the amount released”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10. The Committee in their  earlier recommendation had desired that Indian 
Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited  (IDPL)  was declared formally sick 
company by the Board for Industrial & Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) in 1992  
and a revival package for the same was approved by BIFR two years later i.e. 
1994 but th e company is  yet to be revived on the basis of approved revival 
package.  The Committee noted that one of the main reasons for the delay was 
the fact that the matter kept shuttling  between various o rganizations such as 
BIFR, Expert Committee, NIPER,  BIFR and Group of Ministers.  Further, the 
draft Cabinet note for the revival of IDPL is still under submission with the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers.  Now , the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
have informed the Committee that the modified revival plan s ubmitted by IDPL 
is being examined in the Department for preparation of a Cabinet note.  Further 
Rs.4.45 crore has been released during 2010-11 to make three  plants of IDPL at 
Rishikesh, Gurgaon and Chennai schedule M/WHO GMP compliant out of which 
IDPL has spent Rs.1.07 crore till September, 2011.  The Committee , while 
observing the facts with regard to revival of IDPL , are worried to note that , 
though so much time has elapsed,  nothing concrete  has been done for revival 
of IDPL.  The Committee further desire to know the reasons for the delay in this 
regard.  The Committee, therefore, strongly deprecate  the inordinate delay in 
this regard and deplore the sorry state of affairs.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department  of Pharmaceuticals  should expedite the 

11 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
approval of modified revival  plan of IDPL  and implement the same without 
delay. 
  
  

12 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No.  1 
 The Committee are perturbed to note that there has been a trend that the 
allocated money under various schemes is underutilized and that too is not being 
properly and evenly spent by the Department of Pharmaceuticals.  During the ye ar 
2010-11, an amount of Rs.125 crore was  earmarked  at BE stage which was reduced 
to  Rs.79 crore at RE (under the Revenue Head) but only Rs.31.51 crore  were spent 
by the Department upto 31 January 2011.  Similarly, under the Capital Head, out of 
Rs.40.00 crore  allocated for the year 2010 -11, an amount of Rs.22.50 crore could be 
utilized till 31 January 2011.  Thus, out of a total amount of Rs.165 crore provided at 
BE stage which was eventually reduced to Rs.119 crore at RE stage, only Rs.54.01 
crore could be spent upto  31 January of 2010-11.   Thus, less than 50 per cent of the 
revised allocation was utilized in the first 10 months which indicates that neither 
judicious allocations are being made by the Government nor allocated funds are 
utilized uniformly and to the optimum.    The Committee cannot but reiterate the need 
for the Ministry to gear up their machinery and ensure that the sanctioned outlays are 
utilized uniformally so that the avowed objectives are fully achieved.  The new 
initiatives by th e Department are also necessary for the sustained growth of the 
pharma sector so that the creation of the Department of Pharmaceuticals as a distinct 
entity is fully justified. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
It is submitted that  the underutilization of funds w as, mainly, in case of new 
NIPER like institutes. This came about on account of certain administrative reasons 
like difficulty in acquiring  suitable land in different selected cities and finalization of 
concrete proposals, resulting in the pace of expendi ture being lower (resulting in low 
final expenditure).  Thereafter, consultants M/s. Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Pvt. Ltd. 
were appointed by the Department for preparation of Detailed Project Report for each 
new NIPER incorporating the element of Public Priva te Partnership (PPP) wherever 
possible and to suggest the areas of specialization. The estimated cost on each 
NIPER as worked out by consultant would be approximately Rs. 330 crore including 
PPP element.  In addition, about 100 acres of land are required f or the project which 
is to be provided by the concerned State Governments free of cost.    Each of these 

13 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
NIPERs would take about 4 -5 years time to be fully established.  The Consultants 
have submitted the Report, which has been accepted by the Government. Based on 
the detailed project report submitted by the consultant, requisite approval would be 
taken for incurring due expenditure. 
 As regards even spread of expenditure during the year, it is submitted that in 
many plan schemes it is not feasible to spread the expenditure evenly. For instance, 
in cases like purchase of machinery & equipment (NIPER and PSUs), holding of 
seminar/workshops, setting up of dedicated cells (NPPA) etc., incurring of 
expenditure in one go becomes unavoidable. The Department however, would like to 
assure the Hon‟ble Committee that the Department is in consonance with the 
concerns of the Committee and shall cont inue to endeavour so that the avowed 
objectives for creation of Department of Pharmaceuticals as a distinct entity are fully 
achieved. 
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(7)/2011-Fin.II dated 9.11.2011] 
Recommendation No.  2 
 
The National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER) was set 
up in 1998 in Mohali, Punjab to nurture and promote quality and excellence in 
pharmaceutical education and research.   The Government had also approved setting 
up of six more i nstitutes under NIPER in 2007.   The Committee, however regret to 
note that despite their earlier recommendation @  to make all the six institutes fully 
functional by April 2011, the matter is still at the stage of acquiring land except that in 
the State of  Gujarat.    While expressing their displeasure at the slow pace of work  
the Committee desire the Department of Pharmaceuticals to take  necessary steps so  
that  all the six Institutes of NIPER are made fully functional  at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Further to the status and performance sent on the subject of establishment of 
new NIPERs, in order to further speed up the progress of establishment following 
steps are being taken:- 
i) Cabinet Note for the establishment of six New NIPERs has been prepared and 
finally submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat. Decision of the Cabinet is awaited.  
ii) State Government of Gujarat has now confirmed allotment of 60 acres of land 
at Plaej village, Taluka District, Gandhinagar. 
iii) Letters have been written by Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers to Chief 
Minister, Bihar for finalization of allocation of land for NIPER, Hajipur. 

14 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
@  7th Report on Demands for Grants for 2010-11 
 
iv) Letters have also been written to Chief Secretaries of Andhra Pradesh, West 
Bengal and Uttar Pradesh to expedite land allocation.  
v) Steps are being expedited to identify a suitable agency for construction of 
setting up of new NIPERs.  
vi) Process of selection of full time Directors and constitution of BoG for the new 
NIPERs has already been set in motion.  
 [Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(7)/2011-Fin.II dated 9.11.2011] 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
 The Committee note that the Department has five Pharmaceutical PSUs under 
its administrative control, viz., Karnataka Antibiotics Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL), 
Rajasthan Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL), Bengal Chemicals and 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL), Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) and Indian 
Drugs Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL).  Out of the se five companies, only  KAPL and 
RDPL are profit making and rest have been referred to BIFR.  The Committee find 
that apart from these PSUs, there are two closed PSUs, viz. Bengal Immunity Limited 
(BIL), Kolkata and Smith Stainstreet Pharmaceuticals Limit ed (SSPL), Kolkata and 
two joint ventures of IDPL.  It is disheartening to note that all the PSUs barring two 
are either closed or running in losses.   One of the major reasons for losses suffered 
by PSUs is inefficiency in operation and  poor marketing  m anagement and stiff 
competition from well entrenched private concerns.  The Committee cannot but 
express their strong displeasure over the performance of PSUs.   The Committee are 
of the considered opinion that PSUs should improve their marketing strategy and 
overcome competition from private concerns and venture into the open market with 
full vigour.   All pending proposals for the revival of pharma PSUs should be 
expeditiously considered and the Government  should extend every possible help to 
revive them. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Apart from KAPL and RDPL, the financial performance of HAL, BCPL & IDPL 
respectively as on 31st March 2006 were as under:- 
(Rupees in crore) 
CPSE Production Sales Profit/Loss 
HAL 47.25 49.21 (34.81) 
BCPL 68.76 52.23 (8.45) 

15 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
IDPL 7.21 6.86 (335.58) 
 
 
HAL 
 Government approved the Rehabilitation of the company on 9 th March 2006 
followed by BIFR approval on 5 th June 2007 which inter alia involves cash infusion by 
GoI to the extent of Rs. 137.59 crore and write off of loan and waiver of interest to the 
extent of Rs. 259.43 crore. The entire cash infusion of Rs. 137.59 crore has been 
released to the company. Parliament has approved writing off of loan and waiver of 
interest to the extent of Rs. 259.43 crore.  
 Further, Government has additionally approved proposals of Rs. 30.17 crore 
received from HAL for setting up new powder injectable facilities for Cephalosporin 
and upgradation of existing vialing facilities for Beta lactum (Penicillin) Antibiotics 
complying with WHO-GMP standards at an estimated cost of Rs. 20.17 crores and for 
upgradation of manufacturing facilities of Tablet, Capsule and Liquid Sections 
complying to WHO-GMP standards at an estimated cost of Rs. 10.00 crore in order to 
make the company further viable. 
 
HAL has completed the work on Cephalosporin in a record time of 9 months. It 
has commenced commercial production in February, 2009 and also obtained WHO -
Certification for the same. Work relating to upgr adation of existing vialling facilities for 
Betalactum Antibiotics has also been completed and validation of equipments & 
facilities is in progress and production will start in October, 2011. As regards the 
upgradation project for Tablet, Capsule and Liqui d Sections complying to WHO -GMP 
standards at an estimated cost of Rs. 10.00 crore, HAL has reported that the project 
activities of upgradation of Quality Control has been completed in May, 2011 and 
keeping in view the utilization of existing manufacturing facilities during last quarter of 
the financial year, Non -Parenteral upgradation was planned after March 2011. The 
work of engaging consultant, conceptual layout has been completed. FDA 
concurrence for layout is under consideration. Basic Engineering work related to Civil 
works, Finalizing broad specification of equipments and machineries is in progress. 
Also the tendering process for procurement of major equipments, tendering process 
for civil, electrical, mechanical and HVAC works to be carried out is in progress.  
Tentatively the entire project activities related to Non -Parenteral upgradation is 
expected to be completed by end of the year. 
 

16 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
Apart from the above, i n order to utilize the above bulk fermentation facilities, 
Government sanctioned project for production of Erythromycin which was viable as 
per initial techno -financial survey by the company.   However, the fermentation 
technology for Erythromycin could not be sourced by HAL on a financially viable basis 
in spite of global tender.   Accordingly, now the setting up of the Erythromycin plan by 
utilization of existing fermentation facilities is being re -examined. Since the 
Erythromycin Thiocyanate Project is n ot commercially viable, as per the 
recommendations of IFCI and the Business Plan approved by the Board of Directors 
of the Company, it is proposed to utilize the said sanctioned funds for the project of 
upgradation of IV Fluid facilities to increase its production capacities to 240 lac bottles 
per annum which is having similar capital outlay of Rs. 40.00 crores. 
 
The staff and other utility overheads expenses of the existing fermentation 
plant has to be however borne by the company which adds up to the loss es in the 
company. 
Production & Sales: 
 Details of Production & Sales of HAL from 2007-08 onwards are as under: 
 (Rs. in crore) 
* Provisional 
 
HAL‟s marketing plan 
HAL‟s sales are presently dependent mostly on institutional sale with PPP 
model, which cannot continue for long. It is not feasible to enhance trade sale with 
existing inadequate field staff, therefore in order to sustain in the market and to 
enhance trade sale, the company plans to induct business associates in each territory 
and induct new products having high value and high margin and phasing out products 
which are at the end of their life cycle.  
 
BCPL 
 2007-08 
 
2008-09 
 
2009-10 
 
2010-11* 2011-12* 
(till 
September’11) 
Production 119.81 155.00 123.16 84.92 29.92 
Sales 
Turnover 106.59 147.39 117.67 88.00 34.02 

17 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
 Similarly, Government approved the Revival Scheme of BCPL on 21st December 
2006 which inter alia comprised cash infusion of Rs. 207.19 crore out of which Rs. 
206.59 crore has already been released to BCPL. The company appointed 
Consultants for undertaking the work of up gradation & modernization of plant & 
machinery including compliance with Schedule ‟M‟/WHO GMP standard. The civil 
construction, commissioning of plant & machinery/utilities & ETP in Panihati has been 
completed and commercial production has been commenced. In Maniktala Factory, 
Store Building, Utilities, ETP, Roads, drains have been completed and installation & 
commissioning of Betalactum & Cephalosporin Block and Ointment Block are in 
progress. ASVS and Liquid Block, Power block as reported by BCPL have been held 
up due to Court Case. Tablet , ORS, renovation/upgradation of existing block, Sterile 
Block etc in Kanpur Factory (as reported by BCPL) is in progress.  
Production & Sales: 
 Details of Production & Sales of BCPL from 2007-08 onwards are as under: 
(Rs. in crore) 
* Provisional 
The implementation of the Revival Package including closing down of old 
products & replacement with new ones is underway. This has caused mandatory 
reduction in stoppage of some production operations.  Impact of up 
gradation/modernization work will be visible in 2011-12. 
 
IDPL 
 
IDPL has appointed consulting firm M/s E & Y for preparation of revival plan. 
The said consultant has since submitted the updated draft report on 08.06.2011 and 
thereafter a modified revival plan submitted by IDPL is being examined in the 
Department for pr eparation of a Cabinet Note. The revival plan has been prepared 
keeping in mind competition from the private sector and the Social Objective as laid 
down by the GoM. Further Rs. 4.45 crore was released during 2010 -11 to make three 
plants: Rishikesh, Gurgao n & Chennai plants of IDPL become Schedule M /WHO 
GMP compliant. IDPL has intimated that Rs. 1.07 crore has been utilized till 
September, 2011 and all efforts are being made to fully utilize the released amount.   
 2007-08 2008-09* 2009-10* 2010-11* 2011-12  
Production 55.69 89.63    83.24           
 
80.12 
(up to August, 
2011) 
18.05 
Sales  Turnover 48.59 86.82    78.24           
 
76.21 
 
20.24 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(7)/2011-Fin.II dated 9.11.2011] 
 
  

19 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 The Committee note  that Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited 
(BCPL) was declared sick by Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) 
on 14 January 1993.  Since the Company incurred continued losses since 1980, a 
Revival Package was prepared and approved by BIFR on 4 April 1995.  The package 
was reviewed by BIFR from time to time,  based on which a Modified Revised 
Rehabilitation Scheme was prepared and approved by BIFR on 14 January 2004.  
Further, based on the requirements for modernization of plants an d machinery and 
taking into account the earlier schemes, the Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector 
Enterprises (BRPSE) recommended a 'Modified Revival Plan' for revival of BPCL on    
25 August 2006.  The recommendations of BPRSE were confirmed by the C abinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) which approved the BPRSE scheme on   21 
December 2006.  The revival scheme included writing off/ waiver of loans/ interests of 
Rs.233.41 crore and cash infusion of Rs.207.19 crore by Government of India out of 
which, Rs.201.59 crore have since been released.  BCPL is stated to have appointed 
Consultants for undertaking the work of upgradation and modernization of plant and 
machinery including compliance with schedule 'M/WHO GMP/ Standard.  The 
Committee are constrained to point out that BCPL which was declared sick in 1993 is 
yet to be revived and a considerable time has been lost in the process.  At this stage 
the Committee cannot but overemphasise the need for periodical monitoring of the 
implementation  of the r evival plan at the highest level so that the Company could 
carry out its operation at the earliest and is able to achieve its objectives.   The 
Committee expect concrete action in a time bound framework by the Department in 
this behalf. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Out of total cash infusion of Rs. 207.19 crore envisaged in the Revival Scheme 
of BCPL, Rs. 206.59 crore has been sanctioned to BCPL till 2010 -11 and balance will 
be released during this financial year as per the requirement and utilization status of  
BCPL.  Out of total release of Rs. 206.59 till 2010 -11, BCPL has reported that only 
Rs. 6.70 crore is unspent. 
The company appointed Consultants for undertaking the work of up gradation 
& modernization of plant & machinery including compliance with Schedu le „M‟/WHO 
GMP standard.  The civil construction, commissioning of plant & machinery/utilities & 
ETP in Panihati has been completed and commercial production has been 
commenced.  In Maniktala Factory, Store Building, Utilities, ETP, Roads and drains 

20 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
have b een completed and installation & commissioning of Betalactum & 
CEPHALOSPORIN Block and Progress.  ASVS and Liquid Block, Power block as 
reported by BCPL have been held up due to Court Case, Tablet, ORS, 
renovation/upgration of existing block, sterile block etc in Kanpur Factory (as reported 
by BCPL) are in progress.  Monitoring of the implementation of the revival plan of 
BCPL is being done through inspection visits of senior officers of this Department.  
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(7)/2011-Fin.II dated 9.11.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No.5  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
As regards the promotion of unbranded generic medicines through Jan 
Aushadhi Stores(JAS), the Committee have been informed that the following efforts 
are being made by the Government:- 
 
(i) Various correspondences/meetings/visits are being done with the authorities of 
State Governments for getting their support in opening of Jan Aushadhi Store.  
Possibilities are being explored to open the Jan Aushadhi Stores in the villages 
also. 
(ii) All pharma CPSUs have been instructed to take necessary action for 
increasing the list of medicines supplied to the Jan Aushadhi Store. 
(iii) We are taking necessary action for the publicity in print and electronic media in 
consultation with Department of Consumer Affairs to make people aware of 
generic drugs and their prices in the Jan Aushadhi Stores. 
 The committee taking note of these measur es would like to be apprised at 
regular intervals of  the concrete progress made in ensuring that generic drugs are 
made available at cheaper rate to the common man throughout  the country at the 
earliest. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As on 30th September, 2011, a total of 112 Jan Aushadhi Generic Drug Stores 
have been opened, having presence in eleven States namely Andhra Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, Delhi, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Odisha, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, West Bengal and Efforts are being made to open more 
number of stores in these states.  

21 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has taken Review Meetings at Joint Secy. 
level on Jan Aushadhi Campaing with the Pharmacists working at JASs in Odisha 
and State Government officials of Odisha on 5 th July, 2011 at Bhubaneswar and on 
5th August, 2011 at Chandigarh with the Pharmacists working at JASs at Punjab, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and UT of Chandigarh and state Government Officials. 
These meetings which were attended by the respective principal Se cretary./ 
Secretary-Cum-Commissioner, Department of Health and Family Welfare, 
Government of Punjab & Odisha. Further, it was stressed that these is a need to open 
more and more Jan Aushadhi Outlets at Sub -Division level to increase the present 
JASs in the States of Punjab & Odisha. 
Further in order to spread Jan Aushadhi Campaign further, BPPI has taken up the 
matter with the Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of Health & Family Welfare 
Department, Governments of Uttarakhand, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattis garh, 
Bihar and Jharkhand persuading them to open at least one Jan Aushadhi Generic 
Drug Out let in every district in their States.  It is expected that more number of stores 
will be opened in due course in order to reach quality generic drugs at affordabl e 
prices to the common man.  
 [Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(7)/2011-Fin.II dated 9.11.2011] 
 
  

22 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Recommendation No.  6 
As regards the Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL), the Government approved 
the rehabilitation of the company on 9 March 2006 followed by BIFR approval on 5 
June 2007. The rehabilitation plan included writing off the loan and waiving interest to 
the extent of Rs. 259.43 crore and releasing of entire cash infusion, BIFR had issued 
guidelines for sale of land as per the Rehabilitation Scheme through Assets Sale 
Committee. Action in this regard is stated to be under progress of HAL. In addition, 
the Government  has approved proposals of Rs. 30.17 crore received from HAL for 
setting up new power injectable facilities at the estimate cost of Rs. 20.17 crore and 
for upgradation of manufacturing facilities of tablet, capsule and liquid section at 
estimated cost of R s. 10.0 crore in conformation to WHO -GMP standards. The 
Committee expect the HAL to fully utilize the funds sanctioned and for its revival and 
endeavor considerable improvement in its performance and also to generate profits, 
in additional to fulfilling its social obligations of manufacturing life saving drugs for the 
common man and economically weaker sections of the society. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
HAL is endeavoring to fully utilize the funds sanctioned for its revival. HAL has 
set-up Cephalosporin Po wder Injectable facilities at an estimated cost of Rs. 12.00 
crore. This facility has been accredited with WHO -GMP certification. The company 
has also taken up upgradation of existing Powder Injectable line. The Project work 
has been completed at an estimated cost of Rs. 8.00 crore and trials and validation of 
the plant & facilities is being carried out. In addition, the company has completed 
upgradation of its Quality Control Laboratory at the cost of Rs. 2.00 crore. 
Further, upgradation of non -parenteral facilities at the cost of Rs. 8.00 crore is 
under execution and Rs. 4.01 crore has been utilized so far, which is expected to be 
completed by end of this year. The proposal for the manufacturing of Erythromycin 
Thiocyanate through utilization of idle ferme ntos at an estimate cost of Rs. 40 crore 
could not progress, as the Project has not been found to be commercially viable, as 
per the recommendations of IFCI & Board of Directors. Accordingly, now the setting 
up of the Erythromycin plant by utilization of existing fermentation facilities is being re-
examined.  
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(7)/2011-Fin.II dated  9.11.2011] 

23 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL) incorporated in 1981 with 
the primary objective of creating self -sufficiency in essential life saving drugs and 
medicines was formally declared si ck by the Board for Industrial & Finance 
Reconstruction (BIFR) in 1992. The Company is yet to be revived even through a 
revival package for the same was formulated and approved by BIFR in February 
1994. From the facts placed before the Committee it is evid ent that the matter kept 
shuttling between the various Organizations such as BIFR, Experts committee, 
NIPER, Board for Reconstruction and Public Sector Enterprises and Group of 
Ministers. It was eventually decided after the formation of new Government that  the 
matter would be placed before the cabinet. The committee regret to observe that the 
draft Cabinet Note for revival of IDPL is stated to be still under submission to the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. The fact that the Department has taken too long 
a time to revive the company is just regrettable. The committee would like to be 
informed about the precise reasons as to why it has taken so much time in 
submission of the requisite draft note to the Cabinet. While emphasizing the need for 
expeditious action in this regard the committee desire that the revival plan should be 
formulated and implemented without any further delay. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The modified revival plan submitted by IDPL is being examined in the 
Department for preparation of a Cabinet Note. Further Rs. 4.45 Crore was released 
during 2010-11 to make three plants: Rishikesh, Gurgaon & Chennai plants of IDPL 
become Schedule M /WHO G MP compliant. IDPL has intimated that Rs. 1.07 crore 
has been utilized till September, 2011 and all efforts are being made to fully utilize the 
amount released. 
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(7)/2011-Fin.II dated 9.11.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.10  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

24 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 The Committee note that the National Pharmaceutical Pricing  Authority 
(NPPA) is responsible for price fixation/ revision of drugs and formulations, monitoring 
the prices of decontrolled drugs and formulations and enforcing and implementing the 
provisions of the Drugs (Price Control) Order, 1995.  An amount of Rs.8 .28 crore 
(Rs.2.40 crore under the Plan and Rs.5.88 crore under Non Plan) has been 
earmarked for NPPA at BE 2011 -12.  NPPA had earlier submitted 5 new plan 
schemes to the Planning Commission in 2007 for the current 11 th Five Year Plan 
amounting to Rs.49.95  crore.  These schemes envisaged Building Robust and 
Responsive Statistical system for NPPA, Creation of NPPA Cells in States, and 
Schemes for Interacting with States.  Proposal for Consumer Awareness and 
Publicity through Print, electronic and other mediu m and Proposal for strengthening 
the existing Monitoring and Enforcement work.  Out of these, Planning Commission 
had initially accorded in-principle approval in March, 2008 for one scheme viz. 
Building Robust and Responsive Statistical system for NPPA. Pl anning Commission 
is stated to have further conveyed its in-principle approval for another scheme i.e. 
“Proposal for Consumer Awareness and Publicity through print, electronic and other 
medium”.  According to the Department, efforts are being made to exped ite in-
principle approval from the Planning Commission for the remaining three schemes 
also.  The Committee regret to point out that out of the five schemes proposal by 
NPPA for the Eleventh Five Year Plan in 2007, three schemes is yet to get in-
principle approval of the Planning Commission.  The committee deprecates the 
inordinate delay on the part of the Department in getting requisite approval from 
Planning Commission for all the schemes. The Department should take up the issue 
with the Planning Commiss ion regarding early approval of the schemes and 
implement the same expeditiously.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Out of five components of the scheme for strengthening of NPPA, Planning 
Commission has accorded in principle approval for two components concerning 
„Building Robust & Responsive Statistical System for NPPA” and proposal for 
“Consumer awareness and publici ty through Print, Electronic and other medium” in 

25 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
March, 2008 and 15 th March, 2011 respectively. For the remaining components, 
Planning Commission vide letter dated 15.3.2011 had intimated that the proposal may 
be considered to be integrated in 12 th Plan schemes of NPPA subject to its relevance 
and establishment of need.   
 
2. Consequent upon decision of Planning Commission communicated vide their 
letter dated 15.3.2011, Department of Pharmaceuticals requested  Planning 
Commission vide d.o. letter dated 24. 3.2011 from Secretary(Pharma)  to reconsider 
its decision in respect of the remaining 2 components viz. (i) Scheme for Interaction 
with States and (ii) Strengthening the existing Monitoring and Enforcement work for 
11th Five Year Plan so that Plan funds al located for the year 2011 -12 do not lapse 
and are utilized for strengthening NPPA. 
 
3. In response, Planning Commission vide its letter dated 20.5.2011 intimated 
that the proposal of according „in-principle‟ approval in respect of two components i.e. 
(a) I nteraction with States and (b) Strengthening of Existing Monitoring and 
Enforcement Work has been re -examined in consultation with their Health Division. 
Further, Planning Commission suggested that under the circumstances the aforesaid 
schemes can be discu ssed in the Twelfth Five Year Plan Working Group on Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals which has been already constituted under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (Pharmaceuticals).  The Group has representations of all the stakeholders 
and relevant Ministries/ Departments including Ministry of Health etc.   
 
4. The Working Group on Drug & Pharmaceuticals for Twelfth Five Year Plan 
(2012-2017) was constituted vide order No. I&M 2(25)/20011 dated 10.05.2011 by the 
Planning Commission under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Pha rma).Based on the 
Terms of Reference (ToR), as conveyed by the Planning Commission, four sub -
working groups have been formed in the Department with the approval of Secretary 
(Pharma) to facilitate and finalize the Report of the Working Group. As suggested by 
Planning Commission, the aforesaid schemes of NPPA are under considerations of 
Working Group for inclusion in the Twelfth Five Year Plan of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals. 
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(7)/2011-Fin.II dated 9.11.2011] 
 
 
 
    New Delhi;                   GOPINATH MUNDE, 
13 March, 2012                                 Chairman, 
23 Phalguna, 1933 (SAKA)                          Standing Committee on  

26 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
                    Chemicals and Fertilizers 
  

27 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
APPENDIX – I 
 
MINUTES 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2011-12) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 05 March, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 
hrs. in Room No.53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
 
Shri Raghunandan Sharma  - In the Chair 
 
Members 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prabhatsinh  Pratapsinh Chauhan 
3. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
4. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
5. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
6. Shri O.S. Manian 
7. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup 
8. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
9. Shri Tufani Saroj 
10. Shri Raju Shetti 
11. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
13. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
14. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani 
15. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
16. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
i) Shri C. S. Joon   - Joint Secretary 

28 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
ii) Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
 
2. As the Chairman could not attend the sitting due to pre -occupation, the 
members chose Shri Raghunandan Sharma, MP and a member of the Committee, to 
act as the Chairman.  The Acting Chairman welcomed  the members to the sitting of 
the Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the following 
draft Action Taken Reports : 
 
(i) & (ii)   ***  ***   ***    ***   
 
(iii) Draft on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals);  and  
 
(iv) ***  ***  ***   ***   *** 
 
4. After some discussion, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee with 
minor amendments as indicated in the Annexure-I, II, III and IV respectively.   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________ 
*** Matters not related to this Report. 
 

29 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
Annexure-III 
[Please see para 4 of the minutes] 
Recom. 
No. 
Page 
No. 
Para 
No. Line Amendments/ modifications 
 
5 
 
8 
 
7 
 
10 from 
the top 
 
Add "The Committee are worried that the 
total sanctioned amount has not been 
spent." After "unspent." 
7 10 10 16 from 
the top 
Substitute "disappointed" By "worried" 
7 10 10 18 from 
the top 
Add "The committee further desire to know 
the reasons for the delay in this regard." 
After "IDPL." 
 
  

30 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\23 Report\23rd Report.Docx 
APPENDIX – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINETEENTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS 
AND FERTILIZERS (2010-11) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-12)’ OF 
THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF 
PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 8 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos.1,2,4,5 and 8)   
 
5 
Percentage of Total 62.50 
III Observation / Recommendation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.No.6) 
 
1 
Percentage of Total 12.50 
IV Observation / Recommendation in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.No.7) 
 
1 
Percentage of Total 12.50 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are of interim nature:-  
 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl.Nos.3 ) 
 
1 
Percentage of Total 12.50 
 
 