STANDING  COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(2013-2014)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2013-2014)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in
the Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2013-2014) of the Ministry of
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)]
FORTY-FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
41

FORTY-FIRST REPORT
STANDING  COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(2013-2014)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2013-2014)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2013-2014) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Department of Pharmaceuticals)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.12.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.12.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)

CC&F No. 41
Price : Rs. 43.00
© 2013 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-14) ........................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 13
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................................... 28
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration ..... 29
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government are of interim nature.......... 32
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of Second Sitting of the Standing Committee
on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2013-14) held on
24 October, 2013 .............................................................. 33
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth
Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2012-13) on ‘Demands
for Grants (2013-14)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). ............ 36

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2013-14)
Shri Gopinath Munde —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S. Alagiri
3. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
4. Shri Prabhatsinh P. Chauhan
5. Shri K.D. Deshmukh
6. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
7. Sk. Nurul Islam
8. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik
9. Shri Paswan Kamlesh
10. Shri Amarnath Pradhan
11. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
12. Shri Tufani Saroj
13. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar
14. Shri Raju Shetti
15. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara
16. Shri D. Venugopal
17. Shri Sai Prathap Annayyagari
18. Vacant
19. Vacant
20. Vacant
21. Vacant
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary
23. Smt. Naznin Faruque
24. Shri A.A. Jinnah
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri
26. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
27. Shri Raghunandan Sharma
28. Shri Ishwar Singh
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain — Joint Secretary
2. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Director
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Additional Director
4. Smt. Emma C. Barwa — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers
(2013-14) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report
on their behalf present this Forty-First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations
contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2012-2013) on Demands for
Grants (2013-2014) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Department of Pharmaceuticals).
2. The Thirty-Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on
30.4.2013. The Action Taken replies of Government to all observations/
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 22.8.2013.
The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2013-2014)
considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 24 October,
2013.
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH MUNDE,
24 October, 2013 Chairman,
2 Kartika, 1935  (Saka) Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers.

REPORT
CHAPTER I
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and
Fertilizers deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2013-14) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 30.04.2013.
In all, the Committee made 10 Observations/Recommendations in
the Report.
2. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) were requested to furnish replies to the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report within three
months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e., by 29.7.2013.
The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the
10 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have been
received from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) vide their O.M. No. 16(3)/2013-Fin. II, dated 22.08.2013.
These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10
(Total = 8)
Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
reply:
Sl. No. Nil
(Total = 0)
Chapter III

2
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Sl. Nos. 3 and 5
(Total = 2)
Chapter IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. No. Nil
(Total = 0)
Chapter V
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report
should be furnished by the Ministry expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations which still
require reiteration or merit comments.
A. Need for Research and Development in the Field of Pharma Sector
Recommendation No. 1
5. Emphasizing the need for Research and Development in the
Field of Pharma Sector, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that net sales of the industry grew by 14.7%
in the quarter ending June, 2012 as compared to the quarter a year
ago. Again in the second quarter ending September 2012, the drugs
and pharmaceuticals industry performed well. However, the
Committee are concerned to note that the imports of ‘Medicinal
and Pharmaceuticals Products’ had risen by 29.43 per cent in the
year 2011-12 as compared to previous year. As a result of which
pressure was exerted on the profit margins of the industry.
According to the Department, although the country is almost self-
sufficient in production of most of formulations/pharmaceuticals
products, imports are resorted to on quality and economic
considerations and not necessarily due to non-availability from
domestic sources. Needless to say, the raw material expenses
necessarily contribute towards the cost component of the quality

3
medicine being sold to the common consumers. The Committee,
are therefore of the view that it would be imperative if the import
of raw material for production of medicine is resorted only if the
same is absolutely necessary for the purpose. In fact, the Committee,
expect the Department to encourage innovation and also intensive
research and development in the field of pharma sector so that
cheap but quality inputs are available within the country itself for
production of quality but cheap medicine which would ultimately
benefit the common man in the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommend to take appropriate steps in this direction.”
Reply of the Government
6. In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“In order to encourage Pharma Innovation and Research and
Development following proposals are under examination in the
Department:—
(i) In order to enhance the national potential for Drug Discovery
and Innovation the Department is in the process of preparing
a Detailed Project Report (DPR) in this regard. For the purpose
the Department has engaged M/s. Ernst and Young Limited
(M/s. E&Y) a global level consultant.
(ii) A proposal is being examined in the Department to set up
a National Centre for R&D in Bulk Drugs at Hyderabad
NIPER.”
Comments of the Committee
7. The Committee had noted that the imports of ‘Medicinal and
Pharmaceuticals Products’ had risen by 29.43 per cent in the year
2011-12 as compared to the previous year. Although the country is
almost self-sufficient in production of most of formulations/
pharmaceuticals products, imports were resorted to on quality and
economic considerations. However, the Committee were of the view
that the import of raw material for production of medicine should be
resorted only if the same is absolutely necessary for the purpose. In
this context, the Committee had desired that the Department should
encourage innovation and also intensive research and development in
the field of pharma sector so that cheap but quality inputs are available
within the country itself for production of cheap but quality medicines

4
for the benefit of the common man in the country. In its Action Taken
Reply, the Department has stated that in order to encourage Pharmacy
Innovation and Research and Development, the proposals — one relating
to enhance the national potential for Drug Discovery and Innovation
and the second regarding setting up of a National Centre for R&D in
bulk drugs at Hyderabad NIPER, are under examination in the
Department. In view of the foregoing, the Committee hope that the
aforesaid proposals would be vigorously pursued. However, the
Committee note that the Department is conveniently silent over the
issue concerning import of raw material for production of medicine.
Since imported raw material would necessarily contribute to the cost
component of the medicine which is ultimately passed on to the
common consumers, it is but imperative that the import of raw material
for production of medicine is resorted to only under extreme
circumstances. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that raw material for production of medicines may
be imported only when the same is absolutely necessary for the purpose.
The Committee desire that the Department should formulate time
bound action plan in this regard. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard.
B. Allocation of funds for the remaining period of Twelfth Five
Year Plan.
Recommendation No. 3
8. While noting significantly less allocation of funds under various
schemes of the Department, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that out of total GBS allocation of
Rs. 2968.00 crore for the scheme-wise Plan Outlays during Twelfth
Five Year Plan, the Department of Pharmaceuticals had proposed
Rs. 567.60 crore for the year 2013-14 but the Planning Commission
has approved only Rs.188.00 crore. The Committee also note that
Planning Commission had indicated that the outlay of the
Department be maintained at the same level as in the previous
year. This was primarily due to gross underutilization of funds by
the Department of during the year 2012-13. The Committee, feel
that it is now the responsibility of the Department to impress upon
the Planning Commission to allocate more funds for the remaining
period of Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Committee expect the
Department to act strongly.”

5
Reply of the Government
9. In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“Planning Commission has been apprised about the Committee’s
concern regarding enhanced allocation.”
Comments of the Committee
10. The Committee had observed that out of total GBS allocation
of Rs. 2968.00 crore for the scheme-wise Plan outlays during Twelfth
Five Year Plan, the Department of Pharmaceuticals had proposed
Rs. 567.60 crore for the year 2013-14 but the Planning Commission had
approved only Rs. 188.00 crore. The Committee had noted that this
was mainly due to under-utilization of funds by the Department during
the year 2012-13. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that
the Department should impress upon the Planning Commission to
allocate more funds for remaining period of Twelfth Five Year Plan.
In their Action Taken Reply, the Department has simply conveyed the
concern of the Committee to the Planning Commission. Thus, the
response of the Department in the matter is too casual and highly
unsatisfactory. The Department has not furnished any explanation for
its failure to utilize the funds timely and optimally which resulted less
allocation of funds by the Planning Commission and the officers
responsible therefor. The Committee are of the opinion that in the
absence of any well thought out action plan for expeditious
implementation of various schemes, the funds could not be utilized
judiciously, optimally and timely. The Committee, therefore, desire
that the Department should spell out its action plan with a view to
impress upon the Planning Commission to allocate requisite funds for
the remaining period of Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Department should
also take action against the officers for their failure to utilize the funds
timely and optimally. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
initiatives taken by the Department in this regard.
C. Setting up of campuses of Six New Institutes under NIPER
Recommendation No. 5
11. While expressing concern over the delay in construction of new
NIPER campuses, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that NIPER was declared as an “Institute
of National Importance” under the Act of Parliament on

6
26th June 1998. NIPER is a member of Association of Indian Universities.
The Committee also observe that in addition to NIPER, SAS Nagar,
Mohali, the Government has set up six new NIPERs at Hajipur,
Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Rae Bareli, Guwahati and Kolkata. At
present these six new NIPERs are functioning with the assistance
of Mentor Institutes presently in the respective States. The work
relating to construction of NIPER campuses at Guwahati and
Gandhinagar has since been awarded to PSUs viz. Engineering
Projects (India) Ltd. (EPIL) and Hindustan Steelworks Construction
Ltd. (HSCL) respectively. The State Government of Andhra Pradesh
has agreed to allot 50 acres of land for NIPER Hyderabad and the
issue is being finalized. The issue of allocation of land for NIPER
Kolkata, Hajipur and Rae Bareli are being pursued with the
respective State Governments.
In view of the foregoing, the Committee regret to note that all six
new NIPERs do not have their own campuses and still they continue
to function with the assistance of Mentor Institutes even after a gap
of more than 4-5 years. Considering the importance of these
Institutes for the continuous growth of pharmaceuticals sector, it
is but essential that all the new NIPER have their own campuses
for their effective functioning for which these are meant for. In this
regard the Committee reiterate its repeated recommendations on
Demands for Grants 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13
regarding completion of necessary formalities for construction of
NIPER Campuses. While some progress has been made with regard
to construction of NIPER Campus at Guwahati and Gandhinagar,
the allotment of land for NIPER in the States of West Bengal, Bihar
and Uttar Pradesh are still awaited. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Department should vigorously and relentlessly
pursue the matter with the concerned State Government so that the
land is allocated for the purpose without any further delay.The
Committee also expect that the Construction of NIPER campuses
at Guwahati and Gandhinagar should be completed within a fixed
time-frame in order to avoid time and cost overruns. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department
in this regard.”
Reply of the Government
12. In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“Following allocation of work for construction of NIPER campuses
at Guwahati and Gandhinagar and signing of MoU, mobilization

7
funds have been released to each NIPER to start construction
work.
A meeting has also been held in the Department in the Chairmanship
of Secretary (Pharma) on 27.5.2013 to review the progress of the
construction work.”
Comments of the Committee
13. Expressing concern over delay in construction of NIPER
Campuses, the Committee had noted that all six new NIPERs do not
have their own campuses and still they continue to function with
the assistance of Mentor Institutes. While the work relating to
construction of NIPER campuses at Guwahati and Gandhinagar has
since been awarded to PSUs and the State Government of
Andhra Pradesh has agreed to allot land for NIPER Hyderabad, the
allocation of land for NIPER Kolkata, Hajipur and Rae Bareli are
being pursued with the respective State Governments. The Committee
had, therefore, recommended that the Department should vigorously
and relentlessly pursue the matter with the concerned
State Governments so that land is allotted for the purpose without any
further delay. The Committee had also expected that the
Construction of NIPER campuses at Guwahati and Gandhinagar
should be completed within a fixed time frame in order to avoid
time and cost overruns. However, the Committee are dismayed to note
from the Action Taken Reply of the Government that the Department
does not have any action plan to set up all six new NIPER campuses
with in a fixed time-frame. While the mobilization funds have been
released for construction of NIPER campuses at Guwahati and
Gandhinagar, the Department is silent on the issue regarding the
progress made with respect to allotment of land for construction
of NIPER campuses at Hyderabad, Kolkata, Hajipur and Rae Bareli.
The Committee, therefore, stress and recommend that the
Department should vigorously and relentlessly pursue the matter with
the respective State Governments for allotment of land for construction
of NIPER campuses in their States. The Committee also desire that
the Department should monitor the pace of progress of construction
of NIPER campuses at Guwahati and Gandhinagar at regular
intervals. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives
taken or being undertaken by the Department and the progress made
in this regard.

8
D. Rehabilitation Scheme for revival of sick Pharma PSUs
Recommendation No. 7
14. While expressing their concern over the slow progress in the
revival of sick Pharma PSUs, the Committee had recommended as
under:—
“The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals has
5 running PSUs under its administrative control viz. Karnataka
Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL), Rajasthan Drugs
and Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL), Bengal Chemicals and
Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL), Hindustan Antibiotics Limited
(HAL) and Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL). Out
of these KAPL and RDPL are profit making and BCPL, HAL and
IDPL are BIFR referred companies. Further, being consistent with
the policy to ensure availability of good quality life saving drugs
at reasonable prices, Government of India has since approved
rehabilitation scheme for revival of HAL and BCPL. The
rehabilitation scheme of IDPL is under consideration and for its
revival, the Cabinet Note will be finalized after receipt of Draft
Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) prepared by the IDBI – Operating
Agency (OA) appointed by BIFR. Final DRS is to be submitted by
IDBI to BIFR which is expected in the month of April, 2013. As
regards BCPL the Committee were informed that Statutory
approvals/clearances from Drug Controller, Kolkata Development
Authority (KDA), Kolkata Municipal Corporation (KMC), Factory
Directorate, Pollution Control Board, Fire, Kolkata Electric Supply
Corporation (CESC), Kanpur Electric Supply Authority (KESA) etc.
are essential before commencement of operation of the plants under
installation and commissioning. In this regard, BCPL has paid small
portion of it from Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) fund and working
Capital and provisional clearances for commencement of
construction have been obtained except electricity. After full payment
of statutory dues, final clearances are expected to be obtained within
two months. The Committee also note that the process of
preparation/approval of 2nd Rehabilitation Plan of HAL is underway
and efforts are being made to complete the process at the earliest.
Since various other agencies are also involved in the process, no
time frame can be indicated by the Department of Pharmaceuticals.
In view of the foregoing, the Committee are, anguished to note that
revival process of sick PSUs is still going on a snail’s pace and
the full revival of these sick PSUs has yet to take place. In this
regard, in their earlier reports on DFG 2009-10, 2010-11 and

9
2011-12 the Committee, recommended that the matter needs to be
pursued by the Department vigorously with all concerned. Since
the revival of these units is essential in order to ensure good quality
of drugs at an affordable price to the majority of the people it is
all the more important for the Department as a nodal agency to
make concerted and coordinated efforts so that these units are
revived within a fix time frame. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
its earlier recommendation that Department of Pharmaceuticals
should expedite the revival of all these sick PSUs without further
delay. The Committee would like to be apprised of the time bound
action plan of the Department in this regard.”
Reply of the Government
15. In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“The position regarding rehabilitation of such Pharma CPSEs is as
under:—
Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL)
Government approved the Rehabilitation Scheme for the company
on 9th March 2006. It was approved by BIFR on 5th June 2007. The
Rehabilitation Scheme inter alia  involved the following:—
Sl. No. P articulars A mount
(Rs. in crores)
1. Cash infusion 137.59
2. Write off/exemptions from Government of 267.57
India
3. Sacrifices by Banks, financial institutions 103.34
and PSUs
Total 508.50
The entire cash infusion of Rs. 137.59 crores has been released to
the company. Government has approved writing off of loan and
waiver of interest to the extent of Rs. 259.43 crores.
Further, the Government has additionally approved proposals of
Rs. 30.17 crore received from HAL for setting up new powder
injectable facilities for Cephalosporin and upgradation of existing
vialling facilities for Betalactum (Penicillin) Antibiotics complying
to WHO-GMP standards at an estimated cost of Rs. 20.17 crores

10
and for upgradation of manufacturing facilities of Tablet, Capsule
and Liquid Sections complying to WHO-GMP standards at an
estimated cost of Rs. 10.00 crore in order to make the company
further viable.
HAL has completed the work on Cephalosporin. It has
commissioned commercial production in February, 2009 and also
obtained WHO-Certification for the same. Work relating to
upgradation of existing vialling facilities for Betalactum Antibiotics
has also been completed.
However, as HAL is still incurring losses, the Department is taking
necessary action to seek the approval of the Cabinet and the BIFR
for the 2nd Rehabilitation Scheme for HAL. HAL is also making
efforts for the sale of its surplus land.
 Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL), Kolkata
Government approved Rehabilitation Scheme for revival of BCPL
on 21.12.2006. The rehabilitation scheme, inter alia , involved the
following:—
(i) Cash infusion of Rs. 207.19 crore (out of Rs. 207.19 crore,
Rs. 145.00 crore is meant for upgradation and modernization
of manufacturing facilities conforming to WHO-GMP
standards).
(ii) Write off of Government of India Loan and waiver of interest
thereon of Rs. 233.41 crores.
Government has approved writing off of GoI loans and interest of
Rs. 233.41 crores and a cash infusion of Rs. 207.19 crore approved
by the Government has been released. The process of upgradation
and modernization of plant and machinery is underway.
Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL)
Proposal for Revival of IDPL is under consideration. Board for
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) has appointed
Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI) as the Operating
Agency (OA). BIFR directed IDBI to submit the Final Draft
Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) to BIFR and the Ministry for
consideration and the same has been submitted on 26.03.2013. A Cabinet
Note on the 2nd rehabilitation package is under preparation.”

11
Comments of the Committee
16. The Committee had noted that out of the five running PSUs
under the administrative control of the Department, only KAPL and
RDPL are profit making units and the remaining three namely HAL,
BCPL and IDPL are loss making/sick units. Since the revival of these
units is essential in order to ensure good quality of drugs at an
affordable price to the majority of the people, the Committee had
recommended that the Department of Pharmaceuticals should expedite
the revival of all the sick PSUs without further delay. In its Action
Taken Reply, the Department has stated that the Government had
approved the Rehabilitation Scheme for HAL on 09.03.2006 and for
BCPL on 21.12.2006. However, HAL is still incurring losses for which
the Department is seeking the approval of the Cabinet and the BIFR
for the 2nd Rehabilitation Scheme, as for BCPL, the process of its
upgradation and modernization of plant and machinery is underway.
In case of IDPL, a cabinet note on the 2nd Rehabilitation package is
under preparation. In view of the above, the Committee regret to note
that all the sick Pharma units are yet to be fully revived to sustain
commercial production of drugs and medicines without any loss.
Further the Department has failed to give the plausible reasons for
their continuous loss. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the Department should make concerted and
coordinated efforts to expedite the revival of all the sick pharma units
in a time bound manner and if felt necessary the Department may also
consider to overhaul the management of these sick units. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken or being undertaken
by the Department in this regard.
E. National Centre for Research and Development in Bulk Drugs
(NCRDBD) at NIPER, Hyderabad
Recommendation No. 10
17. While noting the avowed objectives of the proposed National
Centre for Research and Development in Bulk Drugs (NCRDBD) at NIPER,
Hyderabad, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Department proposes to set up a
National Centre for Research and Development in Bulk Drugs
(NCRDBD) at NIPER, Hyderabad. The Centre would aim at
development of technologies and process for cost competetiveness,
environmental impact management, risk management and
development of safety in manufacturing operations, knowledge
transfer platform between industry and academia. The research

12
avenues for bulk drugs are Drugs process innovation, Drug
discovery and development, Analytical chemistry, Process
engineering, cleaner technology, Polymorphism, Nanotechnology
etc. The Committee were informed that the proposal had been
accorded in-principle approval by the Planning Commission subject
to certain conditions. Keeping in view the avowed objectives of the
proposed centre, the Committee desire that all necessary steps may
be taken by the Department in coordination with all concerned so
that the proposed centre is set up expeditiously within a fixed time
frame.”
Reply of the Government
18. In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“Direction of the Committee has been noted for compliance.”
Comments of the Committee
19.  The Committee had noted that the Department proposes to
set up a National Centre for Research and Development in Bulk Drugs
(NCRDBD) at NIPER Hyderabad for which in-principle approval has
already been accorded by the Planning Commission subject to certain
conditions. The Committee, therefore desired that the proposed centre
is set up expeditiously within a fixed time frame. However, the
Committee regret to note that the Department in its Action Taken Reply
has neither furnished the details of its action plan or the initiatives
taken or being under taken by them nor has indicated any time frame
for completion of the proposed Centre. The Department is
conspicuously silent over the issue. The Committee had , therefore,
would like to reiterate their recommendation that the Department
should take all necessary steps in coordination with all concerned with
a view to expedite the completion of the proposed centre within a
fixed time frame. In this context, the Department should chalk out an
action plan for implementation with in a fixed time frame. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken or being
undertaken by the Department for the purpose.

13
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation No. 1
The Committee note that net sales of the industry grew by 14.7%
in the quarter ending June, 2012 as compared to a year ago quarter.
Again, in the second quarter ending September, 2012 the drugs and
pharmaceuticals industry performed well. However, the Committee are
concerned to note that the imports of ‘Medicinal and Pharmaceuticals
Products’ had risen by 29.43 per cent in the year 2011-12 as compared
to previous year. As a result of which pressure was exerted on the profit
margins of the industry. According to the Department, although the
country is almost self-sufficient in production of most of formulations/
pharmaceuticals products, imports are resorted to on quality and economic
considerations and not necessarily due to non-availability from domestic
sources. Needless to say, the raw material expenses necessarily contribute
towards the cost component of the quality medicine being sold to the
common consumers. The Committee, are therefore of the view that it
would be imperative if the import of raw material for production of
medicine is resorted only if the same is absolutely necessary for the
purpose. In fact, the Committee, expect the Department to encourage
innovation and also intensive research and development in the field of
pharma sector so that cheap but quality inputs are available within the
country itself for production of quality but cheap medicine which would
ultimately benefit the common man in the country. The Committee,
therefore, recommend to take appropriate steps in this direction.
Reply of the Government
In order to encourage Pharma Innovation and Research and
Development following proposals are under examination in the
Department:—
(i) In order to enhance the national potential for Drug Discovery
and Innovation the Department is in the process of preparing

14
a detailed Project Report (DPR) in this regard. For the purpose
the Department has engaged M/s. Ernst and Young Limited
(M/s. E&Y) a global level consultant.
(ii) A proposal is being examined in the Department to set up
a National Centre for R&D in Bulk Drugs at Hyderabad
NIPER.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) F. No. 16(3)/2013-Fin.II, dated 22.08.2013]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please  see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation No. 2
The Committee with great concern note that the budgetary allocation
of Rs. 188 crore for the year 2012-13 of the Department of Pharmaceuticals
was drastically reduced to Rs. 85 crore at RE stage. However, even this
amount could not be utilized fully by the Department as the actual
utilization during the year 2012-13 was only Rs. 42.03 crore. The
Department has attributed this reduction in funds in the year 2012-13
due to non-utilisation of funds to the extent of Rs. 145.97 crore by National
Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER),
Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS),
National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority (NPPA), Pharmaceutical
Promotion and Development Scheme (PPDS) and Project Based Support
to PSUs and Jan Aushadhi Scheme (JAS). However, the Committee feel
that the Department being the nodal agency, cannot escape their
responsibility for gross under utilization of allocated funds for the year
2012-13 under various schemes which remains less by more than
50 per cent of the allocated funds. This only reflects the poor performance
of the Department in achieving its financial and physical targets. The fact
that various schemes/projects of the Department are still awaiting
clearance/approval of the Integrated Finance Division (IFD) and/or the
Planning Commission, also show the lack of will and concerted and
coordinated efforts of the Department and the Institutes under them. The
Committee now expect the Department of Pharmaceuticals to expedite
the process of getting clearances/approvals from Planning Commission/
Integrated Finance Division (IFD) for the speedy implementation of various
schemes so that the sanctioned funds do not remain under utilized. The
under utilization of funds for the year 2012-13 by the Department is
inspite of the earlier recommendations of the Committee on Demands
for Grants 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 to utilize the sanctioned funds

15
properly and timely to achieve the avowed objectives of the Department.
The Committee, therefore strongly deplore the casual and lackadaisical
attitude of the Department and their failure to fully utilize the funds
allocated to them. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Department should make all efforts and prepare its action plan before
hand for optimum utilization of the funds meant for various schemes
run by them. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken
by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The steps taken by the Department of Pharmaceuticals to optimally
utilize the allocated funds with status of the projects is as under:—
(a) Project Based Support to PSUs
(i) Project:  Expanding the capacity of large volume
parentals – IV fluid (Rs. 1417 crore)
Status – A committee under the Chairmanship of AS and FA
has been constituted vide Order dated 15.05.2013 to visit the
plant of Hindustan Antibiotics Limited, Pune to assess the
ground reality and to impress upon the Ministry of Finance
to release assistance under ‘Project based Support’. The
Committee has visited HAL on 04.07.2013 for this purpose.
The Report of the Committee has already been submitted
which is under consideration in the Department.
(ii) Project: Statutory obligations towards Land and Revenue and
fees for obtaining statutory approvals from the State and
Central Drug Controller, KDA and KMC, Factory Directorate,
Pollution Control Board, Fire and Legal issues under
implementation of Revival Scheme of BCPL (Rs. 9.30 crore).
Status – The proposal is under consideration. In this regard,
BCPL has been requested to send a detailed proposal for
consideration of Department for release of funds.
(iii) Project:  Terminal Dues/Gratuity of Retiring Employees
(Rs. 3.00 crores), Upgradation of premises for NIPER at IDPL
(Rs. 2.90 crores) and liquid oral (2nd line) at Gurgaon plant
(0.29 cores).
Status – IDPL has been asked to send detailed proposals for
consideration of this Department for release of funds.

16
(b) Critical Assistance Scheme
WHO GMP compliance in DRPL (6.84 crore)
Status— RDPL has been asked to send proposals for release of
funds. The project for WHO GMP compliance is under process by
the RDPL and RDPL is on the process of utilizing the funds earlier
sanctioned for the purpose. The proposal for the further release of
funds is expected to be received when the RDPL utilize the amount
sanctioned earlier substantially.
(c) Jan Aushadhi Scheme
Jan Aushadhi Scheme (Rs. 25.00 crore)
Status— New business Plan to Jan Aushadhi Scheme has been
finalized. In-principle approval of Planning Commission has been
sought and awaited. EFC Meeting was convened on 05.07.2013 but
has to be postponed as Planning Commission has sought some
more time for appraisal.
(d) Schemes pertaining to NIPER
Status— All out efforts are being made to utilize the funds allocated
to various schemes of NIPER, Necessary approvals of IFD and
Planning Commission are also being expedited wherever required.
(e)  NPPA Schemes
With the notification of National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy,
2012 and Drugs (Price Control) Order, 2013, (DPCO, 2013) the
relevance of the Schemes has been reviewed in consultation with
NPPA and the status of each scheme is as under:—
(i) Creation of NPPA Cells in States:
Status— In view of the changes in norms for pricing as
envisaged in DPCO, 2013, it is felt that separate cells in States
may not be required.
(ii) Scheme for Interaction with States:
Status— NPPA has already taken initiative in this regard by
having regional meetings with States on regular basis. It is
felt that a special scheme for the purpose is not required.

17
(iii) Proposals for strengthening the existing Monitoring and
Enforcement work:
Status— It has been decided to revisit the provisions of this
scheme by NPPA and a view will be taken keeping in view
the requirement under DPCO, 2013.
(iv) Consumer Awareness and Publicity through Print, electronic
and other media:
Status— NPPA decided to continue with Scheme during the
12th Five Year Plan. NPPA/Department has been making a
concerted and coordinated effort for requisite approvals/
clearances of the Scheme with Planning Commission. An
Action Plan for optimum utilization of the funds for the year
2013-14 shall also be formulated by NPPA in the light of
DPCO, 2013.
(f) PTUAS
Status— The proposal of SIDBI on soft was submitted to Planning
Commission on 08.01.2013. In response, Planning Commission vide
its letter dated 30.01.2013 requested DoP to submit proposal in
EFC format. The draft scheme has been uploaded on website of
the department on of the department on 30.05.2013 for seeking
comments/suggestion of the various stakeholders. Department has
also constituted a technical committee comprising members from
Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (KAPL), Small
Industrial Development Bank of India (SIDBI), Ministry of Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME), Drug Controller General
(India), Indian Drug Manufacturers Association (IDMA),
Confederation of Indian Pharmaceuticals Industry (CIPI) and
National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research
(NIPER) to suggest a list of equipments and machinery required
for WHO GMP/other international GMP certification and to work
out their estimated cost of procurement/installation. On finalization
of equipments, the proposal would be submitted to Planning
Commission.
(g) PPD Scheme
Status— The Department is going to have a series of interactive
sessions with Industry Associations to find out the issues which

18
could be taken up for promotion of export. Further State
level interactions are being mooted to extend the benefits of the
scheme.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) F. No. 16(3)/2013-Fin.II, dated 22.08.2013]
Recommendation No. 4
The Committee observe that the policy of the Government is to
ensure availability of good quality life saving drugs at reasonable price
and pay special attention to the poorer sections of the society in the
matter of healthcare. Consistent with this policy, the Government of
India has approved rehabilitation scheme for revival of HAL and BCPL.
The rehabilitation scheme of IDPL is still under consideration. As the
HAL is also still incurring losses, the Second Rehabilitation Plan of
HAL is also under active consideration of the Government. An
amount of Rs. 29.66 crore has been allocated for Project Based
Support to aforesaid PSUs. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Department of Pharmaceuticals should expeditiously utilize the
amount earmarked for project based support to these PSUs so that
the performance of the PSUs improves and the quality life saving
drugs at reasonable price could be manufactured without any
delay and supplied to the poor consumers. The Committee also note
with concern that in case of HAL, out of Rs. 45.00 crore required for
their project, a provision of Rs. 14.17 crore has been made for the year
2013-14. The Committee would, therefore, like to emphasize that a
high powered Committee of the Department should visit the HAL to
assess the ground reality and impress upon the Ministry of Finance to
allocate the requisite amount for the rehabilitation of various schemes
of HAL. The Committee would like to be informed of the progress made
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In pursuance of the above recommendations a committee
under the Chairmanship of AS&FA of this Department is constituted
vide  this Department’s Order dated 15.05.2013 to visit the plant
of Hindustan Antibiotics Limited, Pune to assess the ground reality
and to impress upon the Ministry of Finance to release assistance under
‘Project based Support’ which so far has been denied on ground of default

19
in repayment of loans. The constitution of the Committee may be seen
as under:—
(i) Sh. V .K. Subburaj — Chairman
Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser,
Department of Pharmaceuticals
(ii) Sh. Pradeep Yadav — Member
Joint Secretary,
Department of Pharmaceuticals
(iii) Sh. V .K. Mehta — Member
Director (Finance)
Department of Pharmaceuticals
The Committee has visited to HAL on 04.07.2013 for this purpose.
The committee recommended for the following two projects for assistance
under ‘Project based support’:—
(i) Utility set-up for formulations for the Rs. 8.41 crore.
(ii) Agro-vet Upgradation and expansion for the Rs. 6.00 crore.
The committee also recommended that this immediate investment
will not only improve efficiency of the existing operations but also help
in realizing revenue in the shortest possible gestation time. The assistance
is very critical in sustaining the operations of the company. The committee
recommended sanction of financial assistance of Rs. 14.17 crores under
‘project’ for the above mentioned two projects. The Committee is also of
the view that the default in repayment of GoI loans may not be held
against the company as a special case for sanction of assistance.
The matter has been taken up with the Planning Commission for
the in-principle approval of the above mentioned two projects.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) F. No. 16(3)/2013-Fin.II, dated 22.08.2013]
Recommendation No. 6
The Committee note that National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority
(NPPA) is, inter-alia, entrusted with the mandate of fixation/revision of
prices of schedule bulk drugs/formulation under Drugs (Price Control)
Order, 1995 (DPCO 1995) and enforcement of their prices. It is empowered
to take final decisions on these matters subject to review by the Central

20
Government when considered necessary. In order to ensure availability
of essentials drugs at affordable prices, it also monitors the prices of
decontrolled drugs/formulation and oversees the implementation of the
provisions of the DPCO, 1995. The Committee also note that the role of
NPPA would continue under new National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy
(NPPP), 2012 announced by the Government on 7.12.2012 and the new
DPCO which is under finalization. The Committee hope that the new
DPCO would help the NPPA to enforce the prices of all the medicines
which are essential to take care of the health care of the large section
of the people of the country. The Committee, therefore recommend that
the finalization of new DPCO may be expedited within a fixed time line.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Based on the notification dated 07.12.2012 notifying the National
Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy (NPPA)-2012, the Drug Price Control Order
(DPCO)-2013 has been notified on 15.05.2013.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) F. No. 16(3)/2013-Fin.II, dated 22.08.2013]
Recommendation No. 7
The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals has
5 running PSUs under its administrative control viz. Karnataka Antibiotics
and Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL), Rajasthan Drugs and
Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL), Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals
Limited (BCPL), Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) and Indian Drugs
and Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL). Out of these KAPL and RDPL are
profit making and BCPL, HAL and IDPL are BIFR referred Companies.
Further, being consistent with the policy to ensure availability of good
quality life saving drugs at reasonable prices, Government of India has
since approved rehabilitation scheme for revival of HAL and BCPL. The
rehabilitation scheme of IDPL is under consideration and for its revival,
the Cabinet Note will be finalized after receipt of Draft Rehabilitation
Scheme (DRS) prepared by the IDBI – Operating Agency (OA) appointed
by BIFR. Final DRS is to be submitted by IDBI to BIFR which is expected
in the month of April, 2013. As regards BCPL the Committee were
informed that Statutory approvals/clearances from Drug Controller,
Kolkata Development Authority (KDA), Kolkata Municipal Corporation
(KMC), Factory Directorate, Pollution Control Board, Fire, Kolkata Electric
Supply Corporation (CESC) Kanpur Electric Supply Authority (KESA)
etc. are essential before commencement of operation of the plants under

21
installation and commissioning. In this regard, BCPL has paid small
portion of it from Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) fund and working Capital
and provisional clearances for commencement of construction have been
obtained except electricity. After full payment of statutory dues, final
clearances are expected to be obtained within two months. The Committee
also note that the process of preparation/approval of 2nd Rehabilitation
Plan of HAL is underway and efforts are being made to complete the
process at the earliest. Since various other agencies are also involved in
the process, no time frame can be indicated by the Department of
Pharmaceuticals.
In view of the foregoing, the Committee are, anguished to note that
revival process of sick PSUs is still going on a snail’s space and the full
revival of these sick PSUs has yet to take place. In this regard, in their
earlier reports on DFG 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 the Committee,
recommended that the matter needs to be pursued by the Department
vigorously with all concerned. Since the revival of these units is essential
in order to ensure good quality of drugs at an affordable price to the
majority of the people it is all the more important for the Department
as a nodal agency to make concerted and coordinated efforts so that these
units are revived within a fix time frame. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate its earlier recommendation that Department of Pharmaceuticals
should expedite the revival of all these sick PSUs without further delay .
The Committee would like to be apprised of the time bound action plan
of the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The position regarding rehabilitation of such Pharma CPSEs is as
under:—
HAL: Government approved the Rehabilitation Scheme for the
company on 9th March 2006. It was approved by BIFR on 5th June, 2007.
The Rehabilitation Scheme inter alia  involved the following:—
S.No. P articulars A mount
(Rs. in crores)
1. Cash infusion 137.59
2. Write off/exemptions from Government of 267.57
India
3. Sacrifices by Banks, financial institutions 103.34
and PSUs
Total 508.50

22
The entire cash infusion of Rs. 137.59 crores has been released to
the company. Government has approved writing off of loan and waiver
of interest to the extent of Rs. 259.43 crores.
Further, Government has additionally approved proposals of
Rs. 30.17 crore received from HAL for setting up new powder injectable
facilities for Cephalosporin and upgradation of existing vialling
facilities for Betalactum (Penicilllin) Antibiotics complying to WHO-GMP
standards at an estimated cost of Rs. 20.17 crores and for upgradation
of manufacturing facilities of Tablet, Capsule and Liquid Sections
complying to WHO-GMP standards at an estimated cost of Rs. 10.00
crore in order to make the company further viable.
HAL has completed the work on Cephalosporin. It has
commissioned commercial production in February, 2009 and also obtained
WHO-Certification for the same. Work relating to upgradation of existing
vialling facilities for Betalactum Antibiotics has also been completed.
However, as HAL is still incurring losses, the Department is taking
necessary action to seek the approval of the Cabinet and the BIFR for
the 2nd Rehabilitation Scheme for HAL. HAL is also making efforts for
the sale of its surplus land.
Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL), Kolkata
Government approved Rehabilitation Scheme for revival of BCPL
on 21.12.2006. The rehabilitation scheme, inter alia, involved the following:—
(i) Cash infusion of Rs. 207.19 crore (Out of Rs. 207.19 crore,
Rs. 145.00 crore is meant for upgradation and modernization
of manufacturing facilities conforming to WHO-GMP
standards).
(ii) Write off of Government of India Loan and waiver of interest
thereon of Rs. 233.41 crores.
Government has approved writing off of GoI loans and interest of
Rs. 233.41 crores and a cash infusion of Rs. 207.19 crore approved by
the Government has been released. The process of upgradation and
modernization of plant and machinery is underway .
Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL)
Proposal for Revival of IDPL is under consideration. Board for
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) has appointed Industrial
Development Bank of India (IDBI) as the Operating Agency (OA).

23
BIFR directed IDBI to submit the Final Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS)
to BIFR and the Ministry for consideration and the same been submitted
on 26.03.2013. A Cabinet Note on the 2nd rehabilitation package is under
preparation.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) F. No. 16(3)/2013-Fin.II, dated 22.08.2013]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation No. 8
The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals has
notified the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy-2012 (NPPP-2012) on
7.12.2012. The objective is to put in place a regulatory framework for
pricing of drugs so as to ensure availability of required essential medicines
at reasonable prices even while providing sufficient opportunity for
innovation and competition to support the growth of Pharmaceutical
industry, thereby meeting the goals of employment and shared economic
well being for all. Under this policy all the medicines as under National
List of Essential Medicines (NLEM)-2011 that takes care of the healthcare
needs of the majority of the population of the country will come under
Price Control. As a result therefore 25 per cent of the total domestic
pharma market will come under the price control and the prices of nearly
63 per cent of medicines under NLEM-2011 will decrease substantially.
The Committee, in its Report No. 29 had also recommended that the
mandate of NPPA regarding fixing/revision of pricing of drugs should
be broadened to include all the 348 essential drugs and medicines listed
by the Department of Pharmaceuticals. The Committee, therefore, expect
the Department of Pharmaceuticals to take up follow up steps to
implement the Policy expeditiously without any further delay. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the status of implementation of
the policy within three months of the presentation of the Report.
Reply of the Government
Based on the notification dated 07.12.2012 notifying the National
Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy (NPPP)-2012, the Drug Price Control Order
(DPCO)-2013 has been notified on 15.05.2013 and put on Department of
Pharmaceuticals website  www.pharmaceuticals.gov.in on 16.05.2013.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) F. No. 16(3)/2013-Fin.II, dated 22.08.2013]

24
Recommendation No. 9
The Committee note that in November, 2008, the Department
launched Generic Drug Campaign by opening the first Jan Aushadhi
Generic Drug Campaign Store (JAS) at Amritsar Civil Hospital on
25.11.2008. Since then 147 JAS have been opened (till 31st January, 2013).
The main objective of the campaign was to make available quality generic
drugs at affordable prices to all through the Jan Aushadhi Generic Drug
Stores which are quite cheaper than the branded medicine. The
Government intends to open up one JAS in each district of the country.
A revised Business Plan of Jan Aushadhi Scheme in this regard is under
consideration of the Department and the same will be ready by April,
2013 as informed by the Department. At present only the medicines
manufactured by the Central Pharma Public Sector Undertakings (CPSUs)
under the Department of Pharmaceuticals are being sold at the existing
Jan Aushadhi Stores and as such, the range of medicines being supplied
by these CPSUs is limited, beside limited coverage of the therapeutic
categories. In order to tide over this situation and to increase the range
of medicines. BPPI has initiated a proposal to improve the supply chain,
which would adequately address the issue of wider coverage of the
therapeutic categories, and the same is under consideration of the
Government. The Committee believe that the proposal initiated by BPPI
will be finalized expeditiously without any undue delay. The Committee
are distressed to note that the response from some of the States for the
Jan Aushadhi Scheme is not very affirmative, without which it would
be difficult to implement the scheme successfully in the entire country.
As recommended by the Committee in their reports on Demands for
Grants for the year 2012-13 the Department should open JAS in a mission
mode, in coordination with State Governments. The Committee
recommended that Department should explore options like opening up
of JAS through public-private partnership and also individual
entrepreneurs should also be encouraged to open JAS. Further, the
Department should rope in State PSUs and private manufacturers to
increase the coverage of generic drugs at JAS. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As of now (31.5.2013), 154 Jan Aushadhi Stores have been opened
in twelve States, namely, Punjab, Haryana, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh,
Rajasthan, Delhi, Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Jammu and Kashmir,
Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh, including UT of Chandigarh. Out of this,

25
91 stores are functional and 63 are non-functional. To take this campaign
forward, BPPI had taken up the matter with the State Governments and
the status is as under:—
1. As regards Uttar Pradesh, the Principal Secretary, Health and
Family Welfare Department, convened a meeting on
16th April, 2013 to take a decision with regard to opening
up of Jan Aushadhi Stores in the State. It was informed in
the meeting that the State Government is now giving free
medicines to all the indoor and outdoor patients visiting the
Government Hospitals. In view of this, they were not
interested in opening of Jan Aushadhi Stores in the District
Hospitals. However, they were interested in opening Jan
Aushadhi Stores in the Medical Colleges located in the State
and also having Jan Aushadhi Stores as the Upbhokta Sangh
Stores located in the State. In this regard, the State
Government has to send a comprehensive proposal to the
BPPI which is still awaited.
2. As regards opening up of Jan Aushadhi Stores in other States,
BPPI officials had a meeting with Secretary , Department of
Health and Family Welfare, and Mizoram at Aizawl in
January, 2013. A draft MoU was sent to Secretary, Department
of Health and Family Welfare, and Mizoram on 28th January ,
2013 followed by a reminder letter dated 8th April, 2003 to
Secretary, Department of Health and Family Welfare, and
Mizoram.
3. As a result of continuous persuasion with the Government
of Arunachal Pradesh, they have recently intimated that
they propose to open Jan Aushadhi Stores at 19 places
to benefit the public by making available quality generic
medicines at affordable prices and are in the process
of identifying the space and the agencies for managing
the JASs.
4. As regards Tamil Nadu, after the meeting with the Secretary,
Cooperation, Food, Consumer Affairs and Secretary, Health
and Family Welfare, Government of Tamil Nadu, with regard
to their proposal to sell generic unbranded medicines through
191 pharmacies run by Triplicane Urban Cooperative Society ,
Kamadhenu, a society recognized by the Ministry of
Cooperation Food and Consumer Affairs, a Tripartite draft
MoU was sent to the Secretary, Cooperation, Food and
Consumer Protection, Government of Tamil Nadu on 5th June,

26
2012. In response to the MoU, a letter was received from the
Secretary, Cooperation, Food and Consumer Protection
enclosing therewith a letter from Triplicane Urban
Cooperative Society seeking clarifications, which was
responded by BPPI on 17th October, 2012 followed by a
reminder letter dated 10th April, 2013. Their response is still
awaited.
5. Request has also been received from the State Government
of Sikkim, who have shown interest for opening up of
Jan Aushadhi Stores. BPPI officials would be meeting
Secretary (H&FW) to discuss and finalize the modalities of
opening of the stores, Government of Sikkim.
6. Recently request has also been received from Director of
Health Services, Government of Tripura, for opening up
of Jan Aushadhi Stores in some parts of Tripura State on
pilot basis. BPPI officials would visit Tripura shortly to
finalize the modalities for opening up of Jan Aushadhi
Stores.
7. It is also pertinent to mention here that Director, Directorate
of Health Services, Chhattisgarh vide its letter dated 7th May,
2013 has informed BPPI that State Government of
Chhattisgarh is interested to open Jan Aushadhi Stores in
District Hospitals of Chhattisgarh through Red Cross Societies
and requested BPPI to send the formalities/guidelines to be
followed in regard to opening up of the stores. BPPI officials
would visit Chhattisgarh shortly to finalize the modalities
for opening up of Jan Aushadhi Stores.
8. In Delhi, BPPI have received two requests – one from Senior
General Manager, Delhi Consumer’s Co-operative Store Ltd.,
Moti Nagar and the other from President, Muni Shri Nagraj
Spiritual Centre, NirmanVihar, Delhi to open Jan Aushadhi
Store in their premises at Karampura, Delhi and NirmanVihar,
Delhi. The Delhi Consumer’s Cooperative Stores Ltd., Moti
Nagar, New Delhi has completed all the formalities and they
are going to open a Jan Aushadhi Store at their Head Quarter
at Karampura, Delhi, on 4th June, 2013. As regards opening
up of Jan Aushadhi Store by Muni Shri Nagraj Spiritual
Centre, NirmanVihar, Delhi, a draft MoU was sent to them
through email on 1st February, 2013 and after some
clarifications, they are ready to execute the MoU which is
under process.

27
The revised Business Plan proposes to open the field for opening
up of Jan Aushadhi Stores to individuals and private NGOs etc. on specific
terms and conditions and it is expected that this will give a boost to
opening of new Jan Aushadhi Stores.
As regards therapeutic coverage, it is proposed to have a basket
of 361 medicines, out of which 138 medicines are being manufactured
by 5 CPSUs in-house and it is proposed to procure remaining 223
medicines through open tenders from State PSUs and private sector
companies. The revised Business Plan has been sent to Planning
Commission for necessary action.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) F. No. 16(3)/2013-Fin.II, dated 22.08.2013]
Recommendation No. 10
The Committee note that the Department proposes to set up a
National Centre for Research and Development in Bulk Drugs (NCRDBD)
at NIPER Hyderabad. The Centre would aim at development of
technologies and process for cost competitiveness, environmental impact
management, risk management and development of safety in
manufacturing operations, knowledge transfer platform between industry
and academia. The research avenues for bulk drugs are Drugs process
innovation, Drug discovery and development, Analytical chemistry,
Process engineering, cleaner technology, Polymorphism, Nanotechnology
etc. The Committee were informed that the proposal had been accorded
in-principle approval by the Planning Commission subject to certain
conditions. Keeping in view the avowed objectives of the proposed centre,
the Committee desire that all necessary steps may be taken by the
Department in coordination with all concerned so that the proposed centre
is set up expeditiously within a fixed time frame.
Reply of the Government
Direction of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) F. No. 16(3)/2013-Fin.II, dated 22.08.2013]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please  see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)

28
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
— NIL —

29
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation No. 3
The Committee note that out of total GBS allocation of
Rs. 2968.00 crore for the scheme wise Plan Outlays during
Twelfth Five Year Plan, the Department of Pharmaceuticals had proposed
Rs. 567.60 crore for the year 2013-14 but the Planning Commission has
approved only Rs. 188.00 crore. The Committee also note that Planning
Commission had indicated that the outlay of the Department be
maintained at the same level as in the previous year. This was primarily
due to gross underutilization of funds by the Department of
Pharmaceuticals during the year 2012-13. The Committee, feel that it is
now the responsibility of the Department to impress upon the Planning
Commission to allocate more funds for the remaining period of Twelfth
Five Year Plan. The Committee expect the Department to act strongly.
Reply of the Government
Planning Commission has been apprised about the Committee’s
concern regarding enhanced allocation.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) F. No. 16(3)/2013-Fin.II, dated 22.08.2013]
Recommendation No. 5
The Committee note that NIPER was declared as an “Institute of
National Importance” under the Act of Parliament on 26th June 1998.
NIPER is a member of Association of Indian Universities. The Committee,
also observe that in addition to NIPER, SAS Nagar, Mohali, the
Government has set up six new NIPERs at Hajipur, Hyderabad,
Ahmedabad, Rae Bareli, Guwahati and Kolkata. At present these

30
six new NIPERs are functioning with the assistance of Mentor Institutes
presently in the respective States. The work relating to construction of
NIPER campuses at Guwahati and Gandhinagar has since been
awarded to PSUs viz Engineering Projects (India) Ltd. (EPIL) and
Hindustan Steelworks Construction Ltd. (HSCL) respectively. The
State Government of Andhra Pradesh has agreed to allot 50 acres of
land for NIPER Hyderabad and the issue is being finalized. The
issue of allocation of land for NIPER Kolkata, Hajipur and Rae Bareli
are being pursued with the respective State Governments.
In view of the foregoing, the Committee regret to note that all
six new NIPERs do not have their own campuses and still they continue
to function with the assistance of Mentor Institutes even after a gap of
more than 4-5 years. Considering the importance of these Institutes for
the continuous growth of pharmaceuticals sector, it is but essential
that all the new NIPER have their own campuses for their effective
functioning for which these are meant for. In this regard the Committee
reiterate its repeated recommendations on Demands for Grants
2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 regarding completion of
necessary formalities for construction of NIPER Campuses. While
some progress has been made with regard to construction of NIPER
Campus at Guwahati and Gandhinagar, the allotment of land for NIPER
in the States of West Bengal, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh are still awaited.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should
vigorously and relentlessly pursue the matter with the concerned
State Government so that the land is allocated for the purpose without
any further delay. The Committee also expect that the Construction of
NIPER campuses at Guwahati and Gandhinagar should be completed
within a fixed time frame in order to avoid time and cost overruns. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“Following allocation of work for construction of NIPER campuses
at Guwahati and Gandhinagar and signing of MoU, mobilization
funds have been released to each NIPER to start construction
work.

31
A meeting has also been held in the Department in the Chairmanship
of Secretary (Pharma) on 27.5.2013 to review the progress of the
construction work.”
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) F. No. 16(3)/2013-Fin.II, dated 22.08.2013]
Comments of the Committee
 (Please  see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)

32
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
— NIL —
NEW DELHI; GOPINATH MUNDE,
24 October, 2013 Chairman,
2 Kartika, 1935  (Saka) Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers.

33
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2013-14)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 24 October, 2013 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Gopinath Munde — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S. Alagiri
3. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
4. Shri Prabhatsinh P. Chauhan
5. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya
6. Sk. Nurul Islam
7. Shri Shakti Mohan Malik
8. Shri Paswan Kamlesh
9. Shri Amarnath Pradhan
10. Shri Tufani Saroj
11. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar
12. Shri Raju Shetti
13. Shri D. Venugopal
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Biswajit Daimary
15. Smt. Naznin Faruque

34
16. Shri A.A. Jinnah
17. Shri Brijlal Khabri
18. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya
19. Shri Raghunandan Sharma
20. Shri Ishwar Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain — Joint Secretary
2. Shri U.B.S. Negi — Director
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Additional Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the
Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter took up the following draft Reports
for consideration:
(a) Draft Action Taken Report on the action taken by the
Government on the observations/recommendations contained
in the Thirty-fourth report (15th Lok Sabha) on “Demands for
Grants 2013-14” of the Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals.
(b) Draft Action Taken Report on the action taken by the
Government on the observations/recommendations contained
in the Thirty-fifth report (15th Lok Sabha) on “Demands for
Grants 2013-14” of the Department of Pharmaceuticals.
4. The draft Report relating to the Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals was adopted by the Committee without any amendments.
However, the draft Report relating to the Department of Pharmaceuticals
was adopted with some amendments as indicated in the Annexure.
5. The Committee decided to seek opinion of stakeholders and
the public at large on the subject ‘Jan Aushadhi Scheme’ by giving
advertisements in print and electronic media.
6. The Committee authorised the Chairman to present the Reports
to both Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

35
ANNEXURE
(Vide Para 4 of the Minutes)
Para No. Page No. Line Amendments/modifications (in the
Comments portion of the
draft Report)
7 4 3 from below Insert the following sentence before the
last sentence:  “The Committee desire
that the Department should formulate
time bound action plan in this regard.”
10 5 11 from below After ‘the Planning Commission’ of the
last sentence, add the following: “and
the officers responsible therefor”.
10 5 4 from below Insert the following sentence before the
last sentence: “The Department should
also take action against the officers for
their failure to utilize the funds timely
and optimally .”
13 7 2 from below After  ‘the Department’ of the last
sentence, insert the following: “and the
progress made”
16 11 8 from below Insert the following sentence before the
last two sentences:”Further the
Department has failed to give the
plausible reasons for their continuous
loss.”
16 11 4 from below After ‘in a time bound manner’ and, before
the last sentence, add the following: “and
if felt necessary  the Department may
also consider to overhaul the
management of these sick units”.

36
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIFTH
REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(2012-13) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14)’
OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF
PHARMACEUTICALS)
I. Total No. of Recommendations: 10
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10) 8
Percentage of Total : 80%
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:
Nil 00
Percentage of Total : Nil
IV . Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:
(Vide Recommendation at Sl. Nos. 3 and 5) 2
Percentage of Total : 20%
V . Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited:
Nil 00
Percentage of Total : Nil

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”