37 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
PRODUCTION, DEMAND AND AVAILABILITY OF FERTILIZERS 
AND ITS DISTRIBUTION 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON 'PRODUCTION, DEMAND AND AVAILABILITY OF FERTILIZERS AND ITS 
DISTRIBUTION'  OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS)] 
 
 
 
 THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2013/ Shravana 1935, (Saka) 
 


 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
2 
CC&F No. -37 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
PRODUCTION, DEMAND AND AVAILABILITY OF FERTILIZERS AND 
ITS DISTRIBUTION 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
'PRODUCTION, DEMAND AND AVAILABILITY OF FERTILIZERS AND ITS DISTRIBUTION'  OF THE 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.08.2013 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  13.08.2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2013/ Shravana 1935, (Saka) 
  


 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
3 
iii 
CONTENTS 
 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13) …………… v 
INTRODUCTION vi 
Chapter I Report ……………….………………………………………………….. 6-19 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
20-31 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
32 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
33 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature 
34-41 
 ANNEXURES  
I) Letter regarding - New Investment Policy-2012 42-46 
II) Consumption of Fertilizers 47 
III) Consumption of Urea  48 
IV) Consumption of DAP 49 
V) Consumption of MOP 50 
VI) Consumption of NPK 51 
VII) State-wise and year -wise number of sanctioned Soil Testing 
Laboratories (STLs) to be set up/ strengthened under the Scheme 
– National Project on Management of Soil Health and Fertility 
(NPMSH&F). 
52 
VIII) Requirement, Availability and Sales of Fertilizers during the year 
2012 (April 12 to December 12 along with stock pre-positioned) 
53 
IX) State wise & District wise opening stock, Monthly Plan Dispatches, 
Receipts, Availability and Sales of Urea Fertilizers during Kharif 
2013 (April to June) 
54-62 
APPENDICES 
1. Minutes of Thirteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee  on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2012-13) held on 25 July 2013 
63-64 
2. Minutes of Fourteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2012-13) held on 06 August 2013 
65 
3. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty -Eighth Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2012-13) on ‘Production, Demand And Availability Of Fertilizers 
And Its Distribution’  of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers). 
66 
 
  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
4 
v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri S. Alagiri  
3. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
4. Shri P.P. Chauhan  
5. Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
6. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
7. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
8. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
9. Shri Paswan Kamlesh  
10. Shri  Amarnath Pradhan 
11. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
12. Shri Tufani Saroj 
13. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
14. Shri Raju Shetti 
15. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
16. Shri  D. Venugopal 
17.^ Shri Sai Prathap Annayyagari 
18.* Vacant 
19. # Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
24. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
26. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
27. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
28. %  Vacant 
29. ^ Vacant 
30. ^# Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Smt Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
* SHRI P. BALARAM NAIK APPOINTED AS A MINISTER OF STATE 
#SHRI VITTHALBHAI HANSRAJBHAI (LS) HAS RESIGNED W.E.F. 03 .01.2013 
^ SHRI SAI PRATHAP ANNAYYAGARIN (LS) NOMINATED W.E.F. 09.01.2013. 
% DR. VIJAY MALLYA (RS) HAS RESIGNED W.E.F. 26.02.2013 
^ SHRI K.C. TYAGI (RS) NOMINATED  W.E.F. 07.03.2013. 
^ SHRI PYARIMOHAN MOHAPATRA (RS) HAS RESIGNED W.E.F. 22.03.2013 
# SHRI K.C. TYAGI (RS) HAS RESIGNED W.E.F. 01.04.2013 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
5 
vi 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2012 -13) 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, the 
Thirty-Seventh  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2011 -12) on 
'Production, Demand and Availability of Fertilizers and its Distribution’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
 
2. The Twenty-Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 24 August, 2012.   The Action 
Taken Replies of Government to all observations/recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 25 March, 2013.   The Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2012-13) considered the Action Taken Report and adopted the same at their 
sitting held on 6 August, 2013. 
 
3. An an alysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -Eighth  Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recom mendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
12 August, 2013                                                     GOPINATH MUNDE 
21 Shravana, 1935 (Saka)                                          Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
6 
 
REPORT        
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 'Production, 
Demand and Availability of Fertilizers and its Distribution' of the Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 24 August, 
2012.  The Report contained 14 Observations / Recommendations of the Committee. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were requested 
to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Twenty Eighth 
Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e. by  
24th November, 2012.  The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the  
14 Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from  
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers vide their O.M. No. H-
11021/18/2012- Parl. dated 28th March, 2013.   
 
The categorization of the Action Taken Replies of the Government is as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 Sl.Nos. 1,2,4,7,8,10,11,12,13 and 14 
(Total =10) 
Chapter-II  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies 
 Sl.No. NIL 
(Total =NIL) 
Chapter-III  
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration  
 Sl.No. NIL 
(Total =NIL) 
Chapter-IV  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of  the 
Government are still awaited 
 Sl.Nos.  3,5,6 and 9 
(Total = 4) 
Chapter-V  
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
7 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
8 
1.3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report may be submitted within 
three months of presentation of this Action Taken Report. 
 
1.4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. INVESTMENTS IN FERTILIZERS SECTOR 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
1.5 Stressing the need to attract more investment, the Committee had recommended 
as under:- 
 
"The Committee note that the fertilizer industry is responding positively towards 
the New Investment Policy by inviting investment decision f or revamp of existing 
capacities.  However, the Committee are concerned with the fact that the fertilizer 
units for expansion projects have expressed their apprehensions regarding pricing 
and firm availability of gas before taking final investment decision  to undertake 
expansion of their existing units.  The Committee further note that in absence of 
firm price and availability of gas, a proposal for amendments in the new 
Investment Policy is under consideration of Department of Fertilizers.  The 
Committee therefore recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should make 
efforts to fix the price of gas reasonably for fertilizer sector and ensure the 
availability of gas in order to attract fresh investments in the fertilizers industries.  
The Committee also expect amendments in New Investment Policy will bring more 
investments in the fertilizers industry.  The Committee are also of the view that the 
Government should frame policies in consultation with the major fertilizer 
industries so as to make investments more attractive in the core industry.  The 
Committee are also of the opinion that Public -Private Partnership (PPP) can play 
a crucial role in reviving, expanding and setting up of new fertilizer units."  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In reply to  the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"The New Investment Policy 2012 (Annexure-I) has been formulated on the basis 
of report submitted by the committee constituted under the chairmanship of Dr. 
Saumitra Chaudhury, Member Planning Comm ission, in consultation with fertilizer 
industries. The NIP -2012 is equally applicable to PSU as well as private 
company."  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.6 The Committee note that New Investment Policy  (NIP)- 2012 has been 
formulated  on the basis of report submitted by the Committee constituted under 
chairmanship of Dr. Saumitra Cha udhary, Member Planning Commission, in 
consultation with fertilizers industries.  The Committee also note that NIP -2012 is 
equally applicable to PSU as wel l as private company.  The Committee hope that 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
9 
the NIP -2012 would adequately meet the concern of the fertilizer sector and 
facilitate fresh investment in the sector. The Committee expect that the NIP-2012 
 would be implemented and monitored effectively and  availability of gas would be 
ensured for all gas based units.  The Committee, however,  anguished  to note that 
the Department is silent over the issue with regard to revival of sick fertilizer units 
and setting up of new fertilizer units  through Public P rivate Partnership.  The 
Committee, therefore, again strongly recommend that the Department of Fertilizers 
should work out modalities to involve private companies in revival of sick fertilizer 
units which would in turn make the country self-sufficient in fertilizer production. 
 
B. PRODUCTION OF BIO-FERTILIZERS 
Recommendation No. 5 
1.7 Emphasizing the need for more production of bio -fertilizers, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
"Bio-fertilizers are useful in providing agricultural production as they are eco -
friendly and cost effective fertilizers. The Committee are happy to observe that 
overall production of fertilizers have increased in the year 2008 -09 at 25,065.03 
tonnes but a re dismayed at the fact that the production of Bio -fertilizers was at 
20,040.35 tonnes in 2009-10.  Now, the Committee are happy to note that the total 
production of Bio-fertilizers has gone upto 37997.61 Metric Tonnes during the year 
2010-11.  However, th e Committee express their displeasure over the fact that in 
some states production has been 'Nil' in the years 2007 -08, 2008 -09 etc.  The 
Committee therefore, strongly recommend that the Government should take 
adequate steps to raise the production of bio-fertilizers zone-wise and educate the 
farmers about the benefits of bio fertilizers and thereby encourage them to use it.  
The Committee are of opinion that the increased use of bio -fertilizers would also 
have considerable benefits to the environment and a lso to the health of the soil 
and reduce dependence on artificial fertilizers.  The Committee also recommend 
that Department of Fertilizers should take up the issue with Ministry of Agriculture 
so as to provide incentive to farmers and other manufacturers producing bio -
fertilizers.  The Committee feel that such a step would encourage the use of bio -
fertilizers."  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In reply of the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"Bio-fertilizers Production has furt her increased from 37,997.61 MT during 2010 -
11 to 40,324.21 MT during 2011 -12.  Some states viz. Chhatisgarh has started 
production of bio -fertilizers.  The advisory letter has been issued to concerned 
states for increasing the production as well as taking  the advantage  of National 
Centre of Organic Farming (NCOF)’s Back -ended-Subsidy Scheme through 
NABARD which promotes the production of bio-fertilizers. 
  
Under NCOF scheme, financial assistance is  provided for setting up of organic 
inputs production uni ts as credit linked back -ended subsidy to the tune of 33% 
restricted to Rs. 60.00 lakh for setting up of Fruit/Vegetable market Waste/Agro -

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
10 
waste compost units and 25% restricted to Rs. 40.00 lakh for setting up of Bio -
fertilizers production units/Bio-pesticides production units."  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.8 The Committee are happy to note that bio -fertilizers production has 
increased from 37,997.61 MT during 2010 -11 to 40,324.21 MT during 2011 -12.  
Some states viz.  Chhatisgarh has started production of bio -fertilizers.  The 
Committee are, however,  disappointed to note that the information about other    
states which have started production of bio -fertilizers has not been furnished. The 
Committee would, therefore, l ike the names of all such states along with the 
quantum of bio -fertilizers produced/being produced  by them annually, be 
furnished.  The Committee observe that the Department of Fertilizers have issued 
an advisory letter to the  States for increasing the production of bio-fertilizers.  The 
Committee also take note of National Centre of Organic Farming (NCOF)'s Back – 
ended – subsidy scheme through NABARD which promotes the production of bio 
fertilizers by providing subsidy to the tune of 33% restricted to R s. 60.00 lakh for 
setting up of Fruit/Vegetable market and Waste/Agro-waste compost units and 
25% restricted to Rs. 40.00 lakh for setting up of Bio -fertilizers production 
units/Bio-pesticides production units.  The Committee, therefore, expect that 
Department of Fertilizers would impress upon  all the States/UTs and stakeholders  
to set up Bio -fertilizers/Bio-pesticides plants and avail the facility of NCOF's Back 
ended subsidy s cheme for this purpose.   The Committee recommend that 
adequate publicity for this scheme should be given through print and electronic 
media to encourage farmers and others to set up such plants in the country.  
 
C. CONSUMPTION PATTERN OF FERTILIZERS 
Recommendation No. 6 
1.9 Emphasizing the need for increasing consumption of fertilizers, the Committee 
had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee regret to note that the consumption of fertilizers has not 
increased significantly in the country specially in the states such as Karnataka, 
Tamil Nadu, Chattisgarh, Uttaranchal, Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmir  and almost 
all North Eastern States.  Therefore, the Committee are of opinion that 
Department of Fertilizers should encourage the consumption of fertilizers and thi s 
will result in two pronged benefits, one that it will lead to increase in production 
and marketing of fertilizers and on other hand it will increase the production of 
food crops.  The Committee also recommend that an integrated plan should be 
drawn to id entify the hurdles in the way of increased consumption of fertilizers.  
The Committee also desires that Department of Fertilizers should perform the role 
of facilitator in this task."  
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
11 
  
  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
12 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In reply of the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"The table showing consumption of major fertilizers from 2007 -08 to 2011 -12 is 
enclosed at Annexure-II. The tables showing consumption of Urea, DAP, MOP 
and NPK fertilizers in states namely Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Chattisgarh, 
Uttarakhand, J&K, Jharkhand, Assam are enclosed at  Annexure III, IV, V and VI 
respectively. 
 
It is evident from t he perusal of table at Annexure -I that total consumption of 
fertilizers has generally increased since 2007 -08. Besides, the consum ption of 
most of the fertilizers in states namely Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Chattisgarh, 
Uttarakhand, J&K, Jharkhand, Assam etc has also generally increased since 
2007-08 (as evident from tables at Annexure III, IV, V and VI). 
 
This is due to better extension activities, improved soil testing facilities etc, which 
has enhanced the awareness among the farmers about the balanced use of 
fertilizers, requirement of nutrients for better crop productivity. This increase in the 
total consumption of fertilizers has led to increase in the food grain production in 
the country.  
 
II. Department of Agriculture & Cooperation is taking following measures to promote 
balanced use of fertilizers: 
 
(a) “National Project on Management of Soil Health  & Fertility” (NPMSHF) has 
been taken up from 2008 -09 to promote balanced and judicious use of 
fertilizer in conjunction with organic manure on soil test basis.  The scheme 
is continuing in the 12 th Plan also and the major activities under the 
Scheme are:-  
 
 I. Strengthening of soil testing service 
 (i) Setting up/Strengthening of Static/Mobile Soil Testing   
 Laboratories (STLS ). 
 
 (ii) Trainings/field demonstrations on balanced use of fertilizers.  
 
 (iii) Preparation of digital district soil maps.  
 
 II Promoting use of integrated nutrient management : Promotion of 
 organic manures/soil amendments (lime/basic stag) in acidic 
 soils/micro nutrients.  
 
 III. Strengthening of fertilizer testing serv ices :  Setting 
 up/strengthening  of fertilizer quality control laboratories  
 
 IV. Continuation/strengthening of central fertilizer quality control & 
 training institute and its regional laboratories:  Inspection and 
 analysis of fertilizer samples and trainings.  
 
Details regarding number of Soil testing Laboratories sanctioned under the 
Scheme  States namely Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Chattisgarh, Uttarakhand, J&K, 
Jharkhand, Tripura, Sikkim, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh and 
Mizoram are given at Annexure-VI. 
 
(b) Indian Institute of Soil Science (IISS), Bhopal has been assigned the 
project for preparation of Geo -Referenced Soil Fertility Maps including 
interlinking of soil fertility status with Soil Test Crop Response (STCR) data 
to generate site specific recommendations in 19 major States (171 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
13 
districts). IISS, Bhopal has uploaded the digitized soil fertility maps of 118 
districts on their website. The work is likely to be completed by 31.3.2013."  
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.10 In its earlier r ecommendation, the Committee  had observed that 
consumption of fertilizers has not increased significantly, especially in the states 
such as Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Chhattisgarh, etc.  The Department of Fertilizers in 
this regard have stated that the total c onsumption of fertilizers has generally 
increased since 2007 -08.  This is as a result of better  extension activities, 
improved soil testing facilities etc.  which has enhanced the awareness among the 
farmers about the balanced use of fertilizers, requireme nt of nutrients for better  
crop productivity. This increase in the total consumption of fertilizers has lead to 
increase in food grain production in the country. The Committee further note that 
Indian Institute of Soil Science (IISS), Bhopal has been assi gned the project for 
preparation of geo -referenced soil fertility maps including interlinking of soil 
fertility status with  Soil Testing Crop Response (STCR) data to generate site 
specific recommendations in 19 major States (171 districts).  The Committer were  
informed by the Department of Fertilizers that IISS Bhopal has been assigned the 
work to digitized soil fertility maps of 118 districts on their website. The Committee 
hope that work might have been completed as per the stipulated date i.e. by 
31.03.2013 and interlinking of soil fertility status with Soil Testing Crop Response 
(STCR) data would generate useful site specific details which would ultimately 
promote the correct and appropriate use of fertilizers. In case the work is still 
pending, the Co mmittee  would like to know the reasons for the delay and the 
efforts being made by the Department to complete the work at the earliest. The  
Committee recommend that maps of all the 171 districts be uploaded without any 
further delay.   The Committee also recommends that the Department in 
collaboration with IISS should prepare geo -referenced soil fertility maps for rest of 
the districts of the country and upload the same on the website at the earliest. 
 
 
D. NUTRIENT BASED SUBSIDY (NBS) 
Recommendation No. 7 
1.11 Emphasizing the need for effective implementation of NBS, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee have been informed that the Government has introduced the first 
phase of Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) policy for decontrolled phosphatic and 
potassic fertilizers in April 2010. The subsidy on fertilizers will be determined on 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
14 
the basis of nutrient subsidy fixed by the Government and the nutrient contained in 
the fertilizers. The NBS regime is expected to bring about a balanced use of 
fertilizers and also give a boost to indigenous production of fertilizers. The 
Committee recommend that the De partment of Fertilizers should closely monitor 
the implementation of the policy for its success and fruitful results. The Committee 
also recommend that the Department should take steps for the implementation of 
this policy which is likely to increase quali ty and fertility of the soil and agricultural 
productivity as well as attaining self -sufficiency of fertilizers in the country.  The 
Committee further note that a Committee has been formed under the 
Chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nilekani for feasibility of implementing a mechanism 
for transfer of subsidy under NBS to enable tracking of sale of fertilizers and 
disbursement of subsidy thereon.  This would enable disbursement of direct 
subsidy to the farmers.  The Committee in this regard have been informed that  
Department of Fertilizers will be able to implement the scheme by December 
2012.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the dream of direct subsidy to 
the farmers should be fulfilled in a time bound manner and expect that the scheme 
will be implemented by the targeted time frame."   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In reply of the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "The implementation of the NBS Policy in P&K sector is going to complete three 
years in March 2013 (just completed two years). In order to assess the impact of 
NBS Policy on domestic prices, international trade in fertilizers, availability of 
fertilizers, agricultural productivity, soil fertility etc, the Department of Fertilizers is 
in the process to engage a consultant of international repute. 
 The Department of Fertilizers is in the process of implementing payment of 
fertilizer subsidy directly to the intended beneficiaries in a phased manner. 
 In Phase-I, the information on availability of fertilizers at the farm g ate level will be 
captured. In Phase -II, which will be implemented after the Phase -I stabilize, the 
subsidy is expected to be transferred to the last point sale and in Phase -III, the 
subsidy is expected to be transferred directly to the intended beneficiar ies based 
on AADHAR Numbers.  
 Phase-I has already been implemented with effect from 1.11.2012. For 
implementation of this Phase, about 1.93 lakh dealers have been registered in the 
mobile Fertilizer Monitoring System (m -FMS) who will acknowledge the recei pt of 
the fertilizers through mobile.  The government has provided an incentive of Rs. 
50 per MT for acknowledging such receipt.  The acknowledgment of fertilizer 
receipt by the dealer has been linked to subsidy payment as 5 -15% of subsidy will 
be released to the companies only on the basis of acknowledgement of receipt.  
With implementation of this phase, the information on availability of fertilizers at 
the last point of sale to the farmers shall be available on real time basis in m-FMS.    
 In the meantime the Government has decided to move to phase -III directly. 
Accordingly, it has been decided to implement direct transfer of subsidy to the 
intended beneficiaries on pilot basis in 12 districts across 11 Sta tes with effect 
from 31.3.2013." 
 
The Department of Fertilizers further informed as under:-  
 “Task force under the chairmanship of Mr Nandan Nilekani submitted the   draft 
report for implementation of Direct Transfer of Fertilizer subsidy to the farmers in a 
phased manner. It has yet to submit the final report,  In the draft report it has 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
15 
recommended phase wise approach. Department of Fertilizer launched the 
Phase-I of mFMS on 1 st November 2012. The objective of Phase -I was to ensure 
information visibility of fertilizer availability till the last point sale.  
 
 Phase-II of mFMS was to be launched after the stabilization of 1 st phase-I. Phase-
II objective was to capture the retail sales (i.e. last point sale) and to link 
disbursement of subsidy to the retail sales as captured on mFMS. However, thi s 
required certain changes in CCEA note which warranted the concurrence of 
Ministry of Finance. D/o Fertilizer had received the concurrence of Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance only on 24 th July 2013 vide their Note P.F. II 
D.No. 06(03)/PF-II2011 dated 23/07/2013. D/o Fertilizer plans to launch the pilot 
of Phase-II in a few months in selected districts. 
 PMO in its meeting on 6 th May 2013 ha s informed that “National Committee on 
DBT has decided that tra nsferring food and fertilizer subsidy thr ough DBT is not 
under consideration at present. Therefore, D/o Fertilizers could focus on other 
aspects of the system they are putting in place for the time being”. Minutes of the 
meeting of PMO ha s also conveyed the decision that “DBT in fertilizer is a 
complex matter as there are problems in targeting, determining entitlements and 
preparing beneficiary databases. For the moment , it would be better to keep DBT 
away from fertilizers”. Therefore, it would not be possible to provide a time frame 
by which direct subsidy transfer scheme to farmers will be implemented in the 
entire country. 
 Consultations have been held with the various departments in the Inter Ministerial 
Committee (IMC) for defining the intended beneficiar ies for payment of  direct 
subsidy of fertilizers. However, in view of the complexity of the sector, no decision 
has yet been taken for defining the “intended beneficiary”. PMO in its meeting on 
6th May 2013 ha s also acknowledged this and has conveyed the decision in the 
minutes saying that “DBT in fertilizer is a complex matter as there are problems in 
targeting, determining entitlements and preparing beneficiary databases.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.12 The Committee note that implementation of Nutrient Based Subsidy ( NBS) 
policy in P& K sector has completed three years in March, 2013 and in order to 
assess the impact of NBS policy on domestic prices, international trade in 
fertilizers, availability of fertilizers, agricultural productivity, soil fertility, etc., the 
Department of Fertil izers is in the process of engaging a consultant of 
international repute.  While appreciating this, the Committee hope that this would 
help in finding gaps  or shor tcomings in the implementation of NBS policy and 
suggest rectification for better implementation of the NBS policy. 
 
1.13 The Committee note that more than three years have gone of launching 
Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Scheme which aims to provide Direct Subsidy to 
intended beneficiaries in a phased manner.  The Committee express their 
displeasure on the fact that even after three years of launching the Scheme, Direct 
Subsidy to intended beneficiaries is yet to take its final shape.  The Committee 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
16 
note that Direct Subsidy Scheme on pilot basis has been launched in 12 districts 
across 11 States on 31.03.2013.  However, on being inquired from the Department 
about the reasons for delay in implementation of DBT scheme, the Committee are 
dismayed to note that transferring fertilizer subsidy through Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT) is not presently under co nsideration as there are problems in 
targeting, determining entitlements and preparing database.  The Department of 
Fertilizers has also expressed their inability to provide a time frame by which 
direct subsidy transfer scheme to farmers will be implemente d in the entire 
country.  The Committee are of the strong view that since under the scheme, the 
benefit of subsidy is to given directly to the farmers, it is imperative that on the 
basis of the feedback from the scheme under the pilot project, the Departme nt 
should make a concerted and coordinated efforts in co -operation with 
Ministries/Departments concerned and State Governments so that intended 
beneficiaries get their benefits under the scheme without any inordinate delay. The 
Committee would like the Department to take action accordingly in this regard.  
 
E. DEMAND AND AVAILABILITY OF FERTILIZERS 
Recommendation No. 9 
1.14 Stressing the need for timely availability of fertilizers to the farmers, the Committee 
had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee were informed that Department of fertilizers has an elaborate and 
meticulous system of supply of fertilizers of various states and Union Territories 
for uninterrupted flow of fertilizers to farmers at reasonable prices throughout the 
country.  The Committee were informed that Department of Agriculture and 
cooperation (DAC) holds weekly video -conference with the State Agriculture 
Department and if there is shortage of fertilizers in any district of the country it is 
informed to the Department of Fertilizers (DOF) so that they may make adequate 
arrangements for supply of fertilizers.  However, the Committee are dismayed to 
note that despite repeated assurance from Department of Fertilizers the 
availability of fertilizers has not been upto mark i n various districts of the country.  
The Committee are very unhappy to note that the farmers in various parts of the 
country have been suffering on account of untimely availability of fertilizers and 
this is causing much distress among the farmers.  The Co mmittee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should ensure that there is 
timely availability of fertilizers to the farmers and the farmers should not suffer for 
the want of fertilizers.  The Committee are also of the view that there should be 
proper coordination between Department of Fertilizers (DOF) and Agriculture 
Department of the State Government.   The Committee are also dismayed to note 
that on record there is availability of fertilizers as required but in reality there i s 
acute shortage of fertilizers at ground level.  The Committee feel that there is a 
mismatch in data available with the Department of Fertilizers and other sources 
regarding the availability of fertilizers.  The Committee are, therefore, of the view 
that Department of Fertilizers should explore possibility of creating direct 
communication link between the farmers and Department of Fertilizers to assess 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
17 
the correct demand of fertilizers.  The Committee are also of the view that proper 
distribution mechanism of fertilizers at the district level should also be developed 
so that adequate fertilizers are available to farmers on time.  
 
The Committee during Study visit to Kolkata, Shillong, Cherrapunji, Guwahati, 
Aizawl, Dimapur and Kolkata from 13 to 19 July 201 0 observed that there is very 
acute scarcity of fertilizers in North Eastern States specially in states of Nagaland, 
Meghalaya and Mizoram.  The Committee also noted that the dealers faced 
difficulties in lifting of fertilizers from the company to the reta il market and 
subsequently to the farmers.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department of Fertilizers should take adequate steps for procuring facilities for the 
dealers for lifting of fertilizers from the companies to the retail outlets and t hen to 
the farmers. In this regard the Committee were suggested at Dimapur that the 
fertilizers companies should make available all the requirement of fertilizers at 
Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) Dimapur as this will ensure easy lifting 
and delivery of fertilizers well ahead of season for timely  application of fertilizers.  
The Committee feel that this kind of arrangement can be made for other parts of 
the country for ensuring timely availability of fertilizers.  Further, the Committee 
also observed that farmers were paying exorbitant prices especially in the North 
Eastern States for fertilizers even if the fertilizers are available in surplus.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should look into the matter and 
take necessary steps in this regard.  
 
The Committee during study visit to Kochi, Munnar, Alleppy and Thekkady from 4 
to 8 July 2012 observed that tea and spice growers were not provided timely 
availability of fertilizers especially Muriate of Phosphate (MOP), complex fertili zers 
and Factum Phos.  There was shortage of fertilizers also.  On the contrary the 
Department of Fertilizers vehemently say that there is no dearth of fertilizers.  The 
Committee therefore derive the conclusion that either there is something wrong in 
the assessment of requirement of fertilizers or the artificial scarcity has been 
created by the hoarders and black marketeers.  The Committee also noted that 
Cooperative societies are not consulted while assessing the requirement of 
fertilizers.  The Committee  therefore recommend that Cooperative societies 
should also be involved in the process of data collection in respect of demand of 
fertilizers well before the sowing season so as to ensure that farmers do not feel 
any scarcity of fertilizers during their so wing / application period.  The Committee 
are of the view that some device should be explored in consultation with State 
Governments to check black marketing of fertilizers."   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.15 In reply of the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 
"The state-wise demand(requirement) and supply (availability) of Urea, DAP, MOP 
and complex fertilizers during the year 2012 (April, 2012 to December,2012) is at 
Annexure VIII.  As can be seen from the Annexure, supply o f fertilizers is 
adequate and comfortable.  
 
The state-wise demand is assessed and projected by the respective states before 
beginning of each crop season.  DAC organize a Conference of all stakeholders 
that includes all state governments, Department of Fe rtilizer, Department of 
Railways, FAI  etc.  On the basis of these conference, the requirement of fertilizers 
is assessed by DAC and projection given to DOF. 
 
Steps taken by Department of Fertilizers to provide adequate supply of fertilizers 
are as given below: 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
18 
 
(i) a regular weekly Video conference is being conducted jointly by Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Department of Fertilizers (DOF), Ministry of 
Railways with State Agriculture Officials and corrective actions are taken to 
dispatch fertilizer as indicated by the state governments. 
(ii) The movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is being monitored throughout the 
country by an on -line web based monitoring system ( www.urvarak.co.in) also 
called as Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS); 
(iii) The gap in the demand and domestic production of fertilizer is met through 
imports. 
(iv) The State governments have been advised to instruct the State institutional 
agencies to coordinate with manufacturers and importers of f ertilizers for 
streamlining the supplies. 
The Department of Fertilizers is following a phased approach to achieve direct 
transfer of fertilizer subsidy.  The first phase of the project focuses on the 
information visibility of fertilizer availability at the last point of sale.  The existing 
Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS-www.urvarak.co.in) that tracks availability up to 
the district level is being extended, through the mobile Fertilizer Monitoring 
System (m-FMS-www.mfms.nic.in) to the last point of sale i.e. retailer to track the 
movement and availability of fertilizers.  With this, all stakeholders across fertilizer 
supply chain shall report daily dispatch, receipts and stock updates.   
 
As regards black-marketing and spurious fertilizers, State Governments under the 
extant provisions of Fertiliz er Control Order (FCO), 1985 have been adequately 
empowered to take preventive/punitive actions against the offenders who indulge 
in black-marketing/sales of spurious fertilizers.  Department of Fertilizers has also 
advised/sensitized the State Governments  for gearing up enforcement agencies 
under their jurisdiction for taking appropriate action against the offenders, if any. 
 
Regarding consultation with Cooperative Societies by DAC has advised all the 
state governments to consult Cooperative Societies at t he time of finalization of 
assessment of demand of fertilizers.” 
 
1.16 The Department of Fertilizers further informed the Committee with regard reasons 
for the variation in the demand (requirement), Supply (availability) and sales of fertilizers 
as given in Annexure VII of the Action Taken Replies as under:-  
 “Following are the processes for assessing requirement and ensuring 
adequate and timely availability of fertilizers in the states: 
(a) The month-wise demand is assessed and projected by the Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) in consultation with the State 
Governments before commencement of each cropping season.  
(b) On the basis of month -wise & state -wise projection given by Department 
of Agriculture and Cooperation, Department of Fertilizers alloca tes 
sufficient/adequate quantities of fertilizers to the States by issuing 
monthly supply plan and continuously monitors the availability through 
following system:   
i) The State Governments are regularly advised to coordinate with 
manufacturers and importers  of fertilizers for streamlining the supplies 
through timely placement of indents for railway rakes through their state 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
19 
institutional agencies like Markfed etc.,  in compliance of the monthly 
supply plan issued by Department of Fertilizers.   
ii) Regular weekly Video conference is conducted jointly by Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Department of Fertilizers (DoF), and 
Ministry of Railways with State Agriculture Officials and corrective actions 
are taken to dispatch fertilizer as indicated by the State governments. 
iii) The gap in the demand and domestic production of fertilizer is met 
through imports.  
 
In light of above processes, the reasons for the variations in the demand 
(requirement) supply (availability) and sales of fertilizers as given at Annexure  
VIII of the Action Taken Replies are following:- 
 
‘The projection of month -wise and state -wise requirement of fertilizer as 
assessed by DAC is tentative and based upon the past trends as well as 
considering ideal weather conditions.  As the seaso n progresses actual 
requirement varies because of various factors like delayed/early monsoon, 
change in weather conditions, change in irrigation facilities and change in 
crop patterns.  Therefore, actual requirement may not turn out to be the 
same as the p rojections given at beginning of the season.  As the actual 
requirement changes on the ground, the states and their institutional 
agencies lift the fertilizer according to the actual demand, therefore, the 
actual availability and sales do not match to the projected requirement at 
the start of the season.’ 
 
A statement of fertilizers requirement, availability and sale of Urea,   MOP, 
DAP and NPK fertilizers from April, 2013 to June, 2013 at Annexure-VIII. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.17 The Committee note that a system is in existence and the demand / 
requirement and the availability of fertilizers is accordingly made in all parts of the 
country.  The Department of Fertilizers has further stated that state-wise demand is 
assessed and proj ected by the respective States before beginning of each crop 
season.  Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) organizes  conference 
of all stakeholders  that includes all State Governments, Department of Fertilizers, 
Department of Railways, FAI, etc.  to assess requirement of fertilizers and 
accordingly projections are given to Department of Fertilizers.  
 
1.18 The Committee also note from the figures given in Annexure VIII of the 
action taken reply with regard to requirement, availability and sales of fertilizers 
that almost in every State, the supply of fertilizers is not as per the demand of 
farmers.  As for example, the requirement of urea of the year 2012 in Andhra 
Pradesh was 2600 MTs  against wh ich the availability was 2223.60 MTS , whereas 
sales was at 214 0.61 MTs.  Similarly, the requirement of NPK  fertilizers in Uttar 
Pradesh was at 1050 MTs, but the availability was 721.36 MTs and sale  was at 
543.65 MTs .   The availability of fertilizers in other States is also not as per the 
projected requirement.  With regard to the reasons for variations in requirement, 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
20 
availability and sales , the Department of Fertilizers have stated that projection of 
month-wise and State-wise requirement of fertilizers as assessed by DAC is 
tentative and based upon the past trends as well as considering ideal weather 
conditions.  Further, as the season changes actual requirement also changes and 
the States and their institutional agenci es lift the fertilizers according to actual 
demand, therefore, the actual availability and sales do not match to the projected 
requirement at the start of the season.  
 
1.19 Notwithstanding the reasons stated by the Department regarding the 
demand/supply and sales of fertilizers in the States, the ground reality is that the 
farmers are not getting fertilizers as per their requirement timely as a result of 
which they have to undergo great hardships. This has also been observed by the 
Committee during their study visit to various parts of the country.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should continue evaluating 
an institutional mechanism with a view to ensure that adequate quantity of 
fertilizers are made available to the farmers much before the crop season as per 
their requirement.  In this regard, the Committee also of the view that the 
Department should facilitate godowns for storage of adequate quantity of fertilizers 
so that the same could be made available to the farm ers when required particularly 
during the sowing season. The Committee also reiterate its earlier recommendation 
that State Government should also interact with cooperative societies and would 
like to know the details of advisory issued to all the State Go vernments to consult 
cooperative societies at the time of fertilization of assessment of demand of 
fertilizer and the action taken by the State Government in response thereon.  
 
1.20 The Committee further note that State Governments are adequately 
empowered to take punitive/ preventive actions against the offenders who indulge 
in black-marketing/ sales of spurious fertilizers  under the provisions of Fertilizers 
Control Order (FCO), 1985.  In this regard, the Committee also note that the 
Department of  Fertilizers has also advised/ sensitized the State Governments to 
curb the black -marketing in their States.  The Committee,  however, would like the 
Department of Fertilizers to continue to sensitize the State Governments and 
establish a monitoring mechani sm with a view to keep strict and constant vigil 
against the offenders who indulge in black-marketing and sale of spurious 
fertilizers.   
 
F. TRANSPORTATION 
Recommendation No. 13 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
21 
1.21 Emphasizing the need for smooth transportation of fertilizers, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee note that various problems are faced by Department of Fertilizers 
with regard to transportation of fertilizers.  Some of them among others thus are 
heavy rains, shortage of labour during festival seasons  etc.  This leads to 
congestion in movement of fertilizers from ports to rake points.  Further, 
Committee note that to ensure easy availability of fertilizers, Department of 
Fertilizers has notified Uniform Freight Regime for all fertilizers, wherein freig ht 
subsidy will be paid separately on receipt of all fertilizers in districts/blocks.  Also, 
with regard to shortage of railways rakes the Committee were informed that 
Department of Fertilizers regularly interacts with Ministry of Railways for provision 
of rakes at all ports/plants.  The Committee, are therefore, of the view that 
Department of Fertilizers should ensure that the movement of fertilizers from ports 
to in land is carried out without undue hassles and hindrances."  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In reply of the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 
"In the current financial year, the movement of fertilizers from port/plant to states 
have been smooth.  There was adequate supply of railway rakes." 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.22 The Committee note that in the current financial year the movement of 
fertilizers from port/ plant to States have been smooth and also there was 
adequate supply of railway rakes.  The Committee, however, expect  that the 
Department of Ferti lizers would continue t o monitor and co -ordinate with Ministry 
of Railways in order to ensure sufficiency of rail rakes and smooth movement of 
fertilizers from ports/ plants to the States every year without any  hindrances. 
  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
22 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATIONS NO.1&2 
 
Fertilizers have played a crucial role in accelerating the production of food 
grains from a very modest level of 52 million MT in 1951 -52 to an increase of 
about 218.20 million MT in 2009-10 indicating a fourfold increase.  The Committee 
felt that this momentum have to be maintained and increase the production of food 
grains to feed the growing population of the country.  There are mainly three kinds 
of fertilizers for agriculture production viz. Nitrogen, Phosphate and Potash.  Urea, 
a nitrogen fertilizer, is controlled fertilizer and is under price and distribution control 
whereas DAP and MOP which are phosphatic and potash fertilizers respectively 
are decontrolled fertilizers.   
In phosphatic fertilizers, DAP production is mainly dependent on availability 
of imported raw materials/ intermediates.  Similarly in the absence of commercially 
exploitable potash sources in the country, the entire demand of potash fertilizers 
for direct application as well as for production of complex fertilizers is met through 
imports.  The demand of fertilizers is assessed at the beginning of the crop 
seasons viz. Kharif (April – September) and Rabi (March – October) every year by 
the Department o f Agriculture and Cooperation before the commencement of 
every crop season.   
 
PRODUCTION OF FERTILIZERS 
 The Committee during the examination of the subject were dismayed to 
note that a growing trend of less indigenous production of fertilizers and growing 
trend of import of fertilizers.  The Committee note that production of urea in 2011 -
12 is at 221.00 lakh MT with imports of around 90.00 lakh MT.  Further no new 
urea plants have come after 1998 primarily due to non-availability of natural gas at 
pre-decided price. In order to facilitate new investments in urea sector, an 
investment policy was proposed by Department of Fertilizers (DOF) based on the 
recommendation of Prof. Abhijit Sen, Member Planning Commission, was notified 
on 4 September 2008.  However, the availability of natural gas as expected by the 
Sen Committee has not fructified, meanwhile the estimated capital cost of new 
projects has also increased.  Therefore, again a Group of Ministers (GoM) 
constituted to review the fertilizer policy h as decided the proposal submitted by 
Department of Fertilizers in the meeting held on 5 January, 2011 and a Committee 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
23 
was constituted under Chairmanship of Dr. Saumitra Chaudhuri, Member Planning 
Commission with Secretary (Fertilizers) and Secretary (Petro leum) as members to  
examine the issues relating to the Investment Policy and amendments proposed 
therein and make appropriate comments. The Committee in this regard have been 
further informed that the Committee constituted under Dr. Saumitra Chaudhuri, 
Member, Planning Commission has submitted its report on 2 4.4.2011 on the 
proposal for Nutrient Based Subsidy in urea sector.  Draft Note in this regard is 
placed before Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) and final CCEA 
note, incorporating comments of all Ministries/ Departments is being finalized.   
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that since the report has been 
submitted by Committee under Chairmanship of Dr. Saumitra Chaudhary, Member 
Planning Commission and it is now under considerati on of the Department of 
Fertilizers, the finalization of New Investment Policy should be done as soon as 
possible to facilitate more investments in the fertilizer sector.  
 The Committee are further disappointed to note that with regard to issue of 
revival of fertilizer plants in the public sector have not been able to complete due 
to non-availability of gas.  Further, for some units in public sector their revival plan 
has been submitted to the Cabinet.  This was the result mainly due to failure of 
new investment policy which was formulated in 2008 under Chairmanship  of Shri 
Abhijit Sen Committee. Further, according to the Department of Fertilizers the new 
investment policy did not succeed largely due to uncertainty of the gas price.  The 
report of the new C ommittee is yet to be presented which will finalize the new 
investment policy and this has been stated as another factor as to why production 
of fertilizer have gone down.  Also, the Secretary, Department of Fertilizer has 
submitted that time for reviving of a unit is lengthy.  Further, the crunch in 
availability of gas for fertilizer plants is the biggest hindrance in the increasing 
production of fertilizers.  The Committee, therefore, are of the view that the 
Department, should make all out efforts to rev amp and revive the fertilizers units 
and recommend that Government should provide managerial and technical 
support, feedstock and adequate infrastructure specially ensuring the availability 
of gas.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The Department of Fertilizers has finalized the New Investment Policy 2012 
and notified on 2 nd January 2013 ( Annexure-I) in order to facilitate fresh 
investment in urea sector. T he criteria has been laid down in the New Investment 
Policy 2012 for Revamp, Revival, Expansion and Brownfield/Greenfield projects.  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
24 
While finalizing the proposal for New Investment Policy 2012, the issue of 
availability of natural gas was examined in consultation with the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas while maintaining highest priority for fertilizer secto r in 
allocation of domestic gas, as per decision of EGoM.  
(DoF's O.M. No. H-11021/18/20112- Parl. dated 25.03.2013) 
RECOMMENDATION NO.4 
SINGLE SUPER PHOSPHATE (SSP) 
 Regarding availability of raw material for Single Super Phosphate (SSP), 
the Committee have observed that paucity of raw material is a major constraint in 
achieving self -sufficiency of fertilizers in the country. The indigenous rock 
phosphate supplies meet  only 5 -10% of the total requirement of P 2O5.   The 
Committee also note the Government has announced revised concession scheme 
for SSP w.e.f. 1.5.2008 up to 30.9.2009 according to which manufacturers were 
requested to sell SSP at all India Uniform rate at Rs.3400/- per MT and this led to 
increase in the production and availability.  The Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) 
policy for SSP was introduced w.e.f. 1.5.2010 according to which the 
manufacturers are required to claim NBS who can produce 50% of the actual 
installed capacity or 40,000 MTS per annum, whichever is lower.  In this regard, 
though the Committee are happy to note the measures being taken by the 
Government, the Committee desire that in order to reduce the dependence on 
import of SSP, the Government should make arrangements for procurement of 
raw materials and intermediates in time.  The Committee also recommend that 
periodic and timely revision on concession part of SSP under NBS should be done 
so as to make SSP units more viable and fully productive.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Rock Phosphate is the main raw material for production of SSP. The 
Department of Fertilizes has notified a number of rock phosphate grades and 
blending combination of rocks for production of SSP. Since indigenous availability 
of rock phosphate is very limited and is available only through the mines in 
Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, SSP units have been allowed to procure notified 
grades of rock phosphate from various notified sources.  The Department of 
Fertilizers has also recog nized a number of BRP plant to use low grade of Rock 
phosphate to produce higher grades suitable for production of SSP as per FCO 
standards and have also notified lower grades of rock phosphates for production 
of SSP based on PDIL technical inspection.  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
25 
 Under the existing provisions, the SSP companies can also import other 
un-notified grades of Rock Phosphate for  production of SSP. But before their use, 
the feasibility of production of SSP as per FCO standards is analyzed and notified 
by the Department to ensure quality of SSP.  
 Keeping in view the interest of small SSP units, who can not import rock 
phosphate on their own, the Department has been permitting the SS industry to 
procure rock phosphate from importers of Rock Phosphate on high sea basis. 
In view of above guidelines, there is no issue relating to non -availability of rock 
phosphate to SSP industries.  
 As regards periodic and timely revision on concession, the Department of 
Fertilizers is announcing subsidy rates under NBS Policy every year well in time 
so as to enable the SSP industries to enter long term contract for purchase of raw 
materials at competitive rates. The NBS rates for 2012 -13, for example, were 
announced vide notification dated 29.3.2012. 
(DoF's O.M. No. H-11021/18/20112- Parl. dated 25.03.2013) 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
 
NUTRIENT BASED SUBSIDY  
 The Committee have been informed that the Government has introduced 
the first phase of Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) policy for decontrolled phosphatic 
and potassic fertilizers in April 2010. The subsidy on fertilizers will be determined 
on the basis of nut rient subsidy fixed by the Government and the nutrient 
contained in the fertilizers. The NBS regime is expected to bring about a balanced 
use of fertilizers and also give a boost to indigenous production of fertilizers. The 
Committee recommend that the Dep artment of Fertilizers should closely monitor 
the implementation of the policy for its success and fruitful results. The Committee 
also recommend that the Department should take steps for the implementation of 
this policy which is likely to increase qualit y and fertility of the soil and agricultural 
productivity as well as attaining self -sufficiency of fertilizers in the country.  The 
Committee further note that a Committee has been formed under the 
Chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nilekani for feasibility of implementing a mechanism 
for transfer of subsidy under NBS to enable tracking of sale of fertilizers and 
disbursement of subsidy thereon.  This would enable disbursement of direct 
subsidy to the farmers.  The Committee in this regard have been informed that 
Department of Fertilizers will be able to implement the scheme by December 
2012.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the dream of direct subsidy to 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
26 
the farmers should be fulfilled in a time bound manner and expect that the scheme 
will be implemented by the targeted time frame.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
            The implementation of the NBS Policy in P&K sector is going to complete 
three years in March 2013. just completed two years. In order to assess the 
impact of NBS Policy on domestic prices, international trade in fertilizers, 
availability of fertilizers, agricultural productivity, soil fertility etc, the Department of 
Fertilizers is in the process to engage a consultant of international repute. 
             The Department of Fertilizers is in the process of implementing payment of 
fertilizer subsidy directly to the intended beneficiaries in a phased manner. 
  In Phase-I, the information on availability of fertilizers at the farm gate level 
will be captured. In Phase-II, which will be implemented after the Phase-I stabilize, 
the subsidy is expected to be transferred to the last point sale and in Phase-III, the 
subsidy is expected to be transferred directly to the intended beneficiaries based 
on AADHAR Numbers.  
  Phase-I has already been impleme nted with effect from 1.11.2012. For 
implementation of this Phase, about 1.93 lakh dealers have been registered in the 
mobile Fertilizer Monitoring System (m -FMS) who will acknowledge the receipt of 
the fertilizers through mobile.  The government has provi ded an incentive of Rs. 
50 per MT for acknowledging such receipt.  The acknowledgment of fertilizer 
receipt by the dealer has been linked to subsidy payment as 5 -15% of subsidy will 
be released to the companies only on the basis of acknowledgement of recei pt.  
With implementation of this phase, the information on availability of fertilizers at 
the last point of sale to the farmers shall be available on real time basis in m-FMS.    
 In the meantime the Government has decided to move to phase -III directly. 
Accordingly, it has been decided to implement direct transfer of subsidy to the 
intended beneficiaries on pilot basis in 12 districts across 11 States with effect 
from 31.3.2013. 
The Department of Fertilizers further informed as under:-  
 “Task force under the chairmanship of Mr Nandan Nilekani submitted the   draft 
report for implementation of Direct Transfer of Fertilizer subsidy to the farmers in a 
phased manner. It has yet to submit the final report,  In the draft report it has 
recommended phase wise app roach. Department of Fertilizer launched the 
Phase-I of mFMS on 1 st November 2012. The objective of Phase -I was to ensure 
information visibility of fertilizer availability till the last point sale.  
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
27 
 Phase-II of mFMS was to be launched after the stabiliza tion of 1st phase-I. Phase-
II objective was to capture the retail sales (i.e. last point sale) and to link 
disbursement of subsidy to the retail sales as captured on mFMS. However, this 
required certain changes in CCEA note which warranted the concurrence of 
Ministry of Finance. D/o Fertilizer had received the concurrence of Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance only on 24 th July 2013 vide their Note P.F. II 
D.No. 06(03)/PF-II2011 dated 23/07/2013. D/o Fertilizer plans to launch the pilot 
of Phase-II in a few months in selected districts. 
 PMO in its meeting on 6 th May 2013 ha s informed that “National Committee on 
DBT has decided that tra nsferring food and fertilizer subsidy through DBT is not 
under consideration at present. Therefore, D/o Fertilize rs could focus on other 
aspects of the system they are putting in place for the time being”. Minutes of the 
meeting of PMO ha s also conveyed the decision that “DBT in fertilizer is a 
complex matter as there are problems in targeting, determining entitlemen ts and 
preparing beneficiary databases. For the moment , it would be better to keep DBT 
away from fertilizers”. Therefore, it would not be possible to provide a time frame 
by which direct subsidy transfer scheme to farmers will be implemented in the 
entire country. 
 Consultations have been held with the various departments in the Inter Ministerial 
Committee (IMC) for defining the intended beneficiar ies for payment of  direct 
subsidy of fertilizers. However, in view of the complexity of the sector, no decision  
has yet been taken for defining the “intended beneficiary”. PMO in its meeting on 
6th May 2013 ha s also acknowledged this and has conveyed the decision in the 
minutes saying that “DBT in fertilizer is a complex matter as there are problems in 
targeting, determining entitlements and preparing beneficiary databases.” 
 
(DoF's O.M. No. H-11021/18/20112- Parl. dated 25.03.2013) 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.12 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
28 
RECOMMENDATION NO.8 
JOINT VENTURES (JVs) 
 The Government in the recent years has been encouraging Indian 
companies to establish Joint Venture Production facilities with buy -back 
arrangement, in other countries which have rich resources of raw materials.  The 
Committee are happy to note that the Go vernment is encouraging Indian 
companies to establish joint venture projects with other countries which have rich 
resources of raw material to phosphatic and potassic fertilizers as it would help in 
augmenting the supply of complex fertilizers. The Committ ee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should encourage these initiatives and explore 
the possibilities of new joint ventures which would help in making available 
assured sources of supply of raw materials to the fertilizers.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The recommendations of the Standing Committee are in line with the 
thinking of DOF and is duly noted. 
(DoF's O.M. No. H-11021/18/20112- Parl. dated 25.03.2013) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.10 
 
BLACK MARKETING AND ARTIFICIAL SCARCITY 
 The Committee are dismayed to  note that though the Department of 
Fertilizers has a well planned system of assessing requirement and availability of 
fertilizers there is a rampant instances of black marketing and artificial scarcity of 
fertilizers being created by the hoarders.  The Co mmittee are not satisfied by the 
reply of the Government that when the Central government gets the information 
regarding black marketing and artificial scarcity, the information is sent to the 
State Government and it is the State Government's responsibility to enforce action 
against such cases.  The Department of Fertilizers has further informed that as the 
Central Government does not have force and manpower, the responsibility of 
checking the hoarders and black markete rs has been delegated to the State 
Governments.  The Committee, therefore, are of view that Central Government 
should not shirk from the responsibility of curbing artificial scarcity and hoarding of 
fertilizers.  Department of Fertilizers should take adequ ate and stringent steps to 
curb and reduce such instances.  The Committee feel that  fertilizer companies 
should also have some control in checking such mal -practices by cancelling of 
dealerships of individuals involving in black -marketing  and hoarding of  fertilizers 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
29 
so as to further deter individuals to indulge in such activities. The Committee 
expect that Department of Fertilizers will take more proactive steps in this regard.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Department of Fertilizers (DOF) is responsible for distribution and 
movement of fertilizers in the country.  DOF is also paying subsidy on all major 
fertilizers to ensure adequate and timely availability of fertilizers to the farmers at 
affordable price.  The Maximum Retail Price (MRP) of urea is under sta tutory 
price control while the MRPs of Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers are free 
and the manufacturers/importers are deciding the reasonable MRPs for  these 
fertilizers.  The manufacturers/importers and their wholesale and retail dealers 
are requi red to adhere to the provisions of Fertilizers Control  Order (FCO)  
regarding quality and MRP of fertilizers.  As per the  Allocation of Business Rules 
of Government of India, administration of FCO is the responsibility of Department 
of Agriculture and Co operation.  The equitable distribution of fertilizers to the 
farmers within the State at fair price is the responsibility of the concerned State 
Government.  State Government can conduct search, make seizers and take 
punitive action any person violating pr ovisions of FCO.  However, as DOF is 
responsible for making available subsidized fertilizers as per requirement of 
States, the issue like black marketing, diversion, smuggling, breach of MRP are 
issues of concern for us.  Therefore necessity of keeping str ict vigil and prompt 
action by the States to check black marketing, diversion, smuggling, breach of 
MRP etc. is brought to the notice of State Government at various forums and 
through correspondences.  Lately said issues were highlighted during Zonal 
Conference on Agriculture inputs for Kharif 2013 season held from 6 th to 8 th 
February, 2013 and the National Conference on Agriculture for Kharif Campaign -
2013 from 6 th to 7 th March, 2013, in which representatives from all the States 
were present. 
 All the fert ilizer companies are also advised time and again to take strict 
action against their dealers found indulging in malpractices like black -marketing, 
hoarding etc.   
(DoF's O.M. No. H-11021/18/20112- Parl. dated 25.03.2013) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.11 
 
QUALITY CONTROL OF FERTILIZERS 
 The Committee note that in total the number of labs for analysis of 
fertilizers is at 74 and in the states of West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Maharastra 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
30 
and Uttarakhand the percentage of non -standard samples is at 12.7%, 13.1%, 
15.5% and 6.0% for the year 2010 -11 which is high in comparison to other states.  
The Committee also note that the capacity utilization for checking of non -standard 
samples in some states such as West Bengal, Mizoram, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand 
the capacity utilizati on is below 50%.  The Committee are therefore of the view 
that Department of Fertilizers should ensure that State Government should make 
optimum use of capacity utilization of labs for checking of non -standard fertilizers 
and also to improve the quality of fertilizers in the States where percentage of non-
standard samples have been detected higher so that substandard/ spurious 
fertilizers are not sold in the market.   The Committee note that there are only 71 
fertilizers testing laboratories in the country including only 4 laboratories of 
Government of India.  The Committee therefore recommend  that more fertilizers 
testing laboratories in the country should be set up to ensure quality control of 
fertilizers specially in those  states where large quantities of fertilizers are in use.   
State Governments should also be asked in this regard and if required necessary 
financial and technical assistance should be provided.  Further, a check should be 
maintained on the hand mixing of fertilizers as it leads to infe rior quality of 
fertilizers.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
This subject matter pertains to DAC.  However, DOF has taken comments which 
are as under: 
The Ministry of Agriculture is administering the scheme titled ‘National Project on 
Management of Soil Health and Fertility’ (NPMSH&F). Under the scheme, there is 
a provision for granting assistance/ funds for setting up and strengthening of 
fertilizer quality control laboratory. The details regarding funds, which have been 
released for establishing new laboratories in the various States, are as under: 
S. No. State No. of Lab. Location of FQCL 
1. Orissa 1 Rayagada 
2. Rajasthan 3 Ajmer, Sriganganagar & Kota 
3. Andhra 
Pradesh 
2 Kottapalli, Vijyawada 
4. Bihar 1 Agri. Deptt. Office Complex Bhagalpur 
5. Jharkhand 1 Dhumka 
6. Maharashtra 1 Kolhapur 
7. Punjab 1 Gurdaspur 
8. Uttar Pradesh 3 Agra, Bareilly, Faizabad 
9. Gujarat 1 Nadiyad (Kheda Distt.) 
    

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
31 
The Ministry of Agriculture has also provided funds for strengthening of existing 45 
fertilizer quality control  laboratories during last four years. The details are as 
under: 
Year   No. of Labs. Strengthened 
2008-09    19 
2009-10    19 
2010-11    01 
2011-12    06 
Total     45 
 
Further, the Ministry of Agriculture at various forums is directing/advising the State 
Government to create man power and develop more infrastructures for fertilizer 
quality control. The State Governments are also advised to review the functioning 
of fertilizer quality control set -up by the States, strengthen and improve its 
effectiveness for ensuring availability of good quality of fertilizers. 
(DoF's O.M. No. H-11021/18/20112- Parl. dated 25.03.2013)  
 
 RECOMMENDATION NO.12 
 
IMPORT OF FERTILIZERS 
 The Committee note that India imports about 20% of its requirements of 
Nitrogenous fertilizers, 80% of Phosphatic fertilizers and 100% of the requirement 
of potassic fertilizers.  Thus, the country is heavily import dependent in fertilizer 
sector and foreign exchange outgo on this account cannot be avoided.  The 
Committee are satisfied t o note that the Government is making all out efforts to 
establish joint ventures with the countries which are rich in raw material for 
producing fertilizers.  The Committee are also happy to note that various projects 
are under discussion with different co untries such as Syria, Russia, Indonesia, 
Australia and Ghana.  The Committee hope that the projects under discussion 
with these countries will be fruitful and beneficial to the country.  Further, the 
Committee were informed that in the present the "cartel " at international level has 
been dictating unfair price for raw material making it difficult for Department of 
Fertilizers to import the same.  The Committee therefore, recommend that the 
Department of Fertilizer should take adequate steps to address the problem of 
unfair pricing at the international level.  The Department of Fertilizers should take 
into confidence other friendly countries to negotiate prices of raw materials for 
fertilizers in the international market at a reasonable rates. 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
32 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In view of limitation in the availability of raw materials in the P&K sector the 
policy of the Government is to encourage the fertilizer companies including PSUs 
to from joint ventures/ investments with firm mining contracts or long term supply  
arrangements and also explore possibilities of joint venture with long -term off-take 
arrangements in resource rich countries for securing future supplies in the country. 
The recommendation of the Standing is in line with existing policy. Accordingly, 
the department of Fertilizers will continue to encourage fertilizer companies to 
from joint ventures. 
(DoF's O.M. No. H-11021/18/20112- Parl. dated 25.03.2013) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.13 
TRANSPORTATION 
 The Committee note that various problems are faced by Department of 
Fertilizers with regard to transportation of fertilizers.  Some of them among others 
thus are heavy rains,  shortage of labour during festival seasons etc.  This leads to 
congestion in mov ement of fertilizers from ports to rake points.  Further, 
Committee note that to ensure easy availability of fertilizers, Department of 
Fertilizers has notified Uniform Freight Regime for all fertilizers, wherein freight 
subsidy will be paid separately on receipt of all fertilizers in districts/blocks.  Also, 
with regard to shortage of railways rakes the Committee were informed that 
Department of Fertilizers regularly interacts with Ministry of Railways for provision 
of rakes at all ports/plants.  The Commi ttee, are therefore, of the view that 
Department of Fertilizers should ensure that the movement of fertilizers from ports 
to in land is carried out without undue hassles and hindrances.  
 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In the current financial year, the movement of fertilizers from port/plant to 
states have been smooth.  There was adequate supply of railway rakes. 
(DoF's O.M. No. H-11021/18/20112- Parl. dated 25.03.2013)  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.22 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.14 
MONITORING 
 The Committee are satisfied to note that Fertilizer Monitoring System 
(FMS) in path breaking initiative undertaken by Department of Fertilizers.  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
33 
However, in some parts of the country farmers are facing acute difficulty in getting 
urea, potash, DAP etc., the Committee, therefore, desire that the Central 
Government should devise a foolproof mechanism for proper and equitable 
distribution of fertilizers in all parts of the country especially in remote, hilly and 
inaccessible a reas.  Further, to tackle the problem of artificial shortage, if any, 
created in some region, special efforts may be made to provide adequate quantity 
of fertilizers so that the farmers are not left at the mercy of hoarders and black 
marketers.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The existing Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS -www.urvarak.co.in) that 
tracks availability up to the district level is being extended, through the mobile 
Fertilizer Monitoring System (m-FMS-www.mfms.nic.in) to the last point of sale i.e. 
retailer to track the movement and availability of fertilizers.  With this, all 
stakeholders across fertilizer supply chain shall report daily dispatch, receipts and 
stock updates.  All stakeholders are thus required to register in the mFMS and 
perform the r equired reporting, to increase transparency across the supply chain.  
This transparency in the movement of fertilizers and the information of its 
availability at the last point of sale to the farmers will go a long way in checking 
any illegal sale and black marketing of fertilizers.  The project also aims to transfer 
the fertilizer subsidy directly to the farmers in the subsequent phases of the 
project. 
(DoF's O.M. No. H-11021/18/20112- Parl. dated 25.03.2013)   

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
34 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT's  REPLIES  
 
   
  -   NIL  -   

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
35 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY  OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
-  NIL - 
  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
36 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.3 
 
INVESTMENTS IN FERTILIZERS SECTOR 
 The Committee note that the fertilizer industry is responding positively 
towards the New Investment Policy by inviting investment decision for revamp of 
existing capacities.  However, the Committee are concerned with the fact that the 
fertilizer units for expansion projects have expressed their  apprehensions 
regarding pricing and firm availability of gas before taking final investment decision 
to undertake expansion of their existing units.  The Committee further note that in 
absence of firm price and availability of gas, a proposal for amendmen ts in the 
new Investment Policy is under consideration of Department of Fertilizers.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should make 
efforts to fix the price of gas reasonably for fertilizer sector and ensure the 
availability of gas in order to attract fresh investments in the fertilizers industries.  
The Committee also expect amendments in New Investment Policy will bring more 
investments in the fertilizers industry.  The Committee are also of the view that the 
Government should frame policies in consultation with the major fertilizer 
industries so as to make investments more attractive in the core industry.  The 
Committee are also of the opinion that Public -Private Partnership (PPP) can play 
a crucial role in reviving, expanding and setting up of new fertilizer units.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The New Investment Policy 2012 has been formulated on the basis of 
report submitted by the committee constituted under the chairmanship of Dr. 
Saumitra Chaudhury, Member Planning C ommission, in consultation with fertilizer 
industries. The NIP-2012 is equally applicable to PSU as well as private company.  
(DoF's O.M. No. H-11021/18/20112- Parl. dated 25.03.2013) 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.6 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
 
PRODUCTION OF BIO-FERTILIZERS 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
37 
  Bio-fertilizers are useful in providing agricultural production as they are eco-
friendly and cost effective fertilizers. The Committee are happy to observe that 
overall production of fertilizers have increased in the year 2008 -09 at 25,065.03 
tonnes but are dismayed at the fact that the production of Bio -fertilizers was at 
20,040.35 tonnes in 2009-10.  Now, the Committee are happy to note that the total 
production of Bio-fertilizers has gone upto 37997.61 Metric Tonnes during the year 
2010-11.  However, the Committee express their displeasure over the fact that in 
some states production has been 'Nil' in the years 2007 -08, 2008 -09 etc.  The 
Committee therefore, str ongly recommend that the Government should take 
adequate steps to raise the production of bio-fertilizers zone-wise and educate the 
farmers about the benefits of bio fertilizers and thereby encourage them to use it.  
The Committee are of opinion that the i ncreased use of bio -fertilizers would also 
have considerable benefits to the environment and also to the health of the soil 
and reduce dependence on artificial fertilizers.  The Committee also recommend 
that Department of Fertilizers should take up the iss ue with Ministry of Agriculture 
so as to provide incentive to farmers and other manufacturers producing bio -
fertilizers.  The Committee feel that such a step would encourage the use of bio -
fertilizers.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 Bio-fertilizers Production h as further increased from 37,997.61 MT during 
2010-11 to 40,324.21 MT during 2011 -12.  Some states viz. Chhatisgarh has 
started production of bio -fertilizers. The advisory letter has been issued to 
concerned states for increasing the production as well as taking the advantage  of 
National Centre of Organic Farming (NCOF)’s Back -ended-Subsidy Scheme 
through NABARD with promotes the production of bio-fertilizers. 
  
 Under N COF scheme, financial assistance is  provided for setting up of 
organic inputs production units as credit linked back -ended subsidy to the tune of 
33% restricted to Rs. 60.00 lakh for setting up of Fruit/Vegetable market 
Waste/Agro-waste compost units and 25% restricted to Rs. 40.00 lakh for setting 
up of Bio-fertilizers production units/Biopesticides production units.  
(DoF's O.M. No. H-11021/18/20112- Parl. dated 25.03.2013) 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
38 
CONSUMPTION PATTERN OF FERTILIZERS 
 The Committee regret to note that the consumption of fertilizers has not 
increased significantly in the country specially in the states such as Karnataka, 
Tamil Nadu, Chattisgarh, Uttaranchal, Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmir  and almost 
all North Eastern States .  Therefore, the Committee are of opinion that 
Department of Fertilizers should encourage the consumption of fertilizers and this 
will result in two pronged benefits, one that it will lead to increase in production 
and marketing of fertilizers and on othe r hand it will increase the production of 
food crops.  The Committee also recommend that an integrated plan should be 
drawn to identify the hurdles in the way of increased consumption of fertilizers.  
The Committee also desires that Department of Fertilize rs should perform the role 
of facilitator in this task.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The table showing consumption of major fertilizers from 2007 -08 to 2011 -
12 is enclosed at Annexure-I. The tables showing consumption of Urea, DAP, 
MOP and NPK fertilizers in states namely Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Chattisgarh, 
Uttarakhand, J&K, Jharkhand, Assam are enclosed at  Annexure II, III, IV and V 
respectively. 
 
 It is evident from t he perusal of table at Annexure -II that total consumption 
of fertilizers has generally increased since 2007 -08. Besides, the consumption of 
most of the fertilizers in states namely Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Chattisgarh, 
Uttarakhand, J&K, Jharkhand, Assam etc has also generally increased sinc e 
2007-08 (as evident from tables at Annexure II, III. IV and V). 
 
 This is due to better extension activities, improved soil testing facilities etc, 
which has enhanced the awareness among the farmers about the balanced use of 
fertilizers, requirement of nutrients for better crop productivity. This increase in the 
total consumption of fertilizers has led to increase in the food grain production in 
the country.  
 
II.  Department of Agriculture & Cooperation is taking following measures to 
promote balanced use of fertilizers: 
 
(a) “National Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility” (NPMSHF) has 
been taken up from 2008 -09 to promote balanced and judicious use of 
fertilizer in conjunction with organic manure on soil test basis.  The scheme 
is continuing in the 12 th Plan also and the major activities under the 
Scheme are:-  
 
1. Strengthening of soil testing service 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
39 
(i) Setting up/Strengthening of Static/Mobile Soil Testing Laboratories (STLS ). 
 
(ii) Trainings/field demonstrations on balanced use of fertilizers.  
 
(iii) Preparation of digital district soil maps.  
 
2. Promoting use of integrated nutrient management :promotion of organic 
manures/soil amendments (lime/basic stag) in acidic  soils/micro nutrients.  
 
3. Strengthening of fertilizer testing services :setting up/strengthening of 
fertilizer quality control laboratories  
 
4. Continuation/strengthening of central fertilizer quality control & training 
institute and its regional laboratories :inspection and analy sis of fertilizer 
samples and trainings.  
 
Details regarding number of Soil testing Laboratories sanctioned under the 
Scheme Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram are given at Annexure-VII. 
 
(b) Indian Institute of Soil Science (IISS), Bhopal has been assigned the 
project for preparation of Geo -Referenced Soil Fertility Maps including 
interlinking of soil fertility status with Soil Test Crop Response (STCR) data 
to generate site specific recommend ations in 19 major States (171 
districts). IISS, Bhopal has uploaded the digitized soil fertility maps of 118 
districts on their website. The work is likely to be completed by 31.3.2013.  
 
(DoF's O.M. No. H-11021/18/20112- Parl. dated 25.03.2013) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.9 
 
DEMAND AND AVAILABILITY OF FERTILIZERS 
 The Committee were informed that Department of fertilizers has an 
elaborate and meticulous system of supply of fertilizers of various states and 
Union Territories for uninterrupted flow of fertilizers to farmers at reasonable 
prices throughout the country.   The Committee were informed that Department of 
Agriculture and cooperation (DAC) holds weekly video -conference with the State 
Agriculture Department and if there is shortage of fertilizers in any district of the 
country it is informed to the Department o f Fertilizers (DOF) so that they may 
make adequate arrangements for supply of fertilizers.  However, the Committee 
are dismayed to note that despite repeated assurance from Department of 
Fertilizers the availability of fertilizers has not been upto mark in various districts of 
the country.  The Committee are very unhappy to note that the farmers in various 
parts of the country have been suffering on account of untimely availability of 
fertilizers and this is causing much distress among the farmers.  The Com mittee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should ensure 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
40 
that there is timely availability of fertilizers to the farmers and the farmers should 
not suffer for the want of fertilizers.  The Committee are also of the view that t here 
should be proper coordination between Department of Fertilizers (DOF) and 
Agriculture Department of the State Government.   The Committee are also 
dismayed to note that on record there is availability of fertilizers as required but in 
reality there is  acute shortage of fertilizers at ground level.  The Committee feel 
that there is a mismatch in data available with the Department of Fertilizers and 
other sources regarding the availability of fertilizers.  The Committee are, 
therefore, of the view that D epartment of Fertilizers should explore possibility of 
creating direct communication link between the farmers and Department of 
Fertilizers to assess the correct demand of fertilizers.  The Committee are also of 
the view that proper distribution mechanism of fertilizers at the district level should 
also be developed so that adequate fertilizers are available to farmers on time.  
 The Committee during Study visit to Kolkata, Shillong, Cherrapunji, 
Guwahati, Aizawl, Dimapur and Kolkata from 13 to 19 July 2010  observed that 
there is very acute scarcity of fertilizers in North Eastern States specially in states 
of Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram.  The Committee also noted that the 
dealers faced difficulties in lifting of fertilizers from the company to the retai l 
market and subsequently to the farmers.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department of Fertilizers should take adequate steps for procuring 
facilities for the dealers for lifting of fertilizers from the companies to the retail 
outlets and th en to the farmers. In this regard the Committee were suggested at 
Dimapur that the fertilizers companies should make available all the requirement 
of fertilizers at Central Warehousing Corporation (CWC) Dimapur as this will 
ensure easy lifting and delivery  of fertilizers well ahead of season for timely  
application of fertilizers.  The Committee feel that this kind of arrangement can be 
made for other parts of the country for ensuring timely availability of fertilizers.  
Further, the Committee also observed  that farmers were paying exorbitant prices 
especially in the North Eastern States for fertilizers even if the fertilizers are 
available in surplus.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should 
look into the matter and take necessary steps in this regard.  
 
 The Committee during study visit to Kochi, Munnar, Alleppy and Thekkady 
from 4 to 8 July 2012 observed that tea and spice growers were not provided 
timely availability of fertilizers especially Muriate of Phosphate (MOP), complex 
fertilizers and Factum Phos.  There was shortage of fertilizers also.  On the 
contrary the Department of Fertilizers vehemently say that there is no dearth of 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
41 
fertilizers.  The Committee therefore derive the conclusion that either there is 
something wrong in the assessment of requirement of fertilizers or the artificial 
scarcity has been created by the hoarders and black marketeers.  The Committee 
also noted that Cooperative societies are not consulted while assessing the 
requirement of fertilizers.  The Committee  therefore recommend that Cooperative 
societies should also be involved in the process of data collection in respect of 
demand of fertilizers well before the sowing season so as to ensure that farmers 
do not feel any scarcity of fertilizers during their so wing / application period.  The 
Committee are of the view that some device should be explored in consultation 
with State Governments to check black marketing of fertilizers.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The state -wise demand(requirement) and supply (availability) of Urea, 
DAP, MOP and complex fertilizers during the year 2012 (April, 2012 to 
December,2012) is at Annexure ‘VIII’.  As can be seen from the Annexure, supply 
of fertilizers is adequate and comfortable.  
 
The state-wise demand is assessed and projected by the respective states before 
beginning of each crop season.  DAC organize a Conference of all stakeholders 
that includes all state governments, Department of Fertilizer, Department of 
Railways, FAI  etc.  On the basis of these conference, the requirement of fertilizers 
is assessed by DAC and projection given to DOF. 
 
Steps taken by Department of Fertilizers to provide adequate supply of fertilizers 
are as given below: 
 
(i) a regular weekly Video conference is being conducted jointly by 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Department of Fertilizers 
(DOF), Ministry of Railways with State Agriculture Officials and corrective 
actions are taken to dispatch fertilizer as indicated by the state  
governments. 
(ii) The movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is being monitored 
throughout the country by an on -line web based monitoring system 
(www.urvarak.co.in) also called as Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS); 
(iii) The gap in the demand and domestic production of fertilizer is met through 
imports. 
(iv) The State governments have been advised to instruct the State 
institutional agencies to coordinate with manufacturers and importers of 
fertilizers for streamlining the supplies. 
 The Department of Fertilizers is following a phased approach to achieve 
direct transfer of fertilizer subsidy.  The first phase of the project focuses on the 
information visibility of fertilizer availability at the last point of sale.  The existing  
Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS-www.urvarak.co.in) that tracks availability up to 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
42 
the district level is being extended, through the mobile Fertilizer Monitoring 
System (m-FMS-www.mfms.nic.in) to the last point of sale i.e. retailer to track the 
movement and availability of fertilizers.  With this, all stakeholders across fertilizer 
supply chain shall report daily dispatch, receipts and stock updates.   
 
 As regards black -marketing and spurious fertilizers, State Governments 
under the extant provisions of  Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985 have been 
adequately empowered to take preventive/punitive actions against the offenders 
who indulge in black -marketing/sales of spurious fertilizers.  Department of 
Fertilizers has also advised/sensitized the State Go vernments for gearing up 
enforcement agencies under their jurisdiction for taking appropriate action against 
the offenders, if any. 
 
 Regarding consultation with Cooperative Societies , DAC has advised all 
the state governments to consult Cooperative Societ ies at the time of finalization 
of assessment of demand of fertilizers. 
1.16 The Department of Fertilizers further informed the Committee with regard r easons 
for the variation in the demand (requirement), Supply (availability) and sales of fertilizers 
as given in Annexure VIII of the Action Taken Replies as under:-  
 “Following are the processes for assessing requirement and ensuring 
adequate and timely availability of fertilizers in the states: 
(c) The month-wise demand is assessed and projected by the Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) in consultation with the State 
Governments before commencement of each cropping season.  
(d) On the basis of month -wise & state -wise projection given by Depart ment 
of Agriculture and Cooperation, Department of Fertilizers allocates 
sufficient/adequate quantities of fertilizers to the States by issuing 
monthly supply plan and continuously monitors the availability through 
following system:   
iv) The State Governments  are regularly advised to coordinate with 
manufacturers and importers of fertilizers for streamlining the supplies 
through timely placement of indents for railway rakes through their state 
institutional agencies like Markfed etc.,  in compliance of the mon thly 
supply plan issued by Department of Fertilizers.   
v) Regular weekly Video conference is conducted jointly by Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Department of Fertilizers (DoF), and 
Ministry of Railways with State Agriculture Officials and co rrective actions 
are taken to dispatch fertilizer as indicated by the State governments. 
vi) The gap in the demand and domestic production of fertilizer is met 
through imports.  
 
In light of above processes, the reasons for the variations in the demand 
(requirement) supply (availability) and sales of fertilizers as given at Annexure  
VIII of the Action Taken Replies are following:- 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
43 
‘The projection of month -wise and state -wise requirement of fertilizer as 
assessed by DAC is tentative and based upon the past tre nds as well as 
considering ideal weather conditions.  As the season progresses actual 
requirement varies because of various factors like delayed/early monsoon, 
change in weather conditions, change in irrigation facilities and change in 
crop patterns.  Ther efore, actual requirement may not turn out to be the 
same as the projections given at beginning of the season.  As the actual 
requirement changes on the ground, the states and their institutional 
agencies lift the fertilizer according to the actual demand,  therefore, the 
actual availability and sales do not match to the projected requirement at 
the start of the season.’ 
 
A statement of fertilizers requirement, availability and sale of Urea,   MOP, 
DAP and NPK fertilizers from April, 2013 to June, 2013 at Annexure-VIII. 
 
(DoF's O.M. No. H-11021/18/20112- Parl. dated 25.03.2013) 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
12August, 2013                                                     GOPINATH MUNDE 
21 Shravana, 1935 (Saka)                                          Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
44 
ANNEXURE-I 
No. 12012/39/2011-FPP 
Government of India 
Ministry of Chemical & Fertilizers 
Department of Fertilisers 
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi 
Dated the  02nd  January 2013. 
To 
All Chief Secretaries of State Governments 
CMD/MDs 
RCF/MFL/BVFCL/NFL/KRIBHCO/IFFCO/GSFC/GNVFC/SFC/NFCL/CFCL/TCL 
ZAL/INDO-GULF/SPIC/KSFCL/MCFL/FCIL/HFCL/FACT/IPL/MATIX/KFCL 
All Urea Manufacturing units 
Subject: New Investment Policy - 2012  
Sir 
 I am directed to convey the approval of Government of India for New Investment 
Policy–2012 (NIP -2012) in order to facilitate fresh investments in urea sector.   The 
salient features of the NIP-2012 are as under:- 
 
1. It provides a structure of a floor price and a ceiling price  for the amount payable to 
Urea units, which will be calculated based on the delivered gas price (inclusive of 
charges & taxes) to respective urea units. The floor and ceiling price of each urea unit  
shall be operative with respect to the computed Import Parity Price  (IPP) (Annexure-1).  
The IPP defined for urea under the investment policy of 2008 is the average C&F price 
without any applicable custom duties and handling and bagging charges at the por t.  If 
the computed IPP (payable) is between the floor and the ceiling price for that gas cost, it 
is the IPP (payable) which will be used. If the IPP (payable) is above or below the ceiling 
or the floor respectively, it is the ceiling or floor price that will be acceptable as the case 
may be.  
 
2.  The criteria according to which plants will qualify under different categories 
namely Revamp, Expansion, Revival and Greenfield shall be as below: 
 
2.1 Revamp projects : Any improvement or incremental increase in capacity of 
existing plants by way of capital investment in the existing train of ammonia -urea 
production will be treated as revamp of existing units. 
 
2.2 Expansion or Brownfield projects : Setting up of a new am monia-urea plant (a 
separate new ammonia-urea train) in the premises of the existing fertilizer plants, utilizing 
some of the common utilities will qualify for being treated as an expansion project. The 
investment should exceed a minimum limit of Rs.3000 crore. 
 
2.3 Revival of closed urea units : The three closed urea units of Hindustan Fertilizer 
Corporation Ltd. (HFCL) at Barauni, Durgapur and Haldia, and five closed urea units of 
Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd. (FCIL) at Sindri, Talcher, Ramagundam, Gorakhpur 
and Korba being proposed for revival shall fall under ‘Revival of closed urea units’. 
 
2.4 Greenfield Projects: Any urea unit which shall be set -up at the project site where 
no previous similar manufacturing facilities existed i.e. acquisition of land followed by 
construction of an ammonia -urea plant with storage facilities, transportation facilities, 
water and sewage treatment etc. shall be treated as a Greenfield project. 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
45 
 
3 Greenfield /Revival of Closed HFCL & FCIL Projects 
(i) At a delivered gas price of up  to USD 6.5 per mmbtu for Greenfield/Revival 
 Urea units 
(a) the Floor price is  fixed at USD 305 per MT of Urea  
(b) the Ceiling price is fixed at USD 335 per MT of Urea 
(ii) For each 0.1 USD per mmbtu revision in delivered gas price , it will 
 correspondingly change the  
(a) Floor and Ceiling price by USD 2 per MT up to a delivered gas price of USD 14 
per mmbtu. 
(b) Floor by USD 2 per MT for delivered gas price exceeding USD 14 per mmbtu. 
(iii) The urea from Greenfield/Revival of closed urea units of HFCL and FCIL units  
 will be recognized at a uniform rate of 95% of IPP (C&F) subject to floating 
 floor and ceiling prices mentioned at 3 (i) and 3 (ii) above. 
 
4 Substantial Expansion or Brownfield Projects 
(i) At a delivered gas price of upto USD 6.5 per mmbtu for Expansion/Brownfield 
 Urea units 
(a) the Floor price is fixed at USD 285 per MT of Urea  
(b) the Ceiling price  is  fixed at USD 310 per MT of Urea 
(ii) For each 0.1 USD per mmbtu revision in delivered gas price , it will 
 correspondingly change the  
(a) Floor and Ceiling price by USD 2 per MT up to a delivered gas price of USD 14 
per mmbtu. 
(b) Floor by USD 2 per MT for delivered gas price exceeding USD 14 per mmbtu 
(iii) The urea from Expansion / Brownfield Urea units will be recognized at a  uniform 
rate of 90% of IPP (C&F) subject to floating floor and ceiling  prices mentioned at 
4 (i) and 4 (ii) above. 
 
5 Revamp Projects 
(i) At a delivered gas price of upto USD  7.5 per mmbtu for new Revamp Urea 
 units 
 (a) the Floor price is fixed at USD 245 per MT of Urea  
(b) the Ceiling price is  fixed at USD 255 per MT of Urea 
(ii) For each 0.1 USD per mmbtu revision i n delivered gas price , it will 
 correspondingly change the  
(a) Floor and Ceiling price by USD 2.2 per MT up to a delivered  gas price of USD 
14 per mmbtu. 
(b) Floor by USD 2.2 per MT for deliv ered gas price exceeding USD 14  per 
mmbtu.  
(iii) The urea from Revamp Urea units will be recognised at a uniform rate of 85% 
 of IPP (C&F) subject to floating floor and ceiling prices mentioned at 5 (i) and 
 6 (ii) above. These will be applicable for all output above the “cut-off” point. 
(iii-a) Cut-Off Quantity -  The urea produced from existing units beyond their reassessed 
capacity under NPS or the maximum achieved capacity by a unit for 330 days in 
last four years (2003 -07), whichever is higher (cut off quantity), is recognised as 
the production under  revamp of the existing unit.  However, the urea produced 
under revamp quantity will only be eligible for the above dispensation once the 
total production of the unit crosses 105 per cent of the cut off quantity or 110 per 
cent of the reassessed capacity, whichever is higher.  
(iv) No Administered Pricing Mechanism (APM) gas shall be considered for 
 allocation for production beyond cut-off quantity.  
(v) The Urea units, which have undertaken revamp and are already availing the 
provisions of the Investment P olicy of 2008 , will remain under the Investment 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
46 
Policy of 2008 . In the event of doubling of gas price from USD  4.88 per MMBTU 
(base price including applicable taxes) for a unit under the Investment Policy of 
2008, appropriate revision will be worked out un der that Policy, in consultation 
with the Department of Expenditure.  
(vi) Any further revamp undertaken by an already revamped unit, will be considered to 
be eligible under the same Revamp policy as that applicable to the original 
revamp. In case a unit under the policy of 2008 undertakes further revamp and the 
additional quantity is more than 10% of the present production (maximum 
production in any continuous one year period of the last three years, which should 
not be less than the quantity produced in s imilar period of previous years after 
implementation of NIP-2008 policy), the Urea unit may opt for the dispensation as 
mentioned at 5  (i, ii and iii). Once new investment policy gets applied on the unit 
for the extra production beyond 10% of existing production as discussed above, 
the entire revamp production from the unit (existing & new combined) will be 
recognised as per NIP -2012. Th e option will have to be exercised by the unit 
within three months of start of new increased production. 
 
6 Non-operation of ceiling price and IPP if delivered gas price exceed USD 14 
per mmbtu. 
In the event the delivered gas price crosses USD 14 per mmbtu , the units 
(whether revamp, expansion, brownfield, greenfield or revival) shall be paid only 
the floor price based on the delivered gas price  as mentioned at 3(ii)(b), 4(ii)(b) 
and 5(ii)(b). All other conditions like ceiling price and recognition of urea w.r.t IPP 
shall become non-operational. 
 
7 Operational Principles-   The following is adopted for operating the policy: 
7.1 The increase/decrease of the floor and ceiling price will be calculated at the end of 
each quarter, on the basis of average gas price of previous three months. 
Accordingly, IPP shall also be calculated for each quarter for each plant. 
 
7.2 The price of the delivered gas will be calculated based on delivered gas price as 
certified by MoPNG/Central PSU/State PSU.  
 
7.3 The policy sha ll be applicable to urea units to be based on gas i.e. natural gas 
(domestic/RLNG) and CBM. In case of CBM , price of NG equivalent of CBM as 
given by Public agency will be considered. For revival of closed urea units based 
on coal gasification  and Greenfie ld projects  based on coal gasification, a 
dispensation that is the same as that of CBM will be extended after arriving at 
equivalent NG price. 
 
7.4  While fixing the floor and ceiling price of Greenfield, Revival, Brownfield and 
Expansion urea units, It has been presumed that the delivered cost of CBM/Actual 
mix of gas to the urea unit shall not be less than USD 6.5/mmbtu. 
 
8 Time period for the investment policy 
8.1 It is proposed that only those units whose production starts within five years from 
the dat e of notification of the policy would be covered under the policy. The 
dispensation of guaranteed buy-back under this policy will be available to the units 
for a period of eight years from the date of start of production. Thereafter, the units 
will be governed by the Urea policy prevalent at that time. 
 
9 Mandating of Granulated Urea / Coated Urea 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
47 
9.1 In order to improve the efficiency in the use of Urea, as a part of product 
management strategy, all new urea capacities in the country are mandated to 
produce Urea in granulated form or  coated/fortified Urea. Taking into account the 
additional investment on account of a granulation plant and the incremental 
operating costs, an additional amount of USD 10 per  MT, is allowed in the floor 
and ceiling prices for a ll plants – Greenfield/Revival/ Brownfield–producing 
Granulated Urea. 
  
9.2 As part of the present policy , an additional 5% / 10% additional MRP may be 
allowed in case of Neem coated / Zincated Urea. 
 
10 Joint Venture Units 
10.1 Decision regarding Urea off -take agreement for Joint Venture units set up abroad 
shall be taken on case -to-case basis, based on the prevalent IPP of Urea, price 
and availability of indigenous gas, cost of gas being offered to the JV and demand 
supply gap of Urea in the country. The guiding principle shall, however, be that the 
offered supply on C&F basis from the JV should be equal to or less than the floor  
price for domestic Greenfield units at a gas cost of USD 6.5 per mmbtu.  Thus 
extending the floor price  corresponding to a gas price of USD 6.5 per mmbtu to 
the JV’s abroad will actually mean getting imported gas at a delivered price  of 
USD 6.5 per mmbtu which will result in substantial saving to GOI. While fixing the 
floor and ceiling price for a JV abroad , subject to a maximum floor  price 
corresponding to a delivered gas price of USD 6.5 per mmbtu for domestic units, a 
higher return may be considered keeping in view factors such as risks involved, 
likely time and cost overruns, etc. Approval of CCEA  would be obtained in each 
case. 
 
11 Dispensation for Units in North East 
11.1 For units coming up in the North Eastern States, the special dispensation 
regarding pricing of gas that is being extended by the Central Government/ State 
Government will also be available to any new Investments in the region as well. 
Suitable adjustments will be made to the applicable floor and ceiling prices in case 
the delivered price (after allowing for the special dispensation) falls below USD 6.5 
per mmbtu, subject to approval of Ministry of Finance. 
 
12. As per the budget provisions announced for 201 2-13, capital investment in 
fertilizer sector has been made eligible for Viability Gap Funding (VGF) under the 
Scheme for Support to PPP in infrastructure sector. However no VGF shall be 
allowed to Urea units in Public or Private sector. In case incentives under VGF are 
required to be extended to Fertilizer units being set up in remote areas/difficult 
terrains like north east or units which are based on coal gasification, where the 
capex involved is substantially higher, the same will be examined by DOF in 
consultation with DoE on case to case basis.  
13 The broad stages for setting up a urea project are given at Annexure–2. Since the 
policy envisages payment of subsidy/ incentives to the urea units by the 
Government, all the urea units who plan to set -up urea units in the country should 
mandatorily provide information at beginning and completion of each stage of the 
project as given at Annexure–2. This is also required to assess the demand and 
production gap in the country as well as the cost of gas expected  to be used in 
production of urea from new investments. 
14.     The policy will be effective from the date of notification. 
Yours sincerely 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
48 
( Satish Chandra ) 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India 
Tele : 23386800 
  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
49 
 
Annexure-A 
Import parity price: Import Parity Price for a month would be derived based on the 
prevailing prices in three months preceding the month under consideration as indicated 
below.  
 
Import Parity Price (IPP):  The import parity price (IPP) for a particular month will be the 
lower of the actual average CIF price of urea imported in India during preceding three 
months and the IPP reported in the fertilizer magazines for the same preceding three 
months, as detailed below: 
IPP x = FOB Arabian Gulf + Freight  
Where,  
IPP x = Import Parity Price for month (x) 
FOB Arabian Gulf = Average FOB reported price of urea for AG in the three 
magazines as listed below, during preceding three month (x - 1) to (x - 3).    
Freight = Average freight for AG in the three magazines listed below, during 
preceding three month (x - 1) to (x - 3).  
The exchange rate will be taken as the average of preceding three months for 
arriving at the price in INR. The three fertilizer magazines to be used for arriving at 
IPP prices will be as below: 
(a) Fertiliser Market Bulletin, UK; 
(b) Fertiliser Week by British Sulphur, UK; and 
(c) Fertecon Weekly Nitrogen Fax, UK. 
 
Annexure-B 
Broad stages of a urea project 
 
Following are the broad stages for setting up an Ammonia-Urea Project:- 
 
a) Pre-feasibility Report 
b) Techno Economic Feasibility Report & its approval from the company’s Board of 
Director. 
c) Finalization of Project site. 
d) 1st Stage Environment Clearance from MoEF 
e) Technology Evaluation and Selec tion or EPC (LSTK) bid preparation & 
Evaluation. 
f) Detailed/Bankable Project/Feasibility Report preparation and approval from the 
company’s Board of Director. 
g) Environment Impact Assessment Report preparation and final clearance from 
MoEF 
h) Raw Material and Utilities tie-up for the project 
i) Finalization of EPCM or EPC (LSTK) Contractor. 
j) Achieving Financial Closure 
k) Award of job to EPCM or EPC Contractor. 
l) Signing of Agreement between various agencies 
m) Mobilization Advance to EPCM or EPC Contractor. 
n) Physical Progress Achieved - 25% 
o) Physical Progress Achieved – 50% 
p) Physical Progress Achieved – 75% 
q) Commissioning of Project & Start of commercial production. 
 
*** 
  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
50 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
 
  


 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
51 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
 
 
 
  


 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
52 
ANNEXURE-IV 
 
 
  


 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
53 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
 
 
 
 
  


 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
54 
ANNEXURE-VI 
 
  


 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
55 
 
ANNEXURE-VII 
 
 
 
 
  


 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
56 
ANNEXURE-VIII 
 
 
 
  


 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
57 
 
ANNEXURE-IX 
State wise & District wise Opening stock, Monthly Plan Despatches, Receipts, Availabilty and Sales of Complex Fertilizers during  Kharif 2013 (April to June) 
<Figures in MTs> 
State District Opening Stock Monthly Plan Disptaches Net Receipts Availability Sales Closing 
Stock 
Andaman & Nicobar Andaman 0.00 2000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Andaman & Nicobar Nicobar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Andaman & Nicobar Total 0.00 2000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Andhra Pradesh Adilabad 1714.70 13929.80 5426.80 6074.05 7788.75 6993.75 795.00 
Andhra Pradesh Anantapur 1457.75 17924.00 10028.05 9828.10 11285.85 7781.55 3504.30 
Andhra Pradesh Chittoor 1377.60 6301.75 3752.75 5642.65 7020.25 4338.05 2682.20 
Andhra Pradesh East Godavari 5456.53 10542.55 2377.50 2460.55 7917.08 3099.30 4817.78 
Andhra Pradesh Guntur 7662.35 15533.70 4209.20 5577.00 13239.35 4688.20 8551.15 
Andhra Pradesh Hyderabad 14.10 0.00 5450.00 29.50 43.60 0.00 43.60 
Andhra Pradesh Kadapa 1813.25 9469.50 3333.80 3841.30 5654.55 5273.30 381.25 
Andhra Pradesh Karimnagar 2206.65 18541.85 12134.65 9781.70 11988.35 11539.75 448.60 
Andhra Pradesh Khammam 3913.88 10429.40 3378.55 3505.35 7419.23 5509.85 1909.38 
Andhra Pradesh Krishna 5071.85 17985.05 13474.00 9910.90 14982.75 8834.30 6148.45 
Andhra Pradesh Kurnool 5476.95 26154.45 11913.60 11154.60 16631.55 14214.30 2417.25 
Andhra Pradesh Mahbubnagar 978.67 18136.15 13467.40 11215.00 12193.67 11530.10 663.57 
Andhra Pradesh Medak 270.40 14002.15 3689.50 10401.00 10671.40 10209.40 462.00 
Andhra Pradesh Nalgonda 1821.05 18044.75 5548.40 5552.45 7373.50 4748.40 2625.10 
Andhra Pradesh Nellore 1827.00 6193.00 3410.80 1597.70 3424.70 2929.75 494.95 
Andhra Pradesh Nizamabad 1040.30 26692.20 22812.55 13016.60 14056.90 10099.15 3957.75 
Andhra Pradesh Prakasam 2996.95 9574.80 5224.05 6864.75 9861.70 6425.40 3436.30 
Andhra Pradesh Rangareddy 3419.30 24701.75 20321.10 15427.90 18847.20 14126.10 4721.10 
Andhra Pradesh Srikakulam 883.80 4036.00 186.00 132.30 1016.10 779.80 236.30 
Andhra Pradesh Visakhapatnam 16.45 2293.00 143.00 165.95 182.40 154.85 27.55 
Andhra Pradesh Vizianagaram 1322.54 4824.00 824.00 854.75 2177.29 1385.50 791.79 
Andhra Pradesh Warangal 2593.05 15628.80 3481.65 3748.60 6341.65 5406.40 935.25 
Andhra Pradesh West Godavari 4072.50 20462.85 10441.10 10663.85 14736.35 9450.45 5285.90 
Andhra Pradesh Total 57407.61 311401.50 165028.45 147446.55 204854.16 149517.65 55336.51 
Arunachal Pradesh Anjaw 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh Changlang 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh East Kameng 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh East Siang 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh Kurung Kumey 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh Lohit 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh Lower Dibang Valley 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh Lower Subansiri 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh Papum Pare 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh Tawang 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh Tirap 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh Upper Dibang Valley 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh Upper Siang 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh Upper Subansiri 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh West Kameng 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh West Siang 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arunachal Pradesh Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Baksa 0.00 0.00 0.00 269.80 269.80 269.80 0.00 
Assam Barpeta 267.80 1000.00 0.00 -209.80 58.00 58.00 0.00 
Assam Bongaigaon 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Cachar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Chirang 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Darrang 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.00 5.00 0.00 5.00 
Assam Dhemaji 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 0.00 
Assam Dhubri 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Dibrugarh 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Goalpara 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Golaghat 0.00 50.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Hailakandi 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Jorhat 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Kamrup 29.50 100.00 440.25 360.25 389.75 61.50 328.25 
Assam Karbi Anglong 0.00 50.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Karimganj 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Kokrajhar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Lakhimpur 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Marigaon 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Nagaon 0.00 550.00 1261.00 1256.00 1256.00 465.00 791.00 
Assam Nalbari 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam North Cachar Hills 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Sivasagar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Sonitpur 0.00 0.00 0.00 15.00 15.00 15.00 0.00 
Assam Tinsukia 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Assam Udalguri 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
58 
State wise & District wise Opening stock, Monthly Plan Despatches, Receipts, Availabilty and Sales of Complex Fertilizers during  Kharif 2013 (April to June) 
<Figures in MTs> 
State District Opening Stock Monthly Plan Disptaches Net Receipts Availability Sales Closing 
Stock 
Assam Total 297.30 1750.00 1701.25 1701.25 1998.55 874.30 1124.25 
Bihar Araria 0.00 1500.00 0.00 462.00 462.00 462.00 0.00 
Bihar Arwal 0.00 400.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Aurangabad 0.00 2230.00 0.00 1000.00 1000.00 264.45 735.55 
Bihar Banka 0.00 800.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Begusarai 25.30 0.00 0.00 0.00 25.30 9.40 15.90 
Bihar Bhagalpur 0.00 1185.00 0.00 240.00 240.00 240.00 0.00 
Bihar Bhojpur 43.65 3518.45 0.00 1523.40 1567.05 1543.40 23.65 
Bihar Buxar 0.00 1300.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Darbhanga 0.00 1000.00 0.00 320.00 320.00 320.00 0.00 
Bihar East Champaran 35.65 2400.00 0.00 301.00 336.65 301.00 35.65 
Bihar Gaya 0.00 400.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Gopalganj 0.00 1050.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Jamui 295.00 660.00 0.00 480.00 775.00 480.00 295.00 
Bihar Jehanabad 0.00 650.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Kaimur 0.00 1679.50 0.00 629.50 629.50 307.70 321.80 
Bihar Katihar 0.00 1448.50 5117.40 955.70 955.70 955.70 0.00 
Bihar Khagaria 154.50 25.00 0.00 45.00 199.50 50.50 149.00 
Bihar Kishanganj 0.00 330.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Lakhisarai 596.35 150.00 0.00 0.00 596.35 0.00 596.35 
Bihar Madhepura 2.35 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.35 0.00 2.35 
Bihar Madhubani 0.00 830.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Munger 0.00 300.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Muzaffarpur 28.35 2040.00 0.00 0.00 28.35 0.00 28.35 
Bihar Nalanda 30.00 2640.00 0.00 760.00 790.00 760.00 30.00 
Bihar Nawada 0.00 670.00 0.00 20.00 20.00 20.00 0.00 
Bihar Patna 335.85 2824.00 5441.40 428.00 763.85 428.00 335.85 
Bihar Purnia 30.00 2145.80 0.00 790.80 820.80 810.80 10.00 
Bihar Rohtas 30.60 2928.30 2629.50 1128.30 1158.90 512.65 646.25 
Bihar Saharsa 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Samastipur 276.55 1450.00 0.00 0.00 276.55 7.55 269.00 
Bihar Saran 137.70 1200.00 0.00 0.00 137.70 60.00 77.70 
Bihar Sheikhpura 0.00 750.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Sheohar 0.00 280.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Sitamarhi 0.00 1050.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Siwan 0.00 850.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Supaul 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bihar Vaishali 607.00 2630.00 0.00 2030.00 2637.00 2134.00 503.00 
Bihar West Champaran 0.00 5648.95 3348.95 3047.95 3047.95 781.20 2266.75 
Bihar Total 2628.85 48963.50 16537.25 14161.65 16790.50 10448.35 6342.15 
Chandigarh Chandigarh 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Chandigarh Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Chattisgarh Beejapur 0.00 140.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Chattisgarh Bilaspur 1921.55 2762.85 1412.85 2574.65 4496.20 3254.00 1242.20 
Chattisgarh Dantewada 0.00 120.00 0.00 17.00 17.00 17.00 0.00 
Chattisgarh Dhamtari 0.00 1982.85 0.00 1874.85 1874.85 1401.85 473.00 
Chattisgarh Durg 0.00 5099.20 3470.20 1846.90 1846.90 802.00 1044.90 
Chattisgarh Jagdalpur 151.10 2825.60 2560.60 2635.60 2786.70 2635.60 151.10 
Chattisgarh Janjgir-Champa 3956.65 440.00 0.00 -1311.80 2644.85 1609.80 1035.05 
Chattisgarh Jashpur 0.00 927.00 0.00 538.00 538.00 538.00 0.00 
Chattisgarh Kabirdham 0.00 1309.95 0.00 1004.95 1004.95 1004.95 0.00 
Chattisgarh Kanker 0.00 550.65 0.00 274.65 274.65 274.65 0.00 
Chattisgarh Korba 0.00 195.00 0.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 0.00 
Chattisgarh Koriya 0.00 1789.00 0.00 1352.50 1352.50 926.50 426.00 
Chattisgarh Kumhari 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Chattisgarh Mahasamund 2677.75 1031.00 0.00 -1724.00 953.75 722.00 231.75 
Chattisgarh Narayanpur 0.00 150.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Chattisgarh Raigarh 2057.10 7215.00 2608.00 1242.50 3299.60 3161.10 138.50 
Chattisgarh Raipur 1717.25 13233.45 14560.45 17470.10 19187.35 17210.40 1976.95 
Chattisgarh Rajnandgaon 5.00 1708.60 780.60 1658.40 1663.40 1645.40 18.00 
Chattisgarh Surguja 230.70 13650.25 11052.40 6877.25 7107.95 4844.90 2263.05 
Chattisgarh Total 12717.10 55130.40 36445.10 36431.55 49148.65 40148.15 9000.50 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli 
1.45 400.00 0.00 0.00 1.45 1.45 0.00 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli Total 1.45 400.00 0.00 0.00 1.45 1.45 0.00 
Daman & Diu Daman and Diu 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Daman & Diu Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Delhi Central Delhi 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Delhi Delhi 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Delhi East Delhi 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Delhi North Delhi 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Delhi North East Delhi 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Delhi North West Delhi 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Delhi Southwest 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
59 
State wise & District wise Opening stock, Monthly Plan Despatches, Receipts, Availabilty and Sales of Complex Fertilizers during  Kharif 2013 (April to June) 
<Figures in MTs> 
State District Opening Stock Monthly Plan Disptaches Net Receipts Availability Sales Closing 
Stock 
Delhi Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
GOA GOA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
GOA North Goa 0.00 1070.00 0.00 20.00 20.00 20.00 0.00 
GOA South Goa 0.00 783.00 21.00 33.00 33.00 33.00 0.00 
GOA Total 0.00 1853.00 21.00 53.00 53.00 53.00 0.00 
Gujarat Ahmedabad 195.03 4433.40 4173.15 3436.85 3631.88 2098.65 1533.23 
Gujarat Amreli 188.90 5431.00 1673.00 3511.00 3699.90 1743.88 1956.03 
Gujarat Anand 904.48 1253.45 4184.75 4634.60 5539.08 4615.28 923.80 
Gujarat Banas Kantha 220.55 3525.00 888.00 3689.80 3910.35 1974.70 1935.65 
Gujarat Bharuch 173.93 5558.90 4775.55 5099.35 5273.28 4125.78 1147.50 
Gujarat Bhavnagar 208.40 9600.30 11258.75 8721.10 8929.50 6734.25 2195.25 
Gujarat Dahod 97.75 1317.50 40.00 1254.00 1351.75 878.75 473.00 
Gujarat Gandhinagar 118.20 2038.00 935.00 1273.00 1391.20 821.65 569.55 
Gujarat Jamnagar 300.70 3647.30 3482.70 4626.25 4926.95 2796.65 2130.30 
Gujarat Junagadh 488.78 3503.60 3122.60 2732.45 3221.23 2086.43 1134.80 
Gujarat Kheda 1321.65 1253.45 3330.75 4276.50 5598.15 3602.60 1995.55 
Gujarat Kutch 1190.15 2070.00 995.00 1719.00 2909.15 1435.10 1474.05 
Gujarat Mahesana 239.70 2110.95 2852.15 1207.45 1447.15 658.20 788.95 
Gujarat Narmada 142.43 1778.50 435.00 1198.35 1340.78 1043.05 297.73 
Gujarat Navsari 329.63 4497.80 820.00 3872.25 4201.88 3813.23 388.65 
Gujarat Panch Mahals 271.38 2263.50 3614.85 2047.85 2319.23 1565.98 753.25 
Gujarat Patan 257.55 1698.55 2161.65 442.20 699.75 327.65 372.10 
Gujarat Porbandar 44.10 1729.00 804.00 650.00 694.10 576.00 118.10 
Gujarat Rajkot 363.85 11748.50 11482.40 8603.25 8967.10 3525.65 5441.45 
Gujarat Sabar Kantha 339.85 8163.50 2850.00 5557.65 5897.50 4248.50 1649.00 
Gujarat Surat 1112.58 16052.30 20279.05 14141.45 15254.03 7162.98 8091.05 
Gujarat Surendranagar 91.10 6841.10 5205.10 6549.15 6640.25 4800.38 1839.88 
Gujarat Tapi 342.35 2054.00 111.00 3170.80 3513.15 3047.78 465.38 
Gujarat The Dangs 18.20 100.00 0.00 5.00 23.20 7.50 15.70 
Gujarat Vadodara 1593.13 4744.70 6290.90 6276.70 7869.83 5983.25 1886.58 
Gujarat Valsad 249.90 1860.80 2791.30 2472.85 2722.75 2073.95 648.80 
Gujarat Total 10804.23 109275.10 98556.65 101168.85 111973.08 71747.78 40225.30 
Harayana Ambala 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Bhiwani 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Faridabad 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Fatehabad 0.00 1000.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Gurgaon 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Hisar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Jhajjar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Jind 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Kaithal 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Karnal 0.00 127.50 127.50 127.50 127.50 0.00 127.50 
Harayana Kurukshetra 0.00 188.30 188.30 188.30 188.30 0.00 188.30 
Harayana Mahendragarh 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Mewat 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Palwal 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Panchkula 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Panipat 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Rewari 0.00 1040.40 0.00 1040.40 1040.40 0.00 1040.40 
Harayana Rohtak 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Sirsa 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Sonipat 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Harayana Yamunanagar 21.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 21.00 0.00 21.00 
Harayana Total 21.00 2356.20 315.80 1356.20 1377.20 0.00 1377.20 
Himachal Pradesh Bilaspur 0.00 72.00 0.00 72.00 72.00 72.00 0.00 
Himachal Pradesh Chamba 0.00 90.00 0.00 90.00 90.00 90.00 0.00 
Himachal Pradesh Hamirpur 0.00 15.00 0.00 15.00 15.00 15.00 0.00 
Himachal Pradesh Kangra 4.90 280.00 0.00 280.00 284.90 273.55 11.35 
Himachal Pradesh Kinnaur 0.00 24.00 0.00 24.00 24.00 24.00 0.00 
Himachal Pradesh Kullu 0.00 574.85 0.00 424.85 424.85 424.85 0.00 
Himachal Pradesh Lahaul and Spiti 0.00 500.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Himachal Pradesh Mandi 0.00 1244.00 0.00 644.00 644.00 627.05 16.95 
Himachal Pradesh Shimla 0.00 603.00 2623.60 303.00 303.00 281.70 21.30 
Himachal Pradesh Sirmaur 7.00 800.50 0.00 400.50 407.50 376.10 31.40 
Himachal Pradesh Solan 0.00 1235.25 0.00 735.25 735.25 735.25 0.00 
Himachal Pradesh Una 0.50 1060.20 1175.20 809.70 810.20 808.10 2.10 
Himachal Pradesh Total 12.40 6498.80 3798.80 3798.30 3810.70 3727.60 83.10 
J&K Anantnag 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Bandipore 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Baramulla 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Budgam 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Doda 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Ganderbal 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Jammu 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
60 
State wise & District wise Opening stock, Monthly Plan Despatches, Receipts, Availabilty and Sales of Complex Fertilizers during  Kharif 2013 (April to June) 
<Figures in MTs> 
State District Opening Stock Monthly Plan Disptaches Net Receipts Availability Sales Closing 
Stock 
J&K Kargil 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Kathua 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Kishtwar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Kulgam 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Kupwara 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Leh 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Poonch 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Pulwama 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Rajauri 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Ramban 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Reasi 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Samba 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Shopian 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Srinagar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Udhampur 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
J&K Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Bokaro 0.00 110.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Chatra 0.00 80.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Deoghar 0.00 2385.80 0.00 185.80 185.80 185.80 0.00 
Jharkhand Dhanbad 0.00 50.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Dumka 0.00 600.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand East Singhbhum 0.00 120.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Garhwa 0.00 120.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Giridih 0.00 230.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Godda 0.00 250.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Gumla 0.00 150.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Hazaribag 0.00 760.00 0.00 40.00 40.00 40.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Jamtara 0.00 90.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Khunti 0.00 70.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Koderma 0.00 120.00 0.00 210.00 210.00 210.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Latehar 0.00 160.00 0.00 70.00 70.00 70.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Lohardaga 0.00 1195.00 0.00 687.20 687.20 687.20 0.00 
Jharkhand Pakur 0.00 50.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Palamu 0.00 300.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Ramgarh 0.00 160.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Ranchi 3.70 3916.25 4126.70 2804.05 2807.75 1916.75 891.00 
Jharkhand Sahibganj 0.00 500.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Seraikela 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand Simdega 0.00 240.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Jharkhand West Singhbhum 0.00 269.30 0.00 129.30 129.30 129.30 0.00 
Jharkhand Total 3.70 11926.35 4126.70 4126.35 4130.05 3239.05 891.00 
Karnataka Bagalkot 50.15 3257.00 0.00 2897.95 2948.10 2514.50 433.60 
Karnataka Bangalore Rural 74.38 2978.00 66.00 2317.00 2391.38 1160.05 1231.33 
Karnataka Bangalore Urban 478.25 11198.75 20189.00 11462.45 11940.70 9548.55 2392.15 
Karnataka Belgaum 3739.95 21229.35 13935.35 14588.25 18328.20 11839.20 6489.00 
Karnataka Bellary 4162.20 19311.65 9939.80 9110.00 13272.20 9348.35 3923.85 
Karnataka Bidar 328.35 2257.40 1295.00 1347.45 1675.80 194.35 1481.45 
Karnataka Bijapur 1023.90 7361.30 6376.00 3023.20 4047.10 1956.90 2090.20 
Karnataka Chamrajnagar 112.15 2155.00 0.00 1203.65 1315.80 1308.05 7.75 
Karnataka Chickmagalur 179.95 10761.90 1985.00 14672.60 14852.55 13819.65 1032.90 
Karnataka Chikkballapur 104.30 3762.85 442.00 2858.15 2962.45 2368.70 593.75 
Karnataka Chitradurga 14.30 10296.30 3035.75 5751.75 5766.05 4394.35 1371.70 
Karnataka Davangere 1120.49 37454.25 41763.50 27263.50 28383.99 27575.55 808.44 
Karnataka Dharwad 5631.42 13653.65 11807.15 6699.90 12331.32 6434.80 5896.52 
Karnataka Gadag 0.40 3057.80 0.00 2062.40 2062.80 1612.40 450.40 
Karnataka Gulbarga 648.55 5193.35 4286.25 1125.61 1774.16 932.50 841.66 
Karnataka Hassan 844.22 24894.10 34108.30 17829.15 18673.37 17109.35 1564.02 
Karnataka Haveri 162.35 14436.40 12332.30 13049.70 13212.05 8078.50 5133.55 
Karnataka Kodagu 144.70 4940.85 796.00 5638.00 5782.70 5505.75 276.95 
Karnataka Kolar 53.05 3402.00 1147.35 2283.10 2336.15 2148.65 187.50 
Karnataka Koppal 296.60 13051.20 6124.00 8081.35 8377.95 6325.40 2052.55 
Karnataka Mandya 1328.76 14494.05 3830.65 9587.90 10916.66 10008.85 907.81 
Karnataka Mysore 408.00 20355.55 17982.90 12074.63 12482.63 9923.25 2559.38 
Karnataka North Kannada 16.20 1627.75 0.00 1223.45 1239.65 752.00 487.65 
Karnataka Raichur 5391.10 13076.95 4525.20 3103.65 8494.75 5124.50 3370.25 
Karnataka Ramanagaram 234.95 836.00 0.00 212.05 447.00 421.50 25.50 
Karnataka Shimoga 601.03 12445.50 10251.45 9125.00 9726.03 7052.65 2673.38 
Karnataka South Kannada 56.43 2537.40 2117.40 1846.35 1902.78 1779.90 122.88 
Karnataka Tum-kur 318.35 13656.35 13732.35 12300.35 12618.70 7674.80 4943.90 
Karnataka Udupi 0.00 712.00 0.00 482.00 482.00 419.00 63.00 
Karnataka Yadgir 200.95 2864.35 0.00 1374.54 1575.49 1308.99 266.50 
Karnataka Total 27725.42 297259.00 222068.70 204595.08 232320.50 178640.99 53679.51 
Kerala Alappuzha 1337.57 2294.50 718.00 1021.50 2359.07 1081.25 1277.82 
Kerala Ernakulam 63.55 7700.20 3667.05 4156.08 4219.63 2683.53 1536.10 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
61 
State wise & District wise Opening stock, Monthly Plan Despatches, Receipts, Availabilty and Sales of Complex Fertilizers during  Kharif 2013 (April to June) 
<Figures in MTs> 
State District Opening Stock Monthly Plan Disptaches Net Receipts Availability Sales Closing 
Stock 
Kerala Idukki 63.31 6286.00 2974.00 3598.50 3661.81 3413.50 248.31 
Kerala Kannur 255.85 2035.00 1067.00 1281.00 1536.85 910.78 626.07 
Kerala Kasargod 337.95 1122.00 442.00 601.00 938.95 713.50 225.45 
Kerala Kollam 0.00 2266.00 1227.00 1323.00 1323.00 1023.00 300.00 
Kerala Kottayam 53.88 8709.75 7475.80 5135.75 5189.63 2131.10 3058.53 
Kerala Kozhikode 107.65 3181.05 2452.40 1296.05 1403.70 1093.20 310.50 
Kerala Malappuram 32.60 2713.00 1105.00 1845.00 1877.60 1659.60 218.00 
Kerala Palakkad 4418.58 5850.20 1451.20 2597.25 7015.83 3515.85 3499.97 
Kerala Pathanamthitta 427.00 1402.00 689.00 1115.00 1542.00 929.00 613.00 
Kerala Thiruvananthapuram 91.92 5166.40 2882.00 2989.40 3081.32 2786.15 295.17 
Kerala Thrissur 514.01 4343.05 2060.80 807.50 1321.51 972.00 349.51 
Kerala Wayanad 481.50 1371.00 111.00 413.00 894.50 835.00 59.50 
Kerala Total 8185.36 54440.15 28322.25 28180.03 36365.39 23747.46 12617.92 
Madhya Pradesh Aliraj Pur 0.00 243.00 117.00 147.00 147.00 117.00 30.00 
Madhya Pradesh Anuppur 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Ashoknagar 0.00 108.00 0.00 144.00 144.00 0.00 144.00 
Madhya Pradesh Balaghat 0.00 5649.35 2799.35 2919.35 2919.35 1677.85 1241.50 
Madhya Pradesh Barwani 10.45 1078.40 208.00 1114.25 1124.70 741.40 383.30 
Madhya Pradesh Betul 0.00 150.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Bhind 55.90 250.00 0.00 87.00 142.90 0.75 142.15 
Madhya Pradesh Bhopal 46.85 32.00 0.00 25.00 71.85 25.40 46.45 
Madhya Pradesh Burhanpur 238.55 2037.05 0.00 2414.90 2653.45 1341.50 1311.95 
Madhya Pradesh Chhatarpur 0.00 100.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Chhindwara 756.20 0.00 0.00 120.00 876.20 305.00 571.20 
Madhya Pradesh Damoh 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Datia 0.00 300.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Dewas 0.00 1460.90 68.00 996.40 996.40 580.45 415.95 
Madhya Pradesh Dhar 562.30 1676.00 0.00 2090.95 2653.25 739.15 1914.10 
Madhya Pradesh Dindori 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Guna 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Gwalior 24.15 600.00 0.00 75.00 99.15 18.70 80.45 
Madhya Pradesh Harda 305.40 182.00 0.00 0.00 305.40 0.00 305.40 
Madhya Pradesh Hoshangabad 240.55 48.00 0.00 16.00 256.55 16.00 240.55 
Madhya Pradesh Indore 3718.30 11667.70 10048.00 4675.20 8393.50 862.65 7530.85 
Madhya Pradesh Jabalpur 1649.00 0.00 649.00 209.75 1858.75 215.15 1643.60 
Madhya Pradesh Jhabua 0.00 479.00 127.00 872.15 872.15 262.00 610.15 
Madhya Pradesh Katni 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Khandwa 4403.40 2396.60 3395.70 -589.25 3814.15 212.95 3601.20 
Madhya Pradesh Khargone 792.00 2761.80 56.00 2811.75 3603.75 1777.65 1826.10 
Madhya Pradesh Mandla 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Mandsour 582.35 4348.00 0.00 3583.55 4165.90 4127.05 38.85 
Madhya Pradesh Morena 8.15 2852.60 2602.60 2440.60 2448.75 369.95 2078.80 
Madhya Pradesh Narsinghpur 280.75 0.00 0.00 0.00 280.75 0.00 280.75 
Madhya Pradesh Neemuch 1097.65 2837.10 2736.60 1238.10 2335.75 2215.75 120.00 
Madhya Pradesh Panna 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Raisen 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.05 
Madhya Pradesh Rajgarh 4.40 540.90 326.00 490.90 495.30 114.90 380.40 
Madhya Pradesh Ratlam 1278.90 8662.55 4263.55 4698.00 5976.90 3338.00 2638.90 
Madhya Pradesh Rewa 0.00 200.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Sagar 451.20 400.00 0.00 -449.75 1.45 0.00 1.45 
Madhya Pradesh Satna 497.40 200.00 0.00 0.00 497.40 0.00 497.40 
Madhya Pradesh Sehore 0.00 2045.00 1897.00 1808.00 1808.00 205.00 1603.00 
Madhya Pradesh Seoni 0.00 700.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Shahdol 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Shajapur 1004.40 3866.20 2708.60 3281.30 4285.70 4152.50 133.20 
Madhya Pradesh Shivpuri 0.00 2382.60 2517.60 2335.60 2335.60 201.00 2134.60 
Madhya Pradesh Shoepurkalan 0.00 127.00 0.00 127.00 127.00 0.00 127.00 
Madhya Pradesh Sidhi 0.00 50.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Singroli 0.00 200.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Tikamgarh 0.00 100.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Ujjain 64.40 8720.20 6283.00 5635.20 5699.60 5606.70 92.90 
Madhya Pradesh Umaria 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Madhya Pradesh Vidisha 0.00 100.00 0.00 34.00 34.00 20.00 14.00 
Madhya Pradesh Total 18072.70 69551.95 40803.00 43351.95 61424.65 29244.45 32180.20 
Maharashtra Ahmednagar 1549.95 22858.80 12544.15 11522.05 13072.00 10681.80 2390.20 
Maharashtra Akola 717.50 10425.85 8810.10 6911.10 7628.60 7117.05 511.55 
Maharashtra Amravati 1914.70 7070.55 3138.80 2354.30 4269.00 3389.60 879.40 
Maharashtra Aurangabad 2446.05 21342.25 17042.70 12826.60 15272.65 14934.40 338.25 
Maharashtra Bandra Suburban 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Maharashtra Beed 340.50 26173.05 10942.65 19585.75 19926.25 19786.40 139.85 
Maharashtra Bhandara 143.00 6998.95 34.00 2383.55 2526.55 2291.55 235.00 
Maharashtra Buldhana 2666.05 16904.20 6447.10 8933.05 11599.10 11534.40 64.70 
Maharashtra Chandrapur 70.05 9150.00 5645.60 8186.10 8256.15 6323.35 1932.80 
Maharashtra Dhule 620.60 9401.55 5742.05 6890.40 7511.00 7343.35 167.65 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
62 
State wise & District wise Opening stock, Monthly Plan Despatches, Receipts, Availabilty and Sales of Complex Fertilizers during  Kharif 2013 (April to June) 
<Figures in MTs> 
State District Opening Stock Monthly Plan Disptaches Net Receipts Availability Sales Closing 
Stock 
Maharashtra Gadchiroli 1248.60 2257.30 16.00 -300.70 947.90 441.00 506.90 
Maharashtra Gondia 751.25 4919.25 2446.20 1961.25 2712.50 1127.75 1584.75 
Maharashtra Hingoli 45.70 12724.75 2352.75 5461.75 5507.45 5507.45 0.00 
Maharashtra Jalgaon 1855.85 28149.55 27275.15 21957.70 23813.55 19578.25 4235.30 
Maharashtra Jalna 2668.20 19982.65 21135.95 13027.60 15695.80 15379.50 316.30 
Maharashtra Kolhapur 3423.46 16535.00 10272.55 14212.00 17635.46 13552.35 4083.11 
Maharashtra Latur 3081.25 13983.35 15374.30 10142.80 13224.05 12763.50 460.55 
Maharashtra Mumbai 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Maharashtra Nagpur 914.70 16655.15 13207.10 13470.20 14384.90 10622.35 3762.55 
Maharashtra Nanded 6595.90 23161.90 22879.30 19790.40 26386.30 23165.60 3220.70 
Maharashtra Nandurbar 176.00 4225.00 41.00 3416.65 3592.65 3586.65 6.00 
Maharashtra Nashik 1304.80 28493.30 24512.70 25070.30 26375.10 23951.40 2423.70 
Maharashtra Osmanabad 25.00 7997.95 1705.00 1997.95 2022.95 2022.95 0.00 
Maharashtra Parbhani 151.00 18165.50 15370.70 11738.45 11889.45 10039.50 1849.95 
Maharashtra Pune 272.10 29886.95 13959.60 14412.70 14684.80 11888.60 2796.20 
Maharashtra Raigarh 0.00 3850.55 1161.55 1164.00 1164.00 1157.00 7.00 
Maharashtra Ratnagiri 6.65 6154.00 5517.80 4494.80 4501.45 2684.25 1817.20 
Maharashtra Sangli 1497.10 12878.80 18686.00 11128.85 12625.95 10486.65 2139.30 
Maharashtra Satara 4127.40 13793.30 7963.85 5861.00 9988.40 8024.70 1963.70 
Maharashtra Sindhudurg 0.00 1754.90 738.10 1722.10 1722.10 1669.50 52.60 
Maharashtra Solapur 5201.95 18897.40 3684.95 4289.95 9491.90 6613.60 2878.30 
Maharashtra Thane 0.00 3739.00 2535.00 2579.55 2579.55 2505.05 74.50 
Maharashtra Wardha 1512.90 13349.55 14615.80 7993.35 9506.25 7309.30 2196.95 
Maharashtra Washim 1797.55 6962.15 4180.90 4057.10 5854.65 4724.85 1129.80 
Maharashtra Yavatmal 322.55 16052.95 7883.95 12943.05 13265.60 7440.00 5825.60 
Maharashtra Total 47448.31 454895.40 307863.35 292185.70 339634.01 289643.65 49990.36 
Manipur Bishnupur 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Manipur Chandel 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Manipur Churachandpur 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Manipur Imphal East 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Manipur Imphal West 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Manipur Senapati 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Manipur Tamenglong 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Manipur Thoubal 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Manipur Ukhrul 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Manipur Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Megalaya East Garo Hills 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Megalaya East Khasi Hills 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Megalaya Jaintia Hills 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Megalaya Ri Bhoi 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Megalaya South Garo Hills 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Megalaya West Garo Hills 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Megalaya West Khasi Hills 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Megalaya Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Mizoram Aizawal 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Mizoram Champhai 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Mizoram Kolasib 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Mizoram Lawngtlai 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Mizoram Lunglei 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Mizoram Mamit 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Mizoram Saiha 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Mizoram Serchhip 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Mizoram Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Nagaland Dimapur 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Nagaland Kohima 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Nagaland Mokokchung 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Nagaland Mon 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Nagaland Phek 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Nagaland Tuensang 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Nagaland Wokha 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Nagaland Zunheboto 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Nagaland Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Orissa Angul 0.00 1993.00 0.00 199.00 199.00 199.00 0.00 
Orissa Balangir 81.75 8966.85 3411.90 2388.05 2469.80 2049.15 420.65 
Orissa Baleswar 100.00 3545.15 0.00 652.05 752.05 561.90 190.15 
Orissa Bargarh 1724.35 8589.10 5395.40 3505.30 5229.65 2476.55 2753.10 
Orissa Bhadrak 1431.20 2745.35 1078.00 287.35 1718.55 308.50 1410.05 
Orissa Bhubaneshwar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Orissa Boudh 0.00 569.25 0.00 599.45 599.45 499.45 100.00 
Orissa Cuttack 471.80 7576.15 2321.00 85.40 557.20 97.00 460.20 
Orissa Deogarh 1.50 2374.90 0.00 124.90 126.40 0.00 126.40 
Orissa Dhenkanal 0.00 2165.00 64.00 401.00 401.00 337.00 64.00 
Orissa Gajapati 0.00 1597.00 0.00 254.00 254.00 234.00 20.00 
Orissa Ganjam 1250.95 4279.70 1495.40 1314.00 2564.95 1558.20 1006.75 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
63 
State wise & District wise Opening stock, Monthly Plan Despatches, Receipts, Availabilty and Sales of Complex Fertilizers during  Kharif 2013 (April to June) 
<Figures in MTs> 
State District Opening Stock Monthly Plan Disptaches Net Receipts Availability Sales Closing 
Stock 
Orissa Jagatsinghapur 0.00 2591.00 0.00 53.00 53.00 53.00 0.00 
Orissa Jajpur 34.00 3500.90 2783.60 386.30 420.30 400.05 20.25 
Orissa Jharsuguda 0.00 2699.30 0.00 210.30 210.30 120.00 90.30 
Orissa Kalahandi 197.70 6430.50 3527.50 2083.30 2281.00 1904.40 376.60 
Orissa Kandhamal 0.00 100.00 0.00 64.70 64.70 64.70 0.00 
Orissa Kendrapara 0.00 2060.00 32.00 60.00 60.00 28.00 32.00 
Orissa Kendujhar 0.00 2531.20 0.00 755.80 755.80 755.80 0.00 
Orissa Khordha 0.00 2192.00 32.00 234.05 234.05 202.05 32.00 
Orissa Koraput 916.40 6152.60 4240.25 490.35 1406.75 710.00 696.75 
Orissa Malkangiri 0.00 1364.50 0.00 411.50 411.50 369.00 42.50 
Orissa Mayurbhanj 250.35 2785.00 0.00 1206.55 1456.90 1183.55 273.35 
Orissa Nabarangapur 0.00 1931.55 0.00 2808.80 2808.80 2400.40 408.40 
Orissa Nayagarh 0.00 968.00 0.00 178.00 178.00 178.00 0.00 
Orissa Nuapada 514.95 965.75 65.75 29.75 544.70 87.00 457.70 
Orissa Phulbani 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Orissa Puri 0.00 1426.00 0.00 96.00 96.00 96.00 0.00 
Orissa Rayagada 211.40 2109.20 912.20 1143.20 1354.60 1143.20 211.40 
Orissa Sambalpur 221.55 8724.45 2738.50 1591.60 1813.15 1606.40 206.75 
Orissa Sonepur 5.50 1850.80 0.00 1103.40 1108.90 1007.90 101.00 
Orissa Sundergarh 10.95 2532.50 0.00 699.35 710.30 699.35 10.95 
Orissa Total 7424.35 97316.70 28097.50 23416.45 30840.80 21329.55 9511.25 
Pondicherry Karaikal 0.00 400.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Pondicherry Mahe 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Pondicherry Pondicherry 160.00 4866.80 2410.65 1443.80 1603.80 1340.20 263.60 
Pondicherry Yanam 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Pondicherry Total 160.00 5266.80 2410.65 1443.80 1603.80 1340.20 263.60 
Punjab Amritsar 11.85 140.00 0.00 60.00 71.85 58.15 13.70 
Punjab Barnala 0.00 30.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Punjab Bathinda 2.15 157.00 0.00 147.00 149.15 92.85 56.30 
Punjab Faridkot 0.00 186.80 1418.50 160.30 160.30 153.00 7.30 
Punjab Fatehgarh Sahib 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Punjab Firozpur 0.00 275.55 0.00 275.55 275.55 228.95 46.60 
Punjab Gurdaspur 17.00 100.00 0.00 44.95 61.95 37.10 24.85 
Punjab Hoshiarpur 14.70 1095.00 0.00 450.00 464.70 456.30 8.40 
Punjab Jalandhar 1448.65 1869.10 759.10 547.15 1995.80 572.85 1422.95 
Punjab Kapurthala 39.45 33.45 951.65 398.65 438.10 393.00 45.10 
Punjab Ludhiana 3.85 458.00 0.00 118.00 121.85 78.70 43.15 
Punjab Mansa 0.00 102.50 0.00 42.50 42.50 30.30 12.20 
Punjab Moga 123.35 442.75 0.00 457.75 581.10 541.40 39.70 
Punjab Mohali 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Punjab Muktsar 0.00 265.90 0.00 292.40 292.40 292.40 0.00 
Punjab Nawanshahr 10.30 50.00 0.00 90.00 100.30 100.30 0.00 
Punjab Patiala 0.00 30.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Punjab Rupnagar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Punjab Sangrur 0.00 170.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Punjab Tarntaran 0.00 60.00 0.00 45.00 45.00 37.20 7.80 
Punjab Total 1671.30 5466.05 3129.25 3129.25 4800.55 3072.50 1728.05 
Rajasthan Ajmer 0.00 425.00 0.00 150.00 150.00 75.00 75.00 
Rajasthan Alwar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Banswara 0.00 414.00 64.00 64.00 64.00 54.00 10.00 
Rajasthan Baran 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Barmer 1.00 17.00 17.00 17.00 18.00 17.00 1.00 
Rajasthan Bharatpur 366.65 0.00 0.00 -20.00 346.65 13.00 333.65 
Rajasthan Bhilwara 0.00 807.00 0.00 517.00 517.00 277.00 240.00 
Rajasthan Bikaner 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Bundi 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Chittorgarh 8.40 660.75 758.00 329.00 337.40 191.00 146.40 
Rajasthan Churu 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Dausa 0.00 290.00 0.00 110.00 110.00 110.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Dholpur 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Dungarpur 0.00 382.00 82.00 82.00 82.00 65.00 17.00 
Rajasthan Ganganagar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Hanumangarh 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Jaipur 14.40 1041.25 886.60 740.35 754.75 479.60 275.15 
Rajasthan Jaisalmer 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Jalor 0.00 781.00 181.00 181.00 181.00 86.00 95.00 
Rajasthan Jhalawar 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Jhunjhunu 0.00 20.00 0.00 20.00 20.00 20.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Jodhpur 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Karauli 9.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 9.00 0.00 9.00 
Rajasthan Kota 2.70 0.00 0.00 -0.40 2.30 0.00 2.30 
Rajasthan Nagaur 29.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 29.00 29.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Pali 5.85 474.00 99.00 99.00 104.85 65.00 39.85 
Rajasthan Pratapgarh 0.00 778.05 37.00 623.05 623.05 551.05 72.00 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
64 
State wise & District wise Opening stock, Monthly Plan Despatches, Receipts, Availabilty and Sales of Complex Fertilizers during  Kharif 2013 (April to June) 
<Figures in MTs> 
State District Opening Stock Monthly Plan Disptaches Net Receipts Availability Sales Closing 
Stock 
Rajasthan Rajsamand 0.00 140.00 55.00 55.00 55.00 38.00 17.00 
Rajasthan Sawai Madhopur 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Sikar 0.00 135.00 0.00 35.00 35.00 25.00 10.00 
Rajasthan Sirohi 0.00 690.00 90.00 90.00 90.00 34.00 56.00 
Rajasthan Tonk 0.00 200.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Rajasthan Udaipur 1.65 864.15 963.20 139.15 140.80 121.50 19.30 
Rajasthan Total 438.65 8119.20 3232.80 3231.15 3669.80 2251.15 1418.65 
Sikkim East Sikkim 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Sikkim North Sikkim 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Sikkim South Sikkim 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Sikkim West Sikkim 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Sikkim Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Tamil Nadu Ariyalur 0.00 1488.00 415.00 887.00 887.00 887.00 0.00 
Tamil Nadu Coimbatore 1442.95 6287.55 6100.85 5012.55 6455.50 2952.80 3502.70 
Tamil Nadu Cuddalore 1334.35 7845.75 3808.60 5503.15 6837.50 6823.75 13.75 
Tamil Nadu Dharmapuri 660.00 1488.00 441.00 -149.00 511.00 475.00 36.00 
Tamil Nadu Dindigul 231.85 3707.00 2062.40 2952.00 3183.85 3034.00 149.85 
Tamil Nadu Erode 3009.45 5207.90 3150.85 1424.25 4433.70 4016.15 417.55 
Tamil Nadu Kanchipuram 3.00 5381.00 664.00 3162.20 3165.20 3161.00 4.20 
Tamil Nadu Kanyakumari 12.80 2704.35 1995.20 2119.55 2132.35 2002.68 129.67 
Tamil Nadu Karur 624.00 1037.00 310.00 253.30 877.30 444.00 433.30 
Tamil Nadu Krishnagiri 0.00 2723.00 394.00 4787.30 4787.30 4763.30 24.00 
Tamil Nadu Madurai 1650.15 5280.40 7095.20 3586.40 5236.55 3397.90 1838.65 
Tamil Nadu Nagapattinam 3.00 863.00 128.00 1367.00 1370.00 1370.00 0.00 
Tamil Nadu Namakkal 59.05 2310.00 433.00 505.00 564.05 501.00 63.05 
Tamil Nadu Nilgiris 15.00 587.80 114.00 1352.80 1367.80 1352.80 15.00 
Tamil Nadu Perambalur 2.00 2219.00 957.00 1455.00 1457.00 1412.00 45.00 
Tamil Nadu Pudukkottai 515.60 2605.00 505.00 808.00 1323.60 1154.00 169.60 
Tamil Nadu Ramanathapuram 142.05 550.60 30.00 160.60 302.65 192.65 110.00 
Tamil Nadu Salem 974.90 6648.55 4762.85 2489.25 3464.15 3241.40 222.75 
Tamil Nadu Sivaganga 0.00 559.00 64.00 259.00 259.00 259.00 0.00 
Tamil Nadu Thanjavur 1131.90 1891.00 711.00 1153.00 2284.90 1427.00 857.90 
Tamil Nadu Theni 59.80 3547.15 133.00 2293.15 2352.95 2262.15 90.80 
Tamil Nadu Thoothukudi 130.80 1351.00 613.00 502.00 632.80 566.00 66.80 
Tamil Nadu Tiruchirappalli 3634.78 7853.15 5395.00 1266.25 4901.03 2905.05 1995.98 
Tamil Nadu Tirunelveli 1294.75 2286.00 890.00 1103.00 2397.75 1857.20 540.55 
Tamil Nadu Tiruppur 0.00 1117.00 78.00 205.00 205.00 205.00 0.00 
Tamil Nadu Tiruvallur 20.20 7177.30 1513.00 5506.10 5526.30 5509.30 17.00 
Tamil Nadu Tiruvannamalai 29.90 7991.00 1282.00 6198.00 6227.90 4487.00 1740.90 
Tamil Nadu Tiruvarur 1.00 923.00 358.00 506.00 507.00 506.00 1.00 
Tamil Nadu Vellore 366.82 8219.10 15516.85 4295.75 4662.57 3666.75 995.82 
Tamil Nadu Viluppuram 1282.20 9193.35 5553.80 4588.35 5870.55 5833.30 37.25 
Tamil Nadu Virudhunagar 19.50 607.00 35.00 287.00 306.50 287.00 19.50 
Tamil Nadu Total 18651.80 111648.95 65509.60 65838.95 84490.75 70952.18 13538.57 
Tripura Dhalai 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Tripura North Tripura 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Tripura South Tripura 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Tripura West Tripura 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Tripura Total 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Agra 0.00 575.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Aligarh 21.05 321.50 431.50 321.50 342.55 159.00 183.55 
Uttar Pradesh Allahabad 641.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 681.00 76.65 604.35 
Uttar Pradesh Ambedkar Nagar 0.00 1635.00 0.00 115.00 115.00 115.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Auraiya 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Azamgarh 0.00 695.00 0.00 195.00 195.00 195.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Bagpat 1.35 420.00 0.00 470.00 471.35 471.35 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Bahraich 35.40 1050.00 0.00 0.00 35.40 16.00 19.40 
Uttar Pradesh Ballia 0.00 805.00 0.00 150.00 150.00 150.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Balrampur 0.00 950.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Banda 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Barabanki 0.00 5790.95 3242.70 2670.10 2670.10 2025.35 644.75 
Uttar Pradesh Bareilly 765.30 9409.40 10515.40 6309.40 7074.70 1459.40 5615.30 
Uttar Pradesh Basti 865.75 548.00 672.25 608.00 1473.75 210.00 1263.75 
Uttar Pradesh Bijnor 0.00 2560.50 0.00 80.50 80.50 80.50 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Budaun 2.00 469.80 0.00 379.80 381.80 7.05 374.75 
Uttar Pradesh Bulandshahr 26.20 27.50 0.00 27.50 53.70 53.70 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Chandauli 200.00 50.00 0.00 0.00 200.00 0.00 200.00 
Uttar Pradesh Chatrapati Sahuji 
Maharaj Nagar 
0.00 550.00 0.00 150.00 150.00 106.25 43.75 
Uttar Pradesh Chitrakoot 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Deoria 27.50 4002.35 3883.65 1532.35 1559.85 961.30 598.55 
Uttar Pradesh Etah 24.10 182.50 0.00 82.50 106.60 85.15 21.45 
Uttar Pradesh Etawah 30.00 100.00 0.00 0.00 30.00 0.00 30.00 
Uttar Pradesh Faizabad 405.00 1135.00 0.00 115.00 520.00 115.00 405.00 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
65 
State wise & District wise Opening stock, Monthly Plan Despatches, Receipts, Availabilty and Sales of Complex Fertilizers during  Kharif 2013 (April to June) 
<Figures in MTs> 
State District Opening Stock Monthly Plan Disptaches Net Receipts Availability Sales Closing 
Stock 
Uttar Pradesh Farrukhabad 25.00 1982.45 667.45 782.45 807.45 490.00 317.45 
Uttar Pradesh Fatehpur 0.00 590.00 0.00 160.00 160.00 160.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Firozabad 0.00 325.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Gautam Buddha 
Nagar 
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Ghaziabad 8.30 762.80 0.00 1076.05 1084.35 1084.35 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Ghazipur 0.00 410.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Gonda 0.00 2855.00 0.00 230.00 230.00 230.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Gorakhpur 152.65 3333.80 4075.60 1971.15 2123.80 1837.20 286.60 
Uttar Pradesh Hamirpur 0.00 100.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Hardoi 0.00 550.00 0.00 350.00 350.00 350.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Hathras 0.65 0.00 0.00 45.00 45.65 45.00 0.65 
Uttar Pradesh Jalaun 0.00 100.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Jaunpur 190.00 460.00 0.00 90.00 280.00 90.00 190.00 
Uttar Pradesh Jhansi 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Jyotiba Phule Nagar 84.20 5738.10 2640.60 2943.10 3027.30 960.65 2066.65 
Uttar Pradesh Kahhi Ram Nagar 5.15 0.00 0.00 0.00 5.15 4.85 0.30 
Uttar Pradesh Kannauj 0.00 1375.00 0.00 75.00 75.00 75.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Kanpur Dehat 0.00 550.00 0.00 560.00 560.00 560.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Kanpur Nagar 0.00 1315.00 1827.65 1132.65 1132.65 1132.65 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Kaushambi 8.75 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.75 0.00 8.75 
Uttar Pradesh Kushinagar 0.00 4451.30 0.00 2801.30 2801.30 1292.50 1508.80 
Uttar Pradesh Lakhimpur Kheri 240.25 5422.00 0.00 2487.00 2727.25 2141.05 586.20 
Uttar Pradesh Lalitpur 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Lucknow 0.00 440.00 0.00 40.00 40.00 20.00 20.00 
Uttar Pradesh Maharajganj 0.00 2631.75 0.00 881.75 881.75 859.70 22.05 
Uttar Pradesh Mahoba 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Mainpuri 0.00 100.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Mathura 0.00 300.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Mau 0.00 495.00 0.00 380.00 380.00 380.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Meerut 1185.35 354.40 2531.85 229.40 1414.75 245.25 1169.50 
Uttar Pradesh Mirzapur 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Moradabad 2085.35 9131.65 7332.15 6821.65 8907.00 2366.95 6540.05 
Uttar Pradesh Muzaffarnagar 23.30 1595.00 1580.00 1595.00 1618.30 194.30 1424.00 
Uttar Pradesh Pilibhit 13.80 6526.20 0.00 3826.20 3840.00 1829.80 2010.20 
Uttar Pradesh Pratapgarh 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Rae Bareli 3.20 2047.40 947.40 747.40 750.60 3.20 747.40 
Uttar Pradesh Rampur 122.95 5291.10 2658.60 2761.10 2884.05 439.95 2444.10 
Uttar Pradesh Saharanpur 0.00 3978.80 1318.80 1468.80 1468.80 1089.70 379.10 
Uttar Pradesh Sant Kabir Nagar 0.00 122.50 0.00 122.50 122.50 64.00 58.50 
Uttar Pradesh Sant Ravidas Nagar 5.00 160.00 0.00 225.00 230.00 225.00 5.00 
Uttar Pradesh Shahjahanpur 0.00 2650.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Shrawasti 0.00 570.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Siddharthnagar 0.00 61.75 0.00 61.75 61.75 61.75 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Sitapur 426.75 3853.05 4360.30 2573.05 2999.80 2162.10 837.70 
Uttar Pradesh Sonbhadra 0.00 405.00 0.00 810.00 810.00 810.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Sultanpur 63.75 150.00 0.00 80.00 143.75 139.60 4.15 
Uttar Pradesh Unnao 0.00 150.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh Varanasi 3356.20 1487.90 1952.20 2390.05 5746.25 2390.05 3356.20 
Uttar Pradesh Total 11045.25 104139.45 50638.10 52964.00 64009.25 30021.30 33987.95 
Uttaranchal Almora 0.00 25.00 0.00 58.00 58.00 23.00 35.00 
Uttaranchal Bageshwar 0.00 25.00 0.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 0.00 
Uttaranchal Chamoli 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttaranchal Champawat 0.00 25.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttaranchal Dehradun 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttaranchal Haridwar 1156.90 0.00 0.00 0.00 1156.90 475.30 681.60 
Uttaranchal Nainital 0.00 946.85 0.00 567.85 567.85 430.50 137.35 
Uttaranchal Pauri Garhwal 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttaranchal Pithoragarh 0.00 25.00 0.00 23.50 23.50 12.50 11.00 
Uttaranchal Rudraprayag 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttaranchal Tehri Garhwal 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttaranchal Udham Singh Nagar 115.95 6819.35 7782.80 4556.85 4672.80 4274.75 398.05 
Uttaranchal Uttarkashi 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttaranchal Total 1272.85 7866.20 7782.80 5216.20 6489.05 5226.05 1263.00 
West Bengal Bankura 20.75 6500.35 1736.60 2160.35 2181.10 2160.35 20.75 
West Bengal Bardhaman 479.49 20084.98 7469.70 8454.98 8934.47 5190.85 3743.62 
West Bengal Birbhum 105.67 11510.80 4362.00 8425.76 8531.43 4691.60 3839.83 
West Bengal Cooch Behar 1144.00 1425.00 0.00 275.00 1419.00 340.00 1079.00 
West Bengal Darjiling 0.00 0.00 3749.60 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
West Bengal East Midnapore 5.20 7324.00 714.00 3622.45 3627.65 3622.45 5.20 
West Bengal Hooghly 2412.95 20140.03 13928.25 9810.73 12223.68 7358.25 4865.43 
West Bengal Howrah 202.38 2225.00 20.00 1030.00 1232.38 550.00 682.38 
West Bengal Jalpaiguri 3305.60 10633.85 5568.75 5040.30 8345.90 3610.40 4735.50 
West Bengal Kolkata 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
66 
State wise & District wise Opening stock, Monthly Plan Despatches, Receipts, Availabilty and Sales of Complex Fertilizers during  Kharif 2013 (April to June) 
<Figures in MTs> 
State District Opening Stock Monthly Plan Disptaches Net Receipts Availability Sales Closing 
Stock 
West Bengal Malda 71.78 9897.96 9089.75 4486.11 4557.89 2797.00 1760.89 
West Bengal Murshidabad 418.82 13774.05 5478.95 5831.75 6250.57 4380.75 1869.82 
West Bengal Nadia 544.22 12015.92 6524.55 6789.52 7333.74 5994.85 1338.89 
West Bengal North 24 Parganas 1715.34 11410.41 2861.00 7645.61 9360.95 6272.30 3088.65 
West Bengal North Dinajpur 212.40 8179.54 4064.80 3694.54 3906.94 2672.90 1234.04 
West Bengal Puruliya 0.00 1207.00 32.00 277.00 277.00 277.00 0.00 
West Bengal South 24 Parganas 588.55 5350.00 995.00 2633.80 3222.35 2773.50 448.85 
West Bengal South Dinajpur 120.00 5059.95 0.00 3704.80 3824.80 2791.85 1032.95 
West Bengal West Midnapore 58.11 11871.95 8084.30 4813.50 4871.61 4796.95 74.66 
West Bengal Total 11405.26 158610.79 74679.25 78696.20 90101.46 60281.00 29820.46 
Grand Total   237394.89 ######### 1161068.25 1112492.45 1349887.34 995507.81 354379.53 
 
 
  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
67 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 25 July, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Shri  Dilipbhai Pandya    -    Acting Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri S. Alagiri 
3. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
4. Shri Prabhatsingh P. Chauhan 
5. Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
6. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
7. Shri Shakti Mohan Malik 
8. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
9. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
10. Shri Tufani Saroj 
11. Shri Raju Shetti 
12. Shri D. Venugopal 
RAJYA SABHA 
13. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
14. Smt. Naznin Faruque 
15. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
16. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
17. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  Smt. Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary  
Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Additional Director 
 
2. As the Chairman could not attend the sitting due to pre -occupation, the members 
chose Shri Dilipbhai Pandya, member of the Committee, to act as the Chairman.  The 
Acting Chairman then welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
a) XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX  
 
b) Draft Action Taken Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -eighth report (15 th 
Lok Saba) on “Production, Demand and Availability of Fertilizers and its 
Distribution’ (Department of Fertilizers). 
 
4. The draft Report on the subject “Production, and Availability of Pesticides” 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) was adopted b y the Committee without 
any amendments.  The Draft Action Taken Report on the action taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty -eight report 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
68 
(15th Lok Saba) on “Production, Demand and Availability of Fertilizers and its Distribution’ 
(Department of Fertilizers) was not adopted, as the Committee desired to have further 
clarifications on some points from the Department of Fertilizers before adopting t he 
report.  
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to make consequential changes, if any, 
arising out of the factual verification of the Report by the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers and present th e same to both 
the Houses of Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
XXXXX   Matters not related to this Report 
 
  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
69 
 
MINUTES 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 06 August, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. 
in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
   Shri  Gopinath Munde -    Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
3. Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
5. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
6. Shri Tufani Saroj 
7. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Smt. Naznin Faruque 
9. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  Smt. Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary  
Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
 
I. Draft Action Taken Report on the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/ recommendations contained in the Twenty -eighth report 
(15th LS) on 'Production, Demand and Availability of Fertilizers and its 
Distribution' (Department of Fertilizers). 
II. XXXXX XXXXX XXXXX 
4. Both the reports were adopted by the Committee without any amendment. 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the same to both the 
Houses of Parliament.  
 
6. It was decided that the following Members would present/lay the Reports in Lok 
Sabha/ Rajya Sabha on 13.08.2013.  
  
In Lok Sabha In Rajya Sabha 
Shri Gopinath Munde Shri A.A. Jinnah 
Shri Shakti Mohan Malik Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee 2012-13\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report For NET 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35\Report 
No.37 (Dof).Docx 
70 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XXXXX   Matters not related to this Report 
 
APPENDIX – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION T AKEN BY THE GOVERNME NT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONT AINED IN THE TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA ) OF THE STANDING CO MMITTEE ON CHEMICALS  
AND FERTILIZERS (201 2-13) ON ‘PRODUCTION, DEMAND AND AVAILABIL ITY 
OF FERTILIZERS AND I TS DISTRIBUTION'  OF THE  MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS 
AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 
 
14 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 1,2,4,7,8,10,11,12,13 and 14)   
 
10 
Percentage of Total 71.42% 
III Observation / Recommendation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.No. Nil) 
 
Nil 
Percentage of Total 0% 
IV Observation / Recommendation in respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.No. Nil) 
 
Nil 
Percentage of Total 0% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited:-  
 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl.No.3,5,6 and 9)  
 
04 
Percentage of Total 28.58% 
 