 1 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
    
32 
   STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHRMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
 REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2012/ Agrahayana 1934, (Saka) 


 2 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
CC&F No. 32 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Twenty-Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2012 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  17.12.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
  


 3 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13) ………………………………...  
Introduction. …………………………………………………..…………………………  
Chapter I Report ……………….…………………………………………………..  
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Extract Minutes of Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2012-13) held on 10 December 2012 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty Seventh Report (15 th 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2010-11) on ‘Demands for Grants (2012 -2013)’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).  
 
 
  

 4 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2012-13) 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri S. Alagiri  
3. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
4. Shri P.P. Chauhan  
5. Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
6. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
7. Shri Radadiya Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai 
8. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
9. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
10. Shri Paswan Kamlesh  
11. Shri  Amarnath Pradhan 
12. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
13. Shri Tufani Saroj 
14. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
15. Shri Raju Shetti 
16. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
17. Shri  D. Venugopal 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
24. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
26. Dr. Vijay Mallya 
27. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
28. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
29. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
30.  Vacant 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Smt Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajit Kumar Sahu  - Committee Officer 
 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Shri P. Balaram Naik appointed as a minister of state 
 

 5 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on C hemicals and Fertilizers (2012 -13) 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Thirty Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the observations / recommendations contained in the Twenty -Seventh Report  (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2011 -12) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2012-13)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of Pharmaceuticals).  
 
2. The Twenty-Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 May, 2012.  The Action 
Taken replies of Government to all observations / recommendations contained in the 
Report were receive d on 20 July, 2012. The Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2012 -13) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 10 
December, 2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations / 
recommendations con tained in the Thirty -Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
17 December, 2012                                           GOPINATH MUNDE 
26 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                                           Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 
 
  

 6 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty -Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants (2012 -13) of  the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 2.05.2012. The Report 
contained 10 Observations / Recommendations. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) were  
requested to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-Seventh Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, 
i.e., by 2.08 2012. The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 10 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) vide their O.M. 
No.16(3)/2012-Fin.II, dated 20.07.2012. These have been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations / Observations that have been accepted by the Government :- 
 Sl.Nos. 2,3,4 and 6          (Total =4)     
 These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
 
(ii) Recommendation / Observation  which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply :- 
 Sl.No.Nil             (Total =Nil)  
 This may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report. 
 
(iii) Recommendations / Observations in respect  of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
 Sl.Nos. 1 and 9         (Total =2)  
 These may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
 
(iv) Recommendations / Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are of interim nature :- 
 Sl.Nos.5,7, 8 and 10        (Total =4)  
These may be included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Repor t and the final replies in 
respect of the Observation / Recommendation contained in Chapte r V for which 
only interim replies have  been furnished by the Ministry should be furnished 
expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations / Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 

 7 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
A. FIVE YEAR PLANS 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1 
5. Taking a critical view regarding significantly less allocation of fund in comparison 
to the initial outlay during the Eleventh Five Year Plan period (2007 -12), the Committee 
had observed/recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that out of an outlay of Rs.1396.17 crore for the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007 -12) for the Department of Pharmaceuticals, the  
budget allocation for the period is only Rs.741.76 crore, which is only about 53% 
of the total outlay for  the Eleventh Five Year Plan.  Hence, during the entire five 
years of the Eleventh Five Year Plan, the allocation  sanctioned to the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals is much below than that approved by Planning Commission.  
The Committee fail to understand this mis -match between the overall outlay for 
the Plan period and the funds actually provided to the Department and want an 
explanation from the Departmen t of Pharmaceuticals.  The Committee is also of 
the view that the Planning Commission while approving the allocation, should also 
be realistic so that there may not be much difference between approved allocation 
and the allocation actually disbursed to the Department.   
 
 The Committee also observe that there is underutilization of funds by the 
Department which may be one of the reasons for getting lesser allocation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should improve its 
physical performance in order to have a semblance between financial allocation 
and physical performance. This would also help the Department in obtaining more 
funds as per the stipulations of Planning Commission.  
 
  The Committee also note that in its Mid -term Appraisal Report, the 
Planning Commission has recommended that the Pharmaceutical Research and 
Development Programme (PRDP), which has been  pursued by Department of 
Science and Technology (DST), would be transferred to Department of 
Pharmaceuticals at the end of Ele venth Five Year Plan. However, the Committee 
note with regret that no allocation has been made for the PRDP in the Detailed 
Demands for Grants for the year 2012 -13.  As PRDP is a vital programme in the 
area of pharmaceutical research and development, the C ommittee recommend 
that the Department should make concerted efforts towards getting allocation for 
the scheme from the next financial year and implement the same to achieve the 
desired goals.”  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
6.  In reply to the aforesaid recomme ndation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under :- 
 
“The matter relating to transfer of PRDP is being examined in consultation with 
Department of Science and Technology.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
7. In their recommendation t he Committee had observed that the budget 
allocation for the Department of Pharmaceuticals during the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan period was only 53 % of the initial outlay which was much below than that 
approved by the Planning Commission.  Th e Committee, therefore, recommended 
that during the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the Planning Commission while approving 

 8 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
the allocation, should be realistic so that there may not be much difference 
between approved allocation and the allocation actually disburs ed to the 
Department. Further,  while observing that under-utilization of funds by the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals might  be one of the reasons for getting lesser 
allocation, the Committee recommended that the Department of Pharmaceutical s 
should improve its physical performance  in order to have a semblance between 
financial allocation and physical performance.  
 In addition to above, the Committee also recommended that t he Department 
of Pharmaceuticals  should make concerted effort towards getting allocati on for 
the Pharmaceutical Research a nd Development Programme (PRDP) from the next 
financial year and implement the same to achieve the desired goals.     The 
Department’s reply regarding transfer of the PRDP to the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals and allocati on of funds for the same is also regrettable as the 
Department has only briefly replied that matter relating to transfer of PRDP is 
being examined in consultation with Department of Science and Technol ogy. In 
view of the incomplete reply furnished by the Department, the Committee reiterate 
that the Department  of Pharmaceuticals should hasten its efforts regarding 
transfer of the Programme. 
The Committee are unhappy to point out that Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has not informed in their action taken reply specifically about the 
action taken or planned to be taken to make realistic allocation and disbursal of 
funds by the Planning Commission which would be utilized fully by the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals.  The Committee theref ore, strongly recommend 
that Department of Pharmaceuticals  should take pro-active steps for fully utilizing 
the funds allocated by the Planning Commission during the Twelfth Five Year Plan 
and also Planning Commission should make realistic allocation so th at there may 
not be much difference between approved allocation and the allocation actually 
disbursed to the Department. 
     
B. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHARMACEUTICAL EDUCATION AND 
RESEARCH (NIPER) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.3 
 
8. While expressing concern over delay in construction of new NIPER campuses, 
the Committee had made following recommendation:- 
 
“The Committee note that establishment of NIPERs is a significant effort towards 
development of quality human resource for the growth of pharmaceutical sector i n 
India. However, the Committee is concerned that work relating to construction of 
new NIPER campuses could not be initiated in 2011 -12 and hence, the funds 
allocated for the purpose could not be utilized. The Committee note that 
availability of land has b een a serious impediment in establishment of new 

 9 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
NIPERs. Further, the Committee is dismayed  to note that despite of availability of 
land at Guwahati and Ahmedabad, the construction of campus has not been 
started in 2011-12. This shows lack of proper planning and effort on the part of the 
Department. The Committee desire that the construction work at Guwahati and 
Ahmedabad should start immediately  and the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
should make all necessary efforts towards acquisition of lands at other four places 
namely, Hyderabad, Hajipur, Kolkata and Rae Bareli. The Committee desire to be 
apprised about the Department’s effort towards acquisition of land for New 
NIPERs at the above four places and also progress in the construction of 
campuses for new NIPERs.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
9. In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
“In 2007, Cabinet granted in -principle approval to the setting up of six new 
NIPERs and commencement of classes with the help of mentor Institutes. On 
30.09.2011, Cabinet finally approved establishment of six new NIPERs.  At 
present, land is available at Guwahati & Gandhinagar. As such, the issue of 
construction of NIPER campus at Guwahati & Gandhinagar is u nder the 
consideration of Steering Committee for new NIPERs.  Minister (C&F) has since 
requested Chief Ministers of Bihar and Andhra Pradesh vide letters dated 
10.4.2012 and Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh vide letter dated 24.4.2011 to allot 
requisite land for construction of NIPER campus.  West Bengal Government has 
allotted 35 acres land at Baruipur. It is being developed by the State Government 
agency viz. Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority (KMDA). However, 
issues relating to payment of developm ent charges, extent of availability of land 
exclusively for NIPER are being sorted out. The matter has since been taken up 
at the level of Minister (C&F) with the Chief Minister, West Bengal vide letter 
dated 10/4/2012. Reply from the state Government is awaited.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
10. Expressing serious concern over delay in development of infrastructure for 
new NIPERs, t he Committee had earlier recommended that the Department of  
Pharmaceuticals should start construction of campuses at Guwahati and 
Ahmedabad where land was already available and make all necessary efforts 
towards acquisition of land at four places  i.e. Hyderabad, Hajipur, Kolkata and    
Rae Bareli. In this regard , the Committee have been apprised by the Depart ment 
that the issue of construction of NIPER campuses at Guwahati and Gandhinagar is 
under the consideration of Steering Committee for new NIPERs. Further, the 
Department has also stated that the Chief Ministers  of Bihar, Andhra Pradesh and 
Uttar Pradesh have been requested to allot land for construction of NIPER 
Campuses.  Also, the West Bengal Government has allotted 35 acres of land and it 
is being developed by the State Government Agency viz. Kolkata Metropol itan 
Development Authority (KMDA). However,  issues relating to payment of 
development charges and extent of availability of land exclusively  for NIPER are 
being sorted out with the Government of West Bengal. 

 10 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
 In view of the Action Taken Reply, the Committe e feel that no substantial 
information has been provided by the Department regarding progress in 
construction of campuses at Guwahati and Gandhinagar except stating that the 
issue is under consideration of Steering Committee for new NIPERs. The 
Committee s trongly disapprove such replies and are inclined to presume that 
under the guise of Steering Committee for new NIPERs, the reasons for delay in 
construction of campuses at these two places have not been reported to the 
Committee. Hence, the Committee depre cate such practice and desire to be 
apprised about progress in construction of campuses for new NIPERs at these 
two places.    Further, the Committee take note of efforts made by the Department 
regarding acquisition of land in Bihar, Andhra Pradesh,  Uttar Pradesh and West 
Bengal and hope that the land acquisition and related issues will be vigorously 
pursued further with the respective  State Governments . The Committee also 
desire to know the progress made in this regard within three months of 
presentation of the report.  
 
C. FINALISATION OF PHARMACEUTICAL POLICY 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
11. Citing many past instances when  the Committee strongly recommended 
finalization of the National Pharmaceutical Policy at the earliest, the Committee had 
stated as under:-   
 
“The Committee note that at present the Drugs (Price Control) Order(DPCO), 
1995 allows control of prices of 74 scheduled bulk drugs and formulations 
containing any of the scheduled drugs defined in First Schedule of DPCO.  They 
are disturbed to note that initially the Government announced Pharmaceutical 
Policy 2002.  Then, a draft National Pharmaceutical Policy was prepared which 
has not been finalized till date in spite of the repeated recommendations# of the 
Committee to finalise the same.  Further, new Group of Ministers (GoM) is yet to 
give its recommendation on draft National Pharmaceutical Policy 2006. As 
apprised to the Committee, the Department of Pharmaceuticals has now prepared 
a new Draft National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy 2011 (NPPP 2011) ba sed on 
the criteria of essentiality and requirements as stipulated by Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare. The Committee also note that the draft National Pharmaceutical 
Pricing Policy (NPPP)-2011 proposes to bring 348 essential drugs and medicines 
under National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM) -2011 and associated 
medicines under price control. The Committee were informed that the draft Policy 
NPPP-2011 will now be examined by the Group Of Ministers (GoM) on 
25.04.2012 and the recommendations of the Go M will go to the Cabinet and the 
Cabinet in their wisdom will approve the policy. The Committee hope that now the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals will not resort to dilly dallying tactics in finalizing 
the NPPP-2011 as done in the case of National Pharmaceut ical Policy, which has 
been under consideration since 2002, so that common man can get the medicines 
at affordable prices.” 
--------------------------- 
# Twentieth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee (2005 -06), Twenty -Fifth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2008-09) and First Report on Demands for Grants (2009-10). 

 11 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
12. In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
    “The Group of Ministers (GoM) met on 25.04.2012 and further two more meetings   
have been held by the GoM.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
13. While noting the long delay in finalization of the National Pharmaceutica l 
Policy, the Committee had earlier hoped that the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
would not resort to further delays in finalizing the  draft National Pharmaceutical 
Pricing Policy 2011 (NPPP -2011). In this regard, in their Action Taken R eply, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has informed the Committee  that the Group of 
Ministers (GoM) met on 25.4.2012 and further two more meetings have  been held 
by the GoM to consider the NPPP -2011.  From the above reply, the Committee are 
inclined to infer that the GoM has  yet not been able to finalize its 
recommendations on the draft NPPP -2011. The Committee strongly feel that early 
finalization of such a policy will have a huge positive impact on common man .  
Hence,  the Committee express unhappiness over  further delay i n the finalization 
of the NPPP -2011 and reiterate  that the Depa rtment of Pharmaceutical should 
make all out effort to expedite the finalization and implementation of NPPP -2011 at 
the earliest . The steps taken in this regard may  be informed to the Committee  
within three months of presentation of this report.  
 
D. AVAILABILITY AND AFFORDABILITY OF MEDICINES 
RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
 
14. Expressing apprehension over possibility of malpractices like projecting higher 
production cost by some companies, the Committee had recommended that :- 
 
 “The Committee also feel that there should not be much difference between the 
production price and sale prices of a medicine.  For this purpose the Committee 
recommend that Department of Pharmaceuticals should have a tab on the 
production prices of medicines by different companies and ensure that its sale 
price do not exceed much beyond a reasonable rate.  In such case, the 
Committee have their apprehension that some companies may resort to 
malpractices like projecting higher pro duction cost. The Committee, therefore 
recommend Department of Pharmaceuticals to be cautious in this regard so as to 
curb the malpractice of gold plating by some of the companies.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
15. In reply to the above recommendation of the C ommittee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 

 12 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
“National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) fixes/revises prices of 74 bulk 
drugs included in the First Schedule of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995 
(DPCO, 1995) and formulations containing any of these drugs with an objective to 
make these drugs affordable. No one can sell any scheduled drug/formulation at a 
price higher than the price fixed by NPPA.  NPPA may, from time to time, by 
notification in the official gazette under Para 8, 9 and 11 of the DPCO, 1995 fix the 
price of a scheduled formulation in accordance with the formula laid down in Para 
7 of DPCO,95 keeping in view the cost or efficiency or both of major 
manufacturers of such formulation and such price shall operate  as the ceiling sale 
price for all such packs including those sold under generic name and for every 
manufacturer of such formulations. A manufacturer, distributor or wholesaler shall 
sell a formulation to a retailer , unless otherwise permitted under the pr ovisions of 
this order or any order made there under, at a price equal to the retail price, as 
specified by an order or notified by the Government (excluding excise duty, if 
any), minus sixteen per cent, thereof in the case of scheduled drugs.  The NPPA 
may either on its own motion or on application made to it in this behalf by 
manufacturer in Form -III or Form -IV, as the case may be, after calling for such 
information as it may consider necessary, by notification in the Official Gazette, to 
fix a revised ceiling price for a scheduled formulation.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
16. The Committee in its earlier recommendation had stated that the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals should keep a tab on the production prices of 
medicines by different companies and ensur e that the sale prices of medicines do 
not exceed beyond a reasonable rate. In this regard, the Committee have been 
informed by the Depart ment of Pharmaceuticals in its Action Taken R eply that 
NPPA from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette fix the price of 
Scheduled formulation s in accordance with the formula laid down in para 7 of         
DPCO, 95 keeping in view the cost or efficiency or both of major manufacturers of 
such formulati ons and such price  operate as the ceiling sale price for al l such 
packs including those sold under generic name and for every manufacture of such 
formulations. 
However, the Committee are disappointed to note that though the prices of 
scheduled drugs/formulations are fixed by the Government/NPPA, there is 
possibility of huge difference between production prices and sales prices of non -
scheduled drugs in which case only annual increase in prices is monitored by the 
NPPA. Hence, the Committee recommend that the NPPA/Government should also 
monitor the initial price fixation of all drugs by the companies so that there will not 
be huge difference between the actual production cost of medicine s and its retail  
price by various manufacturers .   The Committee also recommend that NPPA 
should devise norms regarding such initial price fixation by pharma companies so 
that the practice of gold plating can be curbed. 
  
 

 13 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
 
 
E. REVIVAL OF INDIAN DRUGS AND PHARMACEUTICALS LIMITED (IDPL)  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
 
17. Noting the long delay in revival of the Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited 
(IDPL), the Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
“Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), the largest Pharma Public 
Sector Undertaking, was formally declared sick in 1992. Regarding the revival 
process in respect of IDPL, the Committee note that though the draft Cabinet Note 
for revival of IDPL was already prepared, the Department requested Ernst & 
Young (E&Y) to re -assess the liabilities etc. of IDPL and now the Department is 
examining the report of E&Y to finalize the Cabinet Note. The same report of E&Y 
is also being examined by IDBI (Operating Agency) and the same may be 
considered simultaneously by Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction 
(BIFR) and the Ministry for taking early view in the matter. In view of this, the 
Committee strongly feel that the revival process in respect of IDPL is bogged 
down in the labyrinth of bureaucratic processes as two decades have passed 
since IDPL was formally declared sick. This shows nothing but the lackadaisical 
approach of the Department an d other involved organizations towards this issue. 
In view of the sorry state of affairs regarding revival of IDPL, the Committee 
recommend that a time frame should be fixed, possibly in consultation with BIFR 
and other stake holders, so that responsibilit y can be fixed if the time frame is 
violated. The Committee desire to be apprised about further progress in this 
regard.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
18. In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
“Draft Note for the Cabinet has been prepared. However E&Y was requested to 
re-assess the liabilities etc. of IDPL. A re -assessment report of E&Y has since 
been received and being examined in the Department to finalize a Cabinet Note. 
In the mean while BIFR meeting was held on 10.01.2012 and 21.03.2012(case 
No. 503/1992), the Board directed that the copy of E&Y report be submitted to 
BIFR as well as IDBI (Operating agency) and IDBI to examine the report, prepare 
Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) and submit to BIFR by July, 2012.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
19.  The Committee, considering the inordinate delay in the revival of IDPL, had 
earlier recommended that a time-frame should be fixed for revival of the company, 
possibly in consul tation with BIFR and other stake hol ders so that responsibility 
can be fixed if the timeframe is violated.  In response to this, t he Department of 
Pharmaceuticals in its Action Taken Reply has stated that Draft Note for the 
Cabinet has been prepared and a re -assessment report of E&Y has since been 
received and the same is being examined i n the Department to finalize a C abinet 
note.  Meanwhile, BIFR meeting was held on 10.01.2012 and 21.3.2012, the Board 
directed that the copy of E&Y report be submitted to BIFR  as well  as to IDBI 

 14 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
(Operating Agency).   IDBI was supposed  to examine the report and prepare  the 
Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) and submit to BIFR by July, 2012.  The 
Committee in this regard hope that IDBI might have  submitted the DRS to BIFR by 
now.  The Committee would therefore like to be apprised in this regard and ho pe 
that Cabinet would soon consider  the issue.   The Committee  here feel that  
sufficient and substantial work is yet to be done  for speedy revival of IDPL . 
Therefore, the Committee  strongly reiterate that a time -frame should be fixed for 
the revival of IDPL and responsibility should be fixed if the time-frame is violated.   
 
 F. JAN AUSHADHI SCHEME 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
20. Noting that wide geographic and therauptic coverage is indispensable for success 
of the Jan Aushadhi Scheme, the Committee had recommended that:- 
 
“The Committee note that for success of the Jan Aushadhi Scheme, wide 
geographic and therauptic coverage is indispensable. Regarding the geographic 
coverage, so far , only 117 Jan Aushadhi Stores (JAS) are opened and the 
Business Plan of the Department proposes to open 612 Jan Ausadhi Stores(JAS) 
in the first phase. In the second phase, the proposal is to open at least 5 JAS in 
each of the 630 Districts of the country . The Committee feel that the plan of 
geographical expansion of JAS is rather slow and inadequate and hence, 
recommend that the Department should open JAS in a mission mode, in 
coordination with State governments. The Committee recommend that the 
Department should explore options like opening up of JAS through public private 
partnership and also individual entrepreneurs should also be encouraged to open 
JAS. Regarding therauptic coverage, the Committee is unhappy to note that at 
present, only the medicines manufactured by the Central Pharma Public Sector 
Undertakings (CPSUs) are being sold at the existing JAS and as such, the range 
of medicines available at th JAS are limited. The Committee feel that this is one of 
the major weaknesses of the Jan Aushadhi Sc heme. Hence, the Committee 
recommend that urgent steps should be taken by the Department to rope in State 
PSUs and private manufactures to increase the coverage of generic drugs at 
JAS.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
21. In reply to the aforesaid recommendation  of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
“As of now, there are 121 Jan Aushadhi Stores (JASs) in 11 States including UTs 
of Chandigarh in the country. To take this campaign forward, based on the 
request received from the Government of West Bengal, the matter is in the 
process of sending funds to them for opening of 20 new JASs in the State in 
addition to the three already existing there. Request have also been received from 
the Government of Uttar Pradesh to open JASs in t he State, for which meeting 
with the State Government officers will be held shortly to finalize the modalities in 
this regard. Simultaneously, the matter is also actively being pursued with other 
States to open Jan Aushadhi Stores. Although, request has be en sent to such 
States earlier also, fresh reminders are being issued now, which will be followed 
by personal meetings with the concerned officers to impress upon them to open 

 15 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
Jan Aushadhi Stores in their respective States. Recently, meeting was held with 
the Secretary, Cooperation, Food & Consumer Affairs and Secretary, Health & 
Family Welfare, Government of Tamil Nadu with regard to their proposal to sell 
generic unbranded medicines through 191 pharmacies run by Triplicane Urban 
Cooperative Society Kamadh enu, a society recognized by the Ministry of 
Cooperation, Food & Consumer Affairs.       The final details in this connection are  
 
being worked out with regard to this proposal and it is expected that this is likely to 
be finalized in the next couple of months, 
 
           The Department has engaged Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI) to 
conduct a Third Party Evaluation of the on -going Jan Aushadhi Campaign and 
submit its report/recommendation to the Department at the earliest so as to 
enable this Department to implement the Jan Aushadhi Campaign in a more 
effective manner.” 
                     
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
22. The Committee in its report had earlier recommended that to increase the 
geographical coverage of the Jan Aushadhi Scheme, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals should explore options like opening up  of Jan Aushadhi Stores 
(JAS) through Public Private Partnerships (PPP) and also through encouragement 
to individual entrepreneurs. In this regard, the Committee have been informed that 
requests have been received from Governments of West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh 
to open JAS  in their States.  The Committee also note th e Department’s effort 
towards sa le of generic unbranded medicines through 191 pharmacies run by 
Triplicane Urban Cooperative  Society, Kamadhenu. While appreciating the efforts 
of the Department, the Committee recommend that all options for opening of JAS 
viz. PPP, individual entrepreneurship and cooperatives  etc. should be explored in 
all the States and Union Territories.  
Further, with regard to increasing the therapeutic coverage of generic 
medicines, the C ommittee had earlier recommended that urgent steps should be 
taken by the Department to include the state PSUs and private manufactu rers to 
increase the coverage of generic drugs available at  JAS.  The Committee are 
unhappy to note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals ha s not given any 
information regarding action taken on this recommendation of the Committee. As 
the range of generic medicines that are available through the JAS now is limited, it 
is a huge drawback of the Scheme, the Committee therefore, strongly reiterate its 
recommendation that the Department o f Pharmaceuticals should involve  the state 
PSUs and private manufacturers to increase the c overage of generic drug s 
available at JAS. 
  

 16 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
RECOMMENDATION  NO.2 
 
 The Committee note that the budgetary allocation of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals for the year 2011 -12 was Rs. 213 crore, and the same was drastically 
reduced to Rs. 116.08 crore at the RE stage. Even this amount could not be utilized fully 
as the actually utilization during the year 2011-12 is Rs. 77.89 crore. The Committee also 
note that the Department has attributed  this reduction in funds in the year 2011 -12 to 
under-utilization of the funds to the extent of Rs. 81.94 crore in respect of construction of 
new NIPER campuses (including that in Guwahati). Also, new schemes could not be 
introduced to the extent of Rs. 12 .04 crore. In view of this, the Committee conclude that 
there is lack of planning and implementation deficit on the part of the Department and 
hence, Committee reiterate#  that  the implementation machinery of the needs to be 
geared up so that sanctioned f unds are properly and timely used to achieve the avowed 
objectives of the Department. 
__________________________________________________ 
#  19th  Report on Demands for Grants for the year 2011-12 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
   
The matter relating to allotment of land for NIPERs by State Governments is being 
pursued at the highest level with the Chief Minister / Chief Secretary of the respective 
States. Simultaneously, action is being initiated for construction of NIPER Campus at 
places, where adequate  land has been allotted by State Governments i.e. in 
Gandhinagar and Guwahati. 
 
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(3)/2012-Fin.II  dated 20.7.2012] 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
 The committee note that establishment of NIPERs is a significant effort towards  
development of quality human resource for the growth of pharmaceutical sector in India. 
However, the Committee is concerned that work relating to construction of new NIPER 
campuses could not be initiated in 2011 -12 and hence, the funds allocated for the 
purpose could not be utilized. The Committee note that availability of land has been a 
serious impediment in establishment of new NIPERs. Further, the Committee is 
dismayed to note that despite of availability of land at Guwahati and Ahmedabad, the 
construction of campus has not been started in 2011 -12. This shows lack of proper 
planning and effort on the part of the Department. The Committee desire that the 
construction work at Guwahati and Ahmedabad should start immediately and the 
Department of Pharmaceut ical should make all necessary efforts towards acquisition of 
lands at other four places namely, Hyderabad, Hajipur, Kolkata and Rae Bareli. The 
Committee desire to be apprised about the Department’s effort towards acquisition of 
land for New NIPERs at the  above four places and also progress in the construction of 
campuses for new NIPERs. 
 
 

 17 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In 2007, Cabinet granted in-principle approval to the setting up of six new NIPERs 
and commencement of classes with the help of mentor Institute s. On 30.09.2011, 
Cabinet finally approved establishment of six new NIPERs. 
2. At present, land is available at Guwahati & Gandhinagar. As such, the issue of 
construction of NIPER campus at Guwahati & Gandhinagar is under the consideration of 
Steering Committee for new NIPERs. 
3. Minister (C&F) has since requested Chief Ministers of Bihar and Andhra Pradesh  
vide letters dated 10.4.2012 and Chief Minister of  Uttar Pradesh vide letter dated 
24.4.2011 to  allot requisite land for construction of NIPER campus. 
4. West Bengal Government has allotted 35 acres land at Baruipur. It is being 
developed by the State Government agency viz. Kolkata Metropolitan Development 
Authority (KMDA). However, issues relating to payment of development charges, extent 
of availability of land exclusively for NIPER are being sorted out. The matter has since 
been taken up at the level of Minister (C&F) with the Chief Minister, West Bengal vide 
letter dated 10/4/2012. Reply from the state Government is awaited. 
 
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(3)/2012-Fin.II  dated 20.7.2012] 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  (Please see Para No.10  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION  NO.4 
 
            The Committee note that the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
plays vital role in fixation/revision of price of 74 scheduled bulk drugs and formulation 
containing any of the scheduled drugs under the Drugs (Price Control) Order, 1995 as 
well as monitoring and enforcement of prices.   NPPA also provides inputs to the 
Government for policy formulation.   During the Eleventh Five Year Plan period (2007 -
2012), NPPA had proposed five new schemes amounting to Rs.49.95 crore.   These 
schemes are (i) Building Robust and Responsive Statistical System for NPPA; (ii) 
Creation of NPPA  Cells in States; (iii) Scheme for Interaction with States; (iv) Proposal 
for Consumer Awareness and Publicity through Print, Electronic and other medium; and 
(v) Proposal for strengthening the existing Monitoring and Enforcement work.   The 
Committee note that out of these five schemes, Building Robust and Responsive 
Statistical System for NPPA was already approved by the Planning Commission and 
implemented during the Eleventh Plan period and in principle approval in respect of the 
scheme, Proposal for Cons umer Awareness and Publicity through Print, Electronic and 
other medium was given in February, 2011 and in the budget allocation for the year 
2012-13, funds are allocated only for these two schemes.   However, the Committee are 
unhappy to note that other three schemes of the NPPA, namely, Creation of NPPA Cells 
in States; Scheme for Interaction with States and Proposal for strengthening the existing 
Monitoring and Enforcement work, are yet to get in -principle approval of the Planning 
Commission.  Hence, the Committee can not but reiterate its earlier recommendations @ 
that the Department should take up the issue with Planning Commission and make all 
out effort towards getting in -principle approval for these three schemes.   The Committee 
also desire to be appr ised about the outcomes achieved in case of two schemes, 

 18 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
namely, Building Robust and Responsive Statistical System for NPPA and Proposal for 
Consumer Awareness and Publicity through Print, Electronic and other medium.  
______________________________________ 
@ 19th Report on Demands for Grants 2011-12 
   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Out of five components of the scheme for strengthening of NPPA, Planning 
Commission has accorded in principle approval for two components concerning ‘Building 
Robust & Responsive Stat istical System for NPPA” and proposal for “Consumer 
awareness and publicity through Print, Electronic and other medium” in March, 2008 and 
15th March, 2011 respectively. For the remaining components, Planning Commission 
vide letter dated 15.3.2011 had inti mated that the proposal may be considered to be 
integrated in 12 th Plan schemes of NPPA subject to its relevance and establishment of 
need.  
2. Consequent upon decision of Planning Commission communicated vide their 
letter dated 15.3.2011, Department of Pharmaceuticals requested  Planning Commission 
vide D.O. letter dated 24.3.2011 from Secretary(Pharma)  to reconsider its decision in 
respect of the remaining 2 components viz. (i) Scheme for Interaction with States and (ii) 
Strengthening the existing Moni toring and Enforcement work for 11 th Five Year Plan so 
that Plan funds allocated for the year 2011 -12 do not lapse and are utilized for 
strengthening NPPA. 
3. In response, Planning Commission vide its letter dated 20.5.2011 intimated that 
the proposal of according ‘in -principle’ approval in respect of two components i.e. (a) 
Interaction with States and (b) Strengthening of Existing Monitoring and Enforcement 
Work has been re -examined in consultation with their Health Division. Further, Planning 
Commission suggested that under the circumstances the aforesaid schemes can be 
discussed in the Twelfth Five Year Plan Working Group on Drugs & Pharmaceuticals. 
The said Working Group on Drug & Pharmaceuticals for Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012 -
2017), as constituted vi de order No. I&M 2(25)/20011 dated 10.05.2011 by the Planning 
Commission under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Pharma), in its Report to Planning 
Commission, has proposed/recommended schemes  for strengthening of NPPA, for such 
functions as - (a) Strengthen ing of Monitoring and Enforcement work, (b) Building 
Consumer Awareness about pricing and availability,  (c) Creation of NPPA Cells in 
States and (d) Interaction with States -  for the 12th Five Year Plan Period. 
The work done and likely to be accomplished under the following two schemes:   
 
1. Building Robust & responsive statistical system for NPPA 
 
The First Pharmaceutical Census of India (FPCI) was commenced in April 2008. 
Initially, a “Directory of Pharmaceuticals Manufacturing Units in India 2007” was 
prepared which served as the Universe Frame for the above census.  It contains data 
such as addresses and contact details on 10563 allopathic pharmaceuticals 
manufacturing units. 
 
  The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) was entrusted to 
collect data from the manufacturing units concurrently with their 4 th” All India Census of 
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises.  The schedules were not filled up for all the 
manufacturing units. 
 
M/s ICRA Management Consulting Services Limited have been aw arded contract 
in the month of August and November 2010 in respect of following two studies: 
 
1. First Pharmaceutical Census of India; 

 19 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
2. Collection of annual turnover data from the Bulk Drug manufacturing units. 
 
In respect of 1 st study i.e. First Pharmaceutica l Census of India, the services of 
M/s ICRA Management were commissioned for:- 
(i) Processing of data collected by MSME for 6262 schedules to generate 
about 16 tables, generate PMI and submission of report. 
(ii) Collection of data from the left over Units (i.e. 10563-6262)=4301 
(iii) Amalgamation of both sets of data i.e. collected by MSME and M/s ICRA 
and 
(iv) Writing a final report based on processing of this data. 
 
In the “first phase, M/s ICRA was required to generate Pharmaceutical Map of India 
and generate about 16 ta bles from the canvassed Schedules of MSME. M/s ICRA has 
submitted an interim report giving the Pharmaceutical Map of India and also 13 tables 
generated from data collected by MSME. 
  In respect of 2 nd study, M/s ICRA Management Consulting Services Limited has 
been entrusted to carry out a detailed nationwide survey to collect data on Annual 
turnover of Bulk Drugs manufactured in India. M/s ICRA Management has submitted a 
preliminary report bringing out the methodology of survey and problems being faced by 
them in getting the data for the study. 
M/s ICRA Management is yet to submit its report in respect of both these studies.  
These studies are likely to be completed during next financial year 2012-13. 
 
2.  Consumer Awareness and Publicity through Print, Elec tronic and other 
 Medium 
 
‘In Principle’ approval for the scheme was accorded by the Planning Commission 
vide O.M. dated 29 th October, 2010. The Scheme is to be implemented on cost sharing 
basis with the Department of Consumer Affairs. The modalities of im plementation of the 
Scheme has been finalized and the Media Plan for the Scheme has been prepared by 
Department of Consumer Affairs for the NPPA. As the finalization of modalities and 
preparation of Media Plan for NPPA by the Department of Consumer Affairs  has taken 
time, it could not be possible to take up the work under the scheme during the year 
2011-12. For the year 2012 -13 an amount of Rs. 3.42 crore is provided under the 
scheme. NPPA is ready with two ads for print media and has written to Department of 
Consumer Affairs for providing matching funds for the scheme. On receipt of their 
response, Rs. 52 lakh will be released to DAVP under intimation to Department of 
Consumer Affairs to release two print ads for publication in National and Regional 
newspapers along with their share of money to the DAVP.  A meeting with the agencies 
approved by DAVP has also been held in the NPPA for preparation of ad films for 
publicity through electronic media. Nine agencies have submitted the scripts which are 
being scrutinized in the NPPA. 
 
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(3)/2012-Fin.II  dated 20.7.2012] 
RECOMMENDATION  NO.6 
 
  The committee also feel that there should not be much difference between the 
production price and sale prices of a medicine.   For this purpose the Committee 
recommend that Department of Pharmaceuticals should have a tab on the production 
prices of medicines by different companies and ensure that its sale price do not exceed 
much beyond a reasonable rate.   In such case, the Committee have their apprehension 
that some companies may resort to malpractices like projecting higher production cost.   

 20 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
The Committee, therefore, recommend Department of Pharmaceuticals to be cautious in 
this regard so as to curb the malpractices of gold plating by some of the companies.  
   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) fixes/revises prices of  74 bulk 
drugs included in the First Schedule of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995 (DPCO, 
1995) and formulations containing any of these drugs with an objective to make these 
drugs affordable. No one can sell nay scheduled drug/formulation at a price higher than 
the price fixed by NPPA.  
 
 NPPA may, from time to time, by notification in the official gazette under Para 8, 9 
and 11 of the DPCO, 1995 fix the price of a scheduled formulation in accordance with 
the formula laid down in Para 7 of DPCO,95 kee ping in view the  cost or efficiency or 
both of major manufacturers of such formulation and such price shall operate as the 
ceiling sale price for all such packs including those sold under generic name and for 
every manufacturer of such formulations. A man ufacturer, distributor or wholesaler shall 
sell a formulation to a retailer , unless otherwise permitted under the provisions of this 
order or any order made there under, at a price equal to the retail price, as specified by 
an order or notified by the Gov ernment (excluding excise duty, if any), minus sixteen per 
cent, thereof in the case of scheduled drugs.   
  
The NPPA may either on its own motion or on application made to it in this behalf 
by manufacturer in Form -III or Form -IV, as the case may be, after  calling for such 
information as it may consider necessary, by notification in the Official Gazette, to fix a 
revised ceiling price for a scheduled formulation. 
 
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(3)/2012-Fin.II  dated 20.7.2012] 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  (Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
  

 21 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
NIL 
 
  

 22 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 RECOMMENDATION  NO.1 
 
 The Committee note that out of an outlay of Rs.1396.17 crore for the Eleventh 
Five Year Plan(2007 -12) for the Department of Pharmaceuticals, the budget allocation 
for the period is only Rs. 741.76 crore, which is only about 53% of the total outlay for the 
Eleventh Five Year Plan. Hence, during the entire five years of the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan, the allocation sanctioned to th e Department of Pharmaceuticals is much below 
than that approved by Planning Commission. The Committee fail to understand this mis -
match between the overall outlay for the Plan period and the funds actually provided to 
the Department and want an explanatio n from the Department of Pharmaceuticals. The 
Committee is also of the view that the Planning Commission while approving the 
allocation, should also be realistic so that there may not be much difference between 
approved allocation and the allocation actually disbursed to the Department. 
 
 The Committee also observe that there is underutilization of funds by the 
Department which may be one of the reasons for getting lesser allocation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should improve its  physical 
performance in order to have a semblance between financial allocation and physical 
performance. This would also help the Department in obtaining more funds as per the 
stipulations of Planning Commission. 
 
 The Committee also note that in its Mid -term Appraisal Report, the Planning 
Commission has recommended that the Pharmaceutical Research and Development 
Programme (PRDP), which has been pursued by Department of Science and Techno 
logy(DST), would be transferred to Department of Pharmaceuticals at  the end of 
Eleventh Five Year Plan. However, the Committee note with regret that no allocation has 
been made for the PRDP in the Detailed Demands for Grants for the year 2012 -13. As 
PRDP is a vital programme in the area of pharmaceutical research and development, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should make concerted efforts towards 
getting allocation for the next financial year and implement the same to achieve the 
desired goals. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The matter relating to transfer of PRD P is being examined in consultation with 
Department of Science and Technology. 
 
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(3)/2012-Fin.II  dated 20.7.2012] 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  (Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION  NO.9 
 
 The Committee note that for success of the Jan Aushadhi Scheme, wide 
geographic and therapeutic coverage is indispensable. Regarding the geographic 
coverage, sofar, only 117 Jan Aushadhi Stores (JAS) are opened and the Business Plan 
of the Department proposes to open 612 Jan Aushadhi Stores (JAS) in the first phase. In 
the second phase, the proposal is to open at least 5 JAS in each of the 630 Districts of 

 23 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
the country. The Committee feel that the plan of geographical expansion of JAS is rather 
slow and inadequate and hence, recommend that the Department should open JAS in a 
mission mode, in coordination with State Governments. The Committee recommend that 
the Department should explore options like opening up of JAS through public private 
partnership and also individual entrepreneurs should also be encouraged to open JAS. 
 Regarding therapeutic coverage, the Committee is unhappy to note that at 
present, only the medicines manufactured by the Central Pharma Public Sector 
Undertaking (CPSUs) are being sold at the existing JAS and as such, the range of 
medicines available at the JAS are limited. The Committee feel that this is one of the 
major weakness of the Jan Aushadhi Scheme. Hence, the Committee recommend that 
urgent steps should be taken by the Dep artment to rope in State PSUs and private 
manufacturers to increase the coverage of generic drugs at JAS. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 As of now, there are 121 Jan Aushadhi Stores (JASs) in 11 States including UTs 
of Chandigarh in the country. To take this c ampaign forward, based on the request 
received from the Government of West Bengal, the matter is in the process of sending 
funds to them for opening of 20 new JASs in the State in addition to the three already 
existing there. Request have also been receive d from the Government of Uttar Pradesh 
to open JASs in the State, for which meeting with the State Government officers will be 
held shortly to finalize the modalities in this regard. Simultaneously, the matter is also 
actively being pursued with other States to open Jan Aushadhi Stores. Although, request 
has been sent to such States earlier also, fresh reminders are being issued now, which 
will be followed by personal meetings with the concerned officers to impress upon them 
to open Jan Aushadhi Stores in t heir respective States. Recently, meeting was held with 
the Secretary, Cooperation, Food & Consumer Affairs and Secretary, Health & Family 
Welfare, Government of Tamil Nadu with regard to their proposal to sell generic 
unbranded medicines through 191 pharm acies run by Triplicane Urban Cooperative 
Society Kamadhenu, a society recognized by the Ministry of Cooperation, Food & 
Consumer Affairs. The final details in this connection are being worked out with regard to 
this proposal and it is expected that this i s likely to be finalized in the next couple of 
months. 
 
 The Department has engaged Public Health Foundation of India (PHFI) to 
conduct a Third Party Evaluation of the on -going Jan Aushadhi Campaign and submit its 
report/recommendation to the Department at the earliest so as to enable this Department 
to implement the Jan Aushadhi Campaign in a more effective manner. 
 
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(3)/2012-Fin.II  dated 20.7.2012] 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
  

 24 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
 
 The Committee note that at present the Drugs(Price Control) Order(DPCO), 1995 
allows control of prices of 74 scheduled bulk drugs and formulations containing any of 
the scheduled drugs defined in first Schedule  of  DPCO. They are disturbed to note that 
initially the Government announced Pharmaceutical Poly 2002.  Then, a draft National 
Pharmaceutical Policy was prepared which has not been finalized till date in spite of the 
repeated recommendations# of the Committee to finalize the same. Further, new Group 
of Ministers (GoM) is yet to give its recommendation on draft National Pharmaceutical 
Policy 2006.  As appri sed to the Committee, the Department of Pharmaceuticals has 
now prepared a new Draft National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy 2011 (NPPP 2011) 
based on the criteria of essentiality and requirements as stipulated by Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare.  The  Committee also note that the draft National Pharmaceutical 
Pricing Policy (NPPP -2011) proposes to bring 348 essential drugs and medicines under 
price control.  The Committee were informed that the draft Policy NPPP-2011 will now be 
examined by the Group of Ministers (GoM) on 25.04.2012 and the recommendations of 
the GoM will go to the Cabinet and the Cabinet in their wisdom will approve the policy. 
 The Committee hope that now the Department of Pharmaceuticals will not resort 
to dilly dallying tactics in finalizing the NPPP -2011 as done in the case of National 
Pharmaceutical Policy, which has been under consideration since 2002, so that common 
man can get the medicines at affordable prices. 
________________________________ 
# Twentieth Report on Action Take n by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report of the Committee (2005 -06), Twenty -Fifth Report on 
Demands for Grants (2008-09) and First Report on Demands for Grants (2009-10). 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The Group of Ministers ( GoM) met on 25.04.2012 and further two more meetings 
have been held by the GoM. 
 
 
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(3)/2012-Fin.II  dated 20.7.2012] 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  (Please see Para No.16  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION  NO.7 
 
 Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals limited (IDPL), the largest Pharma Public 
Sector Undertaking, was formally declared sick in 1992. Regarding the revival process in 
respect of IDPL, the Committee note that though the draft Cabinet Note for revival of 
IDPL w as already prepared, the Department requested Ernst & Young (E&Y) to re -
assess the liabilities etc. of IDPL and now the Department is examining the report of E&Y 
to finalize the Cabinet Note. The same report of E&Y is also being examined by IDBI 
(operating Agency) and the same may be considered simultaneously by Board for 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) and the Ministry for taking early view of 
this, the Committee strongly feel that the revival process in respect of IDPL is bogged 
down in the labyrinth of bureaucratic processes as two decades have passed since IDPL 

 25 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
was formally declared sick. This shows nothing but the lackadaisical approach of the 
Department and other involved organizations towards this issue. In view of the sorry 
state of affairs regarding revival of IDPL, the Committee recommends that a time frame 
should be fixed, possibly in consultation with BIFR and other stake holders, so that 
responsibility can be fixed if the time frame is violated. The Committee desire to be 
apprised about further progress in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 Draft Note for the Cabinet has been prepared. However E&Y was requested to re -
assess the liabilities etc. of IDPL. A re -assessment report of E&Y has since been 
received and being examined in the Department to finalize a Cabinet Note. 
 
 In the mean while BIFR meeting was held on 10.01.2012 and  21.03.2012(case 
No. 503/1992), the Board directed that the copy of E&Y report be submitted to BIFR as 
well as IDBI (Operating agency) and IDBI to exami ne the report, prepare Draft 
Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) and submit to BIFR by July, 2012. 
 
 [Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(3)/2012-Fin.II  dated 20.7.2012] 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  (Please see Para No.19  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION  NO.8 
 
 The Committee note that since April, 2004 to December, 2011, there has been 
141 instances of Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) in various Indian Drug Manufacturing 
Companies.  The Committee also note that after take over of many big domesti c Pharma 
companies like Ranbaxy etc. by Foreign Multi -National Companies (MNCs), there are 
apprehensions in some quarters that these take over will not only have adverse impact 
on availability of medicines for common man at affordable prices but also affec t the 
overall health care scenario in India.  On the other hand, the Committee also notes that 
there is an urgent need for attracting foreign investments in the pharmaceutical sector, 
particularly in areas like new chemical entities reserve, bio -pharmaceuticals, inspection 
and certification infrastructure etc.  In this context, the Department of Industrial Policy 
and Promotion (DIPP) Press Note No.3(2011 series) dated 8.11.2011 which allows FDI 
up to 100% for brown field investment in pharmaceutical sectors , under government 
approval route is a temporary measure, as this would be reviewed after a period of six 
months.  Committee feels that though there is need for attracting FDI in the Indian 
pharmaceutical sector, this should not be done at the cost of our national interest and 
country’s capacity to produce life saving drugs at affordable prices should not be 
compromised.  Therefore the Committee desire to be apprised about the impact of the 
current policy which allows 100% FDI for brown field investments in  pharmaceutical 
sector under government approval route and also change in policy, if any, on FDI in 
pharmaceutical sector after the lapse of the stipulated six months period. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  It is too early to judge the impact of current policy,  however, Department of 
Economic Affairs (Investment and Infra Division) has informed that till May, 2012, 15 
proposals of Foreign Direct Investment in brown field Pharma companies have been 
cleared by FIPB which is likely to result in flow of approximatel y about Rs. 2029.51 
crores in Foreign Direct Investment.  They have further mentioned that a Special Group 
has been constituted to streamline the process for approval of FDI in brown field Pharma 
through FIPB. 

 26 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
 
 The Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion who are the nodal Department 
for Foreign Direct Investment, has informed that the policy for allowing Foreign Director 
Investment(FDI), up to 100% in existing companies, in the pharmaceuticals sector, under 
the Government approval route, was introduced vide Press Note 3 of 2011, dated 
08.11.2011.  This provision has since been incorporated under “Circular 2 of 2011 -
Consolidated FDI Policy”, effective from 10.04.2012. 
 
[Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M.No. 16(3)/2012-Fin.II  dated 20.7.2012] 
RECOMMENDATION  NO.10 
 
 The Committee note that innovative Research & Development is critical in the 
Pharmaceutical industry. Particularly, New Drug Discovery Research (NDDR) is 
important yet expensive affair. The Committee also note that many Indian companies, 
often in collaboration with multi national Pharma companies, are making significant effort 
in the area NDDR. However, as R&D, particularly NDDR is expensive; the Committee 
recommended that an interest free ve nture fund should be institute to promote NDDR 
with India -specific focus. The Committee is worried to note that most of the Pharma 
PSUs are not investing in R&D. The Committee desire that Department to develop a 
frame PSUs can collaborate with private sect or, universities and research institution in 
R&D work. The Committee note that the Department has awarded assignment to Ernst & 
Young (E&Y) as global level consultant for preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
for developing India as a Drug Discovery  and Pharma Innovation Hub 2020. As the DPR 
is expected in six months, the Committee desire to be apprised about the 
recommendation in the DPR and action taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 The Detailed Project Report (DPR) has not been submitted. The first and second 
drafts were discussed with a broad -based Advisory Committee consisting of 
representatives of Industry, Scientific Organizations and other stake holders. Taking into 
account the views expressed at the meeting, E&Y will finalize the DPR. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;       GOPINATH MUNDE, 
17  DECEMBER, 2012         CHAIRMAN, 
26 AGRAHAYANA,1934 (SAKA)                  STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
                          CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 
 
  

 27 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
APPENDIX – I 
 
MINUTES 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 10 December, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 
hrs. in Room No.63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri A.A. Jinnah     - In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
3. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
5. Shri  Kamlesh Paswan  
6. Shri  Amarnath Pradhan 
7. Shri Tufani Saroj 
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
10. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
Smt. Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary  
Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Additional Director 
 
2. As the Chairman could not attend the sitting due to pre -occupation, the members 
chose Shri A.A Jinnah, MP and a member of the Committee, to act as the Chairman.  
The Acting Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration an d adoption the following 
draft Reports : 
 
(i) ******* 
(ii) *******  
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -seventh Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of Pharmaceuticals);  and 
(iv) ******* 
4. After some discussion, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*** Matters not related to this Report. 
  

 28 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.32 (Pharmaceutical).Docx 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS 
AND FERTILIZERS (2011-12) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13)’ OF THE 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF 
PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 10 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos.2,3,4 and 6)   
 
4 
Percentage of Total 40% 
III Observation / Recommendation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
 
NIL 
 
0 
Percentage of Total NIL 
IV Observation / Recommendation in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 1 and 9) 
 
2 
Percentage of Total 20% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are of interim nature:-  
 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl.Nos.5,7,8 and10 ) 
 
4 
Percentage of Total 40% 
 
 
 