1 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
    
24 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2011-12) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
March, 2012/Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) 


2 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
CC&F No. 24 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2011-12) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15 .03.2012 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  15.03.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2012/Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) 


3 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
  

4 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
 
                                                                
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12) ………………………………... 4 
Introduction. …………………………………………………..………………………… 5 
Chapter I Report ……………….………………………………………………….. 6-16 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
17-24 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
25 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
26 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature 
27-28 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2011-12) held on 05 March 2012 
29-31 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals &  Fertilizers 
(2010-11) on „Demands for Grants (2011 -2012)‟ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals).  
32 
 
  

5 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2011-12) 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Prabhatsinh  Pratapsinh Chauhan 
3. Shri K. D. Deshmukh 
4. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
5. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
6. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
7. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
8. Shri O.S. Manian 
9. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
10. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup 
11. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
12. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
13. Shri Sivakumar alias Ritheesh 
14. Shri Tufani Saroj 
15. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
16. Shri Raju Shetti 
17. Shri Adagooru Viswanath 
18. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
24. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
26. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
27. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani 
28. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
29. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
30. & Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
31.# Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT   
1. Shri  C.S.Joon   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajit Kumar Sahu  - Committee Officer 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
&  NOMINATED W.E.F. 17.09.2011. 
 # Vacancy arisen due to demise of Shri Silvius Condpan, MP (RS)  w.e.f. 10 October 2011 
  

6 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2011 -12) 
having been authorised  by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf present 
this Twenty Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the observations / recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2011 -12) on „Demands 
for Grants (2011 -12)‟ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
 
2. The Twentieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 04 August, 2011.  The Action 
Taken Replies of Government to all observations / recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 1 5 September, 2011.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (2011-12) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 05 
March 2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
13th March, 2012                                          GOPINATH MUNDE 
23 Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)                                                    Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
  

7 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2010-11) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on „Demands 
for Grants (20 11-12)‟ of the Ministry of Chemicals and  Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 04.08.2011. In all, 
the Committee made 11 Observations / Recommendations. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals &  Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish replies to the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report within three months from the date 
of presentation of the Report, i.e. by 04.11.2010. The Acti on Taken Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the 11 Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from  the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals vide their O.M. No.16( 12)/2011-Fin I dated 15.09.2011.  
Accordingly, the Replies have been examined and categorized as follows:-  
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government- 
 Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10 and 11      (Total =8) 
            Chapter-II  
 
(ii)  Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government‟s reply-  
  Sl.No. Nil          (Total =0) 
            Chapter-III  
 
(iii)   Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration-  
  Sl.No. 3         (Total =1) 
            Chapter-IV  
 
(iv)   Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature- 
  Sl. Nos. 6 and 9        (Total =2) 
            Chapter-V  
  

8 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the                   
Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and the 
Final Replies in respect of Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter 
V for which Interim Replies have been furnished by the Department should be 
furnished expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. Proper Implementation of Various Initiatives 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.2) 
 
5. Taking note of the various initiatives, schemes and policies pursued by the 
Department and emphasizing the need for their proper implementation, the Committee 
had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note  that the Department‟s role is limited as a facilitator only for 
the development of chemical industry and accordingly, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has formulated the National Policy on Chemicals 
with the aim of addressing various issues as well as for increasing investment in 
the petrochemicals sector.  The Department has also come out with a cluster 
infrastructure scheme of plastic parks besides setting up an award scheme to 
incentivize meritorious innovations in the field of plastics/el astomers/synthetic 
fibres/surfactants/intermediates. The strengthening and expansion of the Central 
Institute of Plastic Engineering & Technology (CIPET) is also stated to have been 
carried out. The Department aims to create world class infrastructure for the 
Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs) which 
would enable investment in the petrochemicals sector.  Further, a Task Force has 
been set up by the Department to examine various issues relating to the chemicals 
industry, the r eport of  which is yet to be finalized.  The Committee expect  the 
Department to vigorously implement these measures and would like the report of 
the Task Force be finalized at the earliest so as to enable the Department to take 
necessary steps for early stabilization of the chemicals industry.  As regards the 
petrochemicals sector, the Department needs to ensure proper implementation of 
various initiatives like the National Policy on Petrochemicals, Petroleum Chemicals 
and Petrochemical investment Regions (PCPIR), etc., undertaken by the 
Department.” 
  
6. In reply to  the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 
 “In pursuance of the National Policy on Petrochemicals, the Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals is implementing 3 schemes in the 11th Five Year 
Plan viz. (i) Setting up of dedicated Plastic Parks - to promote a cluster approach 
in the areas of development of plastic applications and plastic recycling; (ii) 
Schemes of National Awards for Technology Innovations in Petrochemicals and 

9 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
downstream Plastic Pr ocessing Industry – to incentivize meritorious innovations 
and inventions in the field of Petrochemicals; and (iii) Setting up of Centres of 
Excellence (CoE) in the field of Petrochemicals -  to set up internationally 
recognized centres for the analysis an d dissemination of existing global 
knowledge in the chosen fields, provide authoritative, strategic and timely 
information to organizations and companies for use in the development and 
implementation of their projects/programmes while engaging in future pa th 
breaking R & D efforts.  All the above three schemes have been formulated in the 
year 2010-11. National Chemical Laboratory, Pune and Central Institute of Plastic 
Engineering and Technology (CIPET), Chennai have been selected for setting up 
the Centres of Excellence (CoE) the National Awards for the year 2010 -11 have 
been finalized. The process for appointment of Programme Manager for 
implementation of the plastic parks scheme is under way.  The funds allocated for 
CoE and National Award have been utiliz ed whereas funds for plastic parks 
scheme shall be released after the  Programme Manager is appointed. Hence, 
the formulation and implementation of various schemes under the aegis of 
National Policy on Petrochemical has been taken up vigoursly by the 
Department.”   
Comments of the Committee 
7.  The Committee had earlier recommended that proper implementation of  
various initiatives taken by the Departmen t such as the National Policy on 
Petrochemicals, cluster infrastructure scheme of Plastic Parks, award sch emes to 
incentivize meritorious innovations, setting up of Centres of Excellence (CoE), 
implementation of Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions 
(PCPIR) Scheme, etc. should be carried out  expeditiously. The Committee had 
also recommended that the report of the Task Force should be finalized at the 
earliest so as to enable the Department to take necessary steps for early 
stabilization of the chemicals industry. In its response to  the Committee’s 
recommendation, the Department has provided details of the measures it took to 
implement the National Policy on Petrochemicals.  However, the Committee are 
unhappy to note that the Department has not provided any details about the 
present status of the Task Force i t had set up,  whose finalization of report and 
implementation are  crucial for the growth and development of the chemicals 
industry. The Department has also stated in its A ction Taken Replies (ATR) that 
the process for appointment of Programme Manager for i mplementation of the 
Plastic Park scheme  is under way. The Committee, therefore, desi re that the 
Department should finalize the report of the Task Force at the earl iest. The 
Committee also desire  that the Department should expedite the process of 
appointment of Programme Manager as funds for plastic parks scheme is to be 
released only after the Programme Manager is appointed. The Committee would 
like to be apprised about any progress in this regard.   

10 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
B.        Reduction of Excise Duty on Petrochemicals 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
8.  Emphasizing the need to reduce the rate of excise duty on petrochemicals as part 
of the stimulus package to boost production and sustain the present momentum of growth 
in the petrochemicals sector, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
“The Committee note that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has 
constituted an inter-ministerial Expert Committee for promotion of plastics in thrust 
areas,  namely, plastic in agriculture (plasticulture ),  water management, 
construction and packaging.  The Department also interacts with the industry 
associations at the national level and pro -actively takes up issues related to 
petrochemical industry for sustainable development of the sector.  The Committ ee 
have also been given to understand that stimulus packages announced in 
December 2008 and January 2009 reduced the excise duty to 8% from the existing 
rate of 14% which was, however, increased subsequently in the Budget 2010-11 to 
10%.  As a result of re duction in excise duties, polymers and performance plastics 
had registered significant growth rates of 12.26% and 8.38% respectively.  
Together, the major petrochemicals registered a growth rate of 9.92% during the 
period from April 2010 to January 2011.  These increases in growth rate can be 
attributed, at least in part, to the reduction in excise duties and other measures 
taken as part of the stimulus package.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should impress upon the 
Ministry of Finance to reduce the excise duty to 8% from the present rate of 10% in 
order to further boost production and sustain the present momentum of growth in 
the sector.  The Committee feel that the initiative of stimulus package sho uld not 
be a short term measure but the same should continue till the per capita use of 
polymers and plastics comes at par with the developed countries of the world.” 
  
9.  The Department in its action taken reply has stated as under:-   
 
 “The  Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals recommended continuance of 
stimulus packages for the year 2010 -11. However, this was not agreed to by 
Ministry of Finance in view of improvement in economic performance. Further, 
Hon‟ble Finance Minister stated in his Budget Speech 2011-12, that in view of the 
healthy growth in indirect taxes in 2010 -11, the option to roll back the Central 
excise duty to levels prevailing in November 2008 was available. However, it was 
decided to maintain the standard rate of Central excise duty at 10 per cent.”  
Comments of the Committee 
10.  The Committee , in their earlier recommendation , had recommended for 
reduction in excise duty on petrochemicals from 10% to 8% with the aim to boost 
production and sustain the momentum of growth in the petrochemicals sector. 
The Committee had  also recommended that the initiative of stimulus package 
should not be a short term measure but it should continue till the per capita use 
of polymers and plastics comes at par with the developed countries of the world. 
The Department of Chemicals and  Petrochemicals, in its Action Taken Replies , 

11 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
had stated that the Fina nce Minister, in his Budget speech 2011 -12, noted that in 
view of the healthy growth in indirect taxes in 2010 -11, the option to roll back the 
excise duty to levels prevailing in November 2008 was available.  However, the 
Department has decided to maintain the rate of central excise duty on 
petrochemicals at 10%. The Committee are unhappy to observe that though the 
facility to roll back the excise duty  was available , it was not  availed by the 
Department. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their ori ginal recommendation to 
reduce the rate of excise duty on petrochemicals  from 10% to 8% and urge the 
Department to actively take up the issue with the Ministry of Finance and intimate 
any action taken in this regard to the Committee.  
C.  Operationalization of PWM Centres 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
11.  Stressing on the urgent need to speed up the process of operationalization of 
Plastic Waste Management Centres (PWMCs) all over the country, the Committee had 
recommended as under:-  
  “The Committee note that a Plastic Waste Management Centre (PWMC), set up 
in Guwahati, has started functioning since August 2009.  This Centre is a unit of 
CIPET-Guwahati, and is the first of its kind in the country.  The Committee 
believe that proper plast ic waste management is the need of the hour in which 
the Department should play a pivotal role.  The Committee appreciate the steps 
taken by the Department to set up other Plastic Waste Management Centre in 
various parts of the country, including Delhi.  T he matter in this connection is 
being taken up by the Department with State Governments whose proposals will 
be further taken up with the Ministry of Urban Affairs for implementation under the 
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM).  The committee 
feel that the process for setting up and operationalization of these centres need to 
be expedited with a missionary zeal.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
any new measures and progress made in this regard. 
  The Committee also note tha t the Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) 
Rules, 2011, were notified by the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) on 
7 February 2011.  Under the new Rules, use of plastic materials and sachets for 
storing and packing gutka, tobacco and pan masala,  has been banned.  Also, no 
food stuff is to be packed in recycled plastics and compostable plastics.  All 
recycled carry bags are required to carry specific BIS standard markings.  The 
Rules also recognize the role of waste pickers and envisage a predomin ant role 
for municipal bodies in waste disposal and management.  The Committee call 
upon the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals to ensure that the new 
Rules are implemented expeditiously and applied uniformly throughout the 
country.” 

12 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
 
12.  The Department in its action taken reply to the above -mentioned 
recommendation has stated as under:-   
 “The problems created by the use of plastics are primarily and principally due to 
shortcomings in the solid waste management system.  Municipal solid wa ste 
management is a state subject and it is the primary responsibility of the State 
Government / Urban Local Bodies to plan, design, implement and maintain solid 
waste management systems in urban areas. The Department has taken up the 
issue with the Minist ry of Urban Development for funding of such projects under 
the flagship programme of Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNURM).   
 Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOEF) had earlier notified Plastic Waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules,  2011 on 4th February, 2011.  The MOEF 
subsequently invited suggestions from the public on 21/4/2011 on the Notification 
dated 4.2.2011.  After considering the suggestions / objections on the said 
notification including those submitted by this Department, Ministry of Environment 
and Forests has further notified the Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) 
(Amendment) Rules on 2nd July, 2011. The new Rules have entrusted the 
responsibility of plastic waste management to the concerned municipal authority 
and manufacturers / brand owners through „Extended Producer‟s Responsibility‟. 
As the said rules have been issued under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, 
the responsibility for implementing these rules rests with the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests.  The Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals is in 
agreement with the rules and shall extend full cooperation to the Ministry of 
Environment & Forest   and the State Government in the implementation of these 
rules.”  
Comments of the Committee 
13.  The Committee, in their earlier recommendation,  had stressed on the need 
to expedite the process of setting up and operationalization of Plastic Waste 
Management Centres (PWMCs) in various parts of the country. In this regard, t he 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated in its Action Taken 
Replies that municipal solid waste management is a state subject and it is the 
primary responsibility of the State Government/urban local bodies to plan, design, 
implement and maintain solid waste management sy stems in urban areas . 
Further, the Committee observed that the Department has taken up the issue of 
plastic waste management with the Ministry of Urban Development for funding of 
such projects under the flagship programme of the Jawaharlal Nehru National 
Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM). However, the Committee are unhappy to note 
that the Department has not provide d a status report on the PWMCs under 
construction or planned  which are  to be set up under its aegis . Therefore, the 
Committee, while reiterating th eir earlier recommendation, desire that the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should give a status report on the 

13 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
PWM Centre in Delhi and other parts of the country to the Committee at the 
earliest.  
D.  Expansion of CIPET Centres 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
14.  Emphasizing the need for further expansion of Central Institute of Plastics 
Engineering and Technology (CIPET) Centres down to the district level  in view of  the 
huge potential for increased production and  use of plastics in the country, the  Committee 
had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee note that the average per capita consumption of plastics in India 
is about 6.5 kg only in one year compared to 100 kg in the developed countries. 
There is, thus, huge potential for increased production  and use of plastics in our 
country.  In this regard, the Committee feel that the role of specialized institutions 
like the Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology (CIPET) need to 
be further strengthened in its endeavour of popularizing pl astics for everyday use, 
quality up-gradation of plastic products, and proper management of wastes. With 
this purpose in mind, the Committee recommend the CIPET Centres should be 
further expanded so as to reach down to the district level, preferably in 
collaboration with district level educational trust societies. The Committee expect 
the Department to take proactive steps in this regard.”  
  
 
15.  The Department in its action taken reply to the above -mentioned recommendation 
has stated as under:-    
 
 “The Department is continuously monitoring the activities of CIPET in order to 
strengthen its role in the field of Academics, Technology and Research so that it 
can popularize the use of plastic products, by continuously upgrading their quality, 
and providing solutions for proper disposal of plastic waste.  Regarding exploring 
the possibility of expanding its centres in each state to district level, a committee 
consisting of representatives from the Department, Planning Commission and 
CIPET will undertake a need assessment study after ensuring the economic 
viability of the projects, and submit its final recommendation to the Department for 
further implementation.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 16.  The Committee , while acknowledging the huge scope for increasi ng and 
popularizing the use of plastics in the coun try, had earlier  recommended that 
CIPET centres be further expanded so as to reach down to the district level in all 
states. In its Action Taken Replies, the Department has expressed agreement with 
the Committee’s recommendation and has  stated that a committee consisting of 
representatives from the Department, Planning Commission and CIPET will be 
undertaking a need assessment study after ensuring the economic viability of the 

14 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
projects, and submit its fina l recommendation to the Department for further 
implementation. In light of this, the Committee while strongly reiterating their 
earlier recommendation for expansion of CIPET Centres down to the district level, 
expect that the said committee would  complete its work and submit its findings 
soon. The Committee also desire to be apprised about any further progress in this 
regard.  
E.  Expediting of PCPIR Projects 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
17.  Stressing on the need to expedite the process  for setting up Petroleum, Chemical 
and Petrochemical Investment Regions (PCPIR) with special emphasis on the pending 
project in Tamil Nadu, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“Regarding the National Policy on Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical 
Investment Region (PCPIR), which the Government approved in April 2007, the 
Committee note that the policy aims to adopt a holistic approach to promote the 
Petroleum, Chemicals and petrochemicals sector in an integrated, environment -
friendly manner on a lar ge scale. According to the Department, the PCPIR is a 
specifically delineated investment region having an area of about 250 sq km. (with 
minimum 40% of the designated area earmarked for processing activities). This 
region will be a combination of productio n project, public utilities, logistics, 
environmental protection, residential areas and administrative services, The 
Committee also note that the investment expected in these regions is to the tune of 
Rs. 4,86,180 crore and the number of employment to be g enerated is 30 lakh. In 
other words, the country has a huge stake in the development and success of 
these dedicated Regions. The Committee note that four PCPIR proposals from the 
State Government of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, West Bengal and Orissa have 
already been approval by the Government of India. Another proposal from Tamil 
Nadu for setting up two PCPIRs at Cuddalore and Nagapattinam is under process. 
The Committee desire that the approval for these two PCPIRs should be obtained 
expeditiously. The Commi ttee also recommend that the Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals should harness optimum benefits from these Regions and 
deliver the same to all the stakeholders and public at large. The Committee would 
like to be informed about the action taken in this regard.”    
 
18.  The Department in its action taken reply to the above -mentioned 
recommendation has stated as under:-    
 “It may please be noted that approval of only one PCPIR , viz. in Tamil Nadu 
(Cuddalore and Nagapattinam Districts) remains pendi ng as on date. As per 
directions of the High Powered Committee (HPC) chaired by Cabinet Secretary, a 
meeting has already been convened with Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
to discuss the outstanding issues relating to provision of road infrastructure  in this 
PCPIR. The matter is expected to be resolved shortly after which the proposal will 
be placed before the CCEA for approval. 
           The Department has been actively involved in the monitoring of actual 
implementation of PCPIRs. Special attention  is being paid to speedy development 

15 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
of infrastructure and promotion of investments in these regions. As on date Rs. 
92600 crore worth of investments have come into the approved PCPIRs.” 
 
  

16 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
Comments of the Committee 
 
19.  The Committee, in their earlier recommendation, had noted that while a total 
of four PCPIRs in four states had  so far been approved, two PCPIRs in Tamil Nadu 
remains under process, and therefore had recommended that the approval of these 
two PCPIRs should be obtained expeditiously. In this regard, the Department, in its 
Action Taken Replies, has  clarified that approval for  only one PCPIR, viz. in Tamil 
Nadu (Cuddalore and Nagapattinam districts) remains pending as on 15.9.2011. In 
this regard, t he Committee had observed from the reply of the Department that as 
per direction of the High Powered Committee (HPC) chaired by Cabinet Secretary, a 
meeting has already been convened w ith the Ministry of Road Transport and  
Highways to discuss the outstanding issues relating to provision of road 
infrastructure in this PCPIR. Further, as the matter is being actively pursued , the 
Department in its reply has  expressed the hope that the matter will be resolved 
shortly. Therefore, w hile appreciating the steps taken by the Department to 
expedite the pending PCPIR and development of infrastructure and promotion of 
investments in these regions, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and desire to be apprised about any further progress with regard to  the 
implementation of PCPIRs.   
 
F.  Need to Maintain Viability of HIL and Finding Alternatives to Endosulfan 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
20. Noting the need to ensure the viability of Hindustan Insecticides Ltd (HIL) and of 
finding effective alternatives to Endosulfan in view of the recent Government order 
banning product ion and use of the same in the c ountry, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee are glad to note that the Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL), a 
public sector undertaking (PSU) under the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals, has been continuously improving its turnover and has posted 
profit for five year s in succession. Among the 36 restructured PSU‟s HIL is one of 
the 11 PSUs which has continuously posted profits. The Company achieved an all -
time record turnover of Rs.243.88 crore during 2009 -10 compared to Rs. 215.35 
crore the previous year. The HIL is today the largest producer of DDT in the world. 
However, the Committee note that the Kerala Government had, on 27 May 2011, 
ordered the closure of HIL units producing Endosulfan in the State, which is now 
banned throughout the State. The Department has con firmed that the Supreme 
Court has placed an immediate ban on the production, use and sale of Endosulfan 
all over India and that the License issued for HIL for production of the same has 
since been withdrawn. The Committee are disturbed to read news reports  

17 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
suggesting that the company had repeatedly violated directions by the Kerala State 
Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) to remove hazardous Chemical wastes from HIL 
units. While the Committee are aware that the stoppage of production of 
Endosulfan will affect the Green Revolution as well as the Company‟s profit 
margins, they are of the firm view that public health considerations cannot be 
compromised in any way. The Committee expect the Company to take urgent 
steps to keep the Company viable while exploring alt ernate venues to relocate 
manpower displaced. The Committee also recommends that safe alternatives to 
Endosulfan be found out in view of its efficacy in plant protection. The Committee 
desire to be kept informed about all remedial steps taken in this regard.” 
  
21,  The Department in its action taken reply to the above -mentioned recommendation 
has stated as under:-     
 
“HIL‟s  unit in Kochi produces DDT Technical and its formulation, Dicofol and 
Mancozeb besides  Endosulfan. The unit also has manufacturing  facilities for 
various other formulations like Chlorpyriphos and Quinalphos etc. which are  
marketed mainly in South India. The unit is in operation since 1957. The report 
regarding violation of Kerala State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) was mainly 
with reference to desludging of a lagoon which is in existence since inception of 
HIL. Though the lagoon was isolated and not part of manufacturing process, the 
closure notice was issued mainly to stop HIL from manufacturing Endosulfan, as it 
had become a cont entious issue in the State. The unit also has an Effluent 
Treatment Plant. HIL got the order on 27.05.2011 to restart all facilities other than 
Endosulfan as by then Hon‟ble Supreme Court had placed a temporary ban on 
manufacture and sale of Endosulfan.  
All Plants barring Endosulfan are fully operational at Udyogamandal and there has 
not been any job loss . All employees are gainfully employed in other operating 
plants at Udyogamandal. HIL has taken up manufacture of an input for Dicofol at 
the Endosulfan  Plant of Udyogamandal unit which was hitherto being 
manufactured at Rasayani. 
With reference to Endosulfan, the matter is sub -judice and the company, alongwith 
other manufacturers, is in close dialogue with Ministry of Agriculture regarding 
alternatives to Endosulfan.  HIL has initiated steps to manufacture six new 
Technicals at Rasayani unit. These Plants, when fully operational, will more than 
nullify the loss due to ban on Endosulfan.”  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
22.  While referring to  the Kerala Government’s Notificatio n dated 27 May 2011 
which ordered that HIL Units producing Endosulfan be closed , the Committee had 
earlier recommended that urgent steps mus t be taken to keep the Company viable 
while exploring alternate venues to relocate displaced manpower. The Committee 
had also stressed the urgent need to find safe alternatives to Endosulfan which is 
now banned all over the country. The Department, in its Action Taken Replies, has  
addressed the Committee’s concerns by stating that there have not been any job 
losses due the above -mentioned reasons, as all employees are gainfully employed 
in other operating plants at Udyogamandal. The Department has also stat ed that 
HIL has taken up manufacture of an input for Dicofol at the Endosulfan Plant at 

18 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
Udyogamandal unit which was hitherto manufactured at Rasayani. As to the 
Committee’s earlier recommendation regarding finding alternatives to Endosulfan , 
the Department has stated that HIL is presently in dialogue with the Ministry of 
Agriculture on the issue. The Committee , therefore,  reiterate that the issue of 
finding a viable and safe alternative to Endosulfan is of utmost importance for the 
country a nd action in this direction must be taken on a priority basis. The 
Committee would also like to apprised about any further development in this 
regard.  
  

19 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 1 
  
The  Committee note that the production of major chemicals had recorded negative 
growth rate of -19.20% in case of organic chemicals, - 12.65% of inorganic chemicals, -
3.53%  in case of pesticides (technicals ) during the period from 2008 -09 to 2009 -10 and 
the Compound Annual Rate of Growth (CARG) of these chemicals was -0.5% from 2005-
06 to 2009 -10. Similarly, the annual growth of production of some selected major 
petrochemicals was not satisfactory during the period from 2008-09 to 2009-10 as it was -
5.32% in case of polymers.  The total annual growth rate of these petrochemicals was 
only 1.15% during the period form 2008 -09 to 2009 -10 and the CARG was only 2.64% 
during the same period. Consequent upon announc ement of stimulus package by the 
Government during December 2008 -January 2009, the growth rate of major chemicals, 
petrochemicals and intermediates are stated to have shown slight improvement. While 
emphasizing the need for continuance of stimulus packages  for some more time, the 
Committee expect the Department to proactively play the designated role of facilitator for 
the development of chemicals and petrochemicals industry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department continued to play the role of facilitator  in the development of 
Petrochemicals Industry. The Department recommended continuance of stimulus 
packages in year 2010-11 as well. While this was not agreed to by the Ministry of Finance 
in view of improvement in economic performance, it may be seen that  due to the 
proactive role played by the Department in addressing the issues faced by the industry, 
the growth of major Petrochemicals during the financial year 2010 -11 was at 8.7% as 
compared to 2009-10 whereas growth during 2009 -10 as compared to 2008 -09 was only 
1.15%. 
 
(Units in Tonnes) 
Group 2008-09 
 
2009-10 
 
Growth over 
previous 
year 
2010-11 Growth over 
previous 
year 
Synthetic 
Fibre 
23,43,384 26,00,697 11 % 27,90,958 7.3 % 
Polymer 50,60,228 47,90,657 (-) 5.3 % 52,92,127 10.5 % 
Synthetic 
Rubber 
96,093 1,05,730 10 % 94,633 (-) 10.5 % 
Detergent 
Intermediate 
5,51,694 6,18,044 12 % 6,38,195 3.2 % 
Performance 
Plastic 
1,41,323 1,71,504 21.4 % 1,91,482 11.6 % 
Total 81,92,722 82,86,632 1.15 % 90,07,395 8.7 % 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (12)/2011-Fin. Dated 15.09.2011] 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
Recommendation Sl. No. 2 
 
The Committee note that the Department‟s role is limited as a facilitator only for the 
development of chemical industry and accordingly, the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has formulated the National Policy on Chemicals with the aim of 
addressing various issues as well as for increasing investment in the petrochemicals 
sector.  The Department has also come out with a cluster infrastructure scheme of plastic 
parks besides setting up an award scheme to incentivize meritorious innovations in the 
field of plastics/el astomers/synthetic fibres/surfactants/intermediates.  The strengthening 
and expansion of the Central Institute of Plastic Engineering & Technology (CIPET) is 
also stated to have been carried out. The Department aims to create world class 
infrastructure for  the Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions 
(PCPIRs) which would enable investment in the petrochemicals sector.  Further, a Task 
Force has been set up by the Department to examine various issues relating to the 
chemicals industry, the report of which is yet to be finalized.  The Committee expect the 
Department to vigorously implement these measures and would like the report of the 
Task Force be finalized at the earliest so as to enable the Department to take necessary 
steps for early st abilization of the chemicals industry.  As regards the petrochemicals 
sector, the Department needs to ensure proper implementation of various initiatives like 
the National Policy on Petrochemicals, Petroleum Chemicals and Petrochemical 
investment Regions (PCPIR), etc., undertaken by the Department. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In pursuance of the National Policy on Petrochemicals, the Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals is implementing 3 schemes in the 11th Five Year Plan viz. 
(i) Setting up of dedicated Plastic Parks - to promote a cluster approach in the areas of 
development of plastic applications and plastic recycling; (ii) Schemes of National Awards 
for Technology Innovations in Petrochemicals and downstream Plastic Processing 
Industry – to incentiviz e meritorious innovations and inventions in the field of 
Petrochemicals; and (iii) Setting up of Centres of Excellence (CoE) in the field of 
Petrochemicals -  to set up internationally recognized centres for the analysis and 
dissemination of existing globa l knowledge in the chosen fields, provide authoritative, 
strategic and timely information to organizations and companies for use in the 
development and implementation of their projects/programmes while engaging in future 
path breaking R & D efforts.  All t he above three schemes have been formulated in the 
year 2010 -11. National Chemical Laboratory, Pune and Central Institute of Plastic 
Engineering and Technology (CIPET), Chennai have been selected for setting up the 
Centres of Excellence (CoE) the National Awards for the year 2010 -11 have been 
finalized. The process for appointment of Programme Manager for implementation of the 
plastic parks scheme is under way.  The funds allocated for CoE and National Award 
have been utilized whereas funds for plastic park s scheme shall be released after the  
Programme Manager is appointed. Hence, the formulation and implementation of various 
schemes under the aegis of National Policy on Petrochemical has been taken up 
vigoursly by the Department.   
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (12)/2011-Fin. Dated 15.09.2011] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

21 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
Recommendation Sl. No. 4 
 
The Committee observe  that for various schemes being implemented by the 
Department, the Budget Estimates (BE) were significantly lower or higher than that of 
Revised Estimates (RE) during each of the previous four years of the 11 th Plan. This is 
evident from the fact that it w as Rs 209 crore under BE and Rs 170 crore under RE 
during 2007-08, Rs 295 crore under BE and Rs 250 crore under RE during 2008 -09,   Rs 
239.75 under BE and Rs 405.82 crore under RE during 2009 -10, Rs 400 crore under BE 
and Rs. 903 crore under RE during 2010-11. 
 
 It may also be observed that during the first two years of the Plan, the RE was less 
than BE whereas the RE was considerably higher than BE during the 3 rd and 4th years of 
the Plan, i.e., 2009-10 and 2010-11, resulting in huge fluctuations  in allocations from year 
to year, which in turn adversely affected the completion schedules of schemes. The 
Committee feel that there is an urgent need for proper planning and drawing up of 
realistic estimates and timely and prudent use of approved outlays. The D epartment of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals should also endeavor to impress upon the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance to allocate necessary funds for the various 
schemes and programmes that are asked for.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It is submitted that the variation in BE and RE in first two years of the Plan was 
mainly in the scheme “New NIPER like institute” (now being operated by the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals) on account of certain administrative reasons like difficulty in acquiring 
suitable land in different selected cities and delay in finalization of concrete proposals. On 
the other hand, the higher RE in the 3 rd and 4 th year come about due to the fact that 
though higher outlays were solicited for BE, the same could not be accommo dated in BE, 
though it was all along implicitly assured that requisite funds would be made available as 
per the pace of expenditure incurred on the Project. Indeed, requisite funds for the project 
were made available at RE stage, resulting in significantly  higher RE allocations vis -à-vis 
BE (in these two years). The Department has always endeavoured to have a realistic 
assessment of fund requirements and to use the funds allocated in a prudent as well as 
timely manner.  The Department shall continue to do so. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (12)/2011-Fin. Dated 15.09.2011] 
  
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 5 
 
The Committee note that a Plastic Waste Management Centre (PWMC), set up in 
Guwahati, has started functi oning since August 2009.  This Centre is a unit of CIPET -
Guwahati, and is the first of its kind in the country.  The Committee believe that proper 
plastic waste management is the need of the hour in which the Department should play a 
pivotal role.  The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the Department to set up other 
Plastic Waste Management Centre in various parts of the country, including Delhi.  The 
matter in this connection is being taken up by the Department with State Governments 
whose proposals will be further taken up with the Ministry of Urban Affairs for 
implementation under the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM).  
The committee feel that the process for setting up and operationalization of these centres 
need to be expedited with a missionary zeal.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
any new measures and progress made in this regard. 
 

22 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
  The Committee also note that the Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) 
Rules, 2011, were notified by the Ministry of Environment  and Forests (MoEF) on 7 
February 2011.  Under the new Rules, use of plastic materials and sachets for storing and 
packing gutka, tobacco and pan masala, has been banned.  Also, no food stuff is to be 
packed in recycled plastics and compostable plastics.  All recycled carry bags are 
required to carry specific BIS standard markings.  The Rules also recognize the role of 
waste pickers and envisage a predominant role for municipal bodies in waste disposal 
and management.  The Committee call upon the Department  of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals to ensure that the new Rules are implemented expeditiously and applied 
uniformly throughout the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The problems created by the use of plastics are primarily and principally due to 
shortcomings in the solid waste management system.  Municipal solid waste 
management is a state subject and it is the primary responsibility of the State 
Government / Urban Lo cal Bodies to plan, design, implement and maintain solid waste 
management systems in urban areas. The Department has taken up the issue with the 
Ministry of Urban Development for funding of such projects under the flagship programme 
of Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM).   
 
 Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOEF) had earlier notified Plastic Waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules, 2011 on 4th February, 2011.  The MOEF 
subsequently invited suggestions from the public on 21/4/2011 on the Notification dated 
4.2.2011.  After considering the suggestions / objections on the said notification including 
those submitted by this Department, Ministry of Environment and Forests has further 
notified the Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) (Am endment) Rules on 2nd July, 
2011. The new Rules have entrusted the responsibility of plastic waste management to 
the concerned municipal authority and manufacturers / brand owners through „Extended 
Producer‟s Responsibility‟. As the said rules have been is sued under the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986, the responsibility for implementing these rules rests with the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests.  The Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals is 
in agreement with the rules and shall extend full cooper ation to the Ministry of 
Environment & Forest   and the State Government in the implementation of these rules. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (12)/2011-Fin. Dated 15.09.2011] 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 7 
 
 The Committee observe  that instances of non -utilization and under -utilization of 
funds are quite common at the Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) which 
they have been pointing out from time to time.  This is evident from the fact that there was 
a reduction in the funds allocated to IPFT under Plan Head during 2010 -11 from Rs.4.25 
crore to Rs.0.59 crore.  Further, for the financial year 2011 -12, only a sum of Rs. 1 crore 
has been allocated.  The Department had cited poor utilization of allocated funds in the 
previous two years as the reason for this drastic reduction in fund allocation.  The 
inadequate utilization of allocated funds was further blamed on certain shortcomings in 
procedure for the procurement of sophisticated technical equipments for the developme nt 

23 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
of ecological and environmental -friendly technology.  The Committee are disappointed to 
note that the Department had, instead of trying to fix responsibility for such lapses and 
finding ways to improve the Institute‟s dismal performance, resorted to sim ply cutting fund 
allocations.  The Committee also note that the Department has since instituted a 
Justification and Specification Committee to address problems in the procurement 
process.  In the light of these, the Committee expect better performance and results from 
this important Institute and wish to be apprised of the status and progress of the 
Justification and Specification Committee thus set up. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals shares the concern of the 
Committee regarding less than satisfactory utilization of funds allocated to IPFT, 
especially during the years 2009 -10 and 2010 -11.  The plan allocation of IPFT for the 
year 2011 -12 was reduced to Rs. 1crore to improve technical & financial discipline in 
utilization of plan funds and to facilitate & initiate a system of sound financial management 
with regard to implementation of plan schemes in the future.  IPFT has since then been 
reviewing its activities and if necessary, will seek additional funds at RE stage.  Similarly, 
the Justification and Specification Committees was also constituted not only to address 
problems in the procurement process, but also to streamline and ensure effective 
utilization of allocated funds for capital support.  As a result of these co mmittees, 
utilization of Rs.3.05 crore out of sanctioned budget of Rs.4.00 crore for capital support in 
the year 2009 -10 has been achieved during the year 2010 -11.  Furthermore, IPFT has 
been approved as a Designated Laboratory by the Organization of Prohi bition of 
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), Hague, Netherlands, in July, 2011. The Department is 
committed to help the Institute become self -sufficient by strengthening its core activities 
and building close synergy with industry. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (12)/2011-Fin. Dated 15.09.2011] 
 
  
Recommendation Sl. No. 8 
 
 The Committee note  that the Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP) was approved 
by the Government on 18 April 2006 as a part of projects undertaken for rapid economic 
growth of the State of Assam.  AGCP is scheduled for commissioning in April 2012 and a 
joint venture company, Bra hmaputra Cracker & Polymer Limited (BCPL) has been 
incorporated for execution of this project.  A capital subsidy of Rs 2,138 crore on fixed 
cost basis (phased during construction period of 5 years at constant prices) has to be 
provided by the Department for this project.  The Committee note that as against planned 
capital subsidy of Rs 662.78 crore for the first three years, the amount actually provided 
and released for AGCP was Rs 453.74 crore. For the year 2010 -11, as against the 
subsidy of Rs 900 crore asked for by the Department, only Rs 212.74 crore have been 
provided. However, at a supplementary stage, additional allocations of Rs 579 crore was 
sought and was provided, resulting in the revision and final allocation of Rs 791.74 crore. 
As for the annua l plan for 2011 -12, the Department sought an allocation of Rs 892.52 
crore as capital subsidy, but the Planning Commission sanctioned only Rs 675.71 crore.  
The overall physical progress at the project, as on 15 February 2011 was 32.8%. 
Compared to last year‟s figure of 11.8%, this is an improvement, but not yet enough. The 
Committee regret to observe that as against the original target of commissioning by April 
2012, the BCPL has submitted a revised schedule for mechanical completion  and 
commissioning by July 2013 and December, 2013 respectively. The Committee are 
inclined to conclude that delay in execution of this important project will not only result in 
cost escalation but also deprive the State of Assam of the envisaged benefits which 

24 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
would have accru ed to them earlier. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department, as the implementing agency for AGCP, should take expeditious concrete 
steps for removal of hurdles so as to ensure the execution of the project at the earliest. 
The Committee also  wish to point out that despite the provision of a mechanism of non -
lapsable pool fund for North Eastern States in the budgetary allocations, if such important 
projects suffer on account of constraint of funds, the onus of delay is only on the 
Department. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals shares the concern of the 
Committee regarding time and cost overrun in the implementation of Assam Gas Cracker  
Project.  The project implementation was affected due to various reasons including delays 
in selection of process technology licensor, frequent bandhs, labour unrest, inadequate 
availability of skilled manpower at the site, prolonged monsoon, non availabi lity of 
accessible borrow earth sources in adequate numbers, security issues, etc.  After initial 
delays, efforts are being made by all the agencies involved to implement this project as 
per revised implementation plan.  This is being ensured through i) ad vance planning and 
organization of work; ii) mobilization of additional men and machinery; iii) Detailed regular 
meetings with contractor for deployment of requisite resources and removal of difficulties; 
and iv) expediting the placement and delivery of cr itical orders for project execution.  The 
project activities are now being carried out with a fast pace and the cumulative 
expenditure, as on 31.07.2011, has reached a level of Rs.2533 crore. BCPL has prepared 
a Business Plan of expenditure of Rs.3215 cror e during the current financial year.  The 
physical progress of the project in July, 2011 is 45.7% as against the original scheduled 
target of 90.1% and 45% as per the revised mechanical completion target by July, 2013. 
 
The issue of adequate fund allocatio n for the project is continuously taken up by 
this Department with Planning Commission as per projections for release of capital 
subsidy.  The crucial capital subsidy for the project has been provided as per Business 
Plan formulated by BCPL and requirement  of the project.  In view of significant strides in 
the  implementation plan of the project, an amount of Rs.492 crore has already been 
released by the Department of the total BE of Rs.675.71 crore and the remaining BE is 
also likely to be released in the first half of the current financial year.  The additional fund 
requirement shall be taken up with the Ministry of Finance at the revised estimate stage. 
The project has never suffered on account of fund constraints. This flagship project of 
North East Regi on is on its way to fulfilling the aspirations & commitments and is 
expected to spur inclusive economic growth in the region as also to create a strong 
stimulus for generation of employment. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (12)/2011-Fin. Dated 15.09.2011] 
  
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 10 
 
The Committee note that there are problems afflicting the two units of the 
Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd (HOCL), a public sector undertaking under the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. The two units are located at Rasayani In 
Maharashtra and Ko chi in Kerala. During their recent Study Visit to Mumbai in January 
2011, the Committee had expressed concern about the low sales volume in relation to 
production at the two units. The Committee had also observed that there was no sound 
marketing policy being followed at HOCL and that the post of Director at HOCL, Mumbai 
was lying vacant for a long time. The Committee were apprised that the Chemicals 
industry had borne the brunt of the global meltdown and this partly accounted for revenue 

25 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
losses during 2008 -09. The Department had assured the Committee that remedial 
measures were being taken in all these spheres. The Committee would like to be 
informed about the concrete steps taken on these issues within three months of 
presentation of this report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
HOCL Kochi Unit has been consistently producing at its full capacity except during 
annual shut down once in two years for a period of 2 months. Rasayani unit is  operated 
below capacity and the products are unviable due to old plants/ tech nology and small 
capacity of plants. The post of Director (Marketing) has been filled up on 30.04.2011. 
HOCL has now prepared its marketing policy and has taken adequate steps to improve 
the marketing of its products. As the overall market situation has im proved and also due 
to adequate measures taken,  the company has posted a profit of Rs. 25.71 crore with a 
turnover of Rs.738 crore in the year 2010 -11  as against previous year loss of Rs. 83.08 
crore with a turnover of Rs. 520.71 crore. The Department ha s taken up the matter with 
Ministry of Commerce for the imposition/ continuation of Anti Dumping duties on Phenol, 
Aceton, and Aniline which are the main products   of the company.   
  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (12)/2011-Fin. Dated 15.09.2011] 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 11 
 
The Committee are glad to note that the Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL), a 
public sector undertaking (PSU) under the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, 
has been continuously improving its turnover and has posted profit for five years in 
succession. Among the 36 restructured PSU‟s HIL is one of the 11 PSUs which has 
continuously posted profits. The Company achieved an all -time record turnover of 
Rs.243.88 crore during 2009-10 compared to Rs. 215.35 crore the previous year. The HIL 
is today the largest producer of DDT in the world. 
However, the Committee note that the Kerala Government had, on 27 May 2011, ordered 
the closure of HIL units producing Endosulfan in  the State, which is now banned 
throughout the State. The Department has confirmed that the Supreme Court has placed 
an immediate ban on the production, use and sale of Endosulfan all over India and that 
the License issued for HIL for production of the sam e has since been withdrawn. The 
Committee are disturbed to read news reports suggesting that the company had 
repeatedly violated directions by the Kerala State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) to 
remove hazardous Chemical wastes from HIL units. While the Co mmittee are aware that 
the stoppage of production of Endosulfan will affect the Green Revolution as well as the 
Company‟s profit margins, they are of the firm view that public health considerations 
cannot be compromised in any way. The Committee expect the  Company to take urgent 
steps to keep the Company viable while exploring alternate venues to relocate manpower 
displaced. The Committee also recommends that safe alternatives to Endosulfan be 
found out in view of its efficacy in plant protection. The Commi ttee desire to be kept 
informed about all remedial steps taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
HIL‟s  unit in Kochi produces DDT Technical and its formulation, Dicofol and 
Mancozeb besides  Endosulfan. The unit also has manufacturing facilities f or various 
other formulations like Chlorpyriphos and Quinalphos etc. which are  marketed mainly in 
South India. The unit is in operation since 1957. The report regarding violation of Kerala 

26 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) was mainly with reference to  desludging of a 
lagoon which is in existence since inception of HIL. Though the lagoon was isolated and 
not part of manufacturing process, the closure notice was issued mainly to stop HIL from 
manufacturing Endosulfan, as it had become a contentious issue  in the State. The unit 
also has an Effluent Treatment Plant. HIL got the order on 27.05.2011 to restart all 
facilities other than Endosulfan as by then Hon‟ble Supreme Court had placed a 
temporary ban on manufacture and sale of Endosulfan.  
 
All Plants barring Endosulfan are fully operational at Udyogamandal and there has 
not been any job loss . All employees are gainfully employed in other operating plants at 
Udyogamandal. HIL has taken up manufacture of an input for Dicofol at the Endosulfan 
Plant of Udyogamandal unit which was hitherto being manufactured at Rasayani. 
 
With reference to Endosulfan, the matter is sub -judice and the company, alongwith 
other manufacturers, is in close dialogue with Ministry of Agriculture regarding 
alternatives to Endosulfan .  HIL has initiated steps to manufacture six new Technicals at 
Rasayani unit. These Plants, when fully operational, will more than nullify the loss due to 
ban on Endosulfan.   
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (12)/2011-Fin. Dated 15.09.2011] 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT WANT 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
-- NIL-- 
  

28 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
  
Recommendation Sl. No. 3 
 
The Committee note that the  Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has 
constituted an inter-ministerial Expert Committee for promotion of plastics in thrust areas,  
namely, plastic in agriculture (plasticulture),  water management, construction and 
packaging.  The Department als o interacts with the industry associations at the national 
level and pro -actively takes up issues related to petrochemical industry for sustainable 
development of the sector.  The Committee have also been given to understand that 
stimulus packages announce d in December 2008 and January 2009 reduced the excise 
duty to 8% from the existing rate of 14% which was, however, increased subsequently in 
the Budget 2010 -11 to 10%.  As a result of reduction in excise duties, polymers and 
performance plastics had regis tered significant growth rates of 12.26% and 8.38% 
respectively.  Together, the major petrochemicals registered a growth rate of 9.92% 
during the period from April 2010 to January 2011.  These increases in growth rate can 
be attributed, at least in part, t o the reduction in excise duties and other measures taken 
as part of the stimulus package.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should impress upon the Ministry of 
Finance to reduce the excise duty to 8% from the present rate of 10% in order to further 
boost production and sustain the present momentum of growth in the sector.  The 
Committee feel that the initiative of stimulus package should not be a short term measure 
but the same should continue till the per capita use of polymers and plastics comes at par 
with the developed countries of the world. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  The  Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals recommended continuance of 
stimulus packages for the year 2010 -11. However, this was not agreed to by Ministry of 
Finance in view of improvement in economic performance. Further, Hon‟ble Finance 
Minister stated in his Budget Speech 2011 -12, that i n view of the healthy growth in 
indirect taxes in 2010 -11, the option to roll back the Central  excise duty to levels 
prevailing in November 2008 was available. However, it was decided to maintain the 
standard rate of Central excise duty at 10 per cent. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (12)/2011-Fin. Dated 15.09.2011] 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE 
  
Recommendation Sl. No. 6 
 
The Committee note that the average per capita consumption of plastics in India is 
about 6.5 kg only in one year compared to 100 kg in the developed countries. There is, 
thus, huge potential for increased production and use of plastics in our countr y.  In this 
regard, the Committee feel that the role of specialized institutions like the Central Institute 
of Plastics Engineering and Technology (CIPET) need to be further strengthened in its 
endeavour of popularizing plastics for everyday use, quality u p-gradation of plastic 
products, and proper management of wastes. With this purpose in mind, the Committee 
recommend the CIPET Centres should be further expanded so as to reach down to the 
district level, preferably in collaboration with district level edu cational trust societies. The 
Committee expect the Department to take proactive steps in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Department is continuously monitoring the activities of CIPET in order to 
strengthen its role in the field of Academics, T echnology and Research so that it can 
popularize the use of plastic products, by continuously upgrading their quality, and 
providing solutions for proper disposal of plastic waste.  Regarding exploring the 
possibility of expanding its centres in each state to district level, a committee consisting of 
representatives from the Department, Planning Commission and CIPET will undertake a 
need assessment study after ensuring the economic viability of the projects, and submit 
its final recommendation to the Department for further implementation.   
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (12)/2011-Fin. Dated 15.09.2011] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation Sl. No. 9 
 
            Regarding the National Policy on Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical 
Investment Region (PCPIR), which the Government approved in April 2007, the 
Committee note that the policy aims to adopt a holistic approach to promote the 
Petroleum, Chemicals and petrochemicals sector in an integrated, environment -friendly 
manner on a large scale. According to the Department, the PCPIR is a specifically 
delineated investment region having an area of about 250 sq km. (with minimum 40% of 
the designate d area earmarked for processing activities). This region will be a 
combination of production project, public utilities, logistics, environmental protection, 
residential areas and administrative services, The Committee also note that the 
investment expected in these regions is to the tune of Rs. 4,86,180 crore and the number 
of employment to be generated is 30 lakh. In other words, the country has a huge stake in 
the development and success of these dedicated Regions. The Committee note that four 
PCPIR proposals from the State Government of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, West Bengal 
and Orissa have already been approval by the Government of India. Another proposal 
from Tamil Nadu for setting up two PCPIRs at Cuddalore and Nagapattinam is under 
process. The Committe e desire that the approval for these two PCPIRs should be 

30 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
obtained expeditiously. The Committee also recommend that the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals should harness optimum benefits from these Regions and 
deliver the same to all the stakeholde rs and public at large. The Committee would like to 
be informed about the action taken in this regard.     
 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
            It may please be noted that approval of only one PCPIR , viz. in Tamil Nadu 
(Cuddalore and Nagapattinam Districts) remains pending as on date. As per directions of 
the High Powered Committee (HPC) chaired by Cabinet Secretary, a meeting has already 
been convened with Ministry of Road Transport & Highways to discuss the outstanding 
issues relating to provision of road infrastructure in this PCPIR. The matter is expected to 
be resolved shortly after which the proposal will be placed before the CCEA for approval. 
 
            The Department has been actively involved in the monitoring of actual 
implementation o f PCPIRs. Special attention is being paid to speedy development of 
infrastructure and promotion of investments in these regions. As on date Rs. 92600 crore 
worth of investments have come into the approved PCPIRs.   
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (12)/2011-Fin. Dated 15.09.2011] 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
      New Delhi;                 GOPINATH MUNDE, 
13th March, 2012              Chairman, 
23 Phalguna, 1933 (SAKA)         Standing Committee on 
                 Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

31 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
 
APPENDIX – I 
MINUTES 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2011-12) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 05 March, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 
hrs. in Room No.53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
 
Shri Raghunandan Sharma  - In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prabhatsinh  Pratapsinh Chauhan 
3. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
4. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
5. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
6. Shri O.S. Manian 
7. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup 
8. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
9. Shri Tufani Saroj 
10. Shri Raju Shetti 
11. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
13. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
14. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani 
15. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
16. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
i) Shri C. S. Joon   - Joint Secretary 
ii) Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
 
  

32 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
2. As the Chairman could not attend the sitting due to pre -occupation, the members 
chose Shri Raghunandan Sharma, MP and a member of the Committee, to act as the 
Chairman.  The Acting Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the following 
draft Action Taken Reports : 
(i), (ii) & (iii)   ***  ***    ***            ***  
  
 (iv) Draft on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2011-12) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
 
4. After some discussi on, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee with 
minor amendments as indicated in the Annexure-I, II, III and IV respectively.   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________ 
*** Matters not related to this Report. 
 
  

33 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
 
Annexure-IV 
[Please see para 4 of the minutes] 
Recom. 
No. 
Page 
No. 
Para 
No. Line Amendments/ modifications 
 
6 
 
12 
 
16 
 
4 from the 
bottom 
 
Add "while strongly reiterating their earlier 
recommendation for expansion of CIPET 
Centres down to the district level" After 
"the Committee" 
 
 
  

34 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\24 Report\ATR Report On 24th.Docx 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2010 -11) ON 
„DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011 -2012)‟ OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS).  
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 11 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted  
by the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10, and 11)   
8 
Percentage of Total 72.72% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation Sl. No. Nil)  
 
0 
Percentage of Total 0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Sl. No. 3)  
1 
Percentage of Total 9.1%  
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are of interim nature:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Sl. Nos. 6 and 9) 
 
2 
Percentage of Total 18.18% 
 