    
30 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Twenty Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
 
 REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 


 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
2 
CC&F No. -30 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Twenty Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2012 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  17.12.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 


 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
3 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13) ………………………………...  
Introduction. …………………………………………………..…………………………  
Chapter I Report ……………….…………………………………………………..  
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which th e Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature 
 
ANNEXURE 
A Availability of Fertilizers during Kharif 12 (upto July 2012) along 
with stock pre-position. 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Extracts Minutes of Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2012-13) held on 10 December 2012 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fifth Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizer s 
(2010-11) on ‘Demands for Grants (2012 -2013)’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2012-13) 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri S. Alagiri  
3. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
4. Shri P.P. Chauhan  
5. Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
6. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
7. Shri Radadiya Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai 
8. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
9. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
10. Shri Paswan Kamlesh  
11. Shri  Amarnath Pradhan 
12. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
13. Shri Tufani Saroj 
14. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
15. Shri Raju Shetti 
16. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
17. Shri  D. Venugopal 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
24. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
26. Dr. Vijay Mallya 
27. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
28. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
29. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
30.  Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Smt Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Shri P. Balaram Naik appointed as a minister of state 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
5 
  
                                                                
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2012 -13) 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Thirtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations / recommendations contained in the Twenty -Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2011 -12) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2012 -13)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers).  
 
2. The Twenty -Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 May, 2012.  The Action 
Taken replies of Government to all observations / recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 28 August, 2012. The Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2012 -13) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 10 
December, 2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations / 
recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observat ions / recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        GOPINATH MUNDE, 
17  DECEMBER, 2012                        Chairman, 
26 Agrahayna, 1934 (SAKA)        Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
6 
 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty Fifth  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of t he Committee on Demands for 
Grants (20 12-13) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 02 May , 2012.  The Report contained 11 
Observations / Recommendations. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & F ertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were requested 
to furnish replies to the Observations  / Recommendations contained in the Twenty Fifth 
Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e. by  
2nd August, 2012.  The Action Tak en Replies of the Government in respect of all the  11 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from  the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers , Department of Fertilizers vide their O.M. 
No.5(1)/2011-Fin-II dated 28th August, 2012.   
 
The categorization of the Action Taken Replies of the Government is as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 Sl.Nos. 1, 2, 3,4,5,6,8, 9 and 11 
(Total =09) 
Chapter-II  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies 
 Sl.No. NIL. 
(Total =NIL) 
Chapter-III  
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply  of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration  
 Sl.No. NIL 
(Total =NIL) 
Chapter-IV  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are of interim nature 
 Sl.Nos.  7 and 10 
(Total = 02) 
Chapter-V  
 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
7 
3. The Committee desire that the Action T aken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and the final reply in 
respect of the Observation/Recommendation for which only interim reply has been 
furnished by the Ministry should be furnished expeditiously.   
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government o n some of 
their Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 3 
 
Stressing the need to keep non -plan expenditure under control, the Committee had recommended 
as under:- 
 "The Committee observe from the figures provided by the Department that the non -plan expenditure 
has  increased considerably from the years 2009-10 to 2011-12.  The allocation under the figures for 
the financial years 2009 -10, 2010 -11 and 2011 -112 are Rs.56,600.50, Rs.57860.00 and 
Rs.71592.00 crore (RE) respectively.  The department was unable to provide any satisfactory 
response to a specific query as to how to keep the Non -Plan expenditure under control. While the 
Committee agree that farmers need to be protected from price volatility in the international market 
and other negative factors, the need to rein in the ever increasing expenditure under the Non -Plan 
allocation cannot be over -emphasized.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department 
should take steps on a priority basis to address this issue and intimate the measures taken in this 
regard by them.  The Committee, further, desire that Department of Fertilizers should also keep strict 
watch and control over factors impacting budgetary allocations and expenditure thereon." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In reply of the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under :-  
 
"In order to contain the expenditure un der the non-plan allocation i.e. subsidy bills, the Government 
is implementing NBS policy w.e.f. 1.4.2010. Under the policy, a fixed subsidy on each nutrient of P & 
K fertilizers is announced each year. Normally, the subsidy rate remains fixed for the whol e financial 
year.  Hence, expenditure under non -plan for P&K fertilizers will not exceed the budgeted figures if 
the consumption remains at the expected level. Department of Fertilizers has announced NBS rates 
for the year 2012 -13 in such a manner that tot al subsidy outgo for the P & K Fertilizers  for the 
financial year 2012 -13 would be reduced by more than 20% over the previous year.  However, the 
total subsidy outgo for P & K fertilizers for 2012 -13 will depend on the overall consumption of 
fertilizers in the year 2012-13. 
 
Growing non -plan expenditure on account of subsidy for indigenous urea is mostly on account of 
escalation in input cost as there was no proportionate increase in MRP of urea.  Indigenous Urea 
Subsidy is basically the difference between  the sale price and actual cost of production of urea.  
Fixed cost and variable cost being the two main components of cost of production, the former has 
been frozen at 2002-03 level, and therefore, it has no impact on increase in subsidy. The increase in 
variable cost, (almost 97% of which is constituted by energy cost), is the major cause of increase in 
non-plan expenditure in the form of subsidy for indigenous urea.  The major sources of energy for 
urea units are Natural Gas, Naphtha, FO, HSD and LSHS etc ., the pricing of which is beyond the 
control of DOF. The urea units are at the receiving end.  They are obliged to pay the prices charged 
by the suppliers of such energy resources, namely, ONGC, GAIL, IOCL, BPCL, OIL, RIL etc. and 
prefer claim of escalati on of cost before the DOF.  The DOF is under obligation to reimburse such 
increase in cost of energy / production to the urea manufacturing units. 
The suppliers of the energy resources are under the administrative control of the MOP & NG.  As 
per the exist ing policy, these companies are pricing these resources with Rupee -Dollar linkage.  
Moreover, the prices are mostly linked with their import parity prices.  Falling rupee value has, 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
8 
therefore, impacted the urea cost adversely.  In order to achieve a contro l in subsidy on indigenous 
urea, the MOP & NG may be requested to reign upon the oil companies and direct them to charge 
the urea units for supply of indigenous energy resources at rupee terms.  Moreover, the prices of 
such indigenous energy resources shou ld be based on their cost with reasonable profit and not at 
import parity prices which include a number of notional cost elements that they do not incur.  If gas is 
quickly made available to high cost Non -gas units using Naphtha, FO, LSHS, etc., the impact  on 
subsidy burden will come down.  Further if the MRP is regularly increased to keep pace with 
increase in input cost, subsidy burden will be reduced substantially."   
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
The Committee in its earlier recommendation observed that t he non -plan expenditure ha d 
increased considerably from the years 2009-10 to 2011-12.  The non-plan allocation under the figures 
for the financial  years 2009 -10, 2010 -11 and 2011 -12  were at Rs. 56,600.50, Rs.57,860.00 and 
Rs.71,592.00 crore (RE) respectiv ely.  The Department of Fertilizers in their earlier reply had stated 
the non-plan expenditure on subsidy of P&K fertilizers for last three years 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-
12 was at Rs.39452.06  crore, Rs.41500.00 crore and Rs.36107.94 crore respectively and for urea the 
non-plan expenditure on subsidy was at Rs.24580.23 crore, Rs.24336.68 crore and Rs.37683.00 crore 
respectively.  Thus the total subsidy on fertilizer during  the last three years is Rs.64032 .29, 
Rs.65836.68 , and Rs.74569.87 crore (including  Rs.778.93 crore on loss of bonds for the year        
2011-12).  Thus there is an increase of Rs.9733.19  crore for the year 2010 -11 in the subsidy after 
launching of NBS Regime.  The Department of Fertilizers in this regard in its action taken reply ha s 
stated that NBS policy has been implemented w.e.f. 1.4.2010 in order to contain the expenditure 
under the non-plan allocation i.e. subsidy bills.  Under this policy, a fixed subsidy on each nutrient of 
P&K fertilizers is announced each year and the same is fixed for whole year.  Hence, the expenditure 
under non -plan for P&K fertilizers should not exceed the budgeted figures if the consumption 
remains at the expected level.  The Department in their Action Taken Reply has also stated that 
increase in the subsi dy of urea is mainly due to increasing energy cost.  The Committee therefore, 
recommend that Department of Fertilizers should take concrete measures so as to contain subsidy 
expenditure on account of energy cost .  While doing so,  the MRP of the fertilizer s should not 
allowed to be increased exponentially,  as it increases the burden on the farmers.  The Committee , 
therefore, recommend that Department of Fertilizers should make all out efforts to strike a balance 
between containing the subsidy expenditure and increase in the prices of fertilizers.  
The Committee were also informed that oil companies are pricing the energy resources with 
the rupee-dollar linkage and if there is depreciation in rupee value then it adversely impact s the urea 
cost.  Therefore, D epartment of Fertilizers in their action taken reply ha s stated that Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas may be requested to charge the urea units for supply of indigenous 
energy sources only in rupee terms and also that prices of indigenous energy sourc e should be 
based on their cost with reasonable pro fit and not at import parity prices which include a number of 
notional costs elements .  The Committee, therefore,  agreeing with the Department recommend that 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
9 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas shou ld be requested to charge the prices of the 
indigenous energy sources in rupee terms rather than dollars, as this will bring down the subsidy 
expenditure.  
The Committee , further, recommends that to restrain the non -plan expenditure, the 
Department of Fert ilizers should on priority basis take up the issue of quick availability and fixed  
allocation of gas and firm pricing of gas/ feed stock with Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and 
the oil companies which would in turn reduce the non -plan expenditure owing to reduce energy cost 
and reduce the subsidy.   The Committee also recommends that Department of Fertilizers should 
pursue the matter vigorously with Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and also take steps  to 
insulate the fertilizer industry and far mers from the external factors such as price v olatility in the 
international market and other  negative factors.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
progress in this regard within three months of presentation of report.    
 
B. SUBSIDY/CONCESSION ON FERTILIZERS 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 4 
 
Emphasizing the need to cut the galloping subsidy bill, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee had noted that the total subsidy disbursed on fertilizers has increased from 
Rs.12908.02 crore in 2001 -02 to Rs.65836.68 crore in 2010 -11 and Rs.53589.87 crore in 2011 -12 
(BE).  The total subsidy released  on urea has increased from Rs.17721.43 crore in the year 2006 -
07 to Rs.36883.00 crore in the year 2011 -12 (RE).  The subsidy on P&K ferti lizers has increased 
from Rs.10,298.12  crore in the year 2006 -07 to Rs.34786.87 crore in the year 2011 -12(RE).  The 
Committee’s examination has revealed that the increase in subsidy bill is due to higher consumption 
of fertilizers and also the rise was du e to the increase in international prices of imported  fertilizers 
and increase in the cost of inputs of indigenous fertilizers during the year 2006 -07 to 2011 -12.  
Considering all these facts, the Committee desire that concerted efforts are needed to cut the 
subsidy bill.  However, as there has to be reduction in the subsidy bill, the reduction in subsidy 
should not fall as a burden on the farmers. The Committee, therefore, desire that the reduction in the 
subsidy of fertilizers should not be compensated b y charging higher prices (MRP) of fertilizers from 
the farmers instead the Department of Fertilizers should chalk out such a plan that there is reduction 
of subsidy bill and at the same time it does not burden the farmers with the increased prices of 
fertilizers.  Further, the Committee feel that in view of increased consumption of fertilizers and 
international prices of fertilizer, inputs and finished fertilizers, there is an urgent need for 
technological innovation, state of the art machinery, reducing th e cost of production, energy 
efficiency measures, experienced and qualified technical manpower and optimum capacity utilization 
so as to reduce our dependence on imports and increase the indigenous production of fertilizers."  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In reply of the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under :-  
 
“Since India is 90% dependent on imports in Phosphatic Sector in the form of finished fertilizers or in 
the form of Raw materials and 100% dependent on import dependent on Potash sector, the 
delivered price shall always be same as international prices which is paid either in the form of 
subsidy or the MRP. 
 
 To overcome the impediments in the growth of fertilizer industry for sustainable growth, the 
Government is encouraging  and facilitating the fertilizer industries to enter into long term contracts 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
10 
with the countries having rich resource of raw materials for production of P&K fertilizers.  The 
Government is also allowing companies to use various blends of rock phosphate to manufacture 
SSP, one of complex fertilizers used as substitute of DAP.  Government is also providing grants 
under plan fund to companies to renovate their old plants to maximize production.  The Government 
is also helping by giving advance 85% ‘On Account’  subsidy on sale, which help the companies to 
overcome their working capital difficulties. 
 
 To attain self sufficiency in fertilizer production, the Government has decided to revive the eight 
closed units of HFCL and FCIL, each unit having capacity of 11. 5 LMT per annum.  In Urea sector 
the raw materials are indigenously available.  We are providing nearly 75% of our requirements.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee in its earlier recommendation had observed that the rise in the subsidy bill is 
due to higher consumption of fertilizers an d also due to increase in international prices of imported 
fertilizers from 2006-07 to 2011-12.  The Committee had desired that concrete efforts should be made 
to cut the subsidy bill but the reduction in subsidy shou ld not fall as a burden on the farmers.  
Further, the Committee had recommended that the self -sufficiency in the fertilizer sector should be 
achieved so that there is reduction in the dependence on imports and also increase in the production 
of fertilizers.  In this regard, t he Department of Fertilizers in their written reply have stated that India 
is 90% dependent on imports in the phosphatic sector in the form of finished fertilizers or in the form 
of raw materials and 100% dependent on import dependent o n potash sector  and therefore , the 
delivered price shall always be the same as international prices which is paid either in the form of 
subsidy or the MRP.  Also, to overcome the impediments in the growth of fertilizer sector for 
sustainable growth the Government is encouraging and facilitating the fertilizer industries to enter 
into long term contracts with the countries having rich resource of raw materials for production of 
P&K fertilizers.  Also, the Government have decided to revive the eight closed un its of HFCL and 
FCIL to attain self-sufficiency in fertilizers.  The Committee while agreeing with the imports needs of 
the fertilizer industry , feel that there is a need to cut the subsidy bill, but at the same time the 
reduction of subsidy Bill should not result in additional price burden on the farmers.  The Committee 
are of the view that the reduction in the subsidy bill should not lead to increase in the MRP of 
fertilizers, as the rise in the MRP results in hardships to the farmers specially for small and marginal 
farmers.  The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterates its earlier recommendation that Department of 
Fertilizers should make an all out efforts for technological innovation  especially the development of 
potash and phosphatic minerals by R&D,  state of the art machinery, reducing in the cost of 
production, energy efficiency measures etc.  so as to reduce our dependence on imports  thus  
reducing the subsidy bill and at the same time increasing the indigenous production of fertilizers  so 
as to reduce the evergrowing prices of fertilizers.  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
11 
 
C. DIRECT SUBSIDY TO FARMERS 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No.5 
 
 Emphasizing the need for early implementation of direct sub sidy to farmers, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee are perturbed to note that despite their repeated recommendations in earlier 
Reports, Government have not achieved the long cherished goal of payment of subsidy directly to 
farmers.  The Committee not that the Government has constituted in February 2011, a Task Force  
under Chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nilekani, Chairman, Unique Identification Authority of India 
(UIDAI) to recommend and implement a solution for direct transfer of subsidies on fertilizers among 
other things to the intended beneficiaries.  The Committee understand that the Task Force has since  
submitted its Report  to the Government.  The Committee also understand that the Task Force has 
recommended three phases approach for implementation of the transfer of direct subsidies.  
Currently the Department of Fertilizers is dedicated to stabilize phase I by tackling on ground 
implementation issues such as gaps in mobile coverage over certain geographical regions, regional 
supply chain issues, user trainings and application upgradation.  Thereafter, Phase II and  III  will be 
implemented.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that all three phases of the direct 
subsidy to farmers should implemented in strict time -bound manner, so that the farmers are able to 
benefit from the direct subsidy at the earliest.   The Committee hope that further follow up action in 
this regard would be taken at the earliest so as to find ways and means for providing subsidy direct 
to farmers.  The precise action taken in this regard may be communicated to the Committee." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In reply of the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under :-  
 
 “While work on Phase I started immediately, a project strategy was being formed for the 
implementation of phase II. During the process, a feasibility a ssessment of Phase II was conducted 
and it was felt that while Phase II has its own value additions in terms of Business process re -
engineering and establishing a system based payment mechanism, there was no significant value 
addition to the stakeholders by enabling subsidy transfer to retailers. The desirability of Phase II was 
then discussed with the fertilizer industry, Fertilizer Association of India (FAI) and the Taskforce and 
it was then collectively decided to not proceed with Phase II implementation  but  instead move 
ahead directly with Phase III implementation after Phase I stabilization.  Phase III was further 
detailed out into three sub-stages as follows :- 
 
 Phase III (Stage A) – Subsidy to manufacturers on the basis of retail sales of fertilizer at 
last retail point. 
 Phase III (Stage B) – Subsidy to retail customer on the basis of  fertilizer sales made to him 
/ her. 
 Phase III (Stage C) – Subsidy to ELIGIBLE retail customer on the basis of details of sales 
made to him / her.  This will include defining the entitlement for various user categories. 
Phase III (Stage A) focus on release of subsidy to the manufactures based on the retailer sales to 
farmers.  The benefits envisaged from this stage are following: 
 
a. Shift from production and dispatch based subsidy model to sales based subsidy distribution. 
b. The post sales subsidy policy is in line with the fiscal prudence 
c. Last point sales based data shall facilitate DoF in better budgeting, forecasting and supply 
plan 
d. Data on last point fertilizer availability and sales will further improve information availability 
and transparency 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
12 
e. Relatively less implementation challenges as the manufacturer will continue to be the 
subsidy recipient. 
 
  In  the meantime, a review meeting has been held under the  Chairmanship of Secy. (F) on 
28.06.2012.  The meeting of Task Force are being held to discuss the following :  
 
(i)  Phase I: 
 a. Progress of mobile application deployment post master trainers training  
 b. No. of end to end transactions post training  
 c. Establishment of multi-lingual call centre 
 d. m-FMS-FMS integration (2 way) 
e. Reports on Transparency Portal : status of customized reports for all categories  of users -
manufacturers, dealers, state governments etc. 
 
(ii) Phase II A : 
 a. Progress of DPR” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that the work on Phase -I of the Direct subsidy to the 
farmers has  already started.  The Committee are further informed that  during the feasibility 
assessment of the implementation of phase-II it was found that phase-II did not add significant value 
to the stakeholders by enabling subsidy to retailers.  Therefore, it was collectively decided to not 
proceed with phase II but instead move ahead directly with phase -III implementation after phase -I 
stabilization.  The Committee in this regard, are hopeful that phase-I stabilization will take place soon 
and initiation of phase -III will be done  at the earliest.   The Department of Fertilizers further, in their 
action taken reply have informed that t he phase-III include s 3 stages which includes (stage -A) – 
subsidy to manufacturers on the basis of retail sales of fertilizer s at last point  (stage-B) – subsidy to 
retail customers on the basis of fertilizer sales made to  them.  (Stage -C) – subsidy to eligi ble retail 
customers on the basis of details of sales made to  them.  This will also include defining the 
entitlement for various categories.  The Committee, therefore, recommends  that all phases of the 
direct subsidy to farmers should be implemented in str ict time-bound manner, so that the farmers 
are able to benefit from the direct subsidy  and the poor farmers/ peasants get the maximum benefit 
of subsidy amount as compared to farmers belonging to APL category. The Committee would like to 
the apprised about the progress in this regard within three months of presentation of report.   
 
D. FEEDSTOCK POLICY / ALLOCATION OF GAS TO FERTILIZERS INDUSTRY 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No.7 
 
Stressing the need for firm availability and pricing of natural gas to fertili zer industry, the Committee 
had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee observe that out of 20 units all based on gas with 4 units  based on gas with 4 units 
based on naptha and 4 on FO/LHS as feeds stock.  The total requirement of natural gas for existing 
20 units is largely met from supplies under APM gas, PMT gas, JV gas, RIL gas and RLNG gas. The 
Committee have been informed that eight unit proposing to set up expansion area units of 11.5 to 
12.7 lakh tone capacities require approx.2.2 -2.4 mmscmd of gas by each unit.  The total amount of 
gas required during next five years will be 48.73 mmscmd.  The Committee would like to be apprised 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
13 
about the status report about the progress in allocation of gas to the fertilizer units.  At the same time 
the Committee expect the Department of Fertilizers to vigorously pursue the matter with the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas so that effective and expeditious steps are taken by them to achieve 
these targets. 
 
The Committee need hardly emphasis that pricing and firm availability of natural gas for existing and 
new units of fertilizer companies are the pre -requisites to increase their indigenous production and 
would, therefore, desire the Department to play a proactive role in association with the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas towards allocation of gas for the existing and new fertilizer plants in the 
country. 
 
The Committee are constrained to point out that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(MOPNG) has been non -committal on supplying gas on long term b asis at an agreed price to the 
proposed new investments in the fertilizer sector as has been repeatedly requested by the 
Department of Fertilizers. Also, no decision on nomination of a single nodal agency has  been taken 
by the Government to supply gas to fertilizer industries and to address various issues such as gas 
contracts, take or pay liabilities, variable gas pricing, gas shortfalls etc. The Committee also regret to 
observe that no specific decision has been taken regarding the issue of nominating GA IL (India) 
Limited as the nodal authority for supply of gas to fertilizer industry.  The Committee are of the view 
that the Department of Fertilizers should continue to pursue the matter vigorously with the Ministry  
of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MOPNG) on  the both aspects i.e. supply of natural gas to fertilizer 
industry  as per fixed schedule and nomination of a nodal agency for supply of gas to the fertilizer 
industry.  The Committee would like to be informed of the precise action taken in this regard wi thin 
three months of the presentation of the Report". 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In reply of the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under :-  
 
“The Department of Fertilizers is regularly taking up the issue of adequate allocation of  Natural Gas 
to fertilizer sector on first priority.  So far as nomination of nodal agency for supply of gas to 
fertilizers sector is concerned, the issue was taken up with the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.  
The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas v ide their OM No. L -15016/2/2010-GP-II, dated 7 th May 
2012, intimated that the Department of Fertilizers may take a view in the matter based on 
commercial consideration.  The Department of Fertilizers has received a communication from CMD, 
GAIL that GAIL is  procuring LNG for the fertilizer as an aggregator.  The GAIL has constituted an 
Empowered Committee consists of Directors including representatives from the Government of India 
i.e. MoP&NG.  On the request of GAIL(India) Limited, Joint Secretary(P&A) from  DoF has been 
nominated as a member of Empowered Committee of GAIL, to decide the issues relating to fertilizer 
sector.“ 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee are unhappy to note that Department of Fertilizers in their action taken reply have 
given a very casual reply to the recommendation of the Committee with regard to the pricing and firm 
allocation of natural gas for the existing and new units of fertilizers. The  Department of Fertilizers in 
their action taken reply have merely stated that it is re gularly taking the issue of adequate allocation 
of natural gas to fertilizer sector with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  The Committee are 
also unhappy to note that no decision has been reached yet with regard to the pricing and firm 
allocation of natural gas as these are very important pre -requisites to increase the indigenous 
production of fertilizers by the fertilizer companies.  The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate its 
recommendation that Department of Fertilizers  should play more p ro-active role in pursuance of the 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
14 
issue with Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas towards firm allocation of gas for existing and new 
fertilizers plants in the country.  The Committee  were satisfied to note that GAIL has been made an 
aggregator for procuring LNG.  Also, GAIL has constituted an Empowered Committee consisting of 
Directors including representatives from Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and Joint Secretary 
(P&A), Department of Fertilizers.  The Committee, therefore, hope that GAIL and th e Empowered 
Committee would be active in giving solutions to the issues relating to fertilizer sector such as gas 
contracts, take or pay liabilities, variable gas pricing , gas shortfalls etc.  at the earliest.   The 
Committee would like to be informed of th e action in this regard within three months of the 
presentation of the Report.   
 
E. ASSESSED REQUIREMENT AND AVAILABILITY OF FERTILIZERS 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No.8 
 
Emphasizing the need for proper assessment and availability of fertilizers in all p arts of the country, 
the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note d that e quitable distribution of fertilizers in all parts of the country is an 
important criteria for facilitating increased productivity in agriculture sector.  At present, the 
Department of Fertilizers is required to ensure availability of urea, as per the requirement assessed 
by the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation.  The Committee note that the movement of 
fertilizes is monitored throughout the country by an on -line web based monitoring system (FMS), still 
the farmers are facing great difficulty in getting the fertilizers on time and also they are facing the 
problem of artificial scarcity shortage in some parts of the country.  The Committee are not satisfied 
with the real working of the system in tracking the demands and availability of fertilizers in different 
parts of the country.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department of 
Fertilizers should devise a foolproof mechanism for proper and equ itable distribution of fertilizers in 
all parts of the country especially in remote, hilly and inaccessible areas.  Also, the Department of 
Fertilizers should make serious efforts to collaborate with the State Governments to tackle the 
problem of artificial shortage and punish hoarders and black marketers."  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In reply of the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under :-  
 
“Department of Fertilizers monitors availability of fertilizers state wise.  Further moni toring / 
distribution of fertilizers district / block wise is the responsibility of the respective states.  The state 
wise availability during Kharif 2012 (April to July) along with pre -positioning of fertilizers is Annex A.  
As can be seen, the availability of all the fertilizers is adequate. 
 
There may be some stress in fertilizer availability in case of few states because of non -availability of 
adequate warehouse capacity in these states.  As a result of this, the States lift fertilizer as and 
when requi red.   Department of Fertilizers (DOF) has notified for P & K fertilizers (except SSP) 
Special Freight Scheme w.e.f. 01.04.2012 for giving special freight for difficult, hilly and in-accessible 
States like Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, al l North Eastern States and 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands in order to have equitable distribution of fertilizers.  As a result of which, 
it is expected that the fertilizer availability in these States would improve. 
 
 Besides, the steps taken by Government of India in making availability of fertilizers : 
 
i) The gap between requirement  and indigenous production is met throught imports. 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
15 
ii) Department of Fertilizers is having constant interaction with ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas, GAIL and other supplie rs of Natural Gas / Liquid Natural Gas (NG / LNG) so 
that gas requirement of the fertilizer industry is met ; and  
iii) Government is always encouraging production of urea in the country to achieve self -
sufficiency.  The Government is considering a new pol icy for encouraging investments in 
Urea Sector. 
 
As per Clause 4 (a) of the Fertilizer (Control) Order -Display of stock position of fertilizers – Every 
dealer, who makes or offers to make a retail sale of any fertilizer, shall prominently display in his 
place of business -  the quantities of opening stock of different fertilizers held by him on each day.  
Any person violating this mandatory  provision of FCO is held liable to be proceeded under the 
provisions of FCO and Essential Commodities Act.  The State  Governments as enforcement 
agencies are adequately empowered to take appropriate action against the offenders who indulge in 
any kind of malpractices viz., hoarding etc. 
 
Under Clause 21 of the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985, it is mandatory to prin t the maximum 
retail price (MRP) on each bag of fertilizer whether under statutory price control of out of the purview 
of the statutory price control.  No person shall charge higher than the price printed on the bag.  Any 
person violating this mandatory pr ovision of FCO is held liable under the provisions of FCO and 
Essential commodities Act.  The State Governments as enforcement agencies are adequately 
empowered to take appropriate action against the offenders who indulge in any kind of 
malpractices.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee in its earlier recommendation had observed that inspite of the fact that the movement 
of fertilizers is provided throughout the country by an on -line web based monitoring system (FMS), 
the farmers are facing great diff iculty in getting fertilizers on time and also they are facing artificial 
scarcity/shortage in some parts of the country.  In this regard, t he Department of Fertilizers in their 
written reply have stated that though the availability of fertilizers during k harif 2012 (April to July) 
was adequate but there  has been some stress in fertilizer availability in case of few states because 
of non-availability of adequate warehouse capacity in these states.  As a result of this, the states lift 
fertilizers as and wh en required.  The Committee therefore, recommended that the Department of 
Fertilizers should take measures in coordination with the State Governments to construct more 
warehouses for storage of fertilizers.  Further, with regard to taking appropriate actio n against the  
offenders who indulge in any kind of malpractices viz; hoarding etc,  the Department of Fertilizers in 
their action taken reply have stated that the State Governments as enforcement agencies are 
adequately empowered to take appropriate action  against the offenders who indulge in any kind of 
malpractices.  However, the Committee are not satisfied with the working of the system of tracking 
demands and availability in different parts of the country.  The Committee are of the view that the 
ground reality with regard to availability of fertilizers i s very different.  The Committee during the ir 
various  study tour s have found that the farmers are facing acute shortage of fertilizers.  The 
Committee, therefore , once again strongly reiterates that Depa rtment of Fertilizers should ensure 
that timely and adequate quantity of fertilizers are made available upto block level so that the farmers 
do not suffer due to scarcity of fertilizers.  For this purpose a foolproof mechanism need to be 
developed in consultation with various farmers' organisations/ cooperatives. 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
16 
F. PERFORMANCE OF PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKING 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No.9 
 
Emphasizing the need for improvement in the performance of PSUs, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
"The Commit tee observe that t here are nine Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), one multi -state 
cooperative society and one joint sector company under the administrative control of the Department 
of Fertilizers.  Out of this, Krishak Bharati Cooperative Limited (KRIBHI CO), the multi -State 
cooperative society and three PSUs,  viz.  National Fertilizers Limited (NFL), Rashtriya Chemicals 
and Fertilizers Limited (RCF) and Projects and Development (India) Limited (PDIL) are profit making 
units.  Three PSUs, viz. Fertilizers and  Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT), Madras Fertilizers 
Limited (MFL) and Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL) are loss making units.  
Besides, two PSUs viz. Fertilizer Corporation Ltd. (HFCL) are lying closed after incurring  lo sses 
continuously over a period of time.  Non -availability of surplus funds, outdated machinery causing 
increased cost of production, poor energy efficiency, non -recruitment of experienced and qualified 
technical manpower are the other factors on account o f which some PSUs  have been facing losses 
year after year.  Non-availability of natural gas has also been the main impediment.  The Committee, 
however, have been informed that some initiatives have been taken by the Government to examine 
the technical and  economic feasibility of revival of the sick PSUs .  The Committee also note that 
there has been negligible growth of the fertilizer sector during the last decade.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Department and all PSUs should make efforts for ta king suitable 
measures  to overcome the constraints and for improving capacity utilization, energy conservation 
methods and also to bring down manpower and administrative expenditure." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In reply of the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under :-  
 
“The following steps have been taken by the Fertilizer PSUs to overcome constraints and for 
improving capacity utilization, energy conservation methods and to bring down manpower and 
administrative expenditure; 
 
National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) 
 
To cut down energy consumption, NFL has undertaken Ammonia Feedstock Changeover Projects at 
its three FO based units at Nangal & Bhatinda in Punjab and Panipat in Haryana.  These projects 
shall result in reduction in energy consumption, substitute high cost FO with low cost natural gas and 
substantial reduction in Govt. subsidy outgo.  The company has undertaken energy saving and urea 
capacity enhancement project at Vijaipur-I & II units in Madhya Pradesh.  These projects s hall result 
in increase in urea capacity by 16% at Vijaipur -I & by 23% at Vijaipur -II unit i.e. urea capacity shall 
increase by 3.37 lakh MT. The company over a period of ten years has brought down its Manpower 
from 6602 as on 31.03.2001 to 4515 as on 31.03.2012.   
 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizes Limited (RCF) 
 
RCF is a leading profit making Mini -Ratna fertilizer and Chemical manufacturing company engaged 
in manufacturing of variety of products such as Ujwala urea and complex fertilizer Suphala.  Since 
inception, RCF has economically and safely operated 2 dozen chemical and fertilizer plants for the 
past four and half decade at Trombay.  
 
RCF always strives for upkeep of the plants through modernization and upgradation of technology.  
Company has recentl y modernized its Ammonia -V, Nitric Acid, Methanol and ANP plants. This has 
facilitated plants to sustain operations and meet technological challenges of improved efficiency, 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
17 
lower energy consumption and maintain/excel environmental norms. It has resulted i n achieving 
highest standards of safety and product quality. 
 
RCF is continuously reviewing the workforce of its various plants and departments in its endeavour 
to rationalize and optimize the same. Company’s productivity in terms of manpower has always 
been exceptionally high. Govt. has allocated gas on priority basis to RCF. 
 
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizers Chemicals Limited (BVFCL) 
 
The company is operating its Namrup -II unit and Namrup –III plants which are based on old and 
vintage technology. These urea units consume high energy as compared to present day plants. Both 
the plants have outlived their life resulting repeated machine breakdowns.  There are also 
constraints in availability of original spares and surplus funds preventing the company to take up  
regular maintenance replacement of critical machine parts.  All the problems led to lower capacity 
utilisation and higher energy consumption. 
 
The company has taken various steps to overcome the constraints and improve capacity. 
 
(i) An in-depth internal study of critical areas of plants causing production limitations has been 
carried out.  Based on the study a short/medium term action plan has been drawn up. Funds 
have been made available in phases from GOI as Plan/Non Plan loan under Renewal & 
Replacement Schemes for carrying renovation jobs. 
 
(ii)  Various renovation/replacement of equipments have already been carried out which have 
led to savings in energy. With this , the performance of the company is expected to improve 
significantly. 
 
(iii)  BVFCL ha s already initiated steps for financial restructuring of the company. M/s Haldor 
Topsoe has been appointed as Process Licensor for comprehensive study of Ammonia 
plants and M/s PDIL for Urea plant and off -sites/utilities, situated at  Namrup -II and namrup 
III plant. Based on the study reports of Namrup -II & Namrup -III Plants carried out by M/S 
HTAS and PDIL and viability proposal prepared by PDIL the BVFCL has submitted a 
comprehensive proposal for Long Term Viability of  the Company for submission to BRPSE . 
The proposal is under consideration in the Department of Fertilizers. The following 
dispensation has been sought from BRPSE for long term viability of the Company in this 
proposal: 
 
 Waiver of total cumulative interests of Rs. 373.43 crore accrued on GOI loans till 
31.03.2011 
 Waiver of loan of Rs. 21.96 crore taken for revamp of Namrup -I, since this plants 
has been permanently stopped. 
 For Namrup -III, the capital expenditure of Rs 79.62 crores incurred beyond 
31.03.2003 for revamp of the project to be reco gnised by Govt. of India for 
calculating the concession rate of urea. 
 Since the company is facing technological/financial constraints, it is proposed to 
convert GOI loans provided to the company as interest free loan. However the 
company on earning cash profit, will service the GOI loans. 
 Relaxation in profitability clause for pay revision and enhancement of age of 
superannuation from 58 to 60 years as a special dispensation to meet the 
immediate crisis of manpower. 
 To setup New Brown Field Ammonia-Urea Plant at Namrup (Namrup-IV). 
 
Madras Fertilizers Limited(MFL) 
 
Even though the Company was declared sick by BIFR in its hearing held on 02.04.2009, the 
company’s operations for the year 22011 -12, 2010-11 & 2009 -10, ended with a profit of Rs.111.99 
cr., Rs.169 .86 Cr., & Rs.6.88 Cr. respectively against continuous losses incurred during 2003 -09.  
The profits were mainly due to implementation of NPS –III amendment restricting the reduction in 
fixed cost to 10% from 1.4.2009 and improved production performance.  T he profit during 2010 -11 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
18 
was higher due to account of benefits amounting to Rs.124.69 Cr under One Time Settlement with 
Financial Institutions. 
 
Improvement in reliability of plant operations, energy efficiency and extension of Plant life could be 
achieved due to implementation of various renewal/replacement schemes out of Plan funds received 
as budgetary support.  The company was able to overcome the constraints and achieve 100% 
capacity utilization of its Urea plant by producing 4.78 LMT of Urea  during 2 011-12 which is the 
highest ever achieved since inception.  The specific energy consumption of urea has also registered 
significant improvement compared to FICC norms.  For  instance, the annual specific energy 
consumption was 7.517 Gcal/MT during 2011 -12 and 7.492 Gcal/MT during  2010 -11 as against 
FICC norm of 8337 Gcal/MT.  During the year 22011 -112, the Company could also restart its own 
production of NPK Complex Fertilizers after a gap of more than 4 years and could produce 0.36 
LMT.  The Company has p lanned for production of 4.20 LMT of NPK Complex fertilizers during the 
year 2012-13. 
 
MFL is implementing the projects of conversion of feedstock from Naphtha to Natural gas.  Provision 
is being kept to process Naphtha or Natural gas or a combination of b oth depending upon the 
availability.  Basic Engineering package has been received from M/s Haldor Topsoe AG. M/s 
Projects & Development India Ltd (PDIL) has been engaged as engineering  consultant for 
execution on this project.  In order to source Natural Gas, Company has requested M/s IOCL & M/s 
GAIL to indicate feasibility of supplying 1.54 MMSCMD of Natural Gas and is awaiting a firm 
proposal from them. 
 
The total manpower strength of MFL as on 31.03.2012 was 733 as against the Board approved 
strength of  1032.  However, the company is taking adequate steps to supplement the retiring 
technical manpower and impart training to the new recruits to maintain the technical competence to 
run the Plants. 
 
Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) 
 
For th e financial year 2011 -112 estimated profit of FACT is Rs.6.20 crore.  Turnover achieved in 
2011-12 is Rs.2875 crore, which is 17% higher than 2010 -11 level.  Production has also been good 
with 6017 lakh MT of NP Complex Fertilizers and 1.63 LMT of Ammonium  sulphates and  37854 MT 
of  Caprolactam being produce. Company is generating additional revenue from sale of Phospho -
Gypsum and achieved a new record in Annual sales of 7.3 lakh MT in the current year.  
 
The company is gearing up to switch over to LNG whi ch is expected to be available by the end of  
2012 at Kochi. Following are the major project proposals requiring high capital investment : 
 
 Capacity enhancement of NP plant at Cochin Division by 1000 Tons per day (TPD) 
 1500 TPD Urea plant at Udyogamandal 
 2800-3500 TPD sulphuric Acid Plant 
 A gypsum park at Cochin Division. 
 
Company has called for Expression of Interest from both Public and Private entities for JV 
participation in the above ventures. 
 
The company has appointed M/s Deloitte to prepare a Financ ial restructuring report to be submitted 
to BRPSE. BRPSE has directed to submit the revised proposal. 
 
FCI Aravali gypsum and Minerals India Limited (FAGMIL) 
 
M/s. FCI Aravali Gypsum and Minerals India Limited (FAGMIL) is engaged in mining and marketing 
of Minerals Gypsum which is used for reclaiming Sodic Soil and as fertilizer in Agriculture as a 
sulphur Nutrient. The mineral Gypsum is also used in cement industries as retarder.   

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
19 
The Company has earned profit (PBT) of Rs. 29.44 Crore (approx) during the year 2011 -12 as 
against Rs. 19.89 Crore in the previous year. The Company’s sale turnover has been Rs. 66.53 
Crore during the year 2011-12 as against Rs. 61.48 Crore in the previous year.   
 
Projects and Development & India Limited (PDIL) 
 
PDIL is mainly engaged in design, engineering and consultancy services and also producing catalyst 
for the fertilizers and refinery industries. During the year 2010-11 company has earned a profit (PBT) 
of Rs. 31.78 crore. However, the finalization of accounts for the year  2011-12 is under progress and 
the PBT (Provisional) for the year 2011-12 is likely to be Rs. 34.63 crore. 
 
HFCL and FCIL 
 
Pursuant to the decision dated 30th oct. 2008 of the Cabinet, an Empowered Committee of 
Secretaries (ECOS) under the Chairmanship of Secretary (F) was constituted to evaluate all options 
for revival of closed units of Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer 
Corporation Limited (HFCL) and make suitable recommendations. Based on the recommendations 
of the E COS, a proposal was sent to CCEA, which approved the same in its meeting held on 
4.8.2011 with the stipulation that Board for Industrial and Financial Restructuring (BIFR) proceedings 
be expedited and thereafter, the matter including changes, if any, requi red in bid parameters, be 
placed before the Committee for a final decision. BIFR in their meeting held on 18.8.2011 
considered the issue and directed State Bank of India, the Operating Agency (OA), to examine the 
DRS in consultation with Department of Fert ilizers and submit their recommendations within 3 
months.  Subsequently, as directed by the BIFR, OA examined the DRS and submitted the same to 
BIFR on 17.2.2012.  The DRS was examined by the Consultant of BIFR and as desired by him, OA 
again submitted the DRS to BIFR on 17.3.2012 in a modified format.   
 
At present, the DRS submitted by OA is under examination of BIFR. BIFR orders on miscellaneous 
applications submitted by FCIL/HFCL for seeking first stage clearance are awaited.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee in its earlier recommendation had noted that there has been negligible growth of the 
fertilizer sector during the last decade and this was due to various factors such as non -availability of 
surplus funds, outdated machinery, poor energy eff iciency, non -recruitment of experienced and 
qualified technical manpower and non-availability of natural gas has also been the main impediment.  
The Committee, had therefore, recommended that the Department of Fertilizers and all PSUs should 
make efforts f or taking suitable measures to overcome the constraints and for improving capacity 
utilization, energy conservation methods etc.  The Department of Fertilizers  in their action taken 
reply have given various steps being taken by fertilizer PSUs to overcome constraints and improving 
capacity utilization, energy conservation methods and to bring down manpower and administrative 
expenditure.  The Committee therefore re.iterate that Department of Fertilizers  should make 
sustainable efforts to improve the performance of the PSUs in the fertilizer sector and accelerate the 
growth of PSUs in this area so that it leads to increase in the indigenous production of fertilizer 
thereby reducing our country’s dependence on imports. 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
20 
 
G. CLOSED PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS (PSUs) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No.10 
 
Stressing the need to revive the closed PSUs at the earliest, the Committee had recommen d as 
under:-  
 
"The Committee note that out of the nine Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), Hindustan Fertilizers 
Corporation Limited (HFCL), Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL), BVFCL and FCIL are sick units.  Out 
of these four, the units of FCIL and HFCL are presently lying closed since 2002.  MFL and BVFCL 
are operational but are sick companies under the administrative control of the Department of 
Fertilizers.  The Committee have been given to understand that an Empowered Committee of 
Secretaries (ECOS) was constituted in October 2008 under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(Fertilizers) and Secretaries of Department of Expenditure, De partment of Disinvestment, Planning 
Commission, Department of Public Enterprise and Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas as Members 
to look into all the financial models for revival of each of the closed units.  Further, the Committee 
have been informed tha t for FCIL and HFCL, based on the recommendations of ECOS a note have 
been prepared and forwarded to Cabinet Committee for their consideration.  The CCEA has 
approved the proposal in its meeting with the stipulation that Board for Industrial and Financial 
Restructuring (BIFR) proceedings be expedited. For MFL, BIFR has directed Operating Agency 
(State Bank of India) to workout financial restructuring of MFL  considering the conversion of GOI  
loan into equity.  The operating agency i.e. SBI has submitted it s report to BIFR.  Now, MFL is being 
requested to examine viability of the Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS). For BVFCL, it has been 
suggested / directed to get a detailed financial restructuring proposal made by consultant for 
submission to Board for Reco nstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE). Similarly, initiatives 
have also stated to have been taken by the Government to wipe out the accumulated losses of MFL 
and BVFCL and to make these PSUs commercially viable till the availability of gas.  The Committee 
would like the Department of Fertilizers to take effective and expeditious steps to canalize and 
implement the whole revival process for the closed and loss -making PSUs.  The Committee also 
desire that the revival of closed and sick public sector  undertakings should done in a time bound 
manner and a schedule should be chalked out for the revival of closed and sick fertilizer PSUs.  The 
details of such a revival package may be intimated to the Committee within three months of 
presentation of the Report." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In reply of the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under :-  
 
“The status of revival of HFCL & FCIL and Financial Restructuring of MFL and BVFCL are as under; 
 
Revival of HFCL and FCIL: 
 
Pursuant to  the decision dated 30th oct. 2008 of the Cabinet, an Empowered Committee of 
Secretaries (ECOS) under the Chairmanship of Secretary (F) was constituted to evaluate all options 
for revival of closed units of Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited (FCIL) an d Hindustan Fertilizer 
Corporation Limited (HFCL) and make suitable recommendations. Based on the recommendations 
of the ECOS, a proposal was sent to CCEA, which approved the same in its meeting held on 
4.8.2011 with the stipulation that Board for Industrial and Financial Restructuring (BIFR) proceedings 
be expedited and thereafter, the matter including changes, if any, required in bid parameters, be 
placed before the Committee for a final decision. BIFR in their meeting held on 18.8.2011 
considered the issue and  directed State Bank of India, the Operating Agency (OA), to examine the 
DRS in consultation with Department of Fertilizers and submit their recommendations within 3 
months.  Subsequently, as directed by the BIFR, OA examined the DRS and submitted t he same to 
BIFR on 17.2.2012.  The DRS was examined by the Consultant of BIFR and as desired by him, OA 
again submitted the DRS to BIFR on 17.3.2012 in a modified format.   

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
21 
 
At present, the DRS submitted by OA is under examination of BIFR. BIFR orders on m iscellaneous 
applications submitted by FCIL/HFCL, for seeking first stage clearance are awaited. 
 
Restructuring of BVFCL 
 
For financial restructuring of the BVFCL, company has appointed M/s Haldor Topsoe as Process 
Licensor for comprehensive study of Ammon ia plants and M/s PDIL for Urea plant and off -
sites/utilities, situated at  Namrup -II and namrup III plant.  A comprehensive proposal for revival of 
the company will be prepared based on the technical study report of by Process Licensor M/s Halder 
Topsoe a nd PDIL. A thorough study at the existing Namrup -II and Namrup -III plants has already 
been carried out by them and they have submitted a draft reports in August 2011. In the reports, 
energy saving schemes as well as required renovation to operate the plant s at sustained Load have 
been suggested. Based on the study reports of Namrup -II & Namrup -III Plants carried out by M/S 
HTAS and PDIL and viability proposal prepared by PDIL the BVFCL has submitted a comprehensive 
proposal for Long Term Viability of  the C ompany for submission to BRPSE. The proposal is under 
consideration in the Department of Fertilizers. The following dispensation has been sought from 
BRPSE for long term viability of the Company in this proposal: 
 
 Waiver of total cumulative interests of Rs . 373.43 crore accrued on GOI loans till 
31.03.2011 
 Waiver of loan of Rs. 21.96 crore taken for revamp of Namrup -I, since this plants has 
been permanently stopped. 
 For Namrup -III, the capital expenditure of Rs 79.62 crores incurred beyond 
31.03.2003 for revamp of the project to be recognised by Govt. of India for calculating 
the concession rate of urea. 
 Since the company is facing technological/financial constraints, it is proposed to 
convert GOI loans provided to the company as interest free loan. However the 
company on earning cash profit,  will service the GOI loans. 
 Relaxation in profitability clause for pay revision and enhancement of age of 
superannuation from 58 to 60 years as a special dispensation to meet the immediate 
crisis of manpower. 
 To setup New Brown Field Ammonia-Urea Plant at Namrup (Namrup-IV). 
 
 
Restructuring of MFL: 
 
With regard to restructuring of MFL it may be mentioned that M/s PDIL has submitted its report and 
recommended the conversion of GOI loan into equity and waiver of outstandin g interest liability 
towards GOI.  The views of foreign promoter NICO (Holding 25.77% equity stake) has also been 
received, who have opposed for sale of assets and conversion of Govt. Loan into Equity.  
 
Since MFL is a sick company and BIFR has appointed S tate Bank of India as a Operating Agency 
for submitting a Financial restructuring proposal for MFL, the report of PDIL and the views of Foreign 
promoter NICO was forwarded to SBI for consideration. 
 
State Bank of India (SBI) had considered the viability of  the proposal and views of foreign promoter 
NICO and submitted the report on the financial restructuring package of MFL. The Board of Director 
of the company considered to report of the OA and approved it.   
 
After considering the views of the Board of MFL , NICO and Operating Agency, a BRPSE note for 
financial restructuring of MFL was circulated for inter -ministerial comment. The comments from the 
concerned Ministries/Departments have been received and considered in the DoF. Deptt. of 
Expenditure and Planni ng commission have been requested to submit the fresh comments on the 
proposal.   
In the meantime the BIFR in its hearing held on 25th August 2011 has directed the Operating Agency 
(State Bank of India) to workout financial restructuring of MFL considering  the conversion of GOI 
loan into equity. The operating Agency has submitted its report to BIFR.    BIFR hearing was held on 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
22 
07th May 2012 NICO one of the equity holders in MFL has objected to DRS proposal regarding 
conversion of GOI loan to equity. The matter is pending with BIFR.”  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
The Committee had earlier recommended that the Department of Fertilizers should take effective and 
expeditious steps to canalize and implement the revival process for the closed and loss -making 
PSUs.  The Committee had also desired that the revival of closed and sick public undertakings 
should be done in a time bound manner and a schedule should be chalked out for the revival of 
closed and sick fertilizers PSUs.  The Department of Fertilizers in their action taken reply have given 
the status of revival of Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Limited (HFCL) and FCIL and Financial 
Restructuring of MFL and BVFCL.  Further, the Department of Fertilizers ha s stated that with regard 
to revival of HFCL and FCIL the Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) submitted by State Bank of India, 
the Operating Agency (OA) is under examination of BIFR and BIFR orders on miscellaneous 
application submitted by FCIL/ HFCL, seeking first stage clearance are awaited.  With regards to 
restricting of BVFCL the Department of Fertilizers ha s stated that for restructuring of the BVFCL, the 
company has appointed M/s Haldor Topsoe as Process Licensor for comprehensive study of 
ammonia plants and M/s PDIL fur urea plant and off -sities/ utiliti es, situated at Namrup -II and 
Namrup-III plant.  The study reports have already been submitted in August 2011.  N ow based on the 
study reports of Namrup -II & Namrup -III plants carr ied out by M/s HTAS and PDIL and viability 
proposal prepared by PDIL, the BV FCL has submitted a comprehensive proposal for Long Term 
Viability Plan of the company for submission to BRPSE.  This proposal is under consideration in 
Department of Fertilizers.  Further, with regard to MFL , the  Department of Fertilizers have informed 
that since MFL is a sick company, BIFR has appointed State Bank of India an Operating Agency (OA) 
for submitting a financial restructuring proposal for MFL.  BIFR in its hearing held on 25 th August, 
2011 has directed the OA (State Bank of India) to workout financial restructuring of MFL considering 
the conversion of GOI loan equity.  The Operating Agency has submitted its report to BIFR. BIFR 
hearing was held on 7 th May, 2012 , NICO which is one of the foreign equity holders in MFL has 
objected to Draft Rehab ilitation Scheme (DRS) proposal regarding conversion of GOI loan equity.  
Now the matter is pending with BIFR. 
 The Committee are not satisfied with the progress made in the revival of closed PS Us.  The 
Committee feel that earliest revival of the closed PS Us is vital for the growth of fertilizer industries 
and country's self -sufficiency in the fertilizer production.  The Committee , therefore, strongly 
recommend that the revival of closed PSUs should be done in a strict time-bound manner and 
expeditiously so that the sick and closed PSUs start production of fertilizers.  The Committee also 
recommend that the formalities regarding the revival of closed/ sick PSUs pending at various levels 
should be expedited, so that it saves time and costs overruns , enabling early revival of closed/ sick 
fertilizer industries.  For this purpose matter should  be pursued and resolved with various 
stakeholders including NICO at the earliest.  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
23 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Sl.No./Para No. 1 
 
 There are 30 large size fertilizer plants in the country manufacturing urea (as on 
date 29are functioning) out of which 21 units produce DAP and complex fertilizers, 5 
units produce low analysis straight nitrogenous fer tilizers and the 9 manufacture 
ammonium sulphate as by -product. The Committee note that production of fertilizers in 
the country has been more or less stagnant for the last one decade, whereas the imports 
are increasing to meet the growing demand of fertil izers in the country.  The Committee 
further note that the installed capacity has been 120.61 lakh MT of nitrogenous and 
56.59 lakh MT of phosphatic nutrients.  The Committee observe that the growth of 
fertilizer industry has not kept pace with the growing  requirement of the fertilizers as the 
country is by and large import dependent for meeting requirements of critical phosphatic 
inputs such as rock phosphate and phosphoric acid.  Paucity of raw materials, lack of 
long term availability of natural gas, hig h cost of imported RLNG gas and volatility in 
prices have impeded growth of the fertilizer industry.  Indigenous production of fertilizers 
has not grown due to lack of new investments in urea sector and there has been no 
significant investment in urea sect or in the last decade.  These impediments are matter 
of serious concern.  However, keeping in view the vital role played by the chemical 
fertilizers in the successful agriculture production in the country, the Committee 
recommend that the Department of Fer tilizers should urgently take suitable measures to 
further boost the growth of fertilizer industry so that there is self-sufficiency and sustained 
growth of fertilizer industry. 
 
 The Committee note that in order to increase the indigenous production of ur ea, 
an investment policy in urea sector was notified on 4 th September’2008.  The policy has 
resulted in increase of indigenous Urea production by approximately two million tones 
through revamp of existing plants.  However, no new investments under Expansio n, 
Revival & Greenfield plants have materialized.  The fertilizer companies have also 
expressed concern regarding pricing and firm availability of gas before taking final 
investment decision to undertake expansion, Brownfield and new Greenfield projects.  To 
address the concerns of the fertilizer industry, a proposal for New Investment Policy – 
2012 in urea sector is under consideration of Department of Fertilizers. 
 
 The Committee desire that the finalization for new investment Policy -2012 be 
expedited to attract more investments in the indigenous production of urea by the 
fertilizer industry. 
 
 Further, lack of adequate availability of inputs including natural gas required for 
production of fertilizers and limited resources are major hindrances in achievin g self -
sufficiency in fertilizer sector.  In the absence of ready availability of potash sources in 
the country, the entire demand of potassic fertilizer for direct application as well as for 
production of complex fertilizers is being met through imports.  The Committee have 
been informed that the Department of fertilizers has continuously been following a policy 
for encouraging investments abroad  by Indian entities in fertilizer sector in resource rich 
countries.  The  Committee hope that the Department o f Fertilizer would continue with 
their efforts in exploration of indigenous raw materials for the fertilizer industry.  
Considering the vital role played by chemical fertilizers as one of the key inputs for the 
success of agriculture output in the country,  the Committee feel that there is an urgent 
need for more suitable steps to be taken by the Department to ensure a sustained growth 
of industry as a whole. 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
24 
 The Committee also stress that the Department should vigorously pursue the 
issues regarding adequa te allocation of natural gas and gas pipeline connectivity with 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  The Committee are of the view that with the 
assured allocation of natural gas to the fertilizer sector, the expansion and revamping 
process of existing and new fertilizer projects could be completed at the earliest which in 
turn would avoid cost and tiem overruns.  At the same time, a balanced use of fertilizers 
(NPK) is also essential for increasing agricultural productivity in the country.  The 
Committee would also like to recommend that expeditious measures need to be taken by 
the Department for capacity addition programmes so as to achieve self -sufficiency in 
fertilizer sector. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department of Fertilizers is regularly taking up the issue of adequate 
allocation of Natural Gas to fertilizer sector and early completion of gas pipeline 
connectivity to various Fertilizer plants under categories of conversion, expansion and 
revival units.  The GAIL(India) Limited has intimated Depar tment of Fertilizers that GAIL 
is already laying pipeline infrastructure to connect the fertilizer plants through various 
upcoming pipelines.   
 
As regards  capacity addition programmes to achieve self -sufficiency in fertilizer 
sector, it is submitted that a proposal for amendments to the New Investment Policy 
notified by the Department of Fertilizers on 4 th September 2008 was discussed in the 
meeting of Group of Ministers(GoM) held on 5 th January 2011.  GoM decided to 
constitute a Committee under chairmansh ip of Dr. Saumitra Chaudhuri, Member 
Planning Commission with Secretary(Fertilizers), Secretary(Expenditure), 
Secretary(DAC) and Secretary(Petroleum) as members.  The committee examined the 
proposal for introduction of NBS in urea, including various option s therefor, and made 
suitable recommendations.  The Committee also examined the issues relating to the 
investment Policy and amendments proposed therein and made appropriate 
recommendations.  In the next meeting of the Group of Ministers held on 5th August 2011 
this proposal again came up for discussions and the Chairman of GoM directed the 
Committee to expeditiously submit its recommendations on issues relating to the 
investment policy including amendments proposed therein by the DOF. 
 
The report of the Co mmittee on Investment Policy in Urea sector has been 
finalised and signed on 7 th January 2012.  Proposal regarding new investment policy 
2012 in urea sector was discussed in the meeting of the GoM held on 24 th February 
2012.  GoM decided that the proposal for New Investment Policy – 2012 in urea sector 
suggested by the Committee under Dr. Saumitra Chaudhury, Member Planning 
Commission, as modified by the Department of Fertilizers, be placed before the CCEA.  
Accordingly, a draft CCEA Note on New Investment Policy 2012 has been prepared and 
circulated by the Department of Fertilizers on 26 th June 2012 for inter -ministerial 
consultation and comments.  The comments of all the Departments concerned are 
received except from the Department of Expenditure. 
{Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II/(Vol.II) dated 28.08.2012} 
Recommendation Sl.No./Para No. 2 
 
Eleventh Five Year Plan 
 
The  Committee note from plan outlays and expenditure that an outlay of 
Rs.20627.87 cror e for the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007 -2012) was allocated for 
Department of Fertilizers out of which the actual expenditure of the Department of 
Fertilizers for the years 2007 -08, 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 (RE) was at Rs.264.26 
crore, Rs.745.03 crore Rs.711.24 crore and Rs.1514.38 crore respectively and the RE 
for 2011-12 was Rs.3736.93 crore totaling Rs.6971.84 crore which is only 34%  of the 
total plan allocation.  The Committee are dismayed to note that the Department of 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
25 
Fertilizers has not been abl e to utilize the full amount allocated to them.  The Committee 
are, therefore, inclined to conclude that either requisite funds were not made available to 
the Department every year of the plan period or the Department failed to utilize fully the 
available funds. 
 
The Committee, therefore, feel that there is a need for proper planning and 
projection of realistic estimates and timely and prudent use of approved outlays.  The 
Department of Fertilizers should also endeavour to impress upon the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance to allocate adequate funds for the various  
schemes/programmes that are asked for based on the proper estimates.  The Committee 
are unhappy to note that for the preparation and projection of 12 th Five Year Plan the 
Department of Fertilizers have not finalized the plan outlays for MFL and FACT  for the 
last four years of the 12 th Five Year Plan.  The Committee, therefore, recommend  that 
finalization of the 12 th Five Year Plan should be carried out in all aspects.  The 
Committee further also recommend that with the beginning of the 12 th Five Year Plan the 
Department of Fertilizers should make all out efforts to made optimum utilization of the 
funds which have been allocated for various programmes and projects in each year of  
the 12th Five Year Plan and achieve the targeted goals. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The approved outlay of 11th Five Year Plan is Rs.20627.87 crore.  This consists of 
Rs.1492 crores as Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) and Rs.19135.87 crore as Internal 
and Extra Budge tary Resources (IEBR) generated by the companies from their own 
resources.  GBS of Rs.1492 crores were provided for two schemes namely, revival of 
sick PSUs (Rs.607 crores) and capital subsidy for conversion (Rs.885 crores).  Later on 
the capital subsidy s chemes for conversion of four urea plants based of FO/LSHS was 
not pursued and conversion of urea plants were financed through a non -plan scheme.  
Hence, allocation of Rs.885 crores became redundant.  
 
  DoF had suggested Planning Commission to re -allocate the amount under the 
Head ‘conversion’ for making corpus for acquiring resources abroad.  Of the allocation of 
Rs.607 crores for the revival of sick PSUs the funds had been made available to three 
PSUs namely BVFCL, FACT and MFL.  The total funds made ava ilable by the Planning 
Commission during 11 th Five Year Plan are Rs.875.65 crores which is more than the 
original allocation under GBS.  It may therefore be seen that while Planning Commission 
provided adequate funds for meeting the requirement of three PS Us, namely BVFCL, 
FACT and MFL, shortfall did occur in the realization of the Plan projections insofar as 
capital expenditure from IEBR is concerned by the respective profit making PSUs. 
 
As mentioned above, bulk of outlay projections during 11 th Five Year Plan were 
supposed to be met by profit making companies through their own resources for various 
projects during the Five Year Plan period.  There is a shortfall in meeting these 
projections during 11th Five Year Plan.  It may be mentioned that 11 th Plan projections for 
IEBR were made at the beginning of the 11 th Five Year Plan keeping in view the 
investment environment, policy framework expected during medium and likely 
international environment. These projections were indicative based on economic outlook 
prevailing at that time and expectations from PSUs.  Every year, respective profit making 
companies re-casted their actual expenditure in each year depending upon international 
environment policy, economic viability and priority of requirements set for that year.   
 
The main reasons for shortfall in IEBR realization are as follows: 
 
In case of Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers (RCF), an outlay of Rs.2699.74 
crores was provided for additional Ammonia -Urea (Thal Expansion) Project but the 
expenditure could no t be incurred by RCF due to uncertainty about sourcing of gas.  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
26 
Further an outlay of Rs.2596.26 crores was provided for revival of Durgapur and Talcher 
units and expenditure on the scheme could not be incurred due to absence of favorable 
policy for new investment in Urea sector. 
 
In case of National Fertilizers Limited (NFL), the projected capital expenditure of 
Rs.6050.75 crores was revised to Rs.3993.75 crore during Mid -term appraisal of the 11th 
Five Year Plan due to exclusion of revival of Barauni unit which was earlier to be 
executed by National Fertilizers Limited.  It was taken form NFL and entrusted to Joint 
Venture Company (M/s UVL).  The plan outlay was further revised due to revision in 
project cost for changeover of feedstock project at FO based units and capacity 
enhancement of urea project at Vijaypur.  
 
In case of KRIBHCO, it intended to set up an additional stream of Ammonia -Urea 
plan at its existing fertilizer complex at Hazira.  However, in absence of firm availability of 
gas on long term ba sis and impact of investment policy of the Government, the project 
was not undertaken. KRIBHCO initially wanted to invest Rs.3000 crores on revival of 
Gorakhpur plant at the time of formulation of 11 th Five Year Plan.  However, this project 
was also not undertaken since Government has now proposed a different financial model 
for revival of closed units of FCIL/HFCL. 
 
In view of deviations from the projected outlay to the actual expenditure under 
IEBR during 11 th Five Year Plan, PSUs are asked to make realis tic assessment of 
requirement of expenditure and availability of finance through IEBR.  Department will 
continue to monitor in an effective manner such schemes proposed by the companies 
and would initiate required follow up action.  
 
Department of Fertilizers would make all out efforts to make optimum utilization of 
the funds which have been allocated for various programmes and projects in each year 
of the 12th Five Year Plan and achieve the targeted goals.  For preparation and projection 
of 12th Five Year Plan, Department of Fertilizers have finalized the plan outlays for MFL 
and FACT for the last four years of the 12 Five Year Plan.  Revised statement showing 
the scheme-wise Plan outlays for the 12th Five Year Plan is as under:-  
(In Rs. crore) 
Name of the scheme Particulars 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 Total 
RCF IEBR 673.75 2739.00 2198.00 925.00 300.00 6835.75 
FAGMIL IEBR 23.51 48.42 31.25 5.75 11.30 120.23 
PDIL IEBR 6.05 13.82 9.56 3.94 3.13 36.50 
NFL IEBR 1696.98 717.49 355.60 280.60 70.60 3121.27 
BVFCL GBS 153.31 766.58 1271.36 1119.84 0.00 3311.09 
FACT GBS 142.00 715.00 2405.00 3240.00 35.00 6537.00 
MFL GBS 87.62 124.47 124.22 30.29 17.31 383.91 
Misc. Schemes 
(MIS/IT and R&D) 
GBS 12.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 32.00 
TOTAL  2795.22 5129.78 6399.99 5610.42 442.34 20377.75 
{Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II/(Vol.II) dated 28.08.2012} 
Recommendation Sl.No./Para No. 3 
 
Demands for Grants Allocation 
 
 The  Committee observe from the figure s provided by the Department that the 
non-plan expenditure has  increased considerably from the years 2009 -10 to 2011 -12.  
The allocation under the figures for the financial years 2009 -10, 2010-11 and 2011 -112 
are Rs.56,600.50, Rs.57860.00 and Rs.71592.00 crore (RE) respectively.  The 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
27 
department was unable to provide any satisfactory response to a specific query as to 
how to keep the Non -Plan expenditure under control. While the Committee agree that 
farmers need to be protected from price volatility in the international market and other 
negative factors, the need to rein in the ever increasing expenditure under the Non -Plan 
allocation cannot be over -emphasized.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should take steps on a priority basis to address this issue and intimate the 
measures taken in this regard by them.  The Committee, further, desire that Department 
of Fertilizers should also keep strict watch and control over factors impacting budgetary 
allocations and expenditure thereon. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to contain the expenditure under the non -plan allocation i.e. subsidy bills, 
the Government is implementing NBS policy w.e.f. 1.4.2010. Under the policy, a fixed 
subsidy on each nutrient of P & K fertilizers is announced each y ear. Normally, the 
subsidy rate remains fixed for the whole financial year.  Hence, expenditure under non -
plan for P&K fertilizers will not exceed the budgeted figures if the consumption remains at 
the expected level. Department of Fertilizers has announce d NBS rates for the year 
2012-13 in such a manner that total subsidy outgo for the P & K Fertilizers  for the 
financial year 2012 -13 would be reduced by more than 20% over the previous year.  
However, the total subsidy outgo for P & K fertilizers for 2012 -13 will depend on the 
overall consumption of fertilizers in the year 2012-13. 
 
Growing non-plan expenditure on account of subsidy for indigenous urea is mostly 
on account of escalation in input cost as there was no proportionate increase in MRP of 
urea.  I ndigenous Urea Subsidy is basically the difference between the sale price and 
actual cost of production of urea.  Fixed cost and variable cost being the two main 
components of cost of production, the former has been frozen at 2002 -03 level, and 
therefore, it has no impact on increase in subsidy. The increase in variable cost, (almost 
97% of which is constituted by energy cost), is the major cause of increase in non -plan 
expenditure in the form of subsidy for indigenous urea.  The major sources of energy for  
urea units are Natural Gas, Naphtha, FO, HSD and LSHS etc., the pricing of which is 
beyond the control of DOF. The urea units are at the receiving end.  They are obliged to 
pay the prices charged by the suppliers of such energy resources, namely, ONGC, GA IL, 
IOCL, BPCL, OIL, RIL etc. and prefer claim of escalation of cost before the DOF.  The 
DOF is under obligation to reimburse such increase in cost of energy / production to the 
urea manufacturing units. 
 
The suppliers of the energy resources are under th e administrative control of the 
MOP & NG.  As per the existing policy, these companies are pricing these resources with 
Rupee-Dollar linkage.  Moreover, the prices are mostly linked with their import parity 
prices.  Falling rupee value has, therefore, impa cted the urea cost adversely.  In order to 
achieve a control in subsidy on indigenous urea, the MOP & NG may be requested to 
reign upon the oil companies and direct them to charge the urea units for supply of 
indigenous energy resources at rupee terms.  Mo reover, the prices of such indigenous 
energy resources should be based on their cost with reasonable profit and not at import 
parity prices which include a number of notional cost elements that they do not incur.  If 
gas is quickly made available to high c ost Non-gas units using Naphtha, FO, LSHS, etc., 
the impact on subsidy burden will come down.  Further if the MRP is regularly increased 
to keep pace with increase in input cost, subsidy burden will be reduced substantially.   
{Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II/(Vol.II) dated 28.08.2012} 
Recommendation Sl.No./Para No. 4 
 
Subsidy / Concession on Fertilizers 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
28 
 The Committee note that the total subsidy disbursed on fertilizers has increased 
from Rs.12908.0 2 crore in 2001 -02 to Rs.65836.68 crore in 2010 -11 and Rs.53589.87 
crore in 2011 -12 (BE).  The total subsidy released  on urea has increased from 
Rs.17721.43 crore in the year 2006 -07 to Rs.36883.00 crore in the year 2011 -12 (RE).  
The subsidy on P&K ferti lizers has increased from Rs.10,298.12  crore in the year 2006 -
07 to Rs.34786.87 crore in the year 2011 -12(RE).  The Committee’s examination has 
revealed that the increase in subsidy bill is due to higher consumption of fertilizers and 
also the rise was du e to the increase in international prices of imported  fertilizers and 
increase in the cost of inputs of indigenous fertilizers during the year 2006-07 to 2011-12.  
Considering all these facts, the committee desire that concerted efforts are needed to cut 
the subsidy bill.  However, as there has to be reduction in the subsidy bill, the reduction 
in subsidy should not fall as a burden on the farmers. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the reduction in the subsidy of fertilizers should not be compensated b y charging 
higher prices (MRP) of fertilizers from the farmers instead the Department of Fertilizers 
should chalk out such a plan that there is reduction of subsidy bill and at the same time it 
does not burden the farmers with the increased prices of ferti lizers.  Further, the 
Committee feel that in view of increased consumption of fertilizers and international 
prices of fertilizer, inputs and finished fertilizers, there is an urgent need for technological 
innovation, state of the art machinery, reducing th e cost of production, energy efficiency 
measures, experienced and qualified technical manpower and optimum capacity 
utilization so as to reduce our dependence on imports and increase the indigenous 
production of fertilizers.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Since India is 90% dependent on imports in Phosphatic Sector in the form of 
finished fertilizers or in the form of Raw materials and 100% dependent on import 
dependent on Potash sector, the delivered price shall always be same as international 
prices which is paid either in the form of subsidy or the MRP. 
 
 To overcome the impediments in the growth of fertilizer industry for sustainable 
growth, the Government is encouraging and facilitating the fertilizer industries to enter 
into long term contracts with the co untries having rich resource of raw materials for 
production of P&K fertilizers.  The Government is also allowing companies to use various 
blends of rock phosphate to manufacture SSP, one of complex fertilizers used as 
substitute of DAP.  Government is als o providing grants under plan fund to companies to 
renovate their old plants to maximize production.  The Government is also helping by 
giving advance 85% ‘On Account’ subsidy on sale, which help the companies to 
overcome their working capital difficulties. 
 
 To attain self sufficiency in fertilizer production, the Government has decided to 
revive the eight closed units of HFCL and FCIL, each unit having capacity of 11.5 LMT 
per annum.  In Urea sector the raw materials are indigenously available.  We are 
providing nearly 75% of our requirements. 
{Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II/(Vol.II) dated 28.08.2012} 
Recommendation Sl.No./Para No. 5 
 
Direct Subsidy to Farmers 
 
 The Committee are perturbed to note t hat despite their repeated 
recommendations in earlier Reports, Government have not achieved the long cherished 
goal of payment of subsidy directly to farmers.  The Committee not that the Government 
has constituted in February 2011, a Task Force under Chair manship of Shri Nandan 
Nilekani, Chairman, Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) to recommend and 
implement a solution for direct transfer of subsidies on fertilizers among other things to 
the intended beneficiaries.  The Committee understand th at the Task Force has since  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
29 
submitted its Report  to the Government.  The Committee also understand that the Task 
Force has recommended three phases approach for implementation of the transfer of 
direct subsidies.  Currently the Department of Fertilizers is dedicated to stabilize phase I 
by tackling on ground implementation issues such as gaps in mobile coverage over 
certain geographical regions, regional supply chain issues, user trainings and application 
upgradation.  Thereafter, Phase II and III  will b e implemented.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that all three phases of the direct subsidy to farmers 
should implemented in strict time -bound manner, so that the farmers are able to benefit 
from the direct subsidy at the earliest.  The Commit tee hope that further follow up action 
in this regard would be taken at the earliest so as to find ways and means for providing 
subsidy direct to farmers.  The precise action taken in this regard may be communicated 
to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 While work on Phase I started immediately, a project strategy was being formed 
for the implementation of phase II. During the process, a feasibility assessment of Phase 
II was conducted and it was felt that while Phase II has its own value additions i n terms 
of Business process re -engineering and establishing a system based payment 
mechanism, there was no significant value addition to the stakeholders by enabling 
subsidy transfer to retailers. The desirability of Phase II was then discussed with the 
fertilizer industry, Fertilizer Association of India (FAI) and the Taskforce and it was then 
collectively decided to not proceed with Phase II implementation but  instead move 
ahead directly with Phase III implementation after Phase I stabilization.  Phase I II was 
further detailed out into three sub-stages as follows : 
 
 Phase III (Stage A) – Subsidy to manufacturers on the basis of retail sales 
of fertilizer at last retail point. 
 
 Phase III (Stage B) – Subsidy to retail customer on the basis of  fertilizer 
sales made to him / her. 
 
 Phase III (Stage C) – Subsidy to ELIGIBLE retail customer on the basis of 
details of sales made to him / her.  This will include defining the entitlement 
for various user categories. 
Phase III (Stage A) focus on release of subsidy to the manufactures based on the retailer 
sales to farmers.  The benefits envisaged from this stage are following: 
 
a. Shift from production and dispatch based subsidy model to sales based 
subsidy distribution. 
b. The post sales subsidy policy is in line with the fiscal prudence 
c. Last point sales based data shall facilitate DoF in better budgeting, 
forecasting and supply plan 
d. Data on last point fertilizer availability and sales will further improve 
information availability and transparency 
e. Relatively less implementation challenges as the manufacturer will continue 
to be the subsidy recipient. 
  In the meantime, a review meeting has been held under the Chairmanship of 
Secy. (F) on 28.06.2012.  The meeting of Task Force are being held to discuss the 
following :  
 
(i)   Phase I: 
a. Progress of mobile application deployment post master trainers training  
b. No. of end to end transactions post training  
c. Establishment of multi-lingual call centre 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
30 
d. m-FMS-FMS integration (2 way) 
e. Reports on Transparency  Portal : status of customized reports for all 
categories  of users-manufacturers, dealers, state governments etc. 
 
(ii)  Phase II A : 
 a. Progress of DPR 
{Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II/(Vol.II) dated 28.08.2012} 
Recommendation Sl.No./Para No. 6 
 
Nutrient Based  Subsidy 
 
 The Committee have been informed that the Government has introduced the first 
phase of Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) policy and potassic  fertilizers in April 2010.  The 
subsidy on fertilizers will  be determined on the basis of nutrient subsidy fixed by the 
Government and the nutrient contained in the fertilizers.  Under NBS, the NBS regime is 
expected to bring about a balanced use of fertilizers and also give a boost to indigenous 
production of fertilizers. The Committee however, expressed their concern over the 
increase in prices of P&K fertilizers and also over the fact that the Maximum Retail Price 
(MRP) of P&K fertilizer is open and is allowed to be fixed by manufacturers / impo rters 
based on demand – supply dynamics.  This has made farmers vulnerable to the market 
forces determining the prices of fertilizers.  The Committee, therefore, desire that while 
implementing the NBS policy the Department of Fertilizers should keep in min d the 
interest of the farmers and also farmers should be protected from the market forces.  
Further, the Committee are dismayed to note  that though the NBS policy has completed 
two years of its working, it is yet to stabilize and also no formal study has yet been 
conducted about the effectiveness of the policy.  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Department of Fertilizers.  Should make sincere efforts for  proper implementation of 
NBS and to see that the policy is stabilized to have fruitful results .   The Committee 
recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should closely monitor the implementation 
of the policy  for its success.  The Committee also recommend that the Department 
should take steps for the effective implementation of this policy whi ch is likely increase 
quality and fertility of the soil and agricultural productivity as well as attaining self -
sufficiency of fertilizes in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department of Fertilizers is administering the Nutrient Based Subsidy (N BS) 
policy and potassic fertilizers w.e.f. 1.4.2010.  Under  the NBS policy, an Inter -ministerial 
Committee (IMC) has been constituted with Secretary (Fertilizers) as Chairperson and 
Joint Secretary level representatives of Department of Agriculture & Coop eration (DAC), 
Department of Expenditure (DOE), Planning Commission and Department of Agricultural 
Research and Education (DARE) for effective implementation of NBS policy. 
  
For effective implementation of NBS policy, DOF has given instructions to the 
fertilizer companies to print both the MRP fixed by them and the Central Government 
subsidy on each bag in addition to other statutory requirements.  Selling of the fertilizers 
at prices higher than the MRP is a punishable offence under the Essential Commodit ies 
Act.  The State Governments have been requested to gear up its machinery to ensure 
the sale of the fertilizers at the MRP printed on the bags and to prevent hoarding and 
profiteering.  The State Governments have also been requested to ensure that that the 
sub subsidized fertilizers are used only for agricultural purposes.  The State 
Governments are required to test the samples of the fertilizers in regard to quality of the 
fertilizers at the retail and wholesale points.  The State Governments have been asked to 
strengthen the mobile/static soil testing laboratories and issuance of soil health cards so 
as to encourage use of soil specific fertilizers under the NBS.  Further, the State 
Governments have been requested to activate appropriate District Vigila nce Committee 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
31 
with the objective of ensuring easy availability of fertilizers at reasonable prices and 
prevent wastage of subsidy due to any illegal activity.  The State Governments have also 
been asked to test the samples of SSP alongwith the team of the Projects & 
Development India Ltd (PDIL). 
 
 Based on the Inter Ministerial Committee Meeting, certain other fertilizers covered 
under the FCO are also proposed to be introduced in the Nutrient Based Subsidy.  The 
distribution and movement of fertilizers along with import of furnished fertilizers, fertilizers 
inputs and production by indigenous units is monitored through the Fertilizer Monitoring 
System.  The availability of the fertilizers is ensured in all the States based on the 
requirement thereof.  The NPK complex fertilizers have also been allowed to be imported 
under the NBS.  The manufacturers of customized fertilizers have also been allowed to 
source subsidized fertilizers for manufacturing customized fertilizer.  The manufacturers 
and importers have also been allowed to transport their fertilizers from plants and ports 
by road.  Specific guidelines have also been issued by the Department to the SSP 
manufacturers to claim Nutrient Based Subsidy. 
 
 The monitoring or implementation of NBS policy is done through on line web 
based ‘Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS)’ in which movement, sale, availability, 
consumption of raw materials, production, imports, MRP of fertilizers and payment of 
subsidy is monitored.  Inter Ministerial Committee (IMC) formed under  the NBS takes a 
stock of MRP fixed by the companies. 
 
 Based on the recommendation of IMC to increase the basket of fertilizers and to 
improve the availability of P & K, new grades of fertilizers are included under NBS policy.  
After the implementation of  NBS policy w.e.f. 1.4.2010, 7 new grades of fertilizers have 
been included under the subsidy scheme 
{Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II/(Vol.II) dated 28.08.2012} 
Recommendation Sl.No./Para No. 8 
 
Assessed Requirement and Availability of Fertilizers 
 
 Equitable distribution of fertilizers in all parts of the country is an important criteria 
for facilitating increased productivity in agriculture sector.  At present, the Department of 
Fertilizer is requir ed to ensure availability of urea, as per the requirement assessed by 
the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation.  The Committee note that the movement 
of fertilizes is monitored throughout the country by an on -line web based monitoring 
system (FMS), st ill the farmers are facing great difficulty in getting the fertilizers on time 
and also they are facing the problem of artificial scarcity shortage in some parts of the 
country.  The Committee are not satisfied with the real working of the system in tracki ng 
the demands and availability of fertilizers in different parts of the country.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should 
devise a foolproof mechanism for proper and equitable distribution of fertilizers in a ll 
parts of the country especially in remote, hilly and inaccessible areas.  Also, the 
Department of Fertilizers should make serious efforts to collaborate with the State 
Governments to tackle the problem of artificial shortage and punish hoarders and blac k 
marketers.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Department of Fertilizers monitors availability of fertilizers state wise.  Further 
monitoring / distribution of fertilizers district / block wise is the responsibility of the 
respective states.  The state wise avai lability during Kharif 2012 (April to July) along with 
pre-positioning of fertilizers is Annex A.  As can be seen, the availability of all the 
fertilizers is adequate. 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
32 
 There may be some stress in fertilizer availability in case of few states because of 
non-availability of adequate warehouse capacity in these states.  As a result of this, the 
States lift fertilizer as and when required.   Department of Fertilizers (DOF) has notified 
for P & K fertilizers (except SSP) Special Freight Scheme w.e.f. 01.04.201 2 for giving 
special freight for difficult, hilly and in-accessible States like Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, all North Eastern States and Andaman & Nicobar Islands in order 
to have equitable distribution of fertilizers.  As a result of w hich, it is expected that the 
fertilizer availability in these States would improve. 
 
 Besides, the steps taken by Government of India in mak ing availability of 
fertilizers: 
 
i) The gap between requirement and indigenous production is met through imports. 
 
ii) Department of Fertilizers is having constant interaction with ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas, GAIL and other suppliers of Natural Gas / Liquid Natural Gas 
(NG / LNG) so that gas requirement of the fertilizer industry is met ; and  
 
iii) Government is always encouraging production of urea in the country to achieve 
self-sufficiency.  The Government is considering a new policy for encouraging 
investments in Urea Sector. 
 
 As per Clause 4 (a) of the Fertilizer (Control) Order -Display of stock positi on of 
fertilizers – Every dealer, who makes or offers to make a retail sale of any fertilizer, shall 
prominently display in his place of business -  the quantities of opening stock of different 
fertilizers held by him on each day.  Any person violating thi s mandatory  provision of 
FCO is held liable to be proceeded under the provisions of FCO and Essential 
Commodities Act.  The State Governments as enforcement agencies are adequately 
empowered to take appropriate action against the offenders who indulge in any kind of 
malpractices viz., hoarding etc. 
 
 Under Clause 21 of the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985, it is mandatory to 
print the maximum retail price (MRP) on each bag of fertilizer whether under statutory 
price control of out of the purview of the  statutory price control.  No person shall charge 
higher than the price printed on the bag.  Any person violating this mandatory provision 
of FCO is held liable under the provisions of FCO and Essential commodities Act.  The 
State Governments as enforcemen t agencies are adequately empowered to take 
appropriate action against the offenders who indulge in any kind of malpractices. 
{Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II/(Vol.II) dated 28.08.2012}

 
 
Availability of Fertilizers during Kharif ’12 (Upto July 2012) alongwith Stock Pre-positioned 
 UREA DAP NPK Phosphatic Fertilizers MOP 
States Req
uire
men
t in 
(Apr
il12t
o 
July
12) 
Stock  
Pre- 
positio
ned 
Open
ing  
Stock 
as on  
01.04
.12 
Recei
pt 
(April
12to 
July12
) 
Availa
bility 
(April1
2 
to 
July12) 
Require
ment in 
(April12
to 
July12) 
Stock  
Pre- 
positio
ned 
Open
ing  
Stock 
as on  
01.04
.12 
Recei
pt 
(April
12to 
July12
) 
Availa
bility 
(April1
2 
to 
July12) 
Require
ment in 
(April12
to 
July12) 
Stock  
Pre- 
positio
ned 
Open
ing  
Stock 
as on  
01.04
.12 
Recei
pt 
(April
12to 
July12
) 
Availa
bility 
(April1
2 
to 
July12) 
Require
ment in 
(April12
to 
July12) 
Stock  
Pre- 
positio
ned 
Open
ing  
Stock 
as on  
01.04
.12 
Recei
pt 
(April
12to 
July12
) 
Availa
bility 
(April1
2 
to 
July12) 
Requir
ement 
in 
(April1
2to 
July12) 
Stock  
Pre- 
positio
ned 
Open
ing  
Stock 
as on  
01.04
.12 
Recei
pt 
(April
12to 
July12
) 
Availa
bility 
(April1
2 
to 
July12) 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
850.
00 
 52.65 730.50 783.15 530.000 122.51 54.22 197.06 373.79 725.00 472.18 213.4
5 
485.48 944.54 1255.000 845.97 213.4
5 
682.54 1318.33 155.00 51.95 60.97 49.00 145.84 
Karnataka 450.0
0 
1.03 8.55 410.01 419.59 461.00 192.96 32.44 138.00 363.40 422.00 288.58 92.58 277.64 552.20 883.00 651.98 92.58 415.64 915.60 152.00 102.18 17.95 106.25 146.07 
Kerala 72.00  0.98 52.33 53.31 17.00 3.16 3.66 13.21 20.03 95.00 64.17 20.81 54.21 84.02 112.00 84.20 20.81 67.42 104.06 65.00 54.46 8.39 35.98 55.70 
Tamil Nadu 275.0
0 
 2.80 231.13 233.93 118.00 2.39 15.09 54.68 72.16 174.60 39.20 117.9
8 
113.45 319.44 292.60 11.36 117.9
8 
168.13 391.60 127.00 64.81 10.11 50.63 71.57 
Gujarat 750.0
0 
 8.18 687.13 695.31 355.00 92.32 19.25 135.26 246.84 208.00 190.79 23.77 138.27 309.35 563.00 437.63 23.77 273.54 556.18 68.00 41.45 2.61 29.46 34.29 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
390.4
7 
116.63 30.13 396.85 543.61 371.32 245.35 88.97 273.70 608.02 118.68 63.08 65.34 60.44 172.82 489.99 671.09 65.34 334.14 780.83 79.56 65.77 18.64 43.28 77.13 
Chattisgarh 305.0
0 
94.66 0.08 262.85 357.58 145.00 59.69 12.40 109.28 181.37 88.00 65.65 24.66 59.34 102.21 233.00 247.01 24.68 168.62 283.57 56.00 61.36 1.93 35.92 67.87 
Maharashtra 1040.
00 
14.54 24.24 911.71 950.49 655.00 207.63 31.11 259.49 498.24 637.00 535.54 110.7
8 
501.37 887.72 1292.00 1033.77 110.7
8 
760.86 1385.96 210.00 128.16 26.24 129.44 178.85 
Rajasthan 375.0
0 
23.47 67.82 309.59 400.88 202.00 99.82 12.42 120.42 232.65 51.80 29.50 13.67 29.05 45.90 253.00 262.15 13.67 149.47 278.55 19.50  1.71 2.03 3.73 
Haryana 620.0
0 
78.01 30.90 522.07 630.99 200.00 203.76 11.64 48.48 263.88 35.00  7.52 4.04 11.56 235.00 263.88 7.52 52.52 275.44 25.00  1.71 7.57 9.29 
Punjab 1125.
00 
219.46 24.31 884.17 1127.94 280.00 125.25 42.05 91.12 258.42 30.00 15.85 11.22 7.72 24.07 310.00 274.27 11.22 98.84 282.49 36.00 36.63 3.72 13.95 25.87 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
32.50 4.29 0.00 26.31 30.59 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 7.50 10.81 0.12 1.47 6.94 7.50 10.81 0.12 1.47 6.94 0.30 0.59 0.00 0.00 0.29 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
54.50 35.26 0.23 49.97 85.46 35.00 10.60 2.31 7.25 20.17 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 35.00 20.17 0.00 7.25 20.17 9.00 7.10 0.03 3.72 4.80 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
1750.
00 
386.98 107.4
8 
1518.51 2012.98 490.00 432.52 54.55 325.10 815.17 325.00 185.29 156.9
4 
160.56 422.21 815.00 1000.46 156.9
4 
485.66 1237.38 60.00 22.32 1.93 39.57 48.61 
Uttarkhand 105.0
0 
8.47 1.47 107.26 117.20 16.50 9.14 1.75 3.90 14.79 25.00 19.25 2.53 7.74 15.62 41.50 34.04 2.53 11.64 30.41 5.00 6.02 0.00 0.00 1.49 
Bihar 565.0
0 
15.64 5.38 464.13 485.15 185.00 54.10 30.49 50.90 135.49 135.000 113.13 46.11 24.57 123.81 320.00 248.62 46.11 75.47 259.31 50.00 51.44 2.55 20.86 59.30 
Jharkhand 94.00 8.69 3.31 60.12 72.12 60.00 9.72 3.36 14.84 27.93 26.70  4.86 8.94 13.81 86.70 27.93 4.86 23.78 41.73 15.00 15.00 0.00 3.76 8.12 
Orissa 201.7
0 
 17.75 146.11 163.86 105.79 2.03 16.70 53.21 71.94 137.63 98.37 34.26 69.59 134.29 243.42 170.31 34.26 122.79 206.23 62.81  7.39 41.34 48.74 
West Bengal 308.8
0 
131.55 1.88 308.36 441.79 172.80 72.01 27.75 58.76 158.52 263.65 134.37 82.33 115.35 271.48 436.45 292.90 82.33 174.11 430.00 97.05 85.45 2.65 59.95 129.64 
Assam 95.70 1.91 0.00 89.39 91.30 16.50  8.12 4.21 12.33 4.96  1.98 1.05 3.03 21.46 12.33 1.98 5.26 15.36 39.60 21.90 3.58 6.19 19.27 
All India 9543.
72 
1140.58 388.2
7 
8205.25 9734.10 4435.49 1947.97 
 
468.6
1 
1966.5
1 
4383.09 3526.18 2325.75 1031.
97 
2129.6
3 
4455.40 7961.66 6708.84 1031.
97 
4096.1
4 
8838.49 1352.26 816.59 172.1
2 
684.31 1141.87 
 
{Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II/(Vol.II) dated 28.08.2012}

Recommendation Sl.No./Para No. 9 
 
Performance of Public Sector Undertakings 
  
There are nine Public Sector Undertakings  (PSUs), one multi -state cooperative 
society and one joint sector company under the administrative control of the Department 
of Fertilizers.  Out of this, Krishak Bharati Cooperative Limited (KRIBHICO), the multi -
State cooperative society and three PSUs,  viz.  National Fertilizers Limited (NFL), 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF) and Projects and Development (India) 
Limited (PDIL) are profit making units.  Three PSUs, viz. Fertilizers and  Chemicals 
Travancore Limited (FACT), Madras Fertiliz ers Limited (MFL) and Brahmaputra Valley 
Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL) are loss making units.  Besides, two PSUs viz. 
Fertilizer Corporation Ltd. (HFCL) are lying closed after incurring  losses continuously 
over a period of time.  Non -availability of surplus funds, outdated machinery causing 
increased cost of production, poor energy efficiency, non -recruitment of experienced and 
qualified technical manpower are the other factors on account of which some PSUs  
have been facing losses year after year .  Non -availability of natural gas has also been 
the main impediment.  The Committee, however, have been informed that some 
initiatives have been taken by the Government to examine the technical and economic 
feasibility of revival of the sick PSUs .  The C ommittee also note that there has been 
negligible growth of the fertilizer sector during the last decade.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Department and all PSUs should make efforts for taking 
suitable measures  to overcome the constraints and fo r improving capacity utilization, 
energy conservation methods and also to bring down manpower and administrative 
expenditure. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The following steps have been taken by the Fertilizer PSUs to overcome 
constraints and for improving cap acity utilization, energy conservation methods and to 
bring down manpower and administrative expenditure; 
 
National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) 
 
To cut down energy consumption, NFL has undertaken Ammonia Feedstock 
Changeover Projects at its three FO based un its at Nangal & Bhatinda in Punjab and 
Panipat in Haryana.  These projects shall result in reduction in energy consumption, 
substitute high cost FO with low cost natural gas and substantial reduction in Govt. 
subsidy outgo.  The company has undertaken ener gy saving and urea capacity 
enhancement project at Vijaipur -I & II units in Madhya Pradesh.  These projects shall 
result in increase in urea capacity by 16% at Vijaipur -I & by 23% at Vijaipur -II unit i.e. 
urea capacity shall increase by 3.37 lakh MT. The c ompany over a period of ten years 
has brought down its Manpower from 6602 as on 31.03.2001 to 4515 as on 31.03.2012.   
 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizes Limited (RCF) 
 
RCF is a leading profit making Mini -Ratna fertilizer and Chemical manufacturing 
company engaged in manufacturing of variety of products such as Ujwala urea and 
complex fertilizer Suphala.  Since inception, RCF has economically and safely operated 
2 dozen chemical and fertilizer plants for the past four and half decade at Trombay.  
  
RCF alw ays strives for upkeep of the plants through modernization and 
upgradation of technology.  Company has recently modernized its Ammonia -V, Nitric 
Acid, Methanol and ANP plants. This has facilitated plants to sustain operations and 
meet technological challen ges of improved efficiency, lower energy consumption and 
maintain/excel environmental norms. It has resulted in achieving highest standards of 
safety and product quality. 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
35 
  
RCF is continuously reviewing the workforce of its various plants and departments 
in its endeavour to rationalize and optimize the same. Company’s productivity in terms of 
manpower has always been exceptionally high. Govt. has allocated gas on priority basis 
to RCF. 
 
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizers Chemicals Limited (BVFCL) 
 
The company i s operating its Namrup -II unit and Namrup –III plants which are 
based on old and vintage technology. These urea units consume high energy as 
compared to present day plants. Both the plants have outlived their life resulting repeated 
machine breakdowns.  Th ere are also constraints in availability of original spares and 
surplus funds preventing the company to take up regular maintenance replacement of 
critical machine parts.  All the problems led to lower capacity utilisation and higher 
energy consumption. 
 
The company has taken various steps to overcome the constraints and improve 
capacity. 
 
(i) An in-depth internal study of critical areas of plants causing production limitations 
has been carried out.  Based on the study a short/medium term action plan has be en 
drawn up. Funds have been made available in phases from GOI as Plan/Non Plan loan 
under Renewal & Replacement Schemes for carrying renovation jobs. 
 
(ii) Various renovation/replacement of equipments have already been carried out 
which have led to saving s in energy. With this , the performance of the company is 
expected to improve significantly. 
 
(iii) BVFCL has already initiated steps for financial restructuring of the company. M/s 
Haldor Topsoe has been appointed as Process Licensor for comprehensive st udy of 
Ammonia plants and M/s PDIL for Urea plant and off -sites/utilities, situated at  Namrup-II 
and namrup III plant. Based on the study reports of Namrup -II & Namrup -III Plants 
carried out by M/S HTAS and PDIL and viability proposal prepared by PDIL the  BVFCL 
has submitted a comprehensive proposal for Long Term Viability of  the Company for 
submission to BRPSE. The proposal is under consideration in the Department of 
Fertilizers. The following dispensation has been sought from BRPSE for long term 
viability of the Company in this proposal: 
 
 Waiver of total cumulative interests of Rs. 373.43 crore accrued on GOI 
loans till 31.03.2011 
 Waiver of loan of Rs. 21.96 crore taken for revamp of Namrup -I, since this 
plants has been permanently stopped. 
 For Namrup-III, the capital expenditure of Rs 79.62 crores incurred beyond 
31.03.2003 for revamp of the project to be recognised by Govt. of India for 
calculating the concession rate of urea. 
 Since the company is facing technological/financial constraints, it is 
proposed to convert GOI loans provided to the company as interest free 
loan. However the company on earning cash profit, will service the GOI 
loans. 
 Relaxation in profitability clause for pay revision and enhancement of age 
of superannuation from 58 to 60 years as a special dispensation to meet 
the immediate crisis of manpower. 
 To setup New Brown Field Ammonia-Urea Plant at Namrup (Namrup-IV). 
 
Madras Fertilizers Limited(MFL) 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
36 
 Even though the Company was declared sick by BIFR in its hearing held on 
02.04.2009, the company’s operations for the year 22011-12, 2010-11 & 2009-10, ended 
with a profit of Rs.111.99 cr., Rs.169.86 Cr., & Rs.6.88 Cr. respectively against 
continuous losses incurred during 2003 -09.  The profits were mainly due to 
implementation of NPS –III amendment restricting the reduction in fixed cost to 10% from 
1.4.2009 and improved production performance.  The profit during 2010 -11 was higher 
due to account of benefits amounting to Rs.124.69 Cr under One Time Settlement with 
Financial Institutions. 
 
 Improvement in reliability of plant operations, energy efficiency and extension of 
Plant life could be achieved due to implementation of various renewal/replacement 
schemes out of Plan funds received as budgetary support.  The company was able to 
overcome the constraints and achieve 100% capacity utilization of its Urea plant by 
producing 4.78 LMT of Urea  during 2011 -12 which is the highest ever achieved since 
inception.  The specific energy consumption of urea has also registered significant 
improvement c ompared to FICC norms.  For  instance, the annual specific energy 
consumption was 7.517 Gcal/MT during 2011 -12 and 7.492 Gcal/MT during  2010 -11 as 
against FICC norm of 8337 Gcal/MT.  During the year 22011 -112, the Company could 
also restart its own produc tion of NPK Complex Fertilizers after a gap of more than 4 
years and could produce 0.36 LMT.  The Company has planned for production of 4.20 
LMT of NPK Complex fertilizers during the year 2012-13. 
 
MFL is implementing the projects of conversion of feedstoc k from Naphtha to 
Natural gas.  Provision is being kept to process Naphtha or Natural gas or a combination 
of both depending upon the availability.  Basic Engineering package has been received 
from M/s Haldor Topsoe AG. M/s Projects & Development India Ltd  (PDIL) has been 
engaged as engineering  consultant for execution on this project.  In order to source 
Natural Gas, Company has requested M/s IOCL & M/s GAIL to indicate feasibility of 
supplying 1.54 MMSCMD of Natural Gas and is awaiting a firm proposal from them. 
 
The total manpower strength of MFL as on 31.03.2012 was 733 as against the 
Board approved strength of 1032.  However, the company is taking adequate steps to 
supplement the retiring technical manpower and impart training to the new recruits to 
maintain the technical competence to run the Plants. 
 
Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) 
 
For the financial year 2011 -112 estimated profit of FACT is Rs.6.20 crore.  
Turnover achieved in 2011-12 is Rs.2875 crore, which is 17% higher than 201 0-11 level.  
Production has also been good with 6017 lakh MT of NP Complex Fertilizers and 1.63 
LMT of Ammonium sulphates and  37854 MT of  Caprolactam being produce. Company 
is generating additional revenue from sale of Phospho -Gypsum and achieved a new 
record in Annual sales of 7.3 lakh MT in the current year.  
 
The company is gearing up to switch over to LNG which is expected to be 
available by the end of  2012 at Kochi. Following are the major project proposals 
requiring high capital investment : 
 
 Capacity enhancement of NP plant at Cochin Division by 1000 Tons per 
day (TPD) 
 1500 TPD Urea plant at Udyogamandal 
 2800-3500 TPD sulphuric Acid Plant 
 A gypsum park at Cochin Division. 
 
Company has called for Expression of Interest from both Public and Private e ntities for 
JV participation in the above ventures. 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
37 
 
 The company has appointed M/s Deloitte to prepare a Financial restructuring 
report to be submitted to BRPSE. BRPSE has directed to submit the revised proposal. 
 
 
FCI Aravali gypsum and Minerals India Limited (FAGMIL) 
 
M/s. FCI Aravali Gypsum and Minerals India Limited (FAGMIL) is engaged in 
mining and marketing of Minerals Gypsum which is used for reclaiming Sodic Soil and as 
fertilizer in Agriculture as a sulphur Nutrient. The mineral Gypsum is also use d in cement 
industries as retarder.   
 
The Company has earned profit (PBT) of Rs. 29.44 Crore (approx) during the year 
2011-12 as against Rs. 19.89 Crore in the previous year. The Company’s sale turnover 
has been Rs. 66.53 Crore during the year 2011 -12 as against Rs. 61.48 Crore in the 
previous year.   
 
Projects and Development & India Limited (PDIL) 
 
PDIL is mainly engaged in design, engineering and consultancy services and also 
producing catalyst for the fertilizers and refinery industries. During the yea r 2010 -11 
company has earned a profit (PBT) of Rs. 31.78 crore. However, the finalization of 
accounts for the year 2011 -12 is under progress and the PBT (Provisional) for the year 
2011-12 is likely to be Rs. 34.63 crore. 
 
HFCL and FCIL 
 
 Pursuant to the de cision dated 30th oct. 2008 of the Cabinet, an Empowered 
Committee of Secretaries (ECOS) under the Chairmanship of Secretary (F) was 
constituted to evaluate all options for revival of closed units of Fertilizer Corporation of 
India Limited (FCIL) and Hindu stan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFCL) and make 
suitable recommendations. Based on the recommendations of the ECOS, a proposal 
was sent to CCEA, which approved the same in its meeting held on 4.8.2011 with the 
stipulation that Board for Industrial and Financial Restructuring (BIFR) proceedings be 
expedited and thereafter, the matter including changes, if any, required in bid 
parameters, be placed before the Committee for a final decision. BIFR in their meeting 
held on 18.8.2011 considered the issue and directed State Bank of India, the Operating 
Agency (OA), to examine the DRS in consultation with Department of Fertilizers and 
submit their recommendations within 3 months.  Subsequently, as directed by the BIFR, 
OA examined the DRS and submitted the same to BIFR on 17.2.2012.  The DRS was 
examined by the Consultant of BIFR and as desired by him, OA again submitted the 
DRS to BIFR on 17.3.2012 in a modified format.   
 
 At present, the DRS submitted by OA is under examination of BIFR. BIFR orders 
on miscellaneous applications submitted by  FCIL/HFCL for seeking first stage clearance 
are awaited. 
{Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II/(Vol.II) dated 28.08.2012} 
Recommendation Sl.No./Para No. 11 
 
Indian Fertilizer Joint Venture Abroad 
 
 Due to constraints in the availability of requisite raw materials including gas in the 
country, the Government is stated to have been encouraging Indian companies to 
establish joint venture production facilities with buy -back arrangement in other countries, 
which are rich in fertilizer resources.  In this regard, the Committee note with satisfaction 
that the Government has been encouraging Indian companies to establish joint venture 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
38 
projects in other countries which have rich reso urces of natural gas and rock phosphate 
as it would help in augmenting the supply of fertilizers.  The Committee, however,  
observe that only a token amount of Rs. 1 lakh has been allocated to joint ventures 
abroad in BE 2011 -12 and in the BE of 2012 -13.  To encourage more joint ventures 
abroad, the Committee feel that more amount should be allocated  in the budgetary 
provisions  under the head.  The Committee also feel that process of forming joint 
ventures with the foreign countries such as Syria, Mali, B elarus, etc., should be finalized 
and expedited as soon as possible so that the benefits of joint ventures are accrued by 
the country’s farmers.  The Committee recommend that the Government should 
encourage these initiatives and explore the possibilities o f new joint ventures which 
would help in making  available assured sources of supply of raw materials to the 
fertilizer industries.  The Committee also desire that some incentives should be given to 
the Indian companies to explore and establish joint ventures abroad. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The possibilities of having access to the Natural Resources required for fertilizers 
and setting up of Joint Ventures fertilizer projects in the Countries rich in fertilizer 
resources, is being explored.  The token pro vision of Rs. 1 lakh for joint ventures abroad 
was kept in the BE 2010 -11 and BE 2011 -12 with a view to keep the head alive with the 
consideration that in case of some concrete development in this regard, Department of 
Expenditure / Planning Commission wou ld be requested for requisite funds.  As regards 
providing incentives for the Indian Fertilizer entities for exploration and establishing joint 
ventures abroad, the same was addressed in the investment policy of 2008, which has 
now been reconsidered for re vision and has been submitted for approval of the 
competent authority before it is sent for consideration and approval of CCEA.  Further, 
the Department of Fertilizers forwarded a proposal for setting up of the Sovereign Fund 
on the fertilizer resources/as sets abroad to DEA on 13.01.2012.  It is learnt that a 
proposal for creation of dedicated Sovereign Fund for the purpose of acquiring natural 
resources/raw material resources abroad on energy sector, including fertilizer sector 
also, is under active consideration of the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA). 
 
{Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II/(Vol.II) dated 28.08.2012} 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
39 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
NIL 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
40 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY  
THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
NIL 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
41 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE 
 
Recommendation Sl.No./Para No. 7 
 
Feedstock Policy / Allocation of Gas to Fertilizers Industry 
 
 The Committee observe that out of 20 units all based on gas with 4 uni ts  based 
on gas with 4 units based on naptha and 4 on FO/LHS as feeds stock.  The total 
requirement of natural gas for existing 20 units is largely met from supplies under APM 
gas, PMT gas, JV gas, RIL gas and RLNG gas. The Committee have been informed th at 
eight unit proposing to set up expansion area units of 11.5 to 12.7 lakh tone capacities 
require approx.2.2-2.4 mmscmd of gas by each unit.  The total amount of gas required 
during next five years will be 48.73 mmscmd.  The Committee would like to be ap prised 
about the status report about the progress in allocation of gas to the fertilizer units.  At 
the same time the Committee expect the Department of Fertilizers to vigorously pursue 
the matter with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas so that effe ctive and 
expeditious steps are taken by them to achieve these targets. 
 
 The Committee need hardly emphasis that pricing and firm availability of natural 
gas for existing and new units of fertilizer companies are the pre -requisites to increase 
their indig enous production and would, therefore, desire the Department to play a 
proactive role in association with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas towards 
allocation of gas for the existing and new fertilizer plants in the country. 
 
 The Committee are con strained to point out that the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (MOPNG) has been non -committal on supplying gas on long term basis at 
an agreed price to the proposed new investments in the fertilizer sector as has been 
repeatedly requested by the Department of Fertilizers. Also, no decision on nomination of 
a single nodal agency has  been taken by the Government to supply gas to fertilizer 
industries and to address various issues such as gas contracts, take or pay liabilities, 
variable gas pricing, gas  shortfalls etc. The Committee also regret to observe that no 
specific decision has been taken regarding the issue of nominating GAIL (India) Limited 
as the nodal authority for supply of gas to fertilizer industry.  The Committee are of the 
view that the D epartment of Fertilizers should continue to pursue the matter vigorously 
with the Ministry  of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MOPNG) on the both aspects i.e. supply 
of natural gas to fertilizer industry  as per fixed schedule and nomination of a nodal 
agency f or supply of gas to the fertilizer industry.  The Committee would like to be 
informed of the precise action taken in this regard within three months of the presentation 
of the Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
“The Department of Fertilizers is regularly ta king up the issue of adequate allocation of 
Natural Gas to fertilizer sector on first priority.  So far as nomination of nodal agency for 
supply of gas to fertilizers sector is concerned, the issue was taken up with the Ministry 
of Petroleum & Natural Gas.  The Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas vide their OM No. 
L-15016/2/2010-GP-II, dated 7 th May 2012, intimated that the Department of Fertilizers 
may take a view in the matter based on commercial consideration.  The Department of 
Fertilizers has received a communication from CMD, GAIL that GAIL is procuring LNG 
for the fertilizer as an aggregator.  The GAIL has constituted an Empowered Committee 
consists of Directors including representatives from the Government of India i.e. 
MoP&NG.  On the request of GAI L(India) Limited, Joint Secretary(P&A) from DoF has 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
42 
been nominated as a member of Empowered Committee of GAIL, to decide the issues 
relating to fertilizer sector.“ 
{Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II/(Vol.II) dated 28.08.2012} 
Recommendation Sl.No./Para No. 10 
 
Closed Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) 
 
 Out of the nine Public  Sector Undertakings (PSUs), Hindustan Fertilizers 
Corporation Limited (HFCL), Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL), BVFCL and FCIL ar e sick 
units.  Out of these four, the units of FCIL and HFCL are presently lying closed since 
2002.  MFL and BVFCL are operational but are sick companies under the administrative 
control of the Department of Fertilizers.  The Committee have been given to u nderstand 
that an Empowered Committee of Secretaries (ECOS) was constituted in October 2008 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Fertilizers) and Secretaries of Department of 
Expenditure, Department of Disinvestment, Planning Commission, Department of Publ ic 
Enterprise and Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas as Members to look into all the 
financial models for revival of each of the closed units.  Further, the Committee have 
been informed that for FCIL and HFCL, based on the recommendations of ECOS a note 
have been prepared and forwarded to Cabinet Committee for their consideration.  The 
CCEA has approved the proposal in its meeting with the stipulation that Board for 
Industrial and Financial Restructuring (BIFR) proceedings be expedited. For MFL, BIFR 
has directed Operating Agency (State Bank of India) to workout financial restructuring of 
MFL  considering the conversion of GOI  loan into equity.  The operating agency i.e. SBI 
has submitted its report to BIFR.  Now, MFL is being requested to examine viability of the 
Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS). For BVFCL, it has been suggested / directed to get a 
detailed financial restructuring proposal made by consultant for submission to Board for 
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE). Similarly, initia tives have also 
stated to have been taken by the Government to wipe out the accumulated losses of 
MFL and BVFCL and to make these PSUs commercially viable till the availability of gas.  
The Committee would like the Department of Fertilizers to take effecti ve and expeditious 
steps to canalize and implement the whole revival process for the closed and loss -
making PSUs.  The Committee also desire that the revival of closed and sick public 
sector undertakings should done in a time bound manner and a schedule sh ould be 
chalked out for the revival of closed and sick fertilizer PSUs.  The details of such a revival 
package may be intimated to the Committee within three months of presentation of the 
Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The status of revival of HFCL & FC IL and Financial Restructuring of MFL and 
BVFCL are as under; 
 
Revival of HFCL and FCIL: 
 
Pursuant to the decision dated 30th oct. 2008 of the Cabinet, an Empowered 
Committee of Secretaries (ECOS) under the Chairmanship of Secretary (F) was 
constituted to evaluate all options for revival of closed units of Fertilizer Corporation of 
India Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFCL) and make 
suitable recommendations. Based on the recommendations of the ECOS, a proposal 
was sent to CCEA,  which approved the same in its meeting held on 4.8.2011 with the 
stipulation that Board for Industrial and Financial Restructuring (BIFR) proceedings be 
expedited and thereafter, the matter including changes, if any, required in bid 
parameters, be placed before the Committee for a final decision. BIFR in their meeting 
held on 18.8.2011 considered the issue and  directed State Bank of India, the Operating 
Agency (OA), to examine the DRS in consultation with Department of Fertilizers and 
submit their recommendations within 3 months.  Subsequently, as directed by the BIFR, 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
43 
OA examined the DRS and submitted the same to BIFR on 17.2.2012.  The DRS was 
examined by the Consultant of BIFR and as desired by him, OA again submitted the 
DRS to BIFR on 17.3.2012 in a modified format.   
 
 At present, the DRS submitted by OA is under examination of BIFR. BIFR orders 
on miscellaneous applications submitted by FCIL/HFCL, for seeking first stage clearance 
are awaited. 
 
Restructuring of BVFCL. 
 
For financial restructuring of the BVFCL, company has appointed M/s Haldor 
Topsoe as Process Licensor for comprehensive study of Ammonia plants and M/s PDIL 
for Urea plant and off -sites/utilities, situated at  Namrup -II and namrup III plant.  A 
comprehensive proposal for revival of the company will be prepared based on the 
technical study report of by Process Licensor M/s Halder Topsoe and PDIL. A thorough 
study at the existing Namrup -II and Namrup -III plants has already been carried out by 
them and they have submitted a draft reports in  August 2011. In the reports, energy 
saving schemes as well as required renovation to operate the plants at sustained Load 
have been suggested. Based on the study reports of Namrup -II & Namrup -III Plants 
carried out by M/S HTAS and PDIL and viability propo sal prepared by PDIL the BVFCL 
has submitted a comprehensive proposal for Long Term Viability of  the Company for 
submission to BRPSE. The proposal is under consideration in the Department of 
Fertilizers. The following dispensation has been sought from BRP SE for long term 
viability of the Company in this proposal: 
 
 Waiver of total cumulative interests of Rs. 373.43 crore accrued on GOI 
loans till 31.03.2011 
 Waiver of loan of Rs. 21.96 crore taken for revamp of Namrup -I, since this 
plants has been permanently stopped. 
 For Namrup-III, the capital expenditure of Rs 79.62 crores incurred beyond 
31.03.2003 for revamp of the project to be recognised by Govt. of India for 
calculating the concession rate of urea. 
 Since the company is facing technological/financial c onstraints, it is 
proposed to convert GOI loans provided to the company as interest free 
loan. However the company on earning cash profit,  will service the GOI 
loans. 
 Relaxation in profitability clause for pay revision and enhancement of age 
of superannua tion from 58 to 60 years as a special dispensation to meet 
the immediate crisis of manpower. 
 To setup New Brown Field Ammonia-Urea Plant at Namrup (Namrup-IV). 
 
Restructuring of MFL: 
 
With regard to restructuring of MFL it may be mentioned that M/s PDIL ha s 
submitted its report and recommended the conversion of GOI loan into equity and waiver 
of outstanding interest liability towards GOI.  The views of foreign promoter NICO 
(Holding 25.77% equity stake) has also been received, who have opposed for sale of 
assets and conversion of Govt. Loan into Equity.  
 
Since MFL is a sick company and BIFR has appointed State Bank of India as a 
Operating Agency for submitting a Financial restructuring proposal for MFL, the report of 
PDIL and the views of Foreign promoter NICO was forwarded to SBI for consideration. 
 
State Bank of India (SBI) had considered the viability of the proposal and views of 
foreign promoter NICO and submitted the report on the financial restructuring package of 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
44 
MFL. The Board of Director of the company considered to report of the OA and approved 
it.   
 
 After considering the views of the Board of MFL, NICO and Operating Agency, a 
BRPSE note for financial restructuring of MFL was circulated for inter -ministerial 
comment. The comments from the concerne d Ministries/Departments have been 
received and considered in the DoF. Deptt. of Expenditure and Planning commission 
have been requested to submit the fresh comments on the proposal. 
  
 In the meantime the BIFR in its hearing held on 25th August 2011 has directed the 
Operating Agency (State Bank of India) to workout financial restructuring of MFL 
considering the conversion of GOI loan into equity. The operating Agency has submitted 
its report to BIFR.    BIFR hearing was held on 07 th May 2012 NICO one of th e equity 
holders in MFL has objected to DRS proposal regarding conversion of GOI loan to 
equity. The matter is pending with BIFR. 
 
{Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II/(Vol.II) dated 28.08.2012} 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        GOPINATH MUNDE, 
17  DECEMBER, 2012                        Chairman, 
26 Agrahayna, 1934 (SAKA)        Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
45 
 
APPENDIX – I 
MINUTES 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 10 December, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 
1615 hrs. in Room No.63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri A.A. Jinnah     - In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
3. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
5. Shri  Kamlesh Paswan  
6. Shri  Amarnath Pradhan 
7. Shri Tufani Saroj 
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
10. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Additional Director 
 
2. As the Chairman could not attend the sitting due to pre -occupation, the members 
chose Shri A.A Jinnah, MP and a member of the Committee, to act as the Chairman.  
The Acting Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the following 
draft Reports : 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty -fifth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on  Demands for 
Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of Fertilizers);   
(ii) *******  
(iii) ******* 
(iv) ******* 
4. After some discussion, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*** Matters not related to this Report. 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.30 (Fertilizers).Doc 
46 
  
APPENDIX – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIFTH REPORT  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS 
AND FERTILIZERS (2011-12) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-13)’  
OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 
 
11 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 1, 2, 3,4,5,6,8, 9 and 11)   
 
09 
Percentage of Total 81.82% 
III Observation / Recommendation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.No. Nil) 
 
00 
Percentage of Total 0% 
IV Observation / Recommendation in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.No. Nil) 
 
00 
Percentage of Total 0% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are of interim nature:-  
 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl.No.7 and 10)  
 
02 
Percentage of Total 18.18% 
 
 