    
17 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2010-11) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2011/Sharvana, 1933 (Saka) 


 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
2 
 
CC&F No. 17 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2010-11) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  04.08.2011 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   04.08.2011 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2011/Sharvana, 1933 (Saka) 


 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
3 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2010-11) 
 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Smt. Susmita Bauri  
3 Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle  
4 Shri Prabhatsinh P. Chauhan  
5 Smt. Santosh Chowdhary  
6 Shri K.D. Deshmukh  
7 Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar  
8 Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
9 Shri Madhu Koda  
10 Shri N. Peethambara Kurup  
11. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato  
12 Shri Jagdambika Pal  
13 Shri Tapas Paul  
14 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
15 Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  
16 Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar  
17 Shri Ajit Singh  
18 Shri N. Chaluvaraya Swamy  
19 Shri Narendra Singh Tomar  
20 #Dr. Manda Jagannath 
21  Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Silvius Condpan  
23 Smt. Naznin Faruque  
24 Shri A.A. Jinnah  
25 Shri Brijlal Khabri  
26 Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani  
27 Shri Raghunandan Sharma  
28 Dr. C.P. Thakur  
29 &Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
30 &Shri Abani Roy  
 31 &Shri Biswajit Daimary 
  
SECRETARIAT   
1. Shri N. K. Sapra   - Secretary 
2.  Shri Ashok Sarin   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri  C.S.Joon   - Director 
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Additional Director 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
&  NOMINATED W.E.F. 21.09.2010 
#      NOMINATED W.E.F. 04.10.2010 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
4 
 
  
                                                                
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-11) ………………………………... (iii) 
Introduction. …………………………………………………..………………………… (v) 
Chapter I Report ……………….………………………………………………….. 1 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
17 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
33 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee………………………………………………………………. 
35 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited …………………………………… 
39 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2010-11) held on 31 May 2011. 
45-46 
II Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2010-11) held on 18 July, 2011 
47-48 
III Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (15th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2009-10) on 
„Demands for Grants (2010-2011)‟ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
49 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2010 -11) 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Seventeenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations / recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2010 -11) on „Demands for Grants 
(2010-11)‟ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals).  
 
2. The Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 26 April, 2010.  The Action Taken replies 
of Government to all observations / recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 21 July , 2010.  Subsequently, at the behest of the Committee, the 
Department vide LSS OM dated 3 June 2011 was requested to furnish latest/ updated 
Action Taken replies on the previous Action Taken replies in order to cover any new 
development that might have occurred.  Accordingly, t he Department furnished their 
updated Action Taken replies on 20 June, 2011. The Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (2010-11) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 18 
July, 2011. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations / 
recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
28 July , 2011                                  Gopinath Munde 
6 Shravana, 1933 (Saka)                                                  Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
6 
 
                                                        
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Com mittee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fer tilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 26 April 2010.  The Report 
contained 12 Observations / Recommendations. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish replies to the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report within three months from the date of 
presentation of the Report, i.e. by 26 July 2010. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the 12 Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from  the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals  vide their O.M. No. 16(2)/2010-Fin I dated 21 July 2010.  
Subsequently, at the instance of the Committee the Department of Chemical s and 
Petrochemicals were requested on 03.06.2011 to furnish updated Action Taken Replies  
regarding the details about the Supplementary Demands for Grants obtained by the 
Department during 2010 -11. Accordingly,  the Depar tment furnished their Action Taken 
Replies on 20.06.2011. 
 
3.  The Action Taken Replies of the Government is as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
Sl. Nos. 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 and 12.  
 
 (Total =08) 
Chapter-II  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government‟s replies  
 Sl.No. 7 
(Total =01) 
Chapter-III  
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply  of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration  

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
7 
 
 Sl.Nos. 1, 3 and 11. 
(Total =03) 
Chapter-IV  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are of interim nature 
  
(Total =Nil) 
Chapter-V  
 
 
4. The Committee desi re that the Action Taken Notes on the                   
Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report should be 
furnished expeditiously.   
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government o n some of 
their Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
 
A. CONTINUATION OF STIMULUS PACKAGES EMPHASIZED 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.1) 
 
6. The Committee in their Original Report had noted that the production of major 
chemicals and petrochemica ls had recorded negative growth rate i.e. ( -) 5.24% and ( -) 
5.56% respectively during the year 2008 -09.  Consequent upon announcement of 
Stimulus Packages by the Government in December 2008 and January 2009, the growth 
of major chemicals, petrochemicals an d intermediates was stated to have shown slight 
improvement.  During the period April 2009 to January 2010, the growth in chemicals 
was 1.84% and that for petrochemicals was 0.98%.  However, this improvement was not 
encouraging when compared with the perfo rmance during the period from 2003 -04 to 
2005-06 which for major chemicals ranged from 3.62% to 6.79% and for major 
petrochemicals between 1.61% to 6.91%.  While emphasizing the need for continuance 
of Stimulus Packages for the time being, the Committee ha d recommended that the 
Department should proactively play the designated role of facilitator for development of 
chemicals and petrochemicals and ensure early stabilization of chemicals and 
petrochemicals industry. 
 
7. In reply to aforesaid recommendation, the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals have stated as under:- 
“ The global slowdown effect was not as prominent in India as in other countries 
due to domestic demand.  The stimulus package provided by the Ministry of Finance 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
8 
 
helped in bringing abou t a positive growth rate for improving it further.  Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals supported the continuation of the stimulus package for 
2010-11 also.”  
 
8. The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals in their Action Taken Replies 
dated 20.06.2011 has stated as under:- 
 “Petrochemicals Industry: Post-recovery period has seen Petrochemicals Industry 
growing at a robust growth rate of 8.7% in the year 2010-11 (April to March).”  
 “Chemicals Industry: Major Chemicals have grown at a rate of 6.4 % during 2010-
11”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
9. The Committee in their Original Report had observed that consequent upon 
announcement of Stimulus Packages  in December 2008 and January 2009,  the 
growth rate of major chemicals and petrochemicals  which earlier had recorded 
negative growth rate in 2008 -09 was stated to have shown improvement . The 
Committee had, therefore,  emphasized the need for continuance of Stimulus 
Packages and recommended the Department  of Chemicals and Petrochemicals  to 
play the design ated role of facilitator for development and early stabilization of 
chemicals and petrochemicals industry.   In this regard, the Ministry in their action 
taken reply have stated that Stimulus Packages helped in bringing about a positive 
growth rate  in production of chemicals and petrochemicals  and they supported 
the continuation of Stimulus Packages for 2010 -11 also. The Committee are 
constrained to point out that the Department have neither clearly indicated the 
status as regards continuance of Stimulus Pa ckages nor mentioned about the role 
played by them for the development and stabilization of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals industry. The Committee express their dissatisfaction over such 
casual attitude of the Department in furnishing replies to their recomm endations. 
The Committee hope that in future  their recommendations are taken in all its 
seriousness and proper replies furnished . The Committee also  expect that the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should furnish the status as regards 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
9 
 
continuance of Stimulus Packages as well as the role played by them for the 
development of the Chemicals and Petrochemicals industry at the earliest . As 
regards the updated ATR, the Committee observe that the  Department has only 
provided the percentage rate of growt h of the industries in the Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals sector without touching upon  the substantive recommendation  of 
the Committee. Hence, the need for reiteration.  
 
B.  SUPPLEMENTARY GRANTS FOR ASSAM GAS CRACKER PROJECT 
 
   (Recommendation Sl. No.2) 
 
10. The Committee note that a total outlay of Rs.563.83 crore has been approved for 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals for the 11 th Five Year Plan.   Out of 
this, Rs.200 crore has  been allocated for Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP).  The 
Committee, however, noted that the actual allocation of Rs.126.26 crore made during the 
year 2009-10 for AGCP was much less than projected and demanded figure of Rs.471 
crore. Similarly, in the year 2010-11, the Department made a demand of Rs.900 crore for 
AGCP against which the Planning Commission/ Ministry of Finance have allocated only 
Rs.212.74 crore.  The Committee fail  to understand as to how the project shall be 
completed by the scheduled date i.e. April 2012, if the allocations are drastically curtailed 
by the Planning Commission.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that Planning 
Commission/ Ministry of Finance should provide adequate additional funds at RE stage 
and subsequently also so that this project does not suffer on account of constraint of 
funds.  
 
11. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance have been apprised of the 
concerns of the Standing Committee so as to enable them to appropriately address the 
issue of allocation of requisite funds for the Assam Gas Cracker Project. The Department 
is also making efforts with Ministry of Finance for allocation of the requisite funds at RE 
stage (and in the subsequent annual plans) so that the project does not get affected 
adversely on this account.”   
 
12. At the instance of the Committee, t he Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals in their Action Taken Replies dated 20.06.2011 has furnished the 
following information regarding Supplementary Demands for Grants:- 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
10 
 
“Allocation of additional requisite funds at RE stage (and in the subsequent annual 
plans) was taken up with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance. As a 
result, additional funds of Rs. 579 crore were provided for the Assam Gas Cracker 
Project at RE Stage in 2010 -11. Further, an allocation of Rs. 6 75.71 crore has been 
made for the year 2011 -12 (BE) and additional funds would be sought from Ministry of 
Finance at RE stage as per requirement.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
13. The Committee note that the Department had obta ined an additional 
allocation of Rs. 579 crore through the first Supplementary Demands for Grants 
2010-11. Now that the necessary funding has been obtained, the Committee hope 
that the Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP) will be completed by the scheduled 
date, i.e. April 2012. The Committee expect the Department to take necessary steps 
so that this objective is achieved. 
 
C. JUDICIOUS AND UNIFORM UTILIZATION OF ALLOCATED FUNDS 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No.3) 
 
14. The Committee in their Original Report had observed that Rs.239.75 crore were 
provided for plan expenditure at BE stage for the Department during 2009 -10 which was 
eventually revised to Rs.405.82 crore at RE stage.  The increase at RE stage, according 
to the Ministry, was mainly due to the provision of Rs.1 66.07 crore for Assam Gas 
Cracker Project (AGCP).  The Committee observe d with regret  that either the 
Department failed to anticipate the need for such an expenditure at BE stage, this being 
an ongoing project, or the Planning Commission did not provide th e requisite funds at BE 
stage that might have been asked for by the Department.  The Committee had expected 
due diligence by the Department while making proper and realistic estimate for such an 
important project and also in pursuing the Planning Commissio n to allocate the same.  
The Committee wished to be apprised whether any responsibility has been fixed on the 
erring officers and disciplinary action taken against them.  Further, the dat a pertaining to 
the actual expenditure incurred by the Department dur ing 2009-10 had indicated that a 
major portion of the funds had been incurred by the Department during the last 2 -3 
months of the financial year.  This was evident from the fact that the Department had 
spent only Rs. 233.59 crore till 31 January 2010 where as the actual expenditure of the 
Department by 15 March 2010 was Rs.407.41 crore.  The Committee felt that prudent 
financial practices warrant that the allocated funds are incurred evenly during the year as 
far as possible.  The Committee had expected the Department to take suitable necessary 
steps in future to ensure that allocated funds are spent judiciously and uniformly during 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
11 
 
the year.  The Planning Commission/ Ministry of Finance were also requested to ensure 
that the requisite funds are provided in t ime lest it should retard the progress of this 
important project.  
 
15. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“In the Annual Plan Budget 2009 -10, the Department had requested to provide 
Rs.471.00 crore in the budget outlay toward s Capital Subsidy to Assam Gas Cracker 
Project for 2009 -10. The allocation for 2009 -10 at BE stage was restricted to Rs.239.75 
crores. However, during the budget announcement 2009 -10 also, Finance Minister in his 
speech had announced increase in the budget  outlay for Assam Gas Cracker Project. 
Accordingly, Ministry of Finance provided additional budget to the tune of Rs.166.07 
crore according to the Business Plan of Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited in the 
first supplementary grant for 2009 -10.  The D epartment regularly monitors the physical 
and financial progress of the Project to ensure that allocated funds are spent judiciously 
as per the approved Business Plan.”  
 
16. At the instance of the Committee, the  Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals in their Action Taken Replies dated 20.06.2011 has furnished the 
following information regarding Supplementary Demands for Grants:- 
 “In the year 2010 -11, an amount of Rs. 212.74 crore was initially provided for 
AGCP at BE Stage and additional funds of Rs.  579 crore were provided at RE Stage. 
Accordingly, the funds including additional allocations we re released to BCPL in 2009 -10 
& 2010-11 uniformly by the Department as per staggered allocations. The project is in 
advanced stage of implementation and the Department is making efforts for spending the 
funds judiciously and uniformly during the year. The project has never suffered on 
account of financial constraints.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
17. The Committee had noted that the amount provided for plan expe nditure of 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals during the year 2009 -10 was 
substantially revised at RE stage due to provision for Assam Gas Cracker Project 
(AGCP) and observed that either the Department had failed to anticipate the need 
for such an expenditure at BE stage or the Planning Commission did not provide 
the requisite funds that might have been asked for by the Department. The 
Committee had desired for provision of requisite funds for the project in time and 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
12 
 
also recommended the Departm ent to take suitable steps to ensure the utilization 
of allocated funds judiciously and uniformly throughout the year. In their Action 
Taken Reply, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has  furnished the 
details regarding  funds allocated for AGCP and stated that they regularly monitor 
the physical and financial progr ess to ensure that allocated fu nds are spent 
judiciously as per the approved Bus iness plan. The Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has, however, not furnished any information regarding steps taken 
by them for judicious and uniform utilization of allocated funds  for all the schemes 
of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals . While expressing their 
displeasure over such incomplete response to their specific recommendation, the 
Committee reiterate that the Department should ensure that the allocated funds for 
all the schemes are utilized evenly throughout the year. The Committee also desire 
to be apprised of steps taken in this direction by the Department  of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals within three months of presentation of the Report.  In the updated 
ATR provided by the Department, the Committee observe that the Department has 
only made vague promises to spend funds judiciously and uniformly without 
addressing the specific recommendations of the Committee. While reiterating their 
earlier recommendations, the Committee hope that the Department will take their 
recommendations seriously and take concrete measures to address them. 
 
D.        EXPANSION OF CIPET CENTRES 
(Recommendation Sl. No 4) 
 
18. The Central Institute of Plastic Engineering and Technology (CIPET) is an 
autonomous Institute functioning under the administrative control of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals with the objective of providing training to man power in 
different disciplines of Plastics Engineering and Technology and Technical support / 
consultancy services to the plastics and allied industries. The Committee note that plan 
outlay of Rs. 152.94 crore (Including Rs. 83 crore for new schemes of pet rochemicals) 
and Rs. 0.53 crore non -plan has been provided for CIPET for the year 2010 -11. This 
allocation indicates substantial increase in funds as compared to that of 2009 -10 which 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
13 
 
was Rs. 39.13 crore (including Rs. 5 crore for new schemes of petrochemi cals) under 
plan and Rs. 3 crore under non -plan. The Committee observe that the allocated amount 
is to be utilized for various schemes of CIPET, viz. enhancement of training capabilities, 
Creation of Civil & Technical Infrastructure for expansion of CIPET centres, 
establishment of new CIPET centres, etc. considering the important role played by 
CIPET in Plastic Engineering and Technology, particularly in plastic waste management, 
which is the need of the hour, the Committee hope that the Department will tak e 
necessary steps for judicious and optimal utilization of substantially increased funds for 
all the schemes so that the CIPET strives to enhance the academic and professional 
superiority of the organization. The Committee also desire the Department to tak e 
suitable steps for expansion of network of CIPET centres throughout the country with 
particular reference to areas where there is concentration of plastic industry. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of various schemes of CIPET 
undertaken during the year 2010-11. 
  
19. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
“CIPET has taken necessary steps for judicious and optimal utilization of funds for 
various schemes under XIth Plan. Considering the exponential growth of C IPET, the 
following enhancement proposals are being considered by the administrative Ministry for 
which allocation has been made during Annual Plan 2010 -11 by the Planning 
Commission: 
         Rs. in  Crores 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme Original 
Allocation 
Increase Revised 
Allocation 
1. Establishment of two new CIPET 
centres (ATPDC, Madurai) 0.01 12.40 12.40 
2. Technology upgradation for New 
courses to be offered by CIPET  17.00 30.00 47.00 
3. 
Formulation, Organizing and 
participation  in National Programm e  
for Development of Plastics 
Manufacturing sector in India under 
UNDIO-ICAMT programme 
0.80 01.00 01.80 
4. R & D in Emerging areas 4.98 22.00 26.98 
5. 
Creation of Civil & Technical 
infrastructure for expansion of CIPET 
Centres. 
18.34 20.00 38.34 
 
The year 2010 -11 has witnessed an exponential growth for CIPET in Academic, 
Technology Support and Research & Development services to the plastics and allied 
industries. The Institute had achieved an annual growth of 12.35% in revenue 
generation. CIPET has con structed virtual class rooms, virtual laboratories, academic 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
14 
 
block, HRD centre, hostel to match the additional requirement of enhanced intake of 
students.  Various Faculty Development Programmes in India and abroad are provided to 
CIPET faculties in order to keep the Human Resources always at high esteem.   
 
With substantial increase in financial support during 2010 -11 under the existing 
ongoing schemes, CIPET can accelerate its growth by way of procuring additional Plant 
& Machinery and creation of additio nal Civil & Infrastructural facilities which includes 
hostel for Under Graduate and Post Graduate students, lect ure theatre s, tutorial / 
seminar halls at 4 High Learning Centres etc. to augment the increased intake of 
students in Long-term academic programmes and imparting enhanced Skill Development 
training programmes to the participants from the Plastics industries.  This is evident from 
the fact that the no. of students enrolled in Long -term academic programmes which has 
gone up from 5926 during the year  2008-09 to 7458 during the year 2009 -10.  Further, it 
is anticipated to increase to about 9264 during 2010 -11. (Actual figure for 2010 -11 is 
8853). Similarly, the participants benefited through the Short -term courses has gone up 
from 13,194 during the yea r 2008 -09 to 15,677 during the year 2009 -10 and it is 
expected to touch a figure of 18500 during the year 2010-11 (Actual figure for 2010-11 is 
19553).  
 
The following new academic programmes were introduced during the XI Five Year 
Plan (2008-09 to 2009-10): 
 
1.  Four Year Full Time under Graduate Programme (B.Tech.) in Plastics 
Engineering/Technology – at CIPET - Ahmedabad, Bhubaneswar, Chennai & 
Lucknow. 
 
2. Two Year Full Time Post Graduate Programme (M.Tech.) – Polymer 
Nanotechnology – at LARPM, Bhubaneswar – R&D Wing of CIPET.  
3. Two Year Full Time Post Graduate Programme (M.E.) in CAD/CAM  - at ARSTPS, 
Chennai – R &D Wing of CIPET. 
 
Further CIPET has planned to introduce the following new academic programmes 
from the year 2010-11: 
1.  Four Year Full Time Under Grad uate Programme (B.Tech.) Manufacturing 
Engineering/Technology – at CIPET - Ahmedabad, Bhubaneswar, Chennai & 
Lucknow. 
 
2. Four Year Full Time Under Graduate Programme (B.Tech.) – Plastics 
Engineering/Technology – at CIPET Haldia and Murthal. 
 
3. Five Year Integra ted Post Graduate Programme (M.Sc. (Tech.)) – Material 
Science & Engineering – at CIPET, Bhubaneswar. 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
15 
 
CIPET has already taken necessary steps to identify the areas where there is high 
concentration of plastics and its allied industries and accordingly , initiated the process of 
establishing the following: 
1. Advanced Tooling Product Development Centre (ATPDC) at Madurai - a unit of 
CIPET, Chennai in order to cater to plastic product design, tooling and trained 
manpower requirement of the plastics industry in S outhern part of India at a 
project cost of Rs.24.80 crores (50:50% cost sharing between Centre and State 
Government).  
 
2.  Advanced Plastics Processing Technology Centre (APPTC) is being planned at 
Balasore in order to cater to manpower and technology suppor t needs of the 
plastics processing industries in Eastern part of the country in general and 
surrounding areas of Balasore in particular at a  project cost of Rs.15.00 crore  
(50:50% cost sharing between Centre and State Government).  
 
20. The Department of C hemicals and Petrochemicals in their Action Taken Replies 
dated 20.06.2011 has stated as under:- 
 
“Regarding the expansion of CIPET by way of establishment of CIPET Centres/ 
Service Centres/ Testing Centre s, the committee comprising of representatives of 
CIPET, Administrative Ministry, Planning Commission, All India Plastic s 
Manufacturers‟ Association (AIPMA) has recommended to establish a new 
Plastics Testing Laboratory at Madurai, Testing centre at Daman, Specialized 
Centre at Kerala, a Centre at Uttarakh and after detailed deliberation in view of 
large plastic units coming up there. The proposal is under active consideration of 
the administrative Ministry.”  
21. Further, at  the instance of the Committee, the  Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals in th eir Action Taken Replies dated 20.06.2011 has furnished the 
following information regarding Supplementary Demands for Grants:- 
 “A token supplementary of Rs. 0.01 crore to utilize the savings through re -
appropriation in the 2 nd Batch of Supplementary Deman ds for Grants 2010 -11 was 
obtained for the following purposes:- 
(i) To Provide Central Government share for setting up of Advanced Plastic 
Processing Technology Centre (APPTC) at Balasore, Orissa, as a sub -
Centre of Central Institute of Plastic Engineering and  Technology (CIPET) 
at a cost of Rs. 15 crore with matching State Government contribution 
spread over a period of three years, the first year contribution of Rs. 4 crore 
was obtained through 2nd Supplementary Demands for Grants 2010-11. 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
16 
 
(ii) An amount of Rs. 0. 08 crore was obtained for Central Institute of Plastic  
Engineering & Technology (CIPET) on account of Exchange Rate 
difference for implementation of the United Nations International 
Development Organization (UNIDO) -International Centre for Advancement 
of Manufacturing Technology (ICAMT) Programme.” 
 
22.                    Comments of the Committee 
The Committee observe that the Department had obtained Rs. 4 crore during 
the Second Supplementary as part of the share of the Central Government for the 
setting up of Advanced Plastic Processing Technology Centre (APPTC) at 
Balasore, Orissa, as a sub -Centre of Central Institute of Plastic Engineering and 
Technology (CIPET) whose projected cost of Rs. 15 crore is to be shared  with the 
State Government. The Committ ee also note that the Centre is to be completed in 
three years and this allocation is for the first year. The Committee expect that the 
Department will properly monitor the progress of the Project so that it is 
completed within its scheduled date of comple tion. The Committee also hope that 
the Department will take expeditious steps to expand the network of CIPET centres 
throughout the country. 
 
E.      SETTING UP OF PASTIC WASTE MANAGEMENT CENTRES 
(Recommendation Sl.No 5) 
 
23. The Committee had noted that P lastic Waste Management Centre (PWMC), 
Guwahati started functioning from 31 st August 2009 and was involved in converting all 
kinds of plastic waste into value added products. The Committee had also noted that the 
department have initiated the process of se tting up of PWMC in Delhi. Considering the 
importance of plastic waste management as an important tool in checking the 
environmental degradation and in view of the fact that the Government of Delhi has 
recently initiated various steps to curb the pollution  caused by Plastics, the Committee 
had recommended that the department should take up the matter with Government of 
Delhi so that steps can be taken expeditiously in a time -bound manner for setting up of 
PWMC in Delhi. They had also desired the Government to make sincere efforts to ensure 
that such centres are set up in other parts of the country also. 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
17 
 
24. The Committee had also expressed the opinion that for setting up of Plastic Waste 
Management Centres, a separate fund has to be created. In order to gene rate funds for 
the same, the Committee had expressed  the view that department may examine the 
feasibility of imposing some kind of cess on industries engaged in production/usage of 
polymers. The Committee had desired to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
25. Further, as the Ministry of Environment and Forests and the Ministry of Urban 
Development are also concerned directly with the issue, the Committee felt that the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals may form a Task Force at the apex le vel 
comprising the above Ministries and other agencies so that a mechanism of consultation 
takes place with them on a regular basis with regard to Plastics Waste Management in 
the prevalent overall scenario.   
 
26.   In reply to the abovementioned recommen dation, the Department has stated as 
under:- 
 “CIPET plays a major role in c reating awareness about Plastic  Waste 
Management to general public, NGO‟s, Corporation officials through organizing 
seminars, workshops & conferences.  
CIPET as a nodal agency has taken the initiatives for establishing a Plastic Waste 
Management Centre at Delhi in Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode.  Action has been 
initiated for identifying a suitable land of around 5 acres in the vicinity of Delhi.  Delhi 
Development Authority, New Delhi had been approached for allocating around 5 acres of  
land for setting up of Plastic  Waste Management Centre at Delhi which is under 
progress.  Meanwhile to initiate the activities on war -footing basis, vide letter reference 
No. IPFT/Admin/09-10 dated 12th January, 2010, the Competent Authority has allocated 
approximately 6000 sq. ft. of space at the IPFT campus, Gurgaon.  The process of 
selection of contractor for carrying out the building alteration/ renovation , work is in 
progress.  
An advertisement inviting Expression of Interest (EOI) for establishing PWMC at 
Delhi has been released in the leading newspapers and also hosted on the website. Out 
of 14 Organizations who have shown interest in establishing PWMC, Delhi, during the 
first phase of te chnical evaluation held on 31 st May 2010, 11 Organizations have been 
short-listed and called for a presentation on 25 th June 2010.  Based on the 2 nd phase of 
technical evaluation, further it is planned to invite the short listed organizations for a final 
presentation/evaluation at DCPC, Govt. of India at a later date. 
The issue of levying a cess is still being explored. 
Further, as recommended by the Standing Committee, sincere efforts to establish 
similar Plastic Waste Management Centres in other parts of the country will be taken as 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
18 
 
required. A Task Force, Chaired by Secretary(C&PC) for ensuring a regular consultation 
process with regard to Plastic Waste Management has been set up.”     
 
27. The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals in their Action Ta ken Replies 
dated 20.06.2011 has stated as under:- 
  “A meeting was held under the chairmanship of Secretary (C&PC) on 9 th March, 
2011 wherein CIPET made a presentation covering the rationale and concept of the 
project. The presentation also highlighted th e difficulties faced in proceeding with the 
project as the critical requirement of allotment of land in the vicinity of Delhi remains 
unresolved. During the meeting, Special Secretary, Urban Development Department, 
Government of Delhi, while appreciating t he project indicated that the State 
Government/MCD will consider the same in a positive manner in view of its importance. 
However, they are contemplating to take care of entire solid waste including the plastic 
waste in Delhi. In this regard, Urban Develop ment has already entered into agreement 
with private operators for disposal of solid waste, who have already been provided land 
for implementation of the projects for conversion of municipal solid waste into energy. It 
was opined by the Urban Development M inistry that after collection and disposal of the 
municipal solid wastes of these areas there may not be sufficient availability of plastics 
from other sources for the proposed PWMC centre to be set up in Delhi. The Urban 
Development Ministry indicated tha t there was paucity of land with MCD for allotment to 
CIPET for establishment of PWMC and suggested that the project could be aimed for the 
entire NCR and land could be identified at Greater Noida or in Haryana. 
It was decided that even while Government of  Delhi will continue to be impressed 
upon for early allotment of land, CIPET would also explore the possibility of getting 
allotment of land in Greater Noida or Haryana for setting up of a state of art PWMC, 
which could be a role model for further replication.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
28. The Committee had recommended the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals to take steps for setting up of Plastic Waste Management 
Centre(PWMC) in Delhi in a time bound manner and also to make efforts for setting 
up of such Centres in other Parts of the country. The Committee had also expressed 
the view that the Department may examine the feasibility of imposing some kind of 
cess on industries engaged in production /usage of plastics so as to create a 
separate fund for setting up of PWMCs. The Department has informed the Committee 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
19 
 
through their Action Taken Reply about the steps taken by them for setting up of 
PWMC, Delhi. They have also stated that the issue of levying cess  is being explored. 
The Committee feel that  setting up of PWMC Centres is the need of hour to curb 
environmental pollution. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate the need for 
definite steps by the Department for setting up of PWMC Centres in other parts of the 
country. The Committee would al so like to be apprised of the precise steps taken in 
the direction by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. Further, for 
facilitation of setting up of such centres in other parts of the country, the Committee 
desire that the issue regarding creat ion of separate fund needs to be expedited. In 
this regard, the Committee also recommend that the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals should either take final decision on levying of cess on plastic 
manufacturers/users or explore some other alternati ve for the same at the earliest. 
The Committee wished to be apprised of the final decision taken in the matter. In its 
updated ATR, the Department has highlighted the various initiatives it took on the 
issue of setting up of PWMC Centre in Delhi. The Commi ttee acknowledge the 
numerous procedural issues involved and appreciate the efforts of the Department 
towards finding a suitable arrangement. But the Committee also note that the project 
is still at an exploratory stage with no final solution in sight. In this regard, the 
Committee would like to suggest that the Department should take up the issue with 
the NCR Planning Board (Ministry of Urban Development) for early resolution of land 
allotment issues. The Department also did not address the Committee’s 
recommendation regarding the creation of separate funds through levy of cess to 
finance the setting up of PWMC Centres in other parts of the country. The Committee 
expect the Department to expeditiously address these issues at the earliest.  
 
E.  IMPOSITION OF SAFEGUARD DUTY ON IMPORT OF CAUSTIC SODA 
 
(Recommendation Sl.No 11) 
 
 29. The Committee had  noted with concern that Caustic Chlorine plant of Hindustan 
Organic Chemicals Limited ( HOCL) at Rasayani, Maharastra which was re -

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
20 
 
commissioned in September 2008 had to be shut down again in October 2009 due to 
dumping of caustic soda lye by developed countries and increase in power tariff by 
Maharastra State Electricity Board from Rs.4.50 per unit to Rs.6.15 per unit which made 
caustic soda manufacturing operation  non-remunerative. The Committee were informed 
that even the imposition of 25% safeguard duty on import of caustic soda has not 
produced the desired impact in checking the large scale dumping. The Committee were 
given to understand that in order to check the cost of production and to make the project 
viable, HOCL has taken up the installation of 16 MW Captive Power Plant with which 
power cost per unit is expected to come down to Rs.4. The Committee had expressed 
the hope that the Department of Chemicals and  Petrochemicals will take all necessary 
steps for early installation of 16 MW Captive Power Plant for Rasayani Unit of HOCL.  
The Committee had desired that a part from taking suitable remedial measures to reduce 
the cost of production, the Department of Che micals and Petrochemicals may also 
examine the feasibility of taking up the matter with the Ministry of Finance for raising the 
safeguard duty if any other unit in this Sector is also facing the difficulty on this account. 
The Committee had also desired to be informed of the progress made in this regard. 
 
30.  The Department in their Action Taken Reply have stated as under: 
“(i)  In order to make the Caustic Soda Plant viable, HOCL has taken up the 
installation of 16 MW captive power plant through JV route.    HOCL‟s contribution 
in the JV equity will be in the form of Land. The final documents for Requisition for 
Qualification (RFQ) have been prepared by the Consultants M/s Kirlosakar 
Consultants. The progress of implementation of the proposed JV is being 
reviewed by HOCL Board and the Department regularly through review meetings. 
(ii) The provisional safeguard duty on Caustic Soda was valid upto 02.03.2010. 
However, the DG Safeguard did not recommend further extension of safeguard 
duty. Aggrieved by this decision , Alkali Manufacturers Association representing 
the domestic Chloro alkali has filed an Appeal on 9.5.2010 with Central Excise 
and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal (CESTAT).” 
 
31. The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals in their Action Taken Replies 
dated 20.06.2011 has stated as under:- 
 “Detailed study was done on the viability for setting up of 16 MW Captive 
Power Plant. However, with the present cost of CNG available, the power plant 
has become unviable. Hence, the project has been abandoned for th e time 
being.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
21 
 
32. Taking note of the fact that Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited ( HOCL) 
had taken up the installation of 16 MW captive power plant to check the cost of 
production and to make their caustic chlorine plant at Ra sayani viable, the 
Committee had expressed the hope that the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals would take all necessary steps for early installation of the same. 
The Committee had also recommended the Department to examine the feasibility 
of taking up the matter with the Ministry of Finance for raising the safeguard duty 
on import of caustic soda. According to the Department  of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals, HOCL has taken up the installation of captive power plant for its 
Rasayani Unit through joint venture ( JV) and its progress is being reviewed by 
them. Regarding safeguard duty, the Department have stated that D irector General 
Safeguard did not recommend further extension of duty and Alkali Manufacturers 
Association had filed an appeal against the  same on 9 May 2010 with Central 
Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal (CESTAT). Considering the importance 
of Captive Power Plant for Rasayani Unit of  HOCL, the Committee feel that the 
installation of the same needs to be expedited. The Committee, the refore, desire 
the Department  of Chemicals and Petrochemicals  to take suitable steps in the 
direction and apprise them  of the progress made in this regard. The Committee 
also recommend the Department to take up the matter regarding imposition of 
safeguard duty  on caustic soda with CESTAT for early decision in the matter  as 
such step would help the HOCL  against the dumping of caustic soda . The 
Committee would also like to be informed of decision taken in the matter . In their 
ATR, the Department has informed that the project for setting up of 16 MW Captive 
Power Plant for Rasayani Unit of HOCL has been abandoned. But the Department 
made no mention of how it propose to check the cost of pro duction at the Unit. 
The Committee feel that the Department has failed  to address this issue which is a 
major concern of the Committee, and also that the Committee’s recommendation 
for raising the safeguard duty on import of caustic soda remains unresolved. The 
Committee while reiterating their earlier Recommendation, expect the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals to take expeditious action on them and apprise 
the Committee of the same.  

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
22 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No.2 
 
The Committee note th at a total outlay of Rs.563.83 crore has been approved for 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals for the 11 th Five Year Plan.  Out of 
this, Rs.200 crore have been allocated for Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP).  The 
Committee, however, noted that the actual allocation of Rs.126.26 crore made during the 
year 2009-10 for AGCP was much less than projected and demanded figure of Rs.471 
crore. Similarly in the year 2010 -11, the Department made a demand of Rs.900 crore for 
AGCP against which the Planning  Commission/ Ministry of Finance have allocated only 
Rs.212.74 crore.  The Committee fails to understand as to how the project shall be 
completed by the scheduled date i.e. April 2012, if the allocations are drastically curtailed 
by the Planning Commission .  The Committee, therefore, recommend that Planning 
Commission/ Ministry of Finance should provide adequate additional funds at RE stage 
and subsequently also so that this project does not suffer on account of constraint of 
funds. 
   
Reply of the Government  
 
Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance have been apprised of the 
concerns of the Standing Committee so as to enable them to appropriately address the 
issue of allocation of requisite funds for the Assam Gas Cracker Project. The Department 
is also making efforts with Ministry of Finance for allocation of the requisite funds at RE 
stage (and in the subsequent annual plans) so that the project does not get affected 
adversely on this account.   
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(2)/2010-Fin I dated 21 
July, 2010] 
Further reply of the Government 
Allocation of additional requisite funds at RE stage (and in the subsequent annual 
plans) was taken up with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance. As a 
result, additional fu nds of Rs. 579 crore were provided for the Assam Gas Cracker 
Project at RE Stage in 2010 -11. Further, an allocation of Rs. 975.71 crore has been 
made for the year 2011 -12 (BE) and additional funds would be sought from Ministry of 
Finance at RE stage as per requirement. 
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(7)/2011-Fin  dated 20 
June, 2011] 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
23 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
 The Committee in their Original Report had observe d that Rs.239.75 crore were 
provided for plan expenditure at BE stage for the Department during 2009 -10 which was 
eventually revised to Rs.405.82 crore at RE stage.  The increase at RE stage, according 
to the Ministry, was mainly due to the provision of Rs .166.07 crore for Assam Gas 
Cracker Project (AGCP).  The Committee observe d with regret  that either the 
Department failed to anticipate the need for such an expenditure at BE stage, this being 
an ongoing project, or the Planning Commission did not provide the requisite funds at BE 
stage that might have been asked for by the Department.  The Committee had expected 
due diligence by the Department while making proper and realistic estimate for such an 
important project and also in pursuing the Planning Commiss ion to allocate the same.  
The Committee wished to be apprised whether any responsibility has been fixed on the 
erring officers and disciplinary action taken against them.  Further, the dat a pertaining to 
the actual expenditure incurred by the Department d uring 2009-10 had indicated that a 
major portion of the funds had been incurred by the Department during the last 2 -3 
months of the financial year.  This was evident from the fact that the Department had 
spent only Rs. 233.59 crore till 31 January 2010 whe reas the actual expenditure of the 
Department by 15 March 2010 was Rs.407.41 crore.  The Committee felt that prudent 
financial practices warrant that the allocated funds are incurred evenly during the year as 
far as possible.  The Committee had expected the Department to take suitable necessary 
steps in future to ensure that allocated funds are spent judiciously and uniformly during 
the year.  The Planning Commission/ Ministry of Finance were also requested to ensure 
that the requisite funds are provided in  time lest it should retard the progress of this 
important project.  
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
In the Annual Plan Budget 2009 -10, the Department had requested to provide 
Rs.471.00 crore in the budget outlay towards Capital Subsidy to Assam Gas Cracker 
Project for 2009 -10. The allocation for 2009 -10 at BE stage was restricted to Rs.239.75 
crores. However, during the budget announcement 2009 -10 also, Finance Minister in his 
speech had announced increase in the budget outlay for Assam Gas Cracker Project. 
Accordingly, Ministry of Finance provided additional budget to the tune of Rs.166.07 
crore according to the Business Plan of Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited in the 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
24 
 
first supplementary grant for 2009 -10.  The Department regularly monitors the physical 
and financial progress of the Project to ensure that allocated funds are spent judiciously 
as per the approved Business Plan.  
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(2)/2010-Fin I dated 21 
July, 2010] 
 
Further reply of the Government 
 In th e year 2010 -11, an amount of Rs. 212.74 crore was initially provided for 
AGCP at BE Stage and additional funds of Rs. 579 crore were provided at RE Stage. 
Accordingly, the funds including additional allocations were released to BCPL in 2009 -10 
& 2010 -11 uniformly by the Department as per staggered allocations. The project is in 
advanced stage of implementation and the Department is making efforts for spending the 
funds judiciously and uniformly during the year. The project has never suffered on 
account of financial constraints. 
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(7)/2011-Fin  dated 20 
June, 2011] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
The Central Institute of Plastic Engineering and Technology (CIPET) is an 
autonomous Institute functioning under the admi nistrative control of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals with the objective of providing training to manpower in 
different disciplines of Plastics Engineering and Technology and Technical support / 
consultancy services to the plastics and allie d industries. The Committee note that plan 
outlay of Rs. 152.94 crore (Including Rs. 83 crore for new schemes of petrochemicals) 
and Rs. 0.53 crore non -plan has been provided for CIPET for the year 2010 -11. This 
allocation indicates substantial increase in  funds as compared to that of 2009 -10 which 
was Rs. 39.13 crore (including Rs. 5 crore for new schemes of petrochemicals) under 
plan and Rs. 3 crore under non -plan. The Committee observe that the allocated amount 
is to be utilized for various schemes of CI PET, viz. enhancement of training capabilities, 
Creation of Civil & Technical Infrastructure for expansion of CIPET centres, 
establishment of new CIPET centres, etc. considering the important role played by 
CIPET in Plastic Engineering and Technology, part icularly in plastic waste management, 
which is the need of the hour, the Committee hope that the Department will take 
necessary steps for judicious and optimal utilization of substantially increased funds for 
all the schemes so that the CIPET strives to en hance the academic and professional 
superiority of the organization. The Committee also desire the Department to take 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
25 
 
suitable steps for expansion of network of CIPET centres throughout the country with 
particular reference to areas where there is concentr ation of plastic industry. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of various schemes of CIPET 
undertaken during the year 2010-11. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(Including updated Action Taken Replies given in italics) 
 
CIPET has taken necessary steps for judicious and optimal utilization of funds for 
various schemes under XIth Plan. Considering the exponential growth of CIPET, the 
following enhancement proposals are being considered by the administrative Ministry for 
which allocation has been mad e during Annual Plan 2010 -11 by the Planning 
Commission: 
         Rs. in  Crores 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Scheme Original 
Allocation 
Increase Revised 
Allocation 
1. Establishment of two new CIPET 
centres (ATPDC, Madurai) 0.01 12.40 12.40 
2. Technology upgradat ion for New 
courses to be offered by CIPET  17.00 30.00 47.00 
3. 
Formulation, Organizing and 
participation  in National Programme  
for Development of Plastics 
Manufacturing sector in India under 
UNDIO-ICAMT programme 
0.80 01.00 01.80 
4. R & D in Emerging areas 4.98 22.00 26.98 
5. 
Creation of Civil & Technical 
infrastructure for expansion of CIPET 
Centres. 
18.34 20.00 38.34 
 
The year 2010 -11 has witnessed an exponential growth for CIPET in Academic, 
Technology Support and Research & Development services to the plastics and allied 
industries. The Institute had achieved an annual growth of 12.35% in revenue 
generation. CIPET has constructed virtual class rooms, virtual laboratories, academic 
block, HRD centre, hostel to match the additional requirement of e nhanced intake of 
students.  Various Faculty Development Programmes in India and abroad are provided to 
CIPET faculties in order to keep the Human Resources always at high esteem.   
 
With substantial increase in financial support during 2010 -11 under the e xisting 
ongoing schemes, CIPET can accelerate its growth by way of procuring additional Plant 
& Machinery and creation of additional Civil & Infrastructural facilities which includes 
hostel for Under Graduate and Post Graduate students, lecture theaters, t utorial / 
seminar halls at 4 High Learning Centres etc. to augment the increased intake of 
students in Long-term academic programmes and imparting enhanced Skill Development 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
26 
 
training programmes to the participants from the Plastics industries.  This is evi dent from 
the fact that the no. of students enrolled in Long -term academic programmes which has 
gone up from 5926 during the year 2008 -09 to 7458 during the year 2009 -10.  Further it 
is anticipated to increase to about 9264 during 2010 -11. (Actual figure f or 2010 -11 is 
8853). Similarly, the participants benefited through the Short -term courses has gone up 
from 13,194 during the year 2008 -09 to 15,677 during the year 2009 -10 and it is 
expected to touch a figure of 18500 during the year 2010-11 (Actual figure for 2010-11 is 
19553).  
 
The following new academic programmes were introduced during the XI Five Year 
Plan (2008-09 to 2009-10): 
 
4.  Four Year Full Time under Graduate Programme (B.Tech.) in Plastics 
Engineering/Technology – at CIPET - Ahmedabad, Bhubaneswa r, Chennai & 
Lucknow. 
 
5. Two Year Full Time Post Graduate Programme (M.Tech.) – Polymer 
Nanotechnology – at LARPM, Bhubaneswar – R&D Wing of CIPET.  
6. Two Year Full Time Post Graduate Programme (M.E.) in CAD/CAM  - at ARSTPS, 
Chennai – R &D Wing of CIPET. 
 
Further CIPET has planned to introduce the following new academic programmes 
from the year 2010-11: 
4.  Four Year Full Time Under Graduate Programme (B.Tech.) Manufacturing 
Engineering/Technology – at CIPET - Ahmedabad, Bhubaneswar, Chennai & 
Lucknow. 
 
5. Four Year Full Time Under Graduate Programme (B.Tech.) – Plastics 
Engineering/Technology – at CIPET Haldia and Murthal. 
 
6. Five Year Integrated Post Graduate Programme (M.Sc. (Tech.)) – Material 
Science & Engineering – at CIPET, Bhubaneswar. 
 
CIPET has already taken n ecessary steps to identify the areas where there is high 
concentration of plastics and its allied industries and accordingly initiated the process of 
establishing the following: 
19. Advanced Tooling Product Development Centre (ATPDC) at Madurai - a unit of 
CIPET, Chennai in order to cater to plastic product design, tooling and trained 
manpower requirement of the plastics industry in Southern part of India at a 
project cost of Rs.24.80 crores (50:50% cost sharing between Centre and 
State Government).  
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
27 
 
20.  Advanced Plastics Processing Technology Centre (APPTC) is being planned 
at Balasore in order to cater to manpower and technology support needs of the 
plastics processing industries in Eastern part of the country in general and 
surrounding areas of Balasore in part icular at a project cost of Rs.15.00 crores 
(50:50% cost sharing between Centre and State Government).  
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(2)/2010-Fin I dated 21 
July, 2010] 
 
Regarding the expansion of CIPET by way of establishment of C IPET 
Centres/ Service Centres/ Testing Centre, the committee comprising of 
representatives of CIPET, Administrative Ministry, Planning Commission, All India 
Plastic Manufacturers’ Association (AIPMA) has recommended to establish a new 
Plastics Testing Labo ratory at Madurai, Testing centre at Daman, Specialized 
Centre at Kerala, a Centre at Uttarakhand after detailed deliberation in view of 
large plastic units coming up there. The proposal is under active consideration of 
the administrative Ministry.  
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(7)/2011-Fin  dated 20 
June, 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 The Committee had noted that Plastic Waste Management Centre (PWMC), 
Guwahati started functioning from 31 st August 2009 and was involved in converting all 
kinds of plastic waste into value added products. The Committee had also noted that the 
department have initiated the process of setting up of PWMC in Delhi. Considering the 
importance of plastic waste management as an important tool in checking the 
environmental degradation and in view of the fact that the Government of Delhi has 
recently initiated various steps to curb the pollution caused by Plastics, the Committee 
had recommended that the department should take up the matter with Government of 
Delhi so that steps can be taken expeditiously in a time -bound manner for setting up of 
PWMC in Delhi. They had also desired the Government to make sincere efforts to ensure 
that such centres are set up in other parts of the country also. 
 The Committee had also expressed the opinion that for setting up of Plastic Waste 
Management Centres, a separate fund has to be created. In order to generate funds for 
the same, the Committee had expressed the view that department may examine the 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
28 
 
feasibility of imposing some kind of cess on industries engaged in production/usage of 
polymers. The Committee had desired to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 Further, as the Ministry of En vironment and Forests and the Ministry of Urban 
Development are also concerned directly with the issue, the Committee felt that the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals may form a Task Force at the apex level 
comprising the above Ministries and other  agencies so that a mechanism of consultation 
takes place with them on a regular basis with regard to Plastics Waste Management in 
the prevalent overall scenario.   
 
Reply of the Government  
CIPET plays a major role in creating awareness about Plastic Waste Management 
to general public, NGO‟s, Corporation officials through organizing seminars, workshops & 
conferences.  
CIPET as a nodal agency has taken the initiatives for establishing a Plastic Waste 
Management Centre at Delhi in Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode.  Action has been 
initiated for identifying a suitable land of around 5 acres in the vicinity of Delhi.  Delhi 
Development Authority, New Delhi had been approached for allocating around 5 acres of  
land for setting up of Plastic  Waste Management Centre at Delhi which is under 
progress.  Meanwhile to initiate the activities on war -footing basis, vide letter reference 
No. IPFT/Admin/09-10 dated 12 th January, 2010, the Competent Authority has allocated 
approximately 6000 sq. ft. of space at the IPFT campus, Gurgaon.  The process of 
selection of contractor for carrying out the building alteration/ renovation , work is in 
progress.  
An advertisement inviting Expression of Interest (EOI) for establishing PWMC at 
Delhi has been released in the leading news papers and also hosted on the website. Out 
of 14 Organizations who have shown interest in establishing PWMC, Delhi, during the 
first phase of technical evaluation held on 31 st May 2010, 11 Organizations have been 
short-listed and called for a presentation on 25th June 2010.  Based on the 2 nd phase of 
technical evaluation, further it is planned to invite the short listed organizations for a final 
presentation/evaluation at DCPC, Govt. of India at a later date. 
The issue of levying a cess is still being explored. 
Further, as recommended by the Standing Committee, sincere efforts to establish 
similar Plastic Waste Management Centres in other parts of the country will be taken as 
required. A Task Force, Chaired by Secretary(C&PC) for ensuring a regular consultat ion 
process with regard to Plastic Waste Management has been set up. 
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(2)/2010-Fin I dated 21 
July, 2010] 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
29 
 
Further reply of the Government 
  A meeting was held under the chairmanship of Secretary (C&PC) on 9th March, 
2011 wherein CIPET made a presentation covering the rationale and concept of the 
project. The presentation also highlighted the difficulties faced in proceeding with the 
project as the critical requirement of allotment of land in the vicinity  of Delhi remains 
unresolved. During the meeting, Special Secretary, Urban Development Department, 
Government of Delhi, while appreciating the project indicated that the State 
Government/MCD will consider the same in a positive manner in view of its import ance. 
However, they are contemplating to take care of entire solid waste including the plastic 
waste in Delhi. In this regard, Urban Development has already entered into agreement 
with private operators for disposal of solid waste, who have already been pr ovided land 
for implementation of the projects for conversion of municipal solid waste into energy. It 
was opined by the Urban Development Ministry that after collection and disposal of the 
municipal solid wastes of these areas there may not be sufficient availability of plastics 
from other sources for the proposed PWMC centre to be set up in Delhi. The Urban 
Development Ministry indicated that there was paucity of land with MCD for allotment to 
CIPET for establishment of PWMC and suggested that the project  could be aimed for the 
entire NCR and land could be identified at Greater Noida or in Haryana. 
It was decided that even while Government of Delhi will continue to be impressed 
upon for early allotment of land, CIPET would also explore the possibility of g etting 
allotment of land in Greater Noida or Haryana for setting up of a state of art PWMC, 
which could be a role model for further replication. 
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(7)/2011-Fin  dated 20 
June, 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
The Committee note that Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP) was approved by 
the Government on 18 April 2006 as a part of projects undertaken for rapid economic 
growth of the state of Assam.  AGCP is scheduled for commissioning in April, 2012 and a 
joint venture company Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited (BCPL) has been 
incorporated for execution of this project.  A capital subsidy of Rs.2138 crore on fixed 
cost basis (phased during construction period of 5 years at constant prices) has to be 
provided by the Department for this project.  The Committee note that as against planned 
capital subsidy of Rs.662.78 crore for the first three years, the amount actually provided 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
30 
 
and released for AGCP was Rs.453.74 crore.  Even for the year 2010 -11, as against the 
subsidy of Rs.900 crore asked for by the Department, only Rs.212.74 crore have been 
provided.  The Committee regret to point out that overall physical progress made in the 
project till 15 February 2010 as per details furnished by the Department is 11.8% as 
against scheduled 21.3%.  All this point towards dismal performance both in physical as 
well as financial terms in execution of such an important project.  The Committee are 
inclined to conclude that delay in execution of this project will not only result in cost 
escalation but also deprive the State of Assam of the envisaged benefits which would 
accrue to them.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department as 
implementing agency for AGCP should take expeditious concrete steps for removal of 
hurdles as to ensure the execution of project at the earliest.  The Committee also wish to 
point out that despite the provision of a mechanism of non -lapsable pool fund for North 
Eastern States in the budgetary allocations if such important projects suffer on account of 
constraint of funds, the onus of delay is only on the Department.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard within one month of prese ntation of 
the Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A Monitoring Committee on implementation of Assam Gas Cracker Project 
(AGCP) under the Chairmanship of Secretary (C&PC) monitors the physical and financial 
progress of the project at regular intervals. There  were some delays in the initial phases 
but the implementation plan has been reworked out and slippages have been arrested to 
ensure timely completion. The Monitoring Committee monitors all the critical issues and 
tries to resolve them with the concerned a uthorities including Government of Assam.  
The Prime Minister‟s Office (PMO) also reviews the progress of Assam Gas Cracker 
Project as its Flagship Programme under Delivery Monitoring Unit set -up in the PMO.  
Request is being made to Ministry of Finance to address the issue of shortage of funds at 
the time of 1st Supplementary Demands for Grants 2010-11.  
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(2)/2010-Fin I dated 21 
July, 2010] 
 
Further reply of the Government 
The cumulative progress achieved, in the project as on 15 May, 2011 is 40.3% as 
against the original scheduled target of 81.7% and the cumulative expenditure as on 31 
May, 2011 is Rs. 2,285.02 crore. 
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(7)/2011-Fin  dated 20 
June, 2011] 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
31 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
   
 The Committee note that the Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
Investment Region (PCPIR) policy aims at adopting holistic approach to promote the 
petroleum, chemicals and petrochemicals sectors in an integrated environmen t friendly 
manner on a large scale.  According to the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
the PCPIRs are expected to create an infrastructure worth Rs.39, 744 crore covering 
roads, air links, ports, telecom, power, water treatment, sewerage, effluen t treatment, 
green buffers, etc., besides developing the industry in these regions to the tune of 
approximately Rs.4, 86,180 crore and employment generation of about 30 lakh persons.  
In this connection, the Cabinet approved the proposal for setting up PCP IRs in Andhra 
Pradesh, West Bengal and Gujarat in February 2009 and „Memorandum of Agreement‟ 
was signed with each of the three State Governments on 1 October 2009, 29 October 
2009 and 7 January 2010, respectively.  Further, the Committee have been given t o 
understand that the Department are processing the proposal for setting up PCPIR in 
Orissa. The proposal regarding setting up of PCPIR in Tamil Nadu is now being revised 
by the State Government in terms of PCPIR policy. While welcoming the laudable 
objectives of PCPIR and the efforts made by the Department in this regard, the 
Committee hope that this scheme will take off expeditiously in these States so as to 
achieve the desired results.  The Committee also desire the Department to make all out 
efforts to encourage other State Government also to participate in this important initiative.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in implementation of the 
policy in other States.  
  
Reply of the Government 
(Including updated Action Taken Replies given in italics) 
 
In order to ensure speedy implementation of the approved PCPIRs, the 
Department has established a monitoring mechanism Chaired by Secretary (C&PC). 
Three meetings of this Monitoring Committee have already been held till now.  These 
meetings have enabled the Department to identify areas requiring greater attention.  It 
has also provided the State Governments an opportunity to raise issues requiring 
cooperation and support from various Ministries of Government of India. 
 
2. The significant achievements at this stage are as follows: 
 
     West Bengal PCPIR: 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
32 
 
 Ministry of Environment and Forests have approved Terms of Reference of the 
Environment Impact Assessment.  The EIA clearance is expected by September, 
2011. 
 Completion of IOCL‟s upgradation of the 6 MMTPA refinery to 7.5 MMTPA. 
 Four laning of NH-41 is likely to be completed as per target. 
 A dedicated website on the West Bengal PCPIR has been launched. 
 Notification of the PCPIR is over. 
 Constitution of the West Bengal PCPIR Management Board and notification to this 
effect. 
 Signing of Power Purchase Agreement with the Power Tenant with a committed 
investment of Rs. 12,870 crore. 
 Signing of MoU with Air Liquide. 
Gujarat PCPIR: 
 MoU has been signed between the State Government and the Anchor Tenant viz. 
OPAL- which has incurred a total expenditure of Rs. 5,052 crore till date. 
 The PCPIR has been notified under the Special Investment Region (SIR) Act.  
 92.94 sq.kms. have been acquired. 131.54 sq.kms is under acquisition. 
 Regional Development Authority constituted by Government of Gujarat on 
18.09.2010 under the Special Investment Region Act, 2009 of Government of 
Gujarat. 
 Terms of Reference of EIA study have been approved by M/o Environment and 
Forests. 
 Detailed Development Plan is finalized and under public consultation. 
 Completion of a detailed study of 18 villages involving rehabilitation.   
 Marketing activities by the State Government has yielded an interest in 
investments of about Rs. 77,119 in the PCPIR. Additional investment of Rs. 
50,158 crore committed during Vibrant Gujarat 2011. 
 Petronet LNG is setting up a 1200 mega watt power plant.  
 
Andhra Pradesh PCPIR: 
 
 Feasibility Study for the rail line linking APSEZ to Gangavaram Port has been 
awarded to RITES Limited.   
 Acquisition of additional 3.66 sq.km of the processing land and filling of requisition 
for acquisition of additional 35.18 sq.kms. 
 M/s LEA Associates, South Asia Pvt. Ltd has been appointed as Consultants for 
the Master Plan. 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
33 
 
 Constitution of a Special Development Authority to function as Management 
Board. 
 Engaging of EPTRI as consultant for EIA studies. Approval of TOR by M/o E&F is 
awaited. 
 Actual investments of Rs. 9,290.96 crore. 
 Notification of the PCPIR is completed.  
 
3. The approved PCPIRs have been promoted and showcase d through various 
investor meets, exhibitions as well as national and international road shows.  The 
concerned State Governments have participated in all these events. 
 
4. The proposal of Government of Orissa to set up a PCPIR in Kendrapara and 
Jagatsinghpur Districts was approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) in December, 2010. A Memorandum of Agreement with Government of India 
outlining respective commitments and timelines is to be signed by the State Government 
shortly.  
5. Government of Tamil Nadu has submitted a revised proposal, which has been 
circulated among concerned Ministries and Departments of Government of India.  The 
comments received from them have been forwarded to the State Government for further 
consideration. The High  Powered Committee (HPC) chaired by Cabinet Secretary has 
recommended Government of Tamil Nadu’s proposal for setting up a PCPIR in the 
Cuddalore and Nagapattinam districts for approval by the CCEA. As recommended by 
the HPC, the proposal will be placed be fore the CCEA after further discussions with 
Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, D/o Expenditure and Planning Commission 
regarding provision of road infrastructure in the PCPIR. 
6. As mentioned earlier, the Department has been systematically promoting t he 
PCPIR Policy in different parts of the country. The Department has encouraged all State 
Governments to consider the feasibility of establishing PCPIRs.  However, since the 
policy has certain pre -requisites such as existence of basic infrastructure and i ndustries, 
availability of large tracts of area and investment of substantial amounts by potential 
investors, the evolving of a PCPIR Proposal by any State Government is a fairly complex 
process with huge demands of both capital and infrastructure.   
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(2)/2010-Fin I dated 21 
July, 2010] 
 
 
 
 
  

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
34 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
The Committee note that the National Policy on Petrochemicals was approved by 
the Government on 12 April 2007.  The objectives of National Poli cy on Petrochemicals 
inter-alia are; to increase investment, domestic demand and per capita consumption of 
plastic and synthetic fibres, to promote research and development, etc.  The Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals are stated to have undertaken  certain initiatives in 
respect of National Policy on Petrochemicals and formulated three schemes after 
evaluation of feasibility studies, viz. setting up of Centres of Excellence, National Awards 
for Technology Innovations in Petrochemicals and downstream  Plastic Processing 
Industry and also for setting up of dedicated Plastic Parks to promote a cluster approach 
in the areas of development of plastic applications and plastic recycling.  According to the 
Department, the Planning Commission has approved only  one scheme viz. for setting up 
of Centres of Excellence whereas their approval is awaited in respect of other schemes.  
The Committee call upon the Department to take concerted efforts aimed at 
institutionalization of the schemes by taking up the matter w ith Planning Commission for 
early approval of remaining schemes so as to ensure the optimum utilization of allocated 
funds.  The Committee hope that all the initiatives taken by the Department of 
Petrochemicals Policy will be taken to their logical conclus ions expeditiously to achieve 
the desired objectives. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The Department has already taken up the other schemes with Planning 
Commission. The Planning Commission has accorded „in -principle‟ approval to the other 
two schemes as well. The Department is in the process of implementing all the three 
schemes, approved by the Planning Commission.  
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(2)/2010-Fin I dated 21 
July, 2010] 
Further reply of the Government 
The Schemes for setting up of Centre of Excellence and National Awards for 
Technology Innovations in Petrochemicals and downstream Plastic Processing Industry 
and setting up of dedicated Plastic Parks, under the aegis of National Policy on 
Petrochemicals have been approved by the  Government. The necessary action for 
release of funds and identification of institutions under the schemes of COE & National 
Awards has been taken. 
The Government approved 2 dedicated plastic parks during the 11 th Five Year 
Plan. The Scheme Documents have  been forwarded to all the State Governments 
inviting proposals. Department is simultaneously in the process of identifying the 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
35 
 
Programme Manager. The proposals received from various State Governments are 
under evaluation.  
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(7)/2011-Fin  dated 20 
June, 2011] 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals have 
three Public Sector Undertakings under its administrative control, viz Hindustan Organic 
Chemicals Limited (HOCL), Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL) and Brahmaputra 
Cracker and Polymer Ltd. (BCPL). Consequent upon the implementation of revival 
package in 2006, HOCL earned profits of Rs.17.04 crore and Rs.13.61 crore in the years 
2006-07 and 2007-08 but started incurring losses from the year 2008 -09. The Company 
incurred loss of Rs.66.81 crore again in the year 2009 -10 (upto December 2009). The 
global meltdown and lower price realization have been cited as the reasons for these 
losses. According to the  Department, to put the HOCL back to track, a sum of Rs.15.03 
crore has been released as plan loan in the year 2009 -10 for expansion/ technology 
upgradation schemes and an action plan has also been prepared by HOCL in this 
regard.  The Committee strongly r ecommend that apart from early implementation of 
action plan the company should also take necessary administrative and innovative steps 
to check the recurrence of losses. The Committee hope that with these efforts, 
Department will be able to fine tune the operations of HOCL and put it back on the right 
track. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The Company has been asked to prepare and implement the Action Plan as 
approved by its Board which will be monitored in the periodic Performance Review 
Meetings held in the M inistry. The company has also been advised to appoint 
immediately an external expert/ consultant for advising the company regarding causes of 
losses and making recommendations for arresting the trend of losses. Time lines for the 
various projects for which  Rs.15.03 crore has been released has been prepared by the 
company and the same are also being monitored  in the Performance Review Meetings. 
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(2)/2010-Fin I dated 21 
July, 2010] 
 
Further reply of the Government 
HOCL has engaged SBI Caps Limited to prepare a Business Plan for HOCL and 
for making recommendations for arresting the trend of losses. The Board of Directors 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
36 
 
considered the suggestions / recommendations of M/s SBI Caps. The trend of losses has 
been arrested and HOCL has made a net profit of Rs. 25.72 crore in the year 2010 -11. 
As regards the status of various projects for which a plan loan of Rs. 15.03 crore was 
provided to HOCL in the year 2009 -10, two projects, namely, (i) conversion/ modificati on 
of Hydrogen Plant to CNG feedstock and steam boilers to CNG fuel a nd upgradation of 
aniline plant and  (ii) ERP at Kochi have been implemented after successful  completion 
and the rest of two projects, (a) Upgradation of DCS for CAN,  N2O4 and  (b) 
Debottlenecking of H2O2 plant capacity are under process of completion.  
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(7)/2011-Fin  dated 20 
June, 2011] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
The Committee note that the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) 
approved the revival proposal of Hindustan Insecticides Ltd. (HIL) on 27 July 2008 and 
since then the company has earned profit of Rs.5.66 crore and Rs.6.52 crore in the year 
2006-07 and 2007-08 respectively.  The profit of the company has however, come down 
to Rs.2.71 crore in 2008 -09 and further to Rs.0.85 crore in 2009 -10 (upto 31 December 
2009). The Department has attributed the reduction in profit to the non -availability of 
many raw materials, reduction in demand due to high prices on account of 
unprecedented increase in prices of products like sulphur, phosphorus, etc. The 
Committee recommend that the Department should make all out efforts to make 
available the required raw materials besides making the production cost effective to 
check the gradual decline in profits. The Committee hope that with the budgetary support 
of Rs.20 crore during 2010 -11 HIL will be able to improve performance and show better 
results. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Company is taking all possible actions to improve profitability. T he 
Department is regularly taking review meetings to improve the efficiency and profitability 
of the company. 
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(2)/2010-Fin I dated 21 
July, 2010] 
 
Further reply of the Government 
Rs. 20 crore was allocated as 1st installment for setting up a plant involving a total 
cost of Rs. 40 crore for manufacturing Mancozeb of capacity 20,000 MTPA at Rasayani. 
Being a big investment project, as the various activities related to the implementation of 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
37 
 
the project such as finalization of Draft Project Report, etc were taking time, allocation for 
year 2010 -11 was surrendered. However, HIL earned a net profit of approx. Rs. 1.15 
crore during 2010-11.  
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(7)/2011-Fin  dated 20 
June, 2011] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
38 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technolog y (IPFT) is an Institute entrusted 
with the tasks of development and production of the state -of-the-art environment friendly 
pesticide formulations technology and promotion of efficient application technologies 
suiting the existing requirements of the newe r formulations, etc.  A provision of Rs. 7 
crore (Plan) was made at BE and RE stage during 2009 -10.  However, nothing was 
utilized out of this till 31 st January, 2010 and the Department cited various procedural 
difficulties faced by IPFT for not utilizing the fund.  While expressing their displeasure 
over the alibi of the Department for non -utilization of funds in an era of globalization, the 
Committee expect the Department to make concerted efforts for removal of any such 
procedural hurdles which were face d during 2009 -10 so as to ensure optimum and 
methodical utilization of funds during the current financial year.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised about the precise action taken to remove each of such difficulties by 
IPFT within one month of the presentation of the Report. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The Plan outlay of Rs.7.00 crore was provisioned for procurement of sophisticated 
scientific/technical equipments for development of environment friendly technologies.  
The outlay was not utilized due to r eceipt of few bids, even single bids in some cases, 
against open/global tenders.  Accepting that the same would not have fetched 
competitive rates, corrective steps have been taken and the following committees have 
been constituted to streamline the procurement process: 
i. Justification Committee :  A Justification Committee with external experts has 
been constituted to assess the specific requirement of various divisions of the 
Institute. 
 
ii. Specification Committee:  A Specification Committee has also been const ituted, 
which will finalize the technical specifications of the instruments to be procured in 
such a manner so as to ensure greater competition and participation by 
prospective bidders. 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
39 
 
2. Global tenders will be floated on the recommendations of the Committe es and 
instruments will be procured by the Institute to ensure proper utilization of funds. 
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(2)/2010-Fin I dated 21 
July, 2010] 
 
 
Further reply of the Government 
During the year 2009 -10, a plan allocati on of Rs. 7.00 crore was 
provisioned for IPFT mainly for procurement of sophisticated scientific equipment. 
Out of this amount, IPFT could only draw Rs. 5.06 crore leaving a balance of Rs. 
1.94 crore undrawn and surrendered. The allocated funds could not b e utilized by 
IPFT during the year 2009 -10. The low utilization of funds was on account of 
certain shortcoming in the procurement procedure, which was addressed by 
taking corrective steps and constitution of Justification and Specification 
Committees to st reamline the procurement process. Subsequent to adoption of 
revised tendering process as per recommendations of the Committees, IPFT has 
been able to utilize Rs. 4.11 crore. An amount of Rs. 3.05 crore was utilized on 
procurement of equipments/instruments and Rs. 1.07 crore was utilized on 
RENPAP Trust Fund and Secretariat support; Project Neem Phase II and other 
projects of IPFT. An amount of Rs. 95.00 lakh was surrendered. 
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(7)/2011-Fin  dated 20 
June, 2011] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
40 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
The Committee note that the production of major chemica ls and petrochemicals 
had recorded negative growth rate i.e. ( -) 5.24% and ( -) 5.56% respectively during the 
year 2008 -09.  Consequent upon announcement of Stimulus Packages by the 
Government in December 2008 and January 2009, the growth of major chemicals , 
petrochemicals and intermediates is stated to have shown slight improvement.  During 
the period April 2009 to January 2010, the growth in chemicals was 1.84% and that for 
petrochemicals was 0.98%.  However, this improvement is not encouraging when 
compared with the performance during the period from 2003 -04 to 2005 -06 which for 
major chemicals ranged from 3.62% to 6.79% and for major petrochemicals between 
1.61% to 6.91%.  While emphasizing the need for continuance of Stimulus Packages for 
the time being, the Committee recommends that the Department should proactively play 
the designated role of facilitator for development of chemicals and petrochemicals and 
ensure early stabilization of chemicals and petrochemicals industry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
The global slowdown effect was not as prominent in India as in other countries 
due to domestic demand.  The stimulus package provided by the Ministry of Finance 
helped in bringing about a positive growth rate for improving it further.  Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals supported the continuation of the stimulus package for 
2010-11 also. 
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(2)/2010-Fin I dated 21 
July, 2010] 
 
Further reply of the Government 
  Petrochemicals Industry: Post-recovery period has seen Petrochemicals Industry 
growing at a robust growth rate of 8.7% in the year 2010-11 (April to March).  
 Chemicals Industry: Major Chemicals have grown at a rate of 6.4% during 2010 -
11. 
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(7)/2011-Fin  dated 20 
June, 2011] 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
41 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para. No. 9 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
The Committee note that Rs.239.75 crore were provided for plan expenditure at 
BE stage for the Department during 2009 -10 which was eventually revised to Rs.405.82 
crore at RE stage.  The increase at RE stage, according to the Ministry, was mainly due 
to the provision of Rs.166.07 crore for Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP).  The 
Committee regret to observe that either the Dep artment failed to anticipate the need for 
such an expenditure at BE stage, this being an ongoing project, or the Planning 
Commission did not provide the requisite funds at BE stage that might have been asked 
for by the Department.  The Committee expect due  diligence by the Department while 
making proper and realistic estimate for such an important project and also in perusing 
the Planning Commission to allocate the same.  The Committee may be apprised 
whether any responsibility has been fixed on the erring officers and disciplinary action 
taken against them.  Further, the date pertaining to the actual expenditure incurred by the 
Department during 2009 -10 indicate that a major portion of the funds had been incurred 
by the Department during the last 2 -3 months of the financial year.  This is evident from 
the fact that the Department had spent only Rs. 233.59 crore till 31 January 2010 
whereas the actual expenditure of the Department by 15 March 2010 was Rs.407.41 
crore.  The Committee feel that prudent financia l practices warrant that the allocated 
funds are incurred evenly during the year as far as possible.  The Committee expect the 
Department to take suitable necessary steps in future to ensure that allocated funds are 
spent judiciously and uniformly during t he year.  The Planning Commission/ Ministry of 
Finance may also ensure that the requisite funds are provided in time lest it should retard 
the progress of this important project.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
In the Annual Plan Budget 2009 -10, the Department  had requested to provide 
Rs.471.00 crore in the budget outlay towards Capital Subsidy to Assam Gas Cracker 
Project for 2009 -10. The allocation for 2009 -10 at BE stage was restricted to Rs.239.75 
crores. However, during the budget announcement 2009 -10 also, Finance Minister in his 
speech had announced increase in the budget outlay for Assam Gas Cracker Project. 
Accordingly, Ministry of Finance provided additional budget to the tune of Rs.166.07 
crore according to the Business Plan of Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited in the 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
42 
 
first supplementary grant for 2009 -10.  The Department regularly monitors the physical 
and financial progress of the Project to ensure that allocated funds are spent judiciously 
as per the approved Business Plan.  
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(2)/2010-Fin I dated 21 
July, 2010] 
 
Further reply of the Government 
In the year 2010 -11, an amount of Rs. 212.74 crore was initially provided for 
AGCP at BE Stage and additional funds of Rs. 579 crore were provided at R E Stage. 
Accordingly, the funds including additional allocations were released to BCPL in 2009 -10 
& 2010 -11 uniformly by the Department as per staggered allocations. The project is in 
advanced stage of implementation and the Department is making efforts fo r spending the 
funds judiciously and uniformly during the year. The project has never suffered on 
account of financial constraints. 
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(7)/2011-Fin  dated 20 
June, 2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para. No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
The Committee note with concern that Caustic Chlorine plant of HOCL at 
Rasayani, Maharastra which was re -commissioned in September 2008 had to be shut 
down again in October 2009 due to d umping of caustic soda lye by developed countries 
and increase in power tariff by Maharastra State Electricity Board from Rs.4.50 per unit 
to Rs.6.15 per unit which made caustic soda manufacturing operation non -remunerative. 
The Committee have been informe d that even the imposition of 25% safeguard duty on 
import of caustic soda has not produced the desired impact in checking the large scale 
dumping. The Committee have been given to understand that to check the cost of 
production and to make the project via ble, HOCL has taken up the installation of 16 MW 
capita power plant with which power cost per unit is expected to come down to Rs.4. the 
Committee hope that the Department will take all necessary steps for early installation of 
16 MW Captive Power Plant fo r Rasayani Unit of HOCL. Apart from taking suitable 
remedial measures to reduce the cost of production, the Department may also examine 
the feasibility of taking up the matter with the Ministry of Finance for raising the safeguard 
duty if any other unit in  this Sector is also facing the difficulty on this account. The 
Committee would like to be informed of the progress made in this regard. 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
43 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
(1)  In order to make the Caustic Soda Plant viable, HOCL has taken up the 
installation of 16 MW captive power plant through JV route.   HOCL‟s contribution in the 
JV equity will be in the form of Land. The final documents for Requisition for Qualification 
(RFQ) have been prepared by the Consultants M/s Kirlosakar Consultants. The progress 
of imp lementation of the proposed JV is being reviewed by HOCL Board and the 
Department regularly through review meetings. 
(2) The provisional safeguard duty on Caustic Soda was valid upto 02.03.2010. 
However, the DG Safeguard did not recommend further extension  of safeguard duty. 
Aggrieved by this decision, Alkali Manufacturers Association representing the domestic 
Chloro alkali has filed an Appeal on 9.5.2010 with Central Excise and Service Tax 
Appellate Tribunal (CESTAT). 
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(2)/2010-Fin I dated 21 
July, 2010] 
 
Further reply of the Government 
Detailed study was done on the viability for setting up of 16 MW Captive Power 
Plant. However, with the present cost of CNG available, the power plant has become 
unviable. Hence, the project has been abandoned for the time being. 
[Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals O.M. No.16(7)/2011-Fin  dated 20 
June, 2011] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee  
(Please see Para. No. 32 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
44 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
28 July , 2011                          Gopinath Munde 
6 Shravana, 1933 (Saka)                                                   Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
45 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2010-11) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 31 May, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to 1630 
hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Dr. Manda Jagannath  - Acting Chairman 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
3. Shri Prabhatsinh P. Chauhan  
4. Smt. Santosh Chowdhary  
5. Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar  
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
7. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup  
8. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato  
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal  
10. Shri Tapas Paul  
11. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
12. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  
13. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar  
RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri A.A. Jinnah  
15. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani  
16. Shri Raghunandan Sharma  
17. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
18. Shri Abani Roy  
19. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
 
Secretariat   
1. Shri Ashok Sarin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C. S. Joon   - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Additional Director 
 
 
2. As the Chairman could not attend the sitting due to pre -occupation, the members 
chose Dr. Manda Jagannath,  a member of the Committee, to act as the Chairman.  The 
Acting Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption  the following 
draft Action Taken Reports : 
(i) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
(ii) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
46 
 
 
(iii) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
(iv) Report on Action Taken by the Govern ment on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
 
4. After some deliberation the adoption/ consideration o f the above mentioned 
Reports was deferred to a later date.   
 
   The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*** Matters not related to this Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
47 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2010-11) 
 
THIRTEENTH SITTING 
(18.07.2011) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday from 1500 hours to 1600 hours. 
 
Present 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  - Chairman 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
3. Shri Prabhatsinh P. Chauhan  
4. Smt. Santosh Chowdhary  
5. Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
6. Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar  
7. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
9. Shri Tapas Paul 
10. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
11. Shri N. Chaluvaraya Swamy 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Silvius Condpan 
13. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
14. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani 
15. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
16. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
17. Shri Abani Roy  
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Sarin   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri C. S. Joon   - Director 
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following draft Reports : 
(i), (ii) and  (iii)  *** *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
 
(iv) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
48 
 
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertiliz ers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals); 
 
(v), (vi) and (vii) *** *** *** *** *** *** ***  
 
4. The Committee adopted the draft reports with minor amendments and authorized 
the Chairman to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
   The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*** Matters not related to this Report. 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\17 Report\17 Report.doc 
49 
 
APPENDIX-III 
 (Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 ANALYSIS OF A CTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH REPORT (15 TH LOK SABHA) OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2009 -10) ON 
„DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010 -2011)‟ OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS).  
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 12 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation.Nos.  2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10 and 12)   
8 
Percentage of Total 67% 
III Observations /  Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation No. 7 
 
1 
Percentage of Total 8% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 3 and 11)  
3 
Percentage of Total 25%  
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are of interim nature:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil 
 
0 
Percentage of Total 0% 
 
 
 
 
 