1 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
    
31 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Twenty-Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
 
 
 THIRTY FIRST REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2012/ Agrahayana 1934, (Saka) 


2 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
CC&F No. -31 
 
REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Twenty Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2012 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  17.12.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) 
  


3 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13) ………………………………...  
Introduction. …………………………………………………..…………………………  
Chapter I Report ……………….…………………………………………………..  
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2012-13) held on 10 December 2012 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth (15th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2011-12) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2012-2013)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
 
 
  

4 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2012-13) 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri S. Alagiri  
3. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
4. Shri P.P. Chauhan  
5. Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
6. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
7. Shri Radadiya Vitthalbhai Hansrajbhai 
8. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
9. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
10. Shri Paswan Kamlesh  
11. Shri  Amarnath Pradhan 
12. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
13. Shri Tufani Saroj 
14. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
15. Shri Raju Shetti 
16. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
17. Shri  D. Venugopal 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
24. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
26. Dr. Vijay Mallya 
27. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
28. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
29. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
30.  Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
4. …… 
 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Shri P. Balaram Naik appointed as a minister of state 
 

5 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2012 -13) 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present this Thirty -First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observ ations / recommen dations contained in the Twenty -Sixth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha ) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2011-12) on ‘Demands for Grants (2012-13)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
 
2. The Twenty-Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standi ng Committee 
on Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 May, 2012.  The 
Action Taken Replies of the Government to all observations / recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 3 August, 2012. The Standing 
Committee on Chemic als and Fertilizers (2012 -13) considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on 10 December, 2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations / 
recommendations contained in the Thirty -First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sab ha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of 
the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
17  December, 2012                          GOPINATH MUNDE 
 26 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)                Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

6 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2011-12) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Sixth  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
‘Demands for Grants (20 12-13)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and  Fertilizers (Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 2.5.2012. In all, 
the Committee made 9 Observations / Recommendations. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish replie s to the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth  Report within three months from the 
date of presentation of the Report, i.e. by 1.8.2012. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the 9 Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from  the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals vide their O.M. No.16( 3)/2012-Fin.I dated 3.8.2012.  
Accordingly, the Replies have been examined and categorized as follows:-  
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government- 
 Rec. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 9                          (Total =7) 
            Chapter-II  
 
(ii)  Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply-  
Rec. No. Nil         (Total =0) 
            Chapter-III  
 
(iii)   Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration-  
      Rec. No. Nil        (Total=0) 
            Chapter-IV  
 
(iv)   Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature- 
Rec. Nos. 4 and 8                 (Total =2) 
            Chapter-V  
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the                   
Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and the 
Final Replies in respect of Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter 
V for which Interim Replies have been furnished by the Department should be 
furnished expeditiously.  

7 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. Need for Legislation to Regulate Chemicals Sector 
 
(Recommendation No.4) 
 
5. Emphasizing the need for country-wide legislation to regulate the Chemicals sector 
in India in line with the European Union’s R egistration Evaluation Authorization of 
Chemicals (REACH) enacted by the European Union,  the Committee had recommended 
as under:-                        
“The Committee note that the European Union , in line with the requirements of the 
Chemical Weapons Convention, has enacted a legislation entitled Registration 
Evaluation Authorization of Chemicals (REACH) under which the industry ha s 
been made responsible for the safety of its products. However, as per information 
provided by the Department, there is no such comprehensive legislation in India on 
the lines of REACH and in India, the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) specifies 
the specifications of the products including chemicals which are voluntary in nature 
for compliance by the industry. Moreover, in this regard, there are many different 
regulatory legislations in India and they are administered though various 
Departments/Ministries. 
 
 In light of this, the C ommittee note  that the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has initiated industry consultations for analyzing the requirement of 
legislation similar to REACH enacted by the European Union. The Committee feels 
that the absen ce of a country -wide legislation that regulates safety norms in 
industry in India may allow for exploitation of loopholes in the existing, fragmented 
regime of legislative regulation which may eventually endanger public security from 
hazardous chemicals, e tc. The Committee, therefore, recommend  that the 
Department should examine the desirability and feasibility of a comprehensive 
legislation on the lines of the European Union’s REACH to regulate the industry, 
including the chemicals and petrochemicals indus try, on the safety of their 
products. The Committee would like to be apprised of any initiative taken in this 
regard.” 
   
6. In reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“The Department has initiated the task of preparation of a status paper covering 
the various salient features of the  European Union Registration Evaluation 
Authorization of Chemicals (EU REACH) legislation in a comprehensive manner 
and their comparison with various provisions of existing legislations enacted by 
various Ministries/Departments. The status paper will also i nclude salient features 
of similar chemical legislations enacted by other countries such as Canada, 
Turkey, China, Japan, Malaysia and South Korea etc. to have a comprehensive 

8 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
understanding of their procedures of implementation and other different provisio ns. 
The status paper on the subject will then be circulated to various concerned 
Ministries and industry stakeholders, to solicit their views in the matter, to reach a 
conclusion regarding the requirement as well as form of such legislation, if needed, 
for India.”  
   
Comments of the Committee 
7.  The Committee had earlier noted that the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals had initiated industry consultations for analyzing the requirement 
of legislation similar to Registration Evaluation Authorizatio n of Chemicals 
(REACH) enacted by the European Union. Observing that India presently has no 
such country -wide legislation to regulate safety norms in the chemicals and 
petrochemicals sector, the Committee had then recommended that the 
Department should examine the desirability and feasibility of such a legislation to 
regulate the industry, including the chemicals and petrochemicals industry, on 
the safety of their products.  The Department, in its Action Taken Replies, has 
stated that it has already prepared a status paper on the issue to determine the 
desirability and if so, the form and content that such a legislation may take. The 
Department has also stated that the status paper will cover an evaluation of 
similar chemicals legislations in other countries like Canada, Turkey, China, 
Japan, etc. to have a comprehensive understanding of their procedure of 
implementation, etc. The status paper will then be circulated to the rel evant 
Ministries and industry stakeholders for consultation.  
 In light of this, the Committee, while appreciating the initiatives taken by the 
Department to implement the Committee’s recommendation, feel that proper 
regulation of the chemicals sector is c rucial and urgent for India given the 
absence of robust and comprehensive regulatory framework governing safety 
norms for the sector. T he Committee, therefore, desire  that the preparation of 
status paper covering salient features of EU REACH and other coun tries be taken 
up by the Department and the same be circulated to the concerned Ministries and 
stakeholders on a priority basis and apprise the Committee  about any further 
progress in regard to enactment of legislation.   
B.        Expeditious Execution of PCPIR Projects 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
8.  Expressing concern over the lack of interest on the part of some States and 
emphasizing the need to expeditiously execute the PCPIR Projects undertaken by the 
Department, the Committee had recommended as under:-  

9 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
 
“The Committee note that the National Policy on Petroleum, Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIR) policy adopts a holistic approach to 
promote the petroleum, chemicals and petrochemical sectors in an integrated and 
environment friendly ma nner on a large scale to reap the benefits of co -sitting, 
networking and greater efficiency through use of common infrastructure and 
support services. The Committee also note that a total of five  PCPIR projects were 
approved by the Government of India, ou t of which the status of development of 
PCPIRs at Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Odisha and Tamil Nadu are still at the initial 
stages and the West Bengal Government has decided to abandon the PCPIR 
project in Haldia. The Committee is worried about the lack of i nterest on part of 
some States and also slow pace of establishment of the PCPIRs. Therefore, the 
Committee desire that the Department should take proactive steps as a facilitator 
and ensure expeditious development of these Regions by setting deadlines for 
creation of necessary infrastructure after consultation with all stake holders.” 
  
9.  In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, t he Department in its 
action taken reply has stated as under:-   
 
“The observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee in the above 
Report have been noted for necessary guidance. 
 
Accordingly, the State Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Orissa  and Gujarat 
presently hosting the approved  Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
Investment Regions (PCPIRs), have been requested to review the committed 
timelines of the implementation of the various projects in the PCPIRs, wherever 
required. Meetings were held on 11.06.2012 with the three State s, to review the 
stages of planning and implementation of the various projects in all the three 
PCPIRs vis -à-vis the timelines earlier committed by the respective State 
Governments. It was noted that the States were in the process of fulfilling their 
commitments. The Department continuously monitors the implementation of the 
PCPIRs on a quarterly basis and shall take necessary action wherever required.   
    
The Department has been organizing road shows and delegations both at the 
national and international  levels for promotion of these PCPIRs, showcasing their 
strengths and attracting further investments. 
 
The Department is also in the process of outlining specific policy measures that 
can be introduced to speed up the implementation of Petroleum, Chemicals  and 
Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs) and enhance their attractiveness as 
prospective investment destinations.”  
   
Comments of the Committee 
10.  The Committee , in their earlier observation, had expressed their concern 
over the lack of interest on the part of some States for setting up PCPIR in their 
states and the slow pace of establishment of Petroleum, Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Investment Regions ( PCPIRs) in the country. The Committee had, 
then, recommended that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should 
take proactive steps as a facilitator and ensure ex peditious development of these 

10 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
regions by setting  up deadlines for creation of necessary infrastructure after 
consultation with all stakeholders. In its response to the Committee’s 
recommendation, the Department has said that it has noted the Observations / 
Recommendations of the Committee for necessary guidance and also note that 
the States are in the process of fulfilling their commitments. The Department in its 
written reply has also stated that it is continuously monitoring the implementation 
of the PCPIRs on a quarterly basis and taking necessary action wherever 
required. Further, the Department has also stated that it is in the process of 
outlining specific policy measures to speed up the implementation of PCPIRs and 
enhance their attractiveness for prospective investors. 
  In view of the  above, the Committee reiterate  the need for time -bound 
implementation of the PC PIRs especially by setting deadlines for creation of 
infrastructure after consultation with all stakeholders. The Committee also 
recommend for the need for proper mechanisms to ensure accountability and 
fixing of responsibilities for any lapse or delay in the execution of the Projects 
and desire to be continuously apprised about any further progress in this regard.  
 
C.  Need for Judicious Fund Utilization at IPFT 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
11.  Acknowledging the steps taken by the Institute of Pesticide Formulation 
Technology (IPFT) to remove procedural hurdles which had earlier prevented the 
Institute from properly utilizing its allocated funds, and stressing on the need to 
judiciously utilize i ts allocated funds this year,  the Committee had recommended as 
under:-  
  “The Committee observe  that the Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology 
(IPFT) has taken steps to remove certain procedural hurdles which had prevented 
it from fully utilizing its allocated funds earlier. The Justification and Specification 
Committees set up to streamline  the procurement process at the Institute have 
also started functioning. The Committee also observe that IPFT has recently been 
granted the status of ‘Designated Lab’ by the Organization for the Prohibition of 
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). The budget allocated for IPFT for 2012 -13 under 
Plan Head is Rs. 7 crore, which is a huge jump from the previous year’s allocation 
of Rs. 1 crore.  
In light of the above, the Committee desire that the Institute should judiciously 
utilize the allocated amount for this year for the stated purposes and record a 
better performance in terms of profit and development and production of state -of-
the-art user and environment -friendly pesticide formulation technology. The 
Committee expect the Department to properly oversee the functioning of IFPT and 
apprise the Committee of any new development. The Committee also feel that the 

11 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
Non-Plan allocation for the Institute, at Rs. 3.29 crore and Rs. 3.50 crore for 2011-
12 and 2012 -13 respectively, is very high relative to Plan allocation.  The 
Committee therefore recommend that the Department should take steps to lower 
expenditure under Non-Plan and expect to be apprised about action taken in that 
regard.  
 
12.  The Department in its action taken reply to the above -mentioned 
recommendation has stated as under:-   
 “The Department shares the concern of the Committee on judicious utilization of 
the higher allocation of Rs. 7 crore for  Institute of Pesticide Formulation 
Technology ( IPFT) in the year 2012 -13 (Plan) for the stated purposes and better 
performance.  The lower allocation of Rs. 1 crore in the year 2011 -12 was made 
in view of inadequate utilization in the preceding years and to ensure prudent 
financial management of Plan grants.  The allocation has been increased for BE 
2012-13, as per proj ects proposed for the XII Five Year Plan.   The increased 
allocated budget of Rs. 7.00 crore for 2012 -13 is proposed to be gainfully utilized 
by the  Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) for capital support for 
activities related to Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 
(OPCW), National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratory 
(NABL) and Bureau of  Indian Standards (BIS) activities; analysis of pesticides 
and their residue for providing support to the agrochemical industry; execution of 
new Research & Development (R&D ) projects as also completion of ongoing 
projects; renovation of Pilot Plant and replacement of obsolete machinery and 
equipments.    
 
   The Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals shall monitor and streamline the 
functioning of Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology ( IPFT) and has noted 
the recommendations of the Committee on apprising it of any new significant 
developments in IPFT mandated activities.   
  
 The Department also shares the concern on the higher non -plan allocation for the 
Institute for 2011 -12 and 2012 -13.  As stated above, the allocation of Plan funds 
for Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology ( IPFT) was reduced in 2010 -11 
and 2011-12, showing a proportionally  higher non plan allocation as compared to 
plan allocation.  The non plan allocation for the Institute is required at present to 
cater to its Salary & Establishment costs.  The increase in the Non -Plan budget 
for 2012-13 is due to hike in salary costs and increase in other overheads due to 
increased activities of the Institute. The Department, while reviewing the 
dependence of IPFT  on non-plan funds from the Government, has emphasized (i) 
judicious utilization of internal and extra budgetary resources; (ii ) increasing 
revenue generation through sponsored projects and testing charges; and  (iii) 
utilization of interest from pooling of available funds in IPFT in a single Corpus 
Fund. IPFT has also been asked to build a reasonable Corpus Fund of Rs. 10 
crore to reduce dependence on non plan funds.  Through the above initiatives, the 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals envisages augmentation and 
utilization of internal revenue generation, coupled with increase in plan funds to 
support and strengthen IPFT’s resources and assets over a period of time.” 
   
Comments of the Committee 

12 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
13.  The Committee , in their earlier observation, had noted the huge hike in 
budgetary allocation for the Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
for 2012-13 as compared to the previous year and had desired that the Institute 
should judiciously utilize the allocated amount for this year for the s tated 
purposes and record a better performance in terms of profit and development and 
production of state of the art user and environment -friendly pesticides 
formulation technology. In its reply, the Department has  said, inter alia , that it 
shares the conc erns of the Committee regarding judicious utilization of the 
increase in allocated budget of Rs. 7 crore for the year 2012 -13. Regarding 
increase in non -plan expenditure, the Department, while accepting the 
Committee’s recommendations, also highlighted the  steps it has taken which 
include generation of  revenue internally through sponsored projects and testing 
charges. The Committee also note that IPFT has been asked by the Department to 
build a reasonable Corpus Fund of Rs. 10 crore to reduce dependence on non-
plan funds.  
  While appreciating the efforts of the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals regarding proper utilization of plan allocation and reduction of 
dependence on non -plan allocation  for the IPFT, the Committee desire to be 
apprised about the outcome of increased plan allocation of Rs. 7 crore during the 
year 2012 -13. Further, the Committee also desire to be apprised about the 
outcome of efforts undertaken by the IPFT for internal resource generation and 
creation of the Corpus Fund of Rs. 10  crore and the extent to which its 
dependence on non-plan allocation is reduced due to these efforts.  
D.  HOCL and HIL  
(Recommendation No. 8) 
14.  Emphasizing the urgent need to comprehensively review the functioning of 
Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd (HOCL) to tide over its numerous troubles and also 
stressing the urgent need to find safe alternatives to Endosulfan,  the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 
       “The Committee observe that the Rasayani Unit of Hindustan Organic Chemicals 
Ltd (HOCL) has continued to incur huge financial losses. While the Unit’s turnover 
is approximately Rs. 90 crore, it incur losses to the tune of Rs. 130 crore. The  
Committee are also aware about the longstanding dispute between the 
management of HOCL and some Employee’s Unions regarding wages which 
must have adverse effect on overall productivity. Meanwhile, the Department has 
informed that the proposed 16 MW Captiv e Power Plant (CPP) which was 

13 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
envisaged to reduce power costs at Rasayani Unit has been abandoned due to 
non-viability.  
Regarding Hindustan Insecticides Ltd (HIL), the Committee note that there has 
been no progress regarding the proposed new plant to manu facture Mancozeb as 
the feasibility of the project is in doubt. Also, no decision has so far been taken on 
the issue of finding a viable alternative to Endosulfan.  
            In light of the above, the Committee desire that the Department should undertak e 
a detailed and comprehensive study of the numerous problems afflicting the 
HOCL Unit at Rasayani and take necessary action to remedy the situation. As for 
HIL, the Committee recommend that the Department should continue to pursue 
the matter of finding sa fe and viable alternatives to Endosulfan on a priority basis 
so that the agricultural sector of the economy do not suffer.”  
   
  
15.  The Department in its action taken reply to the above -mentioned recommendation 
has stated as under:-    
 
 “The Department is in full agreement with the recommendation of the Committee 
that the problems which are being faced by the HOCL unit of Rasayani needs to 
be identified and necessary action taken to remedy the situation.  The Department 
has analysed the is sue carefully.  HOCL, Rasayani unit has around 874 
employees.  The employee cost is Rs.71 crore in 2010 -11.  In 2010 -11, the 
Rasayani Unit had a turnover of Rs.86 crore, resulting in a loss of Rs.104 crore.  
To sustain the employee cost of Rs.71 crore, the  factory’s turnover requires to be 
scaled up to the tune of Rs.500 -800 crore atleast.  This will be possible only if 
mega sized projects, producing high volume chemicals, are set  up.  The capacity 
required for viable production will be of the order of Rs.2  lakh to 4 lakh MT per 
annum.  This will require an investment of Rs.2000 to Rs.3000 crore, which the 
company simply does not have.  It is also impractical to expect the Government of 
India to provide plan funds by way of equity for starting such a large p roject.  
Hence, large scale investments by the Government or the company does not 
appear to be a feasible option. 
 
 The biggest asset as far as HOCL Rasayani unit is concerned is the nearly 1000 
acres of land (though on lease).  HOCL and the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has been discussing with other PSUs who may have surplus cash 
to invest but is looking for suitable land.  Some of the chemical PSUs and fertiliser 
PSUs and oil PSUs have been identified as potential candidates in this regard.  
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers (RLF) has actually shown some interest in 
having some kind of tie up with HOCL, utilising the land that is available in 
Rasayani.  There could be synergy between HOCL and RCF in this regard.  The 
possibilities can only emerge after a detailed study on all aspects is undertaken.  
RCF has appointed M/s Deloitte to undertake such a study.  The DCPC has given 
in principle approval for the study.  The study will analyse the possibilities of 
merger/tie up between RCF and HOCL.   This could be with the Rasayani unit 
alone or with the Kochi unit as well.  Study is progressing.  Estimated time of 
completion is 20 weeks. 
 
 The DCPC will take further action on the basis of the results of the study and the 
view that will be taken by t he RCF in the matter.  As regards HIL and finding viable 
alternatives to Endosulfan, the Supreme Court, in Writ Petition (Civil) 213 of 2011, 

14 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
has passed an interim order on 13 -05-2011 banning the production, use and sale 
of Endosulfan all over India till fu rther orders.  The Court also appointed a Joint 
Committee headed by the Director General of India Council of Medical Research 
(ICMR) and the Commissioner (Agriculture) to conduct a scientific study on the 
question whether the use of Endosulfan would cause any serious health hazard to 
human beings and would cause environmental pollution and inter -alia recommend 
alternatives to Endosulfan. This joint Committee headed by the DGICMR has been 
holding meetings with the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, I ndian 
Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, 
Ministry of Environment & Forest, Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), 
Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), Pesticide and Endosulfan  
Manufactures Association, etc to discuss the issue of Endosulfan in pursuance of 
the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. The Department of Chemicals 
& Petrochemicals is closely involved in the task. The committee has to submit its 
report and a final decision will evolve only thereafter.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
16.  The Committee , in their earlier observation / recommendation, had 
emphasized the need for a comprehensive review of the working and structure of 
Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd (HOCL), especially its Rasayani Unit, in view of  
continuous revenue losses and labour problem s. As regards HIL , the Committee 
had also recommended that the Department should pursue the matter of finding a 
safe and viable alternative to Endosulfan on a priority basis. In its Action Taken 
Report, the Department has expressed full agreement with the Committee’s 
recommendation regarding the need to identify and redress the problem affecting 
HOCL Unit at Rasayani. The Department has also elaborated upon measures it 
had proposed to take to generate revenue, like utilizing extra land for productive 
purposes, etc . The Department has also provided updated information on the 
ongoing search for alternatives to Endosulfan and  informed that it is actively 
involved in the task.  
 In light of this , the Committee, while noting the Department’s initiatives, 
expect that all its recommendations will be pursued and fully implemented soon. 
The Committee desire that they should be apprised about the findings of M/s 
Deloitte which is entrusted to study the feasibility of tie -up between Rashtriya 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (RCF) and HOCL, as and when it submit s its report. The 
Committee also desire to be apprised about the latest position regarding 
construction of the  proposed Mancozeb plant of HIL  which has been lying in 
limbo and hope that some headway shall be made in th is regard very soon . The 
Committee feel that the search of alternatives to Endosulfan should be taken up in 
right earnest and hence, desire to be apprised about further progress in this 
regard.   

15 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
  
 The Committee note that there is a general improvement in the growth rate of 
production of major chemicals and petrochemicals. Amongst the major chemicals, 
however, the growth rate of production of Organic Chemicals at 4.84% and Pesticides 
(Technical) at zero percent for the period between 2009 -10 to 2010-11 are unsatisfactory. 
The Compound Annual Rate of Growth (CARG) of production of selected major 
chemicals for the period 2005 -06 to 2010 -11 registered a small improvement at 0.89%. 
Regarding production of major petrochemicals, the committee note that while Elastomers 
registered a negative growth rate of -10.38% during 2009 -10 and 2010 -11, the growth 
rate for Synthetic Detergent Intermediates at 3.24 % is also unsatisfactory. The overall 
CARG for production of major petrochemicals during 2005 -06 and 2010 -11 was 3.82%. 
While these growth rates show that the sector is back on a growth path, the Committee 
feel that they fell far short of the potential as the sector is expected to grow at around 10 
to 11% over the next 10 years. 
  
In this regard, the Committee note that a Working Group on Chemicals Sector has 
already submitted a list of recommendations to the Planning Commission which include 
improvement in infrastructure, development of India’s chemical inventory, rationalization 
of taxes and duties, consolidation of multiple legislations into one Integrated Chemical 
Legislation, improvement of image of industry, setting up of talent development 
infrastructure, and institution of a Technology Upgradation Fund. The Committee feel that 
the above recommendations, if implemented, will help the industry move in a sustained 
growth path. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department should make 
concerted e fforts to include the recommendations of the Working Group on Chemical 
Sector in the Twelfth Five Year Plan, when it is finalized. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
The 12 th Five Year Plan is yet to be finalized by the Planning Commission.  The 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) is making every effort to see that a 
majority of the recommendations of the Working Group on Chemical Sector are included 
in the 12th Five Year Plan. 
  
Some of the schemes included in the recommendations of the Working Group  on 
Chemicals have already been included as plan schemes in the 2012 -13 budget 
estimates.  A number of recommendations of the Working Group have already been 
accepted by the Steering Committee of the Planning Commission.  The DCPC shall 
continue our effort s to get included maximum number of schemes in the 12 th Five Year 
Plan. 
  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (3)/2012- Fin.1  Dated 3.8.2012] 
 
 
 

16 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
The Committee note  that during the Twelfth Five Plan, the Central Institute of 
Plastic Engineering and Technology (CIPET) is proposed to be developed as a premier 
institute of National Importance. The committee also note that presently, CIPET has to 
seek affiliation from di fferent State Universities to conduct UG/PG and Doctoral 
Programmes due to which different syllabus of respective Universities have to be followed 
and the degrees are awarded by different Universities and this leads to variation in course 
contents and regu lations to be followed for the courses. In view of this, the Committee 
feel that CIPET should have the power to award its own degrees and recommend that the 
matter should be pursued vigorously by the Department. The Committee desire to be 
apprised about steps taken by the Department towards this end. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Before CIPET is declared as an Institution of National Importance, with the power 
to award its own degrees, it is necessary to decide on the basic structure.  The question 
of awarding degrees arises only in the 5 High Learning Centres (HLC) of CIPET.  The 
major part of the CIPET function of providing training in plastic engineering and 
technology to students to equip them to take up jobs in factories will continue in the other 
centres of CIPET.  It will not be in order to insist that the other centres shoul d also have 
similar kind of faculty, student -teacher ratio, laboratories, etc. as required for the HLCs.  
At the same time,  it will not be correct to split CIPET into two, one for running the HLCs 
and the other for running the other centres.  Hence, it is  necessary to envisage a suitable 
structure for CIPET which will have the necessary flexibility.  Once this is finalized, a draft 
legislation will be prepared.  This will then be sent for inter -ministerial consultations after 
which Cabinet approval will ne ed to be taken.  If the Cabinet approves the proposal, the 
same will be presented in the Parliament. 
 
Structural changes, particularly in respect of faculty, will also require to be planned 
and implemented.  DG, CIPET is presently examining the faculty str ucture, particularly 
with reference to their eligibility to teach in HLCs, which will award degrees. 
  
Additional faculty will need to be recruited to cater to the needs of the 5 HLCs.  
This will involve additional financial commitment for which non -plan g rants from GoI to 
CIPET will be necessary.  This aspect will need to be discussed further with the Ministry 
of Finance.  
 
Action on all the above points has  already been initiated.  Department is fully 
committed to push for conversion of the HLCs of CIPET into an Institution of National 
Importance, which will have the power to award degrees. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (3)/2012- Fin.1  Dated 3.8.2012] 
  
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
Regarding management of plastic waste, the Committee note the CIPET study 
which reveals that municipal solid waste contains 7% plastic waste. The Committee also 
note that CIPET is contemplating to establish composting Centers for plastic waste in 

17 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
states of  Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Odisha. The Department has also 
interacted with NGOs, Municipal Corporations and other interested organizations for 
improving Plastic Waste recycling and Management and on receipt of plan of action from 
these organizations, it will examine the possibilities of setting up of some Plastic Waste 
Management Centres (PWMCs) in PPP model. In this regard, the Committee feel that 
management of solid waste in general and plastic waste in particular is a great challenge 
in view  of non -biodegradable nature of plastics and also increasing usage of plastic 
products. Hence, the Committee recommend that the PWMCs should be established at 
least in each of the districts of the country and with special focus to the urban areas. In 
view of the urgency of plastic waste management, the Committee desire the Department 
to finalize framework regarding establishment of PWMCs in Public Private Partnership 
mode, in consultation with other stake holders in a time bound manner. The committee 
desire to be apprised about steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
One Plastic Waste Management Centre (PWMC)  has been set up by  Central 
Institute of Plastic Engineering and Technology (CIPET) at Guwahati  in 2009. It is mainly 
for academic and demonstration-cum-training purposes. The Department, through CIPET 
and other stakeholders, have  been conducting seminars aimed at spreading awareness 
on issues such as recyclable properties of plastic, choice of appropriate technology, etc.  
  
The Ministry of Environment and Forest has notified the Plastic Waste 
(Management & Handling ) Rules, 2011 on 4 th February, 2011 and further amendment on 
2nd July, 2011 after wide ranging consultations with the Ministry of Urb an Development, 
the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), concerned stakeholders including Industry 
Associations, etc. These rules provide a systematic framework for Plastic Waste 
Management in the country on the concept of Public Private Partnership. As  per these 
Rules, the issues related to Plastic Waste Management System are to be executed by the 
concerned Municipal Authority/State Government, based on the local conditions and 
involvement of concerned stake holders on the concept of Extended Producer’s  
Responsibility.  The Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals (DCPC) will facilitate 
various technological options through CIPET, if required by the concerned Municipal 
Authority / Local Self Government / State Government.  The DCPC is also in the process  
of preparing the framework for establishment of Plastic Waste Management Centres 
(PWMCs) in Public Private Partnership mode. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (3)/2012- Fin.1  Dated 3.8.2012] 
  
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 The Committee note that the National Policy on Petroleum, Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Investment Regions  (PCPIR) policy adopts a holistic approach to 
promote the petroleum, chemicals and petrochemicals sectors in an integrated and 
environment friendly manner on a large scale to reap the benefits of co-sitting, networking 
and greater efficiency through use of common infrastructure and support services. The 
Committee also note that a total of five PCPIR projects were approved by the 
Government of India, out  of which the status of development of PCPIRs at Andhra 
Pradesh, Gujarat, Orissa and Tamil Nadu are still at the initial stages and the West 
Bengal Government has decided to abandon the PCPIR project in Haldia. The Committee 
is worried about the lack of in terest on part of some States and also slow pace of 
establishment of the PCPIRs. Therefore, the Committee desire the Department should 

18 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
take proactive steps as a facilitator and ensure expeditious development of these Regions 
by setting deadlines for creati on of necessary infrastructure after consultation with all 
stake holders.  
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee in the above 
Report have been noted for necessary guidance. 
 
Accordingly, the State Government s of Andhra Pradesh, Orissa  and Gujarat 
presently hosting the approved  Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment 
Regions (PCPIRs), have been requested to review the committed timelines of the 
implementation of the various projects in the PCPIRs, wherever required. Meetings were 
held on 11.06.2012 with the three State s, to review the stages of planning and 
implementation of the various projects in all the three PCPIRs vis -à-vis the timelines 
earlier committed by the respective State Governments. It was noted that the States were 
in the process of fulfilling their commi tments. The Department continuously monitors the 
implementation of the PCPIRs on a quarterly basis and shall take necessary action 
wherever required.      
 
 The Department has been organizing road shows and delegations both at the 
national and internationa l levels for promotion of these PCPIRs, showcasing their 
strengths and attracting further investments. 
 
   The Department is also in the process of outlining specific policy measures that 
can be introduced to speed up the implementation of Petroleum, Chemi cals and 
Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs) and enhance their attractiveness as 
prospective investment destinations.  
 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (3)/2012- Fin.1  Dated 3.8.2012] 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Regarding the Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP), the Committee observes that 
this is the biggest project undertaken by the Department in terms of fund alloc ation.  The 
Revised Cost Estimate (RCE) for the project is Rs. 8920 crore (on “as built basis”).  For 
the current year, the Planning Commission has approved an allocation of Rs. 1552 crore 
although the Department proposed an amount of Rs. 2552 crore. Howev er, the 
Committee note with regret that the project has encountered numerous cost and time 
overruns, and that the project is now planned to be fully commissioned by December, 
2013. 
 
The Committee note that the main factors primarily responsible for time an d cost 
overruns are poor quality of Detail Feasibility Report (DFR), initial delay in resolving the 
issues raised by feedstock suppliers, delay in incorporation of BCPL and in the 
appointment of Engineering Project Management Consultants (EPMC), delay in a ward 

19 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
and finalization of agreement with the process technology licensors, significant changes 
in technology / engineering / operational / utility requirements, time escalation and 
increased prices of feedstock, inadequate deployment of key personnel, and a bsence of 
proper incentive structure, etc.  The Committee are unhappy to note that the above 
factors for time and cost overruns reflect poor project management skills on the part of 
the Department. Hence, the Committee recommends that the Department should  keep 
constant vigil and monitor the progress of the project, and proactively ensure that further 
time and cost overruns are avoided.  Noting that the employment projected to be 
generated directly or indirectly by the project is around 1, 00, 000, the Comm ittee 
recommend that employment of locals for the project be prioritized as far as practicable.  
Given the huge investment of public money in the project, the committee expect the 
project to really live up to its promise of bringing about socio -economic development of 
the entire region of North-East India. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
The Assam Gas Cracker project along with downstream plastic processing, 
ancillary, engineering and service sector industries, will entail substantial benefits under 
the socio-economic criteria. Apart from generation of employment it also envisages 
improvements in provision of educational, transport and health facilities, attracting 
investments in nature of setting up of downstream industries, improvement in 
infrastructure in and around the project area etc., and overall improvement in the general 
economic condition of the people of North-East 
 
  During the ongoing construction phase, as on date 155 Executives are on the roll 
of Brah maputra Cracker & Polymer Limited (BCPL),  of which 44% are from the North 
East.  Further about 7500 workers are engaged by contractors for the project, of which 
90% are local people. On commissioning and achieving successful trial runs, the project 
will provide direct and indirect employment to l ocal people who will be involved in 
operation and maintenance of plant on contract basis under various contracting 
companies. 
 
 The project is being regularly monitored by the Committee headed by Secretary   
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. This  includes reviews with the project 
authorities, consultants, major contractors, State Government, other Ministries / 
Departments in Government of India, etc. All possible steps are being taken to avoid 
further time and cost overruns. Further, Principal Sec retary to the Prime Minister also 
monitors the project on a regular basis.  The cumulative physical progress, as on 15 th 
June, 2012, is 73.4% and cumulative expenditure, as on 30.6.2012 is Rs. 4957.55 crore. 
 
  [Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (3)/2012- Fin.1  Dated 3.8.2012] 
  
Recommendation No. 7 
 
 The Committee observes that the Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology 
(IPFT) has taken steps to remove certain procedural hurdles which had prevented it from 
fully utilizing its allocated funds earlier.  The Justification and Specification Committees 
set up to streamline the procurement process at the Institute have also started 
functioning.  The Committee also observes that IPFT has recently been granted the 
status of ‘Designated Lab’ by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 
(OPCW).  The budget allocated for IPFT for 2012 -13 under Plan Head is Rs. 7 crore, 
which is a huge jump from the previous year’s allocation of Rs. 1 crore. 
 

20 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
 In light of the above, the Committee desire that the Institute should judiciously 
utilize the allocated amount for this year for the stated purposes and record a better 
performance in terms of profit and development and production of state -of-the art  user 
and environment-friendly pesticide formulation technology.  The Committee expects the 
Department to properly oversee the functioning of IPFT and apprise the Committee of any 
new development.  The Committee also feel that the Non -Plan allocation for the Institute, 
at Rs. 3.29 crore and Rs. 3.50 crore for 2011 -12 and 2012 -13 respectively, is very high 
relative to Plan allocation.  The Committee therefore recommend that the Department 
should take steps to lower expenditure under Non -Plan and expect to be  apprised about 
action taken in that regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Department shares the concern of the Committee on judicious utilization of 
the higher allocation of Rs. 7 crore for  Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (  
IPFT) in the year 2012 -13 (Plan) for the stated purposes and better performance.  The 
lower allocation of Rs. 1 crore in the year 2011 -12 was made in view of inadequate 
utilization in the preceding years and to ensure prudent financial management of Plan 
grants.  The allocation has been increased for BE 2012 -13, as per projects proposed for 
the XII Five Year Plan.   The increased allocated budget of Rs. 7.00 crore for 2012 -13 is 
proposed to be gainfully utilized by the  Institute of Pesticide Formulation Techno logy 
(IPFT) for capital support for activities related to Organization for the Prohibition of 
Chemical Weapons (OPCW),  National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration 
Laboratory (NABL) and Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) activities; analysis of p esticides 
and their residue for providing support to the agrochemical industry; execution of new 
Research & Development (R&D ) projects as also completion of ongoing projects; 
renovation of Pilot Plant and replacement of obsolete machinery and equipments.    
 
   The Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals shall monitor and streamline the 
functioning of Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology ( IPFT) and has noted the 
recommendations of the Committee on apprising it of any new significant developments in 
IPFT mandated activities.    
 
 The Department also shares the concern on the higher non -plan allocation for the 
Institute for 2011 -12 and 2012 -13.  As stated above, the allocation of Plan funds for  
Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology ( IPFT) was reduced in 2010 -11 and 2011 -
12, showing a proportionally higher non plan allocation as compared to plan allocation.  
The non plan allocation for the Institute is required at present to cater to its Salary & 
Establishment costs.  The increase in the Non -Plan budget for 2012 -13 is due to hike in 
salary costs and increase in other overheads due to increased activities of the Institute. 
The Department, while reviewing the dependence of IPFT  on non -plan funds from the 
Government, has emphasized (i) judicious u tilization of internal and extra budgetary 
resources; (ii) increasing revenue generation through sponsored projects and testing 
charges; and  (iii) utilization of interest from pooling of available funds in IPFT in a single 
Corpus Fund. IPFT has also been asked to build a reasonable Corpus Fund of Rs. 10 
crore to reduce dependence on non plan funds.  Through the above initiatives, the 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals envisages augmentation and utilization of 
internal revenue generation, coupled with  increase in plan funds to support and 
strengthen IPFT’s resources and assets over a period of time. 
 
  [Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (3)/2012- Fin.1  Dated 3.8.2012] 
   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

21 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
  
Recommendation No. 9 
 
 Regarding compensation to the victims of the Bhopal Gas Disaster, the 
Committee note that the total ex-gratia amount to be given to victims of various categories 
was Rs.740 crore out of which Rs.647 crore is released, which is about 87 percent of the 
total assistance.  The physical progress is 89 percent.  The Committee desire that the 
Department should make all out effort towards tracing all the victims of the disaster who 
are eligible for ex-gratia compensation. 
 
 Further, the Committee also express their concern about the effects of Bhopal Gas 
Disaster on the next generation of victims and feel that continuous review and research is 
essential in this area.  The Committee note  that the Indian Council of Medical Research 
(ICMR) is now entrusted with the task. The Committee desire to be apprised about any 
progress in this regard. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
As on 15.5.2012, a total of 44,388 cases (91.2%) have been decided by the Office 
of the Welfare Commissioner out of 48,694 cases and a sum of  Rs.653.36 crore (88.3 %) 
has been disbursed in these cases out of the Rs.740 crore as per the initial decision of 
the Cabinet on 24.6.2010.  In addition, the Cabinet  on 23.3.2012, has sa nctioned  an 
additional Rs.134 crore as ex-gratia to the approximately 9000 cases of Cancer and Total 
Renal Failure (TRF) that had additionally arisen as recommended by the Group of 
Ministers (GoM) on 13.1.2012. 
 
 Though the disbursement of compensation wa s started on 19.12.2010 by the 
Office of the Welfare Commissioner, a large number of claimants had failed to attend the 
designated Gas Claim Tribunals for receiving ex -gratia despite notices having been 
served at their last known addresses and publication of their claim details in local 
newspapers.  In order to trace all the victims eligible for ex -gratia, the Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals has also published a Notice in prominent national 
newspapers (both English and Hindi) on 1.4.2012, inviting eligible claimants to contact the 
Office of the Welfare Commissioner for ex-gratia payment.  
 
As regards the task assigned to the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), is 
as decided by the Cabinet on 24.6.2010. 
 
The ICMR has established its 31 st permanent institute namely, ‘National Institute 
for Research in Environmental Health (NIREH) at Bhopal on 11 th October 2010.  The 
Institute aims to focus on research and rehabilitation on several issues including genetic 
disorders, congenital disorders and seco nd generation children related medical issues. 
Ultimately, it is hoped that this Institute will emerge as the apex research institution on 
environmental health in India. 
 
For functioning of NIREH, an agreement was signed on 20 th January, 2011 
between ICMR and Kamla Nehru Hospital, Bhopal for transferring space at the Centre for 
Rehabilitation Studies (CRS), Bhopal, which was earlier operating under the  Madhya 
Pradesh Bhopal Gas Tragedy Relief and Rehabilitation Department. The existing 
infrastructure of CR S, Bhopal is being modified and strengthened to make it operational 
and the existing staff of CRS has been taken on a project mode w.e.f. 1 st February, 2011.  
The new Clinical Facility under NIREH at Kamla Nehru Hospital has been inaugurated on 
16th May, 2012. The Government of Madhya Pradesh has allotted 8.00 hectare of land at 
Bhauri, Bhopal on 23 rd December, 2011 for the construction and setting up of laboratory 
for NIREH.   Response on the request to provide land free of cost is awaited so that after 

22 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
taking possession of the land allocated by Government of Madhya Pradesh, other 
developmental activities, including construction, can be initiated. 
 
   The process for creating 235 posts for NIREH is underway.  New equipment worth 
Rs. 1,38,43,687/- has been p urchased and installed at NIREH.  In addition, some major 
equipment (digital x -ray machine, etc.) which are required for patient management are 
also being acquired. Six consultants have been appointed to start work pertaining to 
clinical, therapeutic, epid emiological and genetic research on Methyl -iso-cynate(MIC) 
affected population as well as on health hazards due to exposure to various chemicals in 
the environment. Dr. H. Raj Mohan, Scientist F,Officer -in-charge, Regional Occupational 
Health Centre (ROHC) , Bangalore, deputed to monitor the progress on ‘Epidemiological 
Study on long term effects of MIC exposure’, has already initiated the work.  
  
  [Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (3)/2012- Fin.1  Dated 3.8.2012] 
  
 
 
 
  

23 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT WANT 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
-- NIL-- 
  

24 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
  
-- NIL-- 
  
  

25 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE 
  
Recommendation No. 4 
 
The Committee note that the European Union, in line with the requirements of the 
Chemical Weapons Convention, has enacted a legislation entitled Registration Evaluation 
Authorization of Chemicals (REACH) under which the industry has been made 
responsible for the safety of its products. Howeve r, as per information provided by the 
Department, there is no such comprehensive legislation in India on the lines of REACH 
and in India, the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) specifies the specifications of the 
products including chemicals which are voluntary in nature for compliance by the industry. 
Moreover, in this regard, there are many different regulatory legislations in India and they 
are administered though various Departments/Ministries. 
 
In light of this, the Committee notes that the Department of  Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has initiated industry consultations for analyzing the requirement of 
legislation similar to REACH enacted by the European Union. The Committee feels that 
the absence of a country -wide legislation that regulates safety norms i n industry in India 
may allow for exploitation of loopholes in the existing, fragmented regime of legislative 
regulation which may eventually endanger public security from hazardous chemicals, etc. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department s hould examine the 
desirability and feasibility of a comprehensive legislation on the lines of the European 
Union’s REACH to regulate the industry, including the chemicals and petrochemicals 
industry, on the safety of their products. The Committee would lik e to be apprised of any 
initiative taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department has initiated the task of preparation of a status paper covering the 
various salient features of the  European Union Registration Evaluation Authorization of 
Chemicals (EU REACH) legislation in a comprehensive manner and their comparison 
with various provisions of existing legislations enacted by various Ministries/Departments. 
The status paper will also include salient features of similar chemical legislations enacted 
by other countries such as Canada, Turkey, China, Japan, Malaysia and South Korea etc. 
to have a comprehensive understanding of their procedures of implementation and other 
different provisions. The status paper on the subject will then be circulat ed to various 
concerned Ministries and industry stakeholders, to solicit their views in the matter, to 
reach a conclusion regarding the requirement as well as form of such legislation, if 
needed, for India. 
   
  [Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (3)/2012- Fin.1  Dated 3.8.2012] 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation No. 8 
 

26 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
           The Committee observe  that the Rasayani  Unit of Hindustan Organic Chemicals 
Ltd (HOCL) has continued to incur huge financial losses. While the Unit’s turnover is 
approximately Rs. 90 crore, it incurs losses to the tune of Rs. 130 crore. The Committee 
are also aware about the longstanding disput e between the management of HOCL and 
some Employee’s Unions regarding wages which must have adverse effect on overall 
productively. Meanwhile, the Department has informed that the proposed 16 MW Captive 
Power Plant (CPP) which was envisaged to reduce power  costs at Rasayani Unit has 
been abandoned due to non-viability. 
 
Regarding Hindustan Insecticides Ltd. (HIL), the Committee note that there has 
been no progress regarding the proposed new plant to manufacture Mancozeb as the 
feasibility of the project is in doubt. Also, no decision has so far been taken on the issue 
of finding a viable alternative to Endosulfan. 
 
In light of the above, the Committee desire that the Department should undertake a 
detailed and comprehensive study of the numerous problems affl icting the HOCL Unit at 
Rasayani and take necessary action to remedy the situation. As for HIL, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should continue to pursue the matter of finding safe and 
viable alternatives to Endosulfan on a priority basis so th at the agricultural sector of the 
economy do not suffer. 
  
  
Reply of the Government 
 
            The Department is in full agreement with the recommendation of the Committee 
that the problems which are being faced by the HOCL unit of Rasayani needs to be 
identified and necessary action taken to remedy the situation.  The Department has 
analysed the issue carefully.  HOCL, Rasayani unit has around 874 employees.  The 
employee cost is Rs.71 crore in 2010 -11.  In 2010 -11, the Rasayani Unit had a turnover 
of Rs.86 crore, resulting in a loss of Rs.104 crore.  To sustain the employee cost of Rs.71 
crore, the factory’s turnover requires to be scaled up to the tune of Rs.500 -800 crore 
atleast.  This will be possible only if mega sized projects, producing high volum e 
chemicals, are setup.  The capacity required for viable production will be of the order of 
Rs.2 lakh to 4 lakh MT per annum.  This will require an investment of Rs.2000 to Rs.3000 
crore, which the company simply does not have.  It is also impractical to expect the 
Government of India to provide plan funds by way of  equity for starting such a large 
project.  Hence, large scale investments by the Government or the company does not 
appear to be a feasible option. 
 
 The biggest asset as far as HOCL Rasayani  unit is concerned is the nearly 1000 
acres of land (though on lease).  HOCL and the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has been discussing with other PSUs who may have surplus cash to 
invest but is looking for suitable land.  Some of the chemical PSUs and fertiliser PSUs 
and oil PSUs have been identified as potential candidates in this regard.  Rashtriya 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (RLF) has actually shown some interest in having some kind of 
tie up with HOCL, utilising the land that is available in Rasayani.  There could be synergy 
between HOCL and RCF in this regard.  The possibilities can only emerge after a detailed 
study on all aspects is undertaken.  RCF has appointed M/s Deloitte to undertake such a 
study.  The DCPC has given in principle appro val for the study.  The study will analyse 
the possibilities of merger/tie up between RCF and HOCL.  This could be with the 
Rasayani unit alone or with the Kochi unit as well.  Study is progressing.  Estimated time 
of completion is 20 weeks. 
 
 The DCPC wil l take further action on the basis of the results of the study and the 
view that will be taken by the RCF in the matter.As regards HIL and finding viable 

27 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
alternatives to Endosulfan, the Supreme Court, in Writ Petition (Civil) 213 of 2011, has 
passed an int erim order on 13 -05-2011 banning the production, use and sale of 
Endosulfan all over India till further orders.  The Court also appointed a Joint Committee 
headed by the Director General of India Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and the 
Commissioner (Agriculture) to conduct a scientific study on the question whether the use 
of Endosulfan would cause any serious health hazard to human beings and would cause 
environmental pollution and inter -alia recommend alternatives to Endosulfan. This joint 
Committee headed by the DGICMR has been holding meetings with the Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of Environment & Forest, Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR), Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), Pesticide and 
Endosulfan  Manufactures Association, etc to discuss the issue of Endosulfan in 
pursuance of the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. The Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals is closely involved in the task. The committee has to submit 
its report and a final decision will evolve only thereafter.  
  [Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
No. 16 (3)/2012- Fin.1  Dated 3.8.2012] 
  
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;         GOPINATH MUNDE, 
17   DECEMBER, 2012      CHAIRMAN  
26 AGRAHAYANA, 1934 (SAKA)   STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
                CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
  

28 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
APPENDIX – I 
 
MINUTES 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 10 December, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 
hrs. in Room No.63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri A.A. Jinnah     - In the Chair 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
3. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
4. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
5. Shri  Kamlesh Paswan  
6. Shri  Amarnath Pradhan 
7. Shri Tufani Saroj 
8. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
10. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
i. Smt. Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
ii. Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Additional Director 
 
2. As the Chairman could not attend the sitting due to pre-occupation, the members 
chose Shri A.A Jinnah, MP and a member of the Committee, to act as the Chairman.  The 
Acting Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the following 
draft Reports : 
(i) ******* 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-sixth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
(iii) ******* 
(iv) ******* 
4. After some discussion, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*** Matters not related to this Report. 
 
 
  

29 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report No.29, 30, 31, 32\Report No.31(C&PC).Docx 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY SIXTH REPORT (15 TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2011-12) 
ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012 -2013)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS).  
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 9 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 9)   
7 
Percentage of Total 78% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation Sl. No. Nil)  
 
0 
Percentage of Total 0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Sl. No. Nil)  
0 
Percentage of Total 0%  
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are of interim nature:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 4 and 8) 
 
2 
Percentage of Total 22% 
 