1 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
    
21 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2011-12) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND 
PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
PRODUCTION, PRICING AND 
DISTRIBUTION OF MOLASSES 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Production, Pricing and Distribution of Molasses of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
March, 2012/Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) 


2 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
CC&F No. 21 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2011-12) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
PRODUCTION, PRICING AND 
DISTRIBUTION OF MOLASSES 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Thirteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Production, Pricing and Distribution of Molasses of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.03.2012 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 15.03.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2012/Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) 


3 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
                                                                
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12) ………………………………... 4 
Introduction. …………………………………………………..………………………… 5 
Chapter I Report ……………….………………………………………………….. 6-17 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
18-24 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
22 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
23-25 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature 
26 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2011-12) held on 05 March 2012 
27 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report (15th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2010-11) on „Production, Pricing and Distribution of Molasses‟ of 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals).  
30 
 
  

4 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2011-12) 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Prabhatsinh  Pratapsinh Chauhan 
3. Shri K. D. Deshmukh 
4. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
5. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
6. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
7. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
8. Shri O.S. Manian 
9. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
10. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup 
11. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
12. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
13. Shri Sivakumar alias Ritheesh 
14. Shri Tufani Saroj 
15. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
16. Shri Raju Shetti 
17. Shri Adagooru Viswanath 
18. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
24. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
26. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
27. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani 
28. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
29. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
30. & Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
31.# Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT   
1. Shri  C.S.Joon   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajit Kumar Sahu  - Committee Officer 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
&  Nominated w.e.f. 17.09.2011. 
 # Vacancy arisen due to demise of Shri Silvius Condpan, MP (RS)  w.e.f. 10 October 2011

5 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
  
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2011 -12) 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf present 
this Twenty First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the observa tions / recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2011 -12) on 
„Production, Pricing and Distribution of Molasses‟ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
 
2. The Thirteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 08 December, 2010.  The 
Action Taken Replies of Government to all observations / recomm endations contained in 
the Report were received on 07 March, 2011.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (2011 -12) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 05 
March 2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Governme nt on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
    New Delhi; 
 13th March, 2012                                                       Gopinath Munde 
 23 Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)                                               Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
  

6 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Thirteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha ) of the Committee (2010 -11) on „Production, 
Pricing and Distribution of Molasses‟  which was presented to Lok Sabha on 08.12.2010.  
The Report contained six Observations / Recommendations. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemica ls and 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish replies to the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report within three months from the date 
of presentation of the Report, i.e. by 8 March 2011. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the 6 Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals on 7 March 2011. These have been categorized as 
follows:-  
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:- 
Sl. Nos. 47, 49, 52           (Total=3) 
These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government‟s reply:- 
Sl. No. Nil            (Total=0) 
 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:- 
Sl. Nos. 50, 51        (Total=2) 
These may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are of interim nature:- 
Sl. Nos. 48         (Total=1) 
This may be included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
 
3.       The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report be furnished 
expeditiously.  
 
4.        The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
  

7 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
A. NEED FOR ROBUST GROWTH OF SUGARCANE 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 47) 
 
5.  The Committee in their Report had noted that molasses is the by -product of 
sugar and as such the production of molasses is dependent upon the production of 
sugarcane/sugar. The Committee noted that though the growth rate index of area 
under sugarcane cultivation had increased significantly during the  period 2001 -2008, 
the growth in yield has not been commensurate with the same. According to the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, the production of sugarcane has shown 
fluctuating trend over the period. This is evident from the available statist ics which 
indicate that sugarcane production in the year 2004 -05 was 237.1 Million MT, 348.2 
Million MT in 2007 -08 and 273.9 Million MT in 2008 -09. Although the targeted 
production of sugarcane for 2009 -10 was 396 Million MT, the actual production as per 
advance estimate was 277.75 Million MT. The Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals had attributed the fluctuation in production of sugarcane to the adverse 
climatic conditions, decrease in sugarcane area, reduction in productivity, delayed and 
intermittent cane price payment, better price realization by the farmers from wheat and 
rice cultivation, diversion of cane towards gur, etc. 
  
Further, the Committee had observed that sugarcane production was not in 
consonance with the increase in area under cultivation during the earlier years and in 
the year 2009 -10, the area under sugarcane cultivation had declined by 1.94 lakh 
hectare than th at of previous year area coverage of 43.96 lakh hectare. This, in 
consequence, had further led to decline in sugarcane production by almost 30 per cent 
of targeted production of 396 Million MT. Expressing their concern on the fluctuating 
trend of sugarcane  production which, in turn, has affected the production of the 
molasses, the Committee had felt that there was an urgent need to ensure the 
satisfactory availability of sugarcane every year. As the sugarcane production falls 
within the domain of the Minist ry of Agriculture, the Committee had desired that the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should coordinate with the Ministry of 
Agriculture to chalk out ways and means for sustained growth of sugarcane production. 
In this regard, the Committee reco mmended the Department to impress upon the 
Ministry of Agriculture the need for taking suitable steps, viz. fixation of Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) for sugar making it lucrative vis -a-vis MSP of wheat and rice, 
incentives to farmers for producing sugarcane , compensation to farmers in case of glut 
of sugar, etc. to encourage sugarcane cultivators. The Committee had desired to  be 
apprised of the steps taken in this direction within three months of presentation of th e 
Report. 
 
6.  The Department of Chemicals a nd Petrochemicals, in their Action Taken Reply 
have stated as under:-  
 
“The matter has been taken up with the Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation in the Ministry of Agriculture requesting them to take necessary 
action in the matter and inform this Dep artment of the action taken.  Department 
of Agriculture & Cooperation  informed that it is evident from the trial data that 
there is a plenty of scope for enhancing productivity of sugarcane crop. With the 
existing sugarcane area (ranging from 42 to 50 lakh ha), sufficient quantity of 
sugarcane can be produced by increasing the level of sugarcane yield through 
various technologies and interventions.” 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No.15021/3/2009-M Dated 7.3.2011] 

8 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
Comments of the Committee 
7.   The Committee had recommended that there is a need to ensure a sustained 
increase in sugarcane production so that production of molasses, which is a by -
product of sugarcane, can also be enhanced and more emphasis should be made 
on enhancing production intensity with the help of technology, rather than 
increases in area under cultivation. Accordingly, in line with the Committee’s 
recommendation, the Department has coordinated with the Ministry of Agriculture 
to find  a mechanism for enhancing sugarcane production. However, the 
Department, in their Action Taken Replies, has not stated anything about the 
Committee’s Recommendations regarding fixation of Minimum Support Price 
(MSP) for sugar and a compensation scheme for  farmers in case of a glut in the 
market. These measures were suggested to encourage sugarcane cultivation. The 
Committee expect that the Committee’s concerns on these issues will be forwarded 
to Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Food  Processing Indu stries for taking 
appropriate action on their part and the Committee would be properly apprised of 
the steps taken by the Government on these recommendations.  
 
B. ENCOURAGING HUMAN CONSUMPTION OF MOLASSES  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 48) 
 
8.  The Committee were surprised to note that despite molasses being a rich source 
of minerals and iron, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals had not so far 
even thought of taking any initiative to encourage human consumption of the same. 
Considering the nutritiou s value of molasses, the Committee had argued, the need to 
encourage its human consumption cannot be overemphasized keeping in view the 
situation in India. Even in years of bumper crop of sugarcane, the sufferings of the 
farmers due to reduction in the pri ces could be mitigated by converting excess sugarcane 
into molasses which can be used for human consumption. The Committee, therefore, had 
desired the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals to encourage utilization of 
molasses for human consumption in India and coordinate with the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries as a priority for taking suitable steps in the direction. The 
Committee had further expressed hope that the production of molasses would be 
augmented in such a way by the Department that besides meeting the industrial 
requirement, it would also cater to the needs of human consumption. They had also said 
that they would like to be apprised of the decision taken in the matter. 
  
9.  The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, in their wr itten reply have 
stated as under:- 
 
“The Standing Committee has recommended to encourage utilization of Molasses 
for human consumption.  The Department had taken up the issue with the Ministry 
of Food Processing Industries requesting them to take suitable steps as per 
Committee‟s recommendation and inform this Department of the action taken. 
Ministry of Food Processing Industries vide O.M.No. 5 -4/2011-FFD dated 25 -2-
2011 has suggested that a joint action committee coordinated by Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers could be formed to address and discuss the issues raised 

9 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
in the Report pertaining to utilization of molasses for human consumption in India.  
The Department shall consider forming of such a committee shortly.” 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No.15021/3/2009-M Dated 7.3.2011] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
10.  The Committee in their recommendation had desired that the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals should encourage utilization of  molasses for 
human consumption. The Committee had also recommended that the Department 
should coordinate with th e Ministry of Food Processing on  a priority basis for 
taking suitable steps in this direction. The Committee are happy to note that t he 
Department has taken up the Committee’s recommendations with the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries for consideration and implementation. Now, there is a 
proposal to set up a Joint Action Committee under the aegis of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers to consider the Committee’s recommendation for 
encouraging human consumption of molasses. The Department in this regard has 
stated that it  shall consider forming such a Committee shortly. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to expedite the process of implementation of their 
recommendation and expect to be apprised of any development made in this 
regard.  
 
C. INCENTIVE SCHEME FOR MOLASSES PRODUCERS 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 49) 
 
11. The Committee were informed that the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution and the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation had taken certain 
steps, viz. fixation of Fair and Remunerative Price (FRP) of sugarcane for 2009 -10, 
long term loans from Sug ar Development Fund (SDF) at concessional rate of interest, 
implementation of Centrally sponsored scheme of sustainable development of 
Sugarcane Based Cropping System (SUBCS), etc. for sugar producers so as to 
improve the sugar production. However, the Dep artment of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals had not initiated any incentive scheme of its own for producers of 
molasses, on the pretext that production of molasses being dependent on sugar, it falls 
within the purview of the Department of Food and Public Distr ibution. The Committee 
felt that it is incumbent on the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, being the 
nodal Department for issues relating to molasses, to ensure enough quantity of 
molasses and its availability at reasonable prices for end users. I n this regard, the 
Committee had desired the Department to explore the feasibility of introducing 
incentive schemes for molasses producers and take suitable steps accordingly. The 
Committee had also felt that the Department should work out a proper co -ordination 
mechanism with the Department of Food and Public Distribution and Department of 
Agriculture and Co-operation and constitute a Committee, if necessary, for the purpose 
of ensuring adequate quantity of sugarcane and molasses required for various 

10 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
purposes. The Committee had said that they would like to be informed of the specific 
steps taken in this regard within three months of presentation of this report. 
 
The Committee had also stated that it is high time that the Government should 
take suitable expe ditious steps to revive sick sugar industrial units which would not 
only ensure optimum utilization of the sugarcane but also result in increase in 
production of sugar, molasses and ethanol which are required in abundance not only 
by public but also by industrial units. 
 
12. The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, in their Action Taken Reply, 
have stated as under:- 
 
“A meeting was held on 28.1.2011 in the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals to discuss issues viz. enhancing sugarcane productio n, 
incentive scheme for producers of molasses and coordination mechanism 
among various agencies for ensuring adequate quantity of sugarcane and 
molasses required for various purposes.  The representatives of Department of 
Food and Public Distribution and D epartment of Agriculture & Cooperation were 
invited in the meeting.   
 
It was informed in the meeting that India has surplus capacity for production of 
sugar.  However, the sugarcane production fluctuates due to its cyclic nature.  
Government has fixed fai r and remunerative price (FRP) for sugarcane.  Some 
State Governments are paying even higher price than the FRP.  Ministry of 
Agriculture has also implemented Sugarcane Development Scheme under 
Macro Management Mode on Agriculture.  The financial allocatio ns and 
expenditure for the last three years of the scheme are as under:  
                                                                   Value in Rs. lakhs 
Year Allocation Utilization 
2007-08 3806.01 3189.92 
2008-09 2806.86 2670.32 
2009-10 (P) 3886.645 3629.635 
  
The Government has also amended Sugarcane Control Order and permitted 
sugar factories to convert sugarcane juice directly into Ethanol.  It is expected 
that these steps will encourage the farmers and enhance the productivity and 
production of sugarcane and  increase the availability of sugar, molasses and 
alcohol.  Further regarding increase in the production of sugarcane, Department 
of Food and Public Distribution has informed that loans from Sugar 
Development Fund (SDF) are given for the purpose of cane de velopment to the 
sugar factories.  The past sanctioned amount for Cane Development Scheme is 
as follows: 
Year   Sanctioned amount (Rs. in crore) 
2006-07     21.05 
2007-08      8.12 
2008-09      1.97 
2009-10     32.35 
2010-11 (upto 31.12.2010)  115.23 
 
Regarding the incentive scheme for producers of molasses, it was discussed 
that the production of Molasses entirely depends upon production of sugar as 
molasses is a by-product of the process of sugar production.  What is necessary 
is to increase productiv ity of sugarcane and sugar so that increased quantity of 
Molasses becomes available.  The increased production shall increase the 

11 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
availability and stabilize the prices of sugarcane, sugar as well as molasses 
which can benefit the end users of all categorie s.  Department of Agriculture & 
Cooperation and Department of Food & Public Distribution are already having 
incentive schemes for production of sugarcane and sugar and since Molasses 
are not produced separately but produced as by -product by sugar mills dur ing 
the production of sugar, separate incentive scheme for Molasses production is 
not considered necessary.   
Regarding coordination mechanism among various agencies for ensuring 
adequate quantity of sugarcane and molasses required for various purposes, it  
was discussed that sugarcane production is cyclic in nature and so it is difficult 
to assure quantity of sugarcane production.  The issue of food security is also 
significant and the priority should be for higher production of food grains rather 
than sugarcane.  It is necessary to enhance productivity of sugarcane so that 
higher output of sugarcane is available without increasing area under sugarcane 
cultivation.  It was, therefore, suggested that under the aegis of the Standing 
Committee, Planning Commiss ion may be requested to form a Committee of 
concerned Ministries/Departments for proper coordination mechanism. 
Regarding revival of sick sugar industrial units, Departme nt of Food and Public 
Distribution has informed that as per the provisions of SDF Rules, a sick 
undertaking is required to get a revival package approved by the BIFR in the 
case of private and public sector sugar factories and by the Committee on 
Rehabilitation (COR) in the case of Co -operative sugar mills, with a component 
of SDF loan in the package.  Loan is available from SDF both for cane 
development and rehabilitation/modernization.  The eligibility criteria for such 
loan to a potentially viable sick u nit is quite favorable to the sugar factories in so 
far as loan up to 60% of the project cost (as against 40% in normal cases) can 
be given from SDF for rehabilitation/modernization projects and the moratorium 
period for repayment can be decided by the Cen tral Government on case to 
case basis (against a fixed moratorium period of 8 years in normal cases).  
Similarly for cane development loan, the 10% contribution required to meet by 
the sugar factory can be met by the concerned State Government also.” 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No.15021/3/2009-M Dated 7.3.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
13.  The Committee had recommended  for an incentive scheme for molasses 
producers, but the Department has  argued that a separate incentive scheme for 
molasses producers is not necessary, as molasses is a by -product of sugarcane 
and there is an incentive scheme already in place for sugarcane producers. The 
Department has  emphasized the need to focus on increasing the  production 
intensity of sugarcane per area rather than increases in area of cultivation and 
suggested that the Committee take the initiative with the Planning Commission to 
form an inter -Ministerial Committee to coordinate measures taken toward s that 
end.  The Committee express their displeasure over such a direction to the 
Committee.  The Committee is no t part of the Executive, as such , directions from 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is highly objectionable .  The 

12 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
Committee would , therefore, like that the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals take up the issue with the Planning Commission to form such an 
inter-Ministerial Committee if they feel that such a Committee would help the 
revival of the molasses industry. The Committee, however,  regret to note that o n 
their recommendation for expeditious action on revival of sick sugar industrial 
units, the Department has failed to spell out any concrete action.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their recommendation regarding revival of sick sugar units and 
expect the Ministry to take the Committee’s recommendations seriously.  
 
D. NEED FOR PROPER MONITORING OF PRODUCTION, PRICE AND 
MOVEMENT OF MOLASSES 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 50) 
 
14. In their Report, the Committee had noted that the pricing and distribution of 
molasses were earlier regulated by the Union Government under the Molasses Control 
Order, 1961. They had also observed that the regime of controls was stated to be 
inhibiting the free movement of molasses; it was also not in keeping with the economic 
liberalization programme of the Government. Consequently, the Government rescinded 
the Molasses Control Order, 1961 on 10 June 1993. The Committee, however, had noted 
that the details of average price of molasses during the last five years is not available with 
the Department as there is no price control. It had expressed regret that the Department 
has not been able to provide specific informa tion relating to molasses due to  absence of 
any specific control mechanism. This pretext, however, does not exonerate the 
Department from the responsibility of monitoring of molasses production and prices and 
maintaining relevant databank thereof, they had stated. While expressing their concern 
over such a state of affairs, the Committee had pointed out that being the nodal agency, 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals cannot absolve itself of the 
responsibility to address all the issues related to molasses. The Committee felt that in the 
absence of any specific controls in operation, the prioritization as regards allocation of 
molasses to different industries cannot be done. Further, to ensure optimal production of 
molasses and to check its shortage in any part of the country, there is a ne ed to monitor 
the production, price and movement of molasses. The Committee, therefore, had 
recommended the Department to chalk out the proper monitoring mechanism for 
molasses at the earliest. For the purpose, there is an urgent need to maintain relevant 
and up -to-date data about movement and prices of molasses, they had said. The 
Committee had further recommended that the Department should evaluate the effects of 
withdrawal of Molasses Control Order, 1961 on the price and distribution of molasses and 
revisit the feasibility of introducing some mechanism of control relevant today. The 
Committee had also wished that they be apprised about the decision taken in the matter 
at the earliest. 
 
15.  The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, in their Action Taken Reply, 
have stated as under:- 
 
“Regarding Control on Molasses and Review of decontrol policy, it is reiterated 
that the prices and distribution of molasses were regulated by the Central 
Government under the Molasses Control Order, 1961 up to 10th June , 1993. 
Central Govt. (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) made Inter -State 
allocations of Molasses from surplus states to deficit states.  The allocations 
were made on the advice of Central Molasses Board  but on a non -statutory 

13 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
basis.  Surplus Sta tes under -reported production of molasses whereas deficit 
states exaggerated their requirement.  Central Govt. allocations were also not 
fully honoured by the State Governments.  There were also reports of inordinate 
delays in obtaining allocations and con sequent wastage of molasses. The 
downstream users of molasses were also not able to fully utilize their capacity. 
This regime of controls was inhibiting the free movement of molasses and was 
not in keeping with the economic liberalization programme of the Government 
which was initiated during the early nineties.  Taking all these factors into 
account and with a view to falling in line with the liberalization policy of the 
Central Government in other sectors of economy, the Molasses Control Order, 
1961 was rescinded on the 10th June, 1993.  The position on implementation of 
Policy was reviewed in Excise Ministers‟ Conference held on 4.11.1993.  The 
report of the Working Group was discussed in Excise Ministers‟ Conference on 
22.6.95.  There were divergent view s and no consensus emerged.  Further, 
Supreme Court judgment dated 11.9.98 upheld the validity of UP Sheera 
Niyantran Adhiniyam, 1964 which specifically deals with molasses produced by 
sugar mills.  The matter was examined in detail in Department of Chemic als and 
Petrochemicals and it was decided that it may not be advisable to reopen the 
issue of reintroducing control regime by the Union Government.  
 
It may be seen from the above background that it may not be necessary to bring 
back the control on Molasse s in the present era of free market economy.  The 
Department has however taken up the issue with the Excise Departments of ten 
major producing states and their comments in the matter have been invited. 
Replies have been received from the states of Andhra P radesh, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand.  Replies form Bihar, 
Maharashtra, Punjab, and Tamil Nadu are awaited. 
 
The Office of the Commissioner of Prohibition & Excise, Andhra Pradesh has 
informed that they regulate possession, use and movement of Molasses through 
Andhra Pradesh Excise (Possession, Import, Export, Transport of Molasses 
Conditions for Licence and Permits) Rules, 2008 and they do not control pricing 
and distribution of Molasses. 
 
The Office of the Director, Prohibiti on & Excise, Gujarat has informed that there 
has not been control over pricing of molasses ever since the withdrawal of the 
Molasses Control Order, 1961 on 10 th June, 1993.  The sale of molasses is 
carried out by the sugar factories as per their own pricin g.  It is desirable that 
some proper mechanism is introduced to exercise regulation of pricing, 
monitoring and distribution of molasses. 
 
The Office of the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Haryana has informed 
that there is no control on molasses in the s tate of Haryana except the 
movement of molasses because there is surplus quantity available in Haryana. 
The price of molasses cannot be ascertained due to fluctuation in the prices.  
Most of the distilleries are using grain for manufacturing alcohol due to  
fluctuation in the prices of molasses and the overall consumption of molasses 
has been drastically reduced.  So they are not in a position to impose control on 
molasses. 
 
The Office of the Excise Commissioner, Karnataka has informed that they 
monitor the production, issue, transportation etc. of Molasses and issue licence 
to possess, store, use and sell molasses.  There is no control over the price. 
 

14 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
The Excise Department, Uttar Pradesh has informed that Uttar Pradesh has 
self-sufficient provisions for the  control of molasses and they do not find any 
difficulty in regulation of molasses.  Therefore there is no need for any new 
arrangement by the Union Government for the control of molasses in the state 
of Uttar Pradesh. 
 
It may be seen from the above that v arious state governments are already 
having some control on Molasses and it may not be possible to build consensus 
for bringing back central control over molasses and as mentioned above it may 
not be necessary to bring back such control in the present era of free market 
economy.  Regarding the data on prices of molasses, the Department has taken 
up the matter with the major molasses producing State Governments and as per 
recently compiled information, the average price of molasses during 2009 -10 
was Rs. 415 per quintal.” 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No.15021/3/2009-M Dated 7.3.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
16. The Committee had recommended in their report  for institution of  a proper 
monitoring mechanism of the production, price and movem ent of molasses in the 
country. In response to that  the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals has 
stated that various State G overnments are already having some control on 
molasses. However, the Committee  are unhappy to point out that  the Department 
did not accept the Committee’s recommendation, stating that it may not be 
possible to build consensus amongst States for bringing control over molasses 
and also it is not necessary to bring back such control ‘in the present era of free 
market economy.’ The Committee had made their  recommendation in view of the 
fact that the Department has not been able to provide details of price and 
availability of molasses in the country after the Molasses Control Order, 1961 was 
rescinded on 10 June, 1993 and in the absence of any specific control in operation, 
prioritization as regards allocation of molasses to different industries cannot be 
done. The Department, while not accepting the Committee’s recomme ndation, did 
not spell out any measure it  propose to take to address the above issues. 
Therefore, the Committee reiterate  their recommendation for a proper monitoring 
mechanism and desire that the Department should  take concrete action towards 
that end.  
  

15 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
 
E. REDUCTION OF EXCISE DUTY ON MOLASSES RECOMMENDED 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 51) 
 
17. The Committee were  informed that excise duty on Denatured Ethyl Alcohol had 
been reduced from 10% to 8% but there was no corresponding reduction in the specific 
duty on molasses. The Committee were given to understand that the Chemical industry 
had been demanding reduction in duty on molasses in line with the reduction of excise 
duty of Denatured Ethyl Alcohol and that the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals had forwarded the request to the Ministry of Finance for consideration. As 
the reduction of duty on molasses is bound to boost the chemical industry, the Committee 
concurred with its demand and desired the Department to take up the matter at the 
appropriate level with the Ministry of Finance for early decision in this regard. The 
Committee had expected to be apprised of a positive decision in the matter at the earliest.  
 
18. In reply to above recommendation of the Committee, the Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals have stated as under:- 
 
  “Since the Excise Duty on Denatured Ethyl Alcohol has been restored a t 10%, 
it was decided not to take up the matter with Ministry of Finance.” 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No.15021/3/2009-M Dated 7.3.2011] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
19.  The Committee had recomme nded for reduction of excise duty on molasses 
from 10 to 8 percent  as the excise duty on Denatured Ethyl Alcohol had also been 
reduced from 10% to 8%, but the Department has  stated that they have decided not 
to pursue the recommendation as the excise duty on Denatured Ethyl Alcohol has 
also been restored to  10 percent. The Committee fail  to understand the 
Department’s reasoning that as the excise duty on Denatured Ethyl Alcoh ol has 
been restored to 10% from 8%, the excise duty on molasses could  not be reduced. 
The Committee are dismayed to note that instead of decreasing the excise duty on 
molasses so as to be at par with excise duty on Denatured Ethyl Alcohol, the 
Government have increased the excise duty on Denatured Ethyl Alcohol to the tune 
of 10% and now taken the position that excise duty on molasses could not be 
reduced. The Committee had made their recommendation w ith a view to support 
and boost the chemicals industry . Therefore, the Committee reiterate their  earlier 
recommendation and desire that the Ministry  should take up the issue with the 
Ministry of Finance on a priority basis and inform the Committee of the outcome at 
the earliest.  

16 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
F. NEED FOR ALLOCATION OF ETHANOL TO DIFFERENT INDUSTRIES 
 
(Recommendation Para No. 52) 
 
20.  In their Report, the Committee had noted that t he Cabinet Committee had 
decided in 2007 to make it mandatory to blend five per cent of ethanol in petrol under 
Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) programme. The Committee had also noted that 10 per 
cent Ethanol blending in petrol was taken up as pilot project i n Aonla depot of UP and 
Desur Depot of Karnataka in December 2008. However, this programme abruptly came 
to an end in the month of October 2009 due to non -availability of alcohol. The 
Committee had been informed that sufficient quantity of Ethanol is not a vailable for 
EBP programme and any continuation of this programme will result in increased import 
of industrial alcohol. According to the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, 
mandatory EBP programme should be deferred till sufficient availability of  alcohol is 
ensured without affecting the industrial sector. On the contrary, the Committee had 
noted that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas have adduced certain benefits, 
viz. saving in foreign exchange, check on carbon emissions by use of eco -friendly fuel 
and no operational loss to Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) which may accrue by 
continuance of the programme. Also, the Government had issued guidelines on 16 
August 2010 wherein OMCs have been directed to implement the programme 
effectively. The Committee had tended to agree with the views and the approach of the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. In that regard, the Committee had desired that 
both the Ministries should co -ordinate and chalk out a strategy regarding allocation of 
Ethanol to di fferent industries. Further, for ensuring sufficient availability of ethanol for 
different industries, the Committee had expressed hope that the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals would take early action on the suggestions for 
improvement in produc tion of molasses made by them in their earlier 
recommendations.  
 
Further, the Committee had also desired that it would be appropriate if the 
industrial units are permitted to produce ethanol direct from cane juice which would 
also boost the demand of suga rcane and in turn benefit the farmers. For that, the 
Committee had observed, the Government ought to take necessary steps in 
consultation and coordination with all the concerned Departments. 
 
21. In reply to above recommendation of the Committee, the Depar tment of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals have stated as under:-  
 
“Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has constituted an Expert Committee on 
Pricing of Ethanol for EBP programme under the Chairmanship of Dr. Saumitra 
Chaudhuri, Member, Planning Commission. T he interim report of the expert 
committee has suggested a mechanism of allocation of Alcohol to different 
users.  
Regarding production of Ethanol directly from sugarcane juice, Central 
Government has already amended Sugarcane Control Order, 1966 in 2007 an d 
permitted sugar factories to convert sugarcane juice directly into Ethanol.”  
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No.15021/3/2009-M Dated 7.3.2011] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
22.  The Committee in their report had recommended that both the Ministries, 
namely, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and Ministry of Chemicals and 

17 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
Fertilizers should coordinate and chalk out a strategy regarding allocation of 
Ethanol to different industries. Further, the Committee had desired that it would be 
appropriate if the industrial units are permitted to produce ethanol directly from 
cane juice which will also boost the demand of sugarcane and in turn benefit the 
farmers. The Committee in this regard note the Department ’s statement  that the 
interim report of the expert committee on Pricing of Ethanol for EBP Programme 
have suggested a mechanism of allocation of Alcohol to different users. The 
Department has also stated that the Committee’s recommendati on for production 
of Ethanol directly from sugarcane juice has also been implemented since 2007. In 
this regard, the Committee expect that the final report of the expert committee 
under Dr. Saumitra Chaudhuri will be submitted soon  and the Committee also 
desire to be apprised about the final recommendations of this committee and their 
implementation. The Ministry may also coordinate with the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas  for the best possible outcome on the basis of the expert 
Committee’s report. 
  

18 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 47) 
Molasses is the by -product of sugar and as such the production of molasses is 
dependent upon the production of sugarcane/sugar. The Committee note that though the 
growth rate index of area under sugarcane cultivation has increased significantly during 
the period 2001 -2008, the growth in yield has not been commensurate with the same. 
According to the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, th e production of 
sugarcane has shown fluctuating trend over the period. This is evident from the available 
statistics which indicate that sugarcane production in the year 2004 -05 was 237.1 Million 
MT, 348.2 Million MT in 2007 -08 and 273.9 Million MT in 2008 -09. Although the targetted 
production of sugarcane for 2009 -10 was 396 Million MT, the actual production as per 
advance estimate is 277.75 Million MT. The Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has attributed the fluctuation in production of sugarcane  to the adverse 
climatic conditions, decrease in sugarcane area, reduction in productivity, delayed and 
intermittent cane price payment, better price realization by the farmers from wheat and 
rice cultivation, diversion of cane towards gur, etc. 
 
The Committee observe that sugarcane production was not in consoanance with 
the increase in area under cultivation during the earlier years and in the year 2009-10, the 
area under sugarcane cultivation has declined by 1.94 lakh hectare than that of previou s 
year area coverage of 43.96 lakh hectare. This, in consequence, has further led to decline 
in sugarcane production by almost 30 per cent of targetted production of 396 Million MT. 
Expressing their concern on the fluctuating trend of sugarcane production which, in turn, 
has affected the production of the molasses, the Committee feel that there is an urgent 
need to ensure the satisfactory availability of sugarcane every year. As the sugarcane 
production falls within the domain of the Ministry of Agriculture , the Committee desire that 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should coordinate with the Ministry of 
Agriculture to chalk out ways and means for sustained growth of sugarcane production. In 
this regard, the Committee recommend the Department t o impress upon the Ministry of 
Agriculture the need for taking suitable steps, viz. fixation of Minimum Support Price 
(MSP) for sugar making it lucrative vis -a-vis MSP of wheat and rice, incentives to farmers 
for producing sugarcane, compensation to farmer s in case of glut of sugar, etc. to 
encourage sugarcane cultivators. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps 
taken in this direction within three months of presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The matter has been taken up with the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation in 
the Ministry of Agriculture requesting them to take necessary action in the matter and 
inform this Department of the action taken.  DAC informed that it is evident from the trial 
data that there is a plenty of scope for enhancing productivity of sugarcane crop. With the 
existing sugarcane area (ranging from 42 to 50 lakh ha), sufficient quantity of sugarcane 
can be produced by increasing the level of sugarcane yield through various technologies 
and interventions. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No.15021/3/2009-M Dated 7.3.2011] 
  
  

19 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 49) 
The Committee have been informed that the Department of Food and Public 
Distribution and the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation have taken certain steps, 
viz. fixation of Fair and Remunerative Price (FRP) of sugarcane for 2009 -10, long term 
loans fr om Sugar Development Fund (SDF) at concessional rate of interest, 
implementation of Centrally sponsored scheme of sustainable development of Sugarcane 
Based Cropping System (SUBCS), etc. for sugar producers so as to improve the sugar 
production. However, t he Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has not initiated 
any incentive scheme of its own for producers of molasses, on the pretext that production 
of molasses being dependent on sugar, it falls within the purview of the Department of 
Food and Public Distribution. The Committee feel that it is incumbent on the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, being the nodal Department for issues relating to 
molasses, to ensure enough quantity of molasses and its availability at reasonable prices 
for end us ers. In this regard, the Committee desire the Department to explore the 
feasibility of introducing incentive schemes for molasses producers and take suitable 
steps accordingly. The Committee also feel that the Department should work out a proper 
co-ordination mechanism with the Department of Food and Public Distribution and 
Department of Agriculture and Co-operation and constitute a Committee, if necessary, for 
the purpose of ensuring adequate quantity of sugarcane and molasses required for 
various purposes. The Committee would like to be informed of the specific steps taken in 
this regard within three months of presentation of this report. 
 
The Committee also feel that it is high time that the Government should take 
suitable expeditious steps to revive sick  sugar industrial units which would not only 
ensure optimum utilization of the sugarcane but also result in increase in production of 
sugar, molasses and ethanol which are required in abundance not only by public but also 
by industrial units. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 A meeting was held on 28.1.2011 in the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals to discuss issues viz. enhancing sugarcane production, incentive scheme 
for producers of molasses and coordination mechanism among various agencies for 
ensuring adequate quantity of sugarcane and molasses required for various purposes.  
The representatives of Department of Food and Public Distribution and Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation were invited in the meeting.   
 
It was informed in the meeting that In dia has surplus capacity for production of 
sugar.  However, the sugarcane production fluctuates due to its cyclic nature.  
Government has fixed fair and remunerative price (FRP) for sugarcane.  Some State 
Governments are paying even higher price than the FRP.  Ministry of Agriculture has also 
implemented Sugarcane Development Scheme under Macro Management Mode on 
Agriculture.  The financial allocations and expenditure for the last three years of the 
scheme are as under: 
                                                                   Value in Rs. lakhs 
Year Allocation Utilization 
2007-08 3806.01 3189.92 
2008-09 2806.86 2670.32 
2009-10 (P) 3886.645 3629.635 
  
The Government has also amended Sugarcane Control Order and permitted sugar 
factories to convert sugarcane juice directly into Ethanol.  It is expected that these 

20 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
steps will encourage the farmers and enhance the productivity and production of 
sugarcane and  increase the availability of sugar, molasses and alcohol.  Further 
regarding increase in the production of sugarcane, Department of Food and Public 
Distribution has informed that loans from Sugar Development Fund (SDF) are given 
for the purpose of cane de velopment to the sugar factories.  The past sanctioned 
amount for Cane Development Scheme is as follows: 
 
Year   Sanctioned amount (Rs. in crore) 
2006-07     21.05 
2007-08      8.12 
2008-09      1.97 
2009-10     32.35 
2010-11 (upto 31.12.2010)  115.23 
 
Regarding the incentive scheme for producers of molasses, it was discussed that 
the production of Molasses entirely depends upon production of sugar as molasses is a 
by-product of the process of sugar production.  What is necessary is to increase 
productivity of sugarcane and sugar so that increased quantity of Molasses becomes 
available.  The increased production shall increase the availability and stabilize the prices 
of sugarcane, sugar as well as molasses which can benefit the end users of all 
categories.  Department of Agriculture & Cooperation and Department of Food & Public 
Distribution are already having incentive schemes for production of sugarcane and sugar 
and since Molasses are not produced separately but produced as by -product by sugar 
mills during the production of sugar, separate incentive scheme for Molasses production 
is not considered necessary.   
Regarding coordination mechanism among various agencies for ensuring 
adequate quantity of sugarcane and molasses required for various purposes, it  was 
discussed that sugarcane production is cyclic in nature and so it is difficult to assure 
quantity of sugarcane production.  The issue of food security is also significant and the 
priority should be for higher production of food grains rather than suga rcane.  It is 
necessary to enhance productivity of sugarcane so that higher output of sugarcane is 
available without increasing area under sugarcane cultivation.  It was, therefore, 
suggested that under the aegis of the Standing Committee, Planning Commission may be 
requested to form a Committee of concerned Ministries/Departments for proper 
coordination mechanism. 
Regarding revival of sick sugar industrial units, Department of Food and Public 
Distribution has informed that as per the provisions of SDF Rules, a sick undertaking is 
required to get a revival package approved by the BIFR in the case of private and public 
sector sugar factories and by the Committee on Rehabilitation (COR) in the case of Co -
operative sugar mills, with a component of SDF loan in the package.  Loan is available 
from SDF both for cane development and rehabilitation/modernization.  The eligibility 
criteria for such loan to a potentially viable sick unit is quite favorable to the sugar 
factories in so far as loan up to 60% of the project cost (as against 40% in normal cases) 
can be given from SDF for rehabilitation/modernization projects and the moratoriu m 
period for repayment can be decided by the Central Government on case to case basis 
(against a fixed moratorium period of 8 years in normal cases).  Similarly for cane 
development loan, the 10% contribution required to meet by the sugar factory can be me t 
by the concerned State Government also.     
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No.15021/3/2009-M Dated 7.3.2011] 
  

21 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
  Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 52) 
The Cabinet Committee had decided in 2007 to make it mandatory to blend five 
per cent of ethanol in petrol under Ethanol Blended Petrol (EBP) programme. The 
Committee note that 10 per cent Ethanol blending in petrol was taken up as pilot project 
in Aonla d epot of UP and Desur Depot of Karnataka in December 2008. However, this 
programme abruptly came to an end in the month of October 2009 due to non -availability 
of alcohol. The Committee have been informed that sufficient quantity of Ethanol is not 
available for EBP programme and any continuation of this programme will result in 
increased import of industrial alcohol. According to the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals, mandatory EBP programme should be deferred till sufficient availability 
of alcohol is ensured without affecting the industrial sector. On the contrary, the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas have adduced certain benefits, viz. saving in foreign 
exchange, check on carbon emissions by use of eco -friendly fuel and no operational loss 
to Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) which may accrue by continuance of the 
programme. Also, the Government has issued guidelines on 16 August 2010 wherein 
OMCs have been directed to implement the programme effectively. The Committee tend 
to agree with the views and the approach of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. In 
this regard, the Committee desire that both the Ministries should co -ordinate and chalk 
out a strategy regarding allocation of Ethanol to different industries. Further, for ensuring 
sufficient availability of ethanol for different industries, the Committee hope that the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals would take early action on the suggestions 
for improvement in production of molasses made by them in their earlier 
recommendations.  
 
The Committee also desire that it would be appropriate if the industrial units are 
permitted to produce ethanol direct from cane juice which would also boost the demand of 
sugarcane and in turn benefit the farmers. For this, the Government ought to tak e 
necessary steps in consultation and coordination with all the concerned Departments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has constituted an Expert Committee on 
Pricing of Ethanol for EBP programme under the Chairmanship of Dr. Sa umitra 
Chaudhuri, Member, Planning Commission. The interim report of the expert committee 
has suggested a mechanism of allocation of Alcohol to different users.  
 
Regarding production of Ethanol directly from sugarcane juice, Central 
Government has already amended Sugarcane Control Order, 1966 in 2007 and permitted 
sugar factories to convert sugarcane juice directly into Ethanol. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No.15021/3/2009-M Dated 7.3.2011] 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

22 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT WANT 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLY 
 
 
-NIL-  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

23 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 50) 
The pricing and distribution of molasses were earlier regulated by the Union 
Government under the Molasses Control Order, 1961. The regime of controls was stated 
to be inhibiting the free movement of molasses; it was also not in keeping with the 
economic l iberalization programme of the Government. Consequently, the Government 
rescinded the Molasses Control Order, 1961 on 10 June 1993. The Committee, however, 
note that the details of average price of molasses during the last five years is not 
available with the Department as there is no price control. It is regretted that the 
Department has not been able to provide specific information relating to molasses due of 
absence of any specific control mechanism. This pretext, however, does not exonerate 
the Department from the responsibility of monitoring of molasses production and prices 
and maintaining relevant databank thereof. While expressing their concern over such a 
state of affairs, the Committee wish to point out that being the nodal agency, the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals cannot absolve itself of the responsibility to 
address all the issues related to molasses. The Committee feel that in the absence of any 
specific controls in operation, the prioritization as regards allocation of molasses to 
different industries cannot be done. Further, to ensure optimal production of molasses 
and to check its shortage in any part of the country, there is a need to monitor the 
production, price and movement of molasses. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department to chalk out the proper monitoring mechanism for molasses at the earliest. 
For the purpose, there is an urgent need to maintain relevant and uptodate data about 
movement and prices of molasses. The Committee further recommend that the 
Department should evaluate the effects of withdrawal of Molasses Control Order, 1961 on 
the price and distribution of molasses and revisit the feasibility of introducing some 
mechanism of control relevant today. The Department should apprise the Committee 
about the decision taken in the matter at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Regarding Control on Molasses and Review of decontrol policy, it is reiterated that 
the prices and distribution of molasses were regulated by the Central Government under 
the Molasses Control Order, 1961 up to 10th June, 1993. Central Govt. (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) made Inter -State allocations of Molasses from surplus 
states to deficit states.  The allocations were made on the advice of Central Molasses 
Board but on a non -statutory basis.  Surplus States under -reported production of 
molasses whereas deficit states exaggerated their requirement.  Central Govt. allocations 
were also not fully honoured by the State Governments.  There were also reports of 
inordinate dela ys in obtaining allocations and consequent wastage of molasses. The 
downstream users of molasses were also not able to fully utilize their capacity. This 
regime of controls was inhibiting the free movement of molasses and was not in keeping 
with the economic liberalization programme of the Government which was initiated during 
the early nineties.  Taking all these factors into account and with a view to falling in line 
with the liberalization policy of the Central Government in other sectors of economy, the  
Molasses Control Order, 1961 was rescinded on the 10th June, 1993.  The position on 
implementation of Policy was reviewed in Excise Ministers‟ Conference held on 
4.11.1993.  The report of the Working Group was discussed in Excise Ministers‟ 
Conference on 22.6.95.  There were divergent views and no consensus emerged.  
Further, Supreme Court judgment dated 11.9.98 upheld the validity of UP Sheera 
Niyantran Adhiniyam, 1964 which specifically deals with molasses produced by sugar 

24 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
mills.  The matter was examined in detail in Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
and it was decided that it may not be advisable to reopen the issue of reintroducing 
control regime by the Union Government.  
 
It may be seen from the above background that it may not be necessary t o bring 
back the control on Molasses in the present era of free market economy.  The 
Department has however taken up the issue with the Excise Departments of ten major 
producing states and their comments in the matter have been invited. Replies have been 
received from the states of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh 
and Uttarakhand.  Replies form Bihar, Maharashtra, Punjab, and Tamil Nadu are awaited. 
 
The Office of the Commissioner of Prohibition & Excise, Andhra Pradesh has 
informed that they regulate possession, use and movement of Molasses through Andhra 
Pradesh Excise (Possession, Import, Export, Transport of Molasses Conditions for 
Licence and Permits) Rules, 2008 and they do not control pricing and distribution of 
Molasses. 
 
The Office of the Director, Prohibition & Excise, Gujarat has informed that there 
has not been control over pricing of molasses ever since the withdrawal of the Molasses 
Control Order, 1961 on 10th June, 1993.  The sale of molasses is carried out by the suga r 
factories as per their own pricing.  It is desirable that some proper mechanism is 
introduced to exercise regulation of pricing, monitoring and distribution of molasses. 
 
The Office of the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Haryana has informed that 
there is no control on molasses in the state of Haryana except the movement of molasses 
because there is surplus quantity available in Haryana. The price of molasses cannot be 
ascertained due to fluctuation in the prices.  Most of the distilleries are using gra in for 
manufacturing alcohol due to fluctuation in the prices of molasses and the overall 
consumption of molasses has been drastically reduced.  So they are not in a position to 
impose control on molasses. 
 
The Office of the Excise Commissioner, Karnataka has informed that they monitor 
the production, issue, transportation etc. of Molasses and issue licence to possess, store, 
use and sell molasses.  There is no control over the price. 
 
The Excise Department, Uttar Pradesh has informed that Uttar Pradesh has  self-
sufficient provisions for the control of molasses and they do not find any difficulty in 
regulation of molasses.  Therefore there is no need for any new arrangement by the 
Union Government for the control of molasses in the state of Uttar Pradesh. 
 
It may be seen from the above that various state governments are already having 
some control on Molasses and it may not be possible to build consensus for bringing back 
central control over molasses and as mentioned above it may not be necessary to bring 
back such control in the present era of free market economy.  Regarding the data on 
prices of molasses, the Department has taken up the matter with the major molasses 
producing State Governments and as per recently compiled information, the average 
price of molasses during 2009-10 was Rs. 415 per quintal. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No.15021/3/2009-M Dated 7.3.2011] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

25 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
Recommendation (Para No. 51) 
The Committee have been informed that excise duty on Denatured Ethyl Alcohol 
has been reduced from 10% to 8% but there is no corresponding reduction in the specific 
duty on molasses. The Committee have been given to understand that the Chemical 
industry has been demanding reduction in duty on molasses in line with the reduction of 
excise duty of Denatured Ethyl Alcohol and the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has forwarded the request to the Ministry of Finance for con sideration. As 
the reduction of duty on molasses is bound to boost the chemical industry, the Committee 
concur with its demand and desire the Department to take up the matter at the 
appropriate level with the Ministry of Finance for early decision in this regard. The 
Committee expect to be apprised of a positive decision in the matter at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
              Since the Excise Duty on Denatured Ethyl Alcohol has been restored at 10%, it 
was decided not take up the matter with Ministry of Finance. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No.15021/3/2009-M Dated 7.3.2011] 
    
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

26 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 48) 
The Committee are surprised to note that despite molasses being a rich source of 
minerals and iron, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has not so far even 
thought of taking any initiative to encourage human consumption of the same. 
Considering the nutritious va lue of molasses, the need to encourage its human 
consumption cannot be overemphasized keeping in view the situation in India. Even in 
years of bumper crop of sugarcane, the sufferings of the farmers due to reduction in the 
prices could be mitigated by conv erting excess sugarcane into molasses which can be 
used for human consumption. The Committee, therefore, desire the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals to encourage utilization of molasses for human 
consumption in India and coordinate with the Minis try of Food Processing Industries as a 
priority for taking suitable steps in the direction. The Committee further hope that the 
production of molasses would be augmented in such a way by the Department that 
besides meeting the industrial requirement, it wo uld also cater to the needs of human 
consumption. The Committee would like to be apprised of the decision taken in the 
matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Standing Committee has recommended to encourage utilization of Molasses 
for human consumption.  The  Department had taken up the issue with the Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries requesting them to take suitable steps as per Committee 
recommendation and inform this Department of the action taken. Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries vide O.M.No. 5 -4/2011-FFD dated 25-2-2011 has suggested that a 
joint action committee coordinated by Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers could be formed 
to address and discuss the issues raised in the Report pertaining to utilization of 
molasses for human consumption in India.  The Department shall consider form ing of 
such a committee shortly. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
O.M. No.15021/3/2009-M Dated 7.3.2011] 
  
 Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
 
 
  
New Delhi;                  GOPINATH MUNDE, 
13th March, 2012                               Chairman, 
23 Phalguna, 1933 (SAKA)         Standing Committee on 
                 Chemicals and Fertilizers  
     
  
 

27 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
 
APPENDIX – I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2011-12) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 05 March, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 
hrs. in Room No.53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
 
Shri Raghunandan Sharma  - In the Chair 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prabhatsinh  Pratapsinh Chauhan 
3. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
4. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
5. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
6. Shri O.S. Manian 
7. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup 
8. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
9. Shri Tufani Saroj 
10. Shri Raju Shetti 
11. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
13. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
14. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani 
15. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
16. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
i) Shri C. S. Joon   - Joint Secretary 
ii) Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
 

28 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
2. As the Chairman could not attend the sitting due to pre -occupation, the 
members chose Shri Raghunandan Sharma, MP and a member of the Committee, 
to act as the Chairman.  The Acting C hairman welcomed the members to the 
sitting of the Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the 
following draft Action Taken Reports : 
(i) Draft on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thir teenth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on „Production, 
Pricing and Distribution of Molasses' of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
 
(ii), (iii) & (iv) ***  ***     ***   ***   
 
4. After some discussion, the dra ft Reports were adopted by the Committee 
with minor amendments as indicated in the Annexure-I, II, III and IV respectively.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*** Matters not related to this Report. 
  

29 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
 
Annexure-I 
[Please see para 4 of the minutes] 
Recom. 
No. 
Page 
No. 
Para 
No. Line Amendments/ modifications 
 
52 
 
17 
 
22 
 
3 from the 
bottom 
 
Add "and the Committee also desire to be 
apprised about the final recommendations 
of this committee and their 
implementation." After "soon." 
 
  

30 
 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\21 Report molasses\21st Report molasses ATR.docx 
 
APPENDIX – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTEENTH REPORT (15 TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2010-11) 
ON „ PRODUCTION, PRICING AND DISTRIBUTION OF MOLASSES ‟ OF THE 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND 
PETROCHEMICALS).  
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 6 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation.Para Nos.  47, 49 and 52)   
3 
Percentage of Total 50% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation Para No. Nil 
 
0 
Percentage of Total 0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Para Nos. 50 and 51)  
2 
Percentage of Total 33.33%  
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are of interim nature:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Para No. 48)  
 
1 
Percentage of Total 16.67% 
 