    
22 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2011-12) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Eighteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
March, 2012/Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) 


 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
2 
CC&F No. 22 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2011-12) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Eighteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011-12) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.03.2012 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  15.03.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2012/Phalguna, 1933 (Saka) 


 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
3 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12) ………………………………... 4 
Introduction. …………………………………………………..………………………… 5 
Chapter I Report ……………….………………………………………………….. 6-13 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
14-23 
Chapter III Observations /  Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
24 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
25-27 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature 
28 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2011-12) held on 05 March 2012 
29-31 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2010-11) on „Demands for Grants (2011 -2012)‟ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
32 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2011-12) 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Prabhatsinh  Pratapsinh Chauhan 
3. Shri K. D. Deshmukh 
4. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
5. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
6. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
7. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
8. Shri O.S. Manian 
9. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
10. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup 
11. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
12. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
13. Shri Sivakumar alias Ritheesh 
14. Shri Tufani Saroj 
15. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
16. Shri Raju Shetti 
17. Shri Adagooru Viswanath 
18. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
24. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
26. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
27. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani 
28. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
29. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
30. & Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
31.# Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT   
1. Shri  C.S.Joon   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Ajit Kumar Sahu  - Committee Officer 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
&  Nominated w.e.f. 17.09.2011. 
 # Vacancy arisen due to demise of Shri Silvius Condpan, MP (RS)  w.e.f. 10 October 2011

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
5 
  
                                                                
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2011 -12) 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf present 
this Twenty Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Gove rnment 
on the observations / recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2011 -12) on 
„Demands for Grants (2011-12)‟ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Departmen t 
of Fertilizers).  
 
2. The Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 04 August, 2011.  The Action 
Taken Replies of Government to all observations / recommendations containe d in the 
Report were received on 03 November, 2011.  The Standing Committee on  Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (2011 -12) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 05 
March 2012. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the obser vations/ 
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
13th March, 2012                                          GOPINATH MUNDE 
 23 Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)                                                  Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
6 
 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(2011-12) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 04 August,  2011.  The Report contained 11 Observations / 
Recommendations. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Departme nt of Fertilizers) were requested 
to furnish replies to the Observations  / Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth 
Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e. by  
4th November, 2011.  The Action Taken Replies of the Go vernment in respect of all the  
11 Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from  
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers , Department of Fertilizers vide their O.M. 
No.5(1)/2011-Fin-II dated 3 November 2011.   
 
The categorization of the Action Taken Replies of the Government is as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 Sl.Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 9 and 10 
(Total =07) 
Chapter-II  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government‟s replies  
 Sl.No. NIL. 
(Total =NIL) 
Chapter-III  
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply  of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration  
 Sl.Nos. 3, 4 and 8 
(Total =03) 
Chapter-IV  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are of interim nature 
 Sl.Nos.  11 
(Total = 01) 
Chapter-V  
 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
7 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and the final reply in 
respect of the Observation/Recommendation for which only interim reply has been 
furnished by the Ministry should be furnished expeditiously.   
 
4. The Committee will no w deal with action taken by the Government o n some of 
their Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 1. 
 
5. Taking note of different impediments/maladies in g rowth of fertilizer industry, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 "At present, there are 56 large fertilizer plants manufacturing a wide range of nitrogenous, 
phosphatic and complex fertilizers in the country.  Out of these, 47 units produce nitrogen ous, 
phosphatic and complex fertilizers and 9 units manufacture ammonium sulphate as bye -product.  
The Committee observed that production of fertilizers in the country has been more or less stagnant 
for the last one decade, whereas the imports are increasi ng to meet the growing demand of 
fertilizers in the country.  The Committee note d that the installed capacity has been 120.61 lakh MT 
of nitrogenous and 56.59 lakh MT of phosphatic nutrients.  The growth of fertilizer industry has not 
kept pace with the gr owing requirement of the fertilizers as the country is by and large import 
dependent for meeting requirements of critical phosphatic inputs such as rock phosphate and 
phosphoric acid.  Paucity of raw materials, lack of long term availability of natural gas , high cost of 
imported RLNG gas and volatility in prices have impeded growth of the fertilizer industry.  These 
impediments are matter of serious concern.  However, keeping in view the vital role played by the 
chemical fertilizers in the successful agricu lture production in the country, the Committee 
recommend that there is urgent need to take suitable steps to overcome the impediments/maladies 
in the growth of fertilizer industry so that there is self -sufficiency and sustained growth of fertilizer 
industry. 
 
 Lack of adequate availability of inputs including natural gas required for production of fertilizers and 
limited resources are the major hindrances in achieving self -sufficiency in fertilizer sector.  In the 
absence of ready availability of potash sou rces in the country, the entire demand of potassic 
fertilizers for direct application as well as for production of complex fertilizers is being met through 
imports.  The Committee have been informed that the surveys and explorations are being carried out 
to find potash and provide indigenous source of potash.  The Committee hope that the Department 
of Fertilizers would continue their best efforts in exploration of indigenous raw materials for the 
fertilizer industry.  Considering the vital role played by chemical fertilizers as one of the key inputs for 
the success of agriculture output in the country, the Committee feel that there is an urgent need for 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
8 
more suitable steps to be taken by the Department to ensure a sustained growth of industry as a 
whole.  
 
 The Committee also desire that the Department should vigorously pursue the issues regarding 
adequate allocation of natural gas and gas pipeline connectivity with Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas.  The Committees are of the view that with the assured a llocation of natural gas to the 
fertilizer sector, the expansion and revamping process of existing and new fertilizer projects could be 
completed at the earliest which in turn would avoid cost and time overruns.  At the same time, a 
balanced use of fertili zers (NPK) is also essential for increasing agricultural productivity in the 
country.  The Committee would also like to recommend that expeditious measures need to be taken 
by the Department for capacity addition programmes so as to achieve self -sufficiency to fertilizer 
sector." 
 
6. In reply to all the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers have stated as under :-  
 
 "More than 90% of the requirement of phosphatic Fertilizers of the country is met through import of 
finished fertilizers/intermediates/raw materials.  The source of potash in the country is non -existent.  
At present, almost all the DAP/NPK manufacturing plants meet their requirement of the raw material 
based on imported sources.  Presently, the country has 84 SSP manufacturing units, whi ch use 
various grades of rock phosphate notified by Department of Fertilizers for manufacturing SSP, 
Rajasthan State Mines and Minerals Ltd.(RSMML) and the Maton Mines of Hindustan Zinc Ltd., 
Udaipur, Rajasthan are the two sources of rock phosphate for man ufacturing SSP. The low grade 
rock phosphate of Madhya Pradesh State Mines is used by beneficiating rock phosphate by M/s 
Krishna Phoschem Ltd., Madhya Pradesh, M/s BEC Fertilizers Ltd., Chattisgarh and M/s Shiva 
Global Industries Ltd.  For upgrading the q ualtity of the rock phosphate to put it for manufacturing 
SSP. 
 
 Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, vide its notification dated 10.05.2011 has redefined SSP 
from 16% to 14.5% P2O5 (water soluble).  Resultantly, the SSP manufacturers may blend high 
grade rock phosphate of the imported sources with the low grade rock phosphate of the country to 
produce SSP of the FCO standards.  Department of Fertilizers is also taking up with the state 
Government of Rajasthan to prospect and explore further indigenou s sources of rock phosphates.  
The State Government of Rajasthan has also been asked by DoF to open it for private entities.  
Department of Fertilizers has also taken up with the State Governments of Rajasthan, Chattisgarh 
and Uttar Pradesh to explore poss ibilities of prospecting and mining rock phosphate indigenously.  
However, no results has come to light in this direction.  However, the proposal of M/s Ugar Sugar 
Works Ltd., for inducting to the low grade potash (14% K) produced out of the molasses of th e sugar 
cane factories is under consideration with Department of Fertilizers for bringing it under the NBS.  
This product has already been inducted in the FCO." 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
9 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. In their earlier recommendation the Committee had stated that there is an urgent need to take 
suitable steps to overcome the impediments like paucity of raw materials, lack of long term 
availability of natural gas, high cost of imported RLNG gas and volatility in prices, that impede the 
sustained growth of fertilizer i ndustry.  The Committee note that efforts towards exploration of 
indigenous sources of fertilizers is yet to achiev e any fruitful result. The Committee hope that 
Department of Fertilizer s would continue with their best effort and apprise the Committee rega rding 
further progress  in this direction.  The Committee, however, regret to note that the issue of adequate 
allocation of natural gas and gas pipeline connectivity is yet to be settled with the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas.  The Committee desire  that the Department of Fertilizers should work in 
tandem with the Ministry  of Petroleum and Natural Gas for expediting the matter at the earliest. The 
Committee are also unhappy to note that in the Action Taken Reply the Department has not apprised 
the C ommittee about capacity addition programmes undertaken recently which are important for 
achieving self-sufficency in fertilizer production.   The Committee , therefore, desire to be apprised 
about pursuance of different capacity addition programmes undertaken by the Department.  
 
B. DEMANDS FOR GRANTS ALLOCATION 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 3. 
 
8. Emphasizing the need to rein in the ballooning expenditure under Non -plan allocation  of the 
Department, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
  
"The Committee are of the view that the non -plan expenditure of the Department need to be kept 
under control.  While the allocation under then on-plan head (RE) reached a peak of Rs. 1,00,491.16 
crore during 2008 -09, the figures for the financial years 2009 -10 to 2010-11 are Rs. 56,600.50 and 
Rs. 57,860.00 crore respectively.  The Department has failed to provide any satisfactory response to 
a specific query as to how to deep the Non -Plan expenditure under control.  While the Committee 
agree that farmers need to be pro tected from price volatility in the international market and other 
negative factors, the need to rein in the ballooning expenditure under the Non-Plan allocation cannot 
be over-emphasized.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should tak e steps 
on a priority basis to address this issue and intimate the measures taken in this regard to them."   
 
9. In reply to all the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers have stated as under :-  
 
 "Government of India, Department of Fertilizers ha s introduced Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy in 
continuation of the erstwhile concession scheme for decontrolled Phosphatic & Potassic Fertilizers 
w.e.f. 1.4.2010.  This policy has been introduced in the context of Nation’s Food Security, declining 
response of agricultural productivity to increase fertilizer usage and to ensure balance application of 
fertilizers in the country.  As per this policy, fixed rate of subsidy of the nutrients of Nitrogen (N), 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
10 
Phosphate (P), Potash (K) and Sulphar (S) per kilogram/per tonne is fixed by the Government based 
on the recommendations of the Inter Ministerial Committee under the Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy.  
These rates based on the international prices of the Fertilizers/intermediates/raw materials and 
exchange rates.  As per this policy, a fixed rate of subsidy is announced annually and the MRP of 
P&K fertilizers has been left open to be fixed by the manufacturers/importers at the reasonable level.  
Resultantly, the rise/fall of the prices of fertilizers/intermediates/r aw material and the exchange rate 
in the international market had a direct bearing on the cost of the fertilizers, which results into higher 
MRP of the P&K fertilizers.  Under the Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy, when the rates of subsidy 
amount is fixed, th e quantum of subsidy increases only with the increase iin the consumption of the 
fertilizer.  The increase in the prices of the fertilizers in the international marker leads to increase in 
the MRP. 
 
 Prior to the introduction of the Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy w.e.f. 1.4.2010, the MRP of the P & K 
Fertilizers covered under the concession scheme was fixed by the Government of India, which was 
much below the actual cost of the fertilizers.  Any rise / fall of the prices of 
fertilizers/intermediates/raw material and the exchange rate in the international market had the direct 
bearing on the cost of the fertilizers, which resulted into higher subsidy of the P&K Fertilizers. 
 
More than 90% of the requirement of P&K fertilizers of the country is met through impo rts.  The 
sources of Potash in the country is non -existent.  Accordingly, the escalation / de -escalation of the 
prices of the fertilizers in the international market is to be borne by the farmers under Nutrient Based 
Subsidy Policy or by the Government und er the erstwhile concession scheme for decontrolled 
phosphatic & potassic fertilizers.  The country doesn’t have any control on the volatility of the prices 
of the fertilizers in the international market.  Since the subsidy is fixed, the volatility of pric e in the 
international price has direct bearing on MRP of fertilizers.  Since under th NBS policy, the subsidy is 
fixed on annual basis, long term contracting is possible  and therefore it reduces the volatility of 
prices of fertilizers in the country in comparison to international market."   
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had expressed unhappiness to note that the 
Department had failed to provide any satisfactory response to a specific query as to how to keep the 
non-plan expenditure under control. The Committee, therefore, had desired that the Department 
should take steps on priority basis to address the issue and intimate the measures taken in this 
regard.  The Committee are unhappy with the fact that the Dep artment of Fertilizers in their Action 
Taken Replies has not given the issue of ballooning expenditure under non -plan expenditure the 
level of priority it deserves and also has not intimated the specific measures taken  to address the 
issue.  The Committee note that more than 90% of the requirement of P &K fertilizer of the country is 
met th rough imports and the country does not have any control on the volatility of prices of 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
11 
fertilizers in the international market. The Committee also note that since under th e Nutrient Based 
Subsidy (NBS) policy, the subsidy is fixed on annual basis, long term contracting is possible. The 
Committee, however, express unhappiness to note that the Department has not taken any firm steps 
in this regard. Hence, t he Committee is pai ned to reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
Department  should take steps on a priority basis to address the issue of ballooning expenditure 
under non-plan allocation and intimate the Committee regarding the measures taken in this regard. 
 
C. SUBSIDY / CONCESSION ON FERTILIZERS 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 4. 
 
11. Stressing the need to cut the galloping subsidy bill, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 "The Committee note that the total subsidy disbursed on fertilizers has increased fr om Rs.28,019.55 
crore in 2006 -07 to Rs. 64,032.29 crore in 209 -10 and Rs. 52,840.73 crore in 2010 -11 (BE).  The 
total subsidy released  on urea has increased from Rs. 17,721.43 crore in the year 2006 -07 to Rs. 
24,430.73 crore in the year 2010 -11 (BE).  The s ubsidy on P&K fertilizers has increased from Rs. 
10,298.12 crore in the year 2006 -07 to Rs. 28,500.00 crore in the year 2010 -11 (BE).  The 
Committee’s examination has revealed that the increase in subsidy bill is due to higher consumption 
of fertilizers an d also the rise was due to the increase in international prices of imported fertilizers 
and increase in the cost of inputs of indigenous fertilizers during the year 2006 -07 to 2010 -11.  
Considering all these facts,  the Committee desire that concerted effo rts are needed to cut the 
galloping subsidy bill.  Needless to say, that in view of increased consumption of fertilizers and 
international prices of fertilizer, inputs and finished fertilizers, there is an urgent need for 
technological innovation, state of  the art machinery, reducing the cost of production, energy 
efficiency measures, experienced and qualified technical manpower and optimum capacity utilization 
so as to reduce our dependence on imports and increase the indigenous production of fertilizers."   
 
12. In reply to all the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers have stated as under :- 
 
"More than 90% of the requirement of the phosphatic fertilizers and its raw materials in the country is 
met through imports.  Since NBS has been implemented on P&K fertilizers in which a fixed subsidy 
is decided on annual basis taking into consideration of the international prices and affordability of 
farmers.  The MRP of fertilizers has been allowed to be fixed by companies at reasonable level 
depending upon demand and supply balance.  In this scenario, companies need to minimise the 
cost of production so as to reduce its MRP in the country and be competitive." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had observed that the increase in subsidy bill 
was due to higher consumption of fertilizers, rise in international price of imported fertilizers and rise 
in input costs of indigenous fertilizers during the year 2006 -07 to 2010 -11. Considering these facts 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
12 
the Committee had felt that efforts are needed to cut the galloping subsidy bill, emphasizing the need 
to take certain specific measures to reduce our dependence on imports and increase the indigenous 
production of fertilizers.  The Committee are unhappy to note that the Ministr y in their Action Taken 
Replies have not given any specific reply regarding efforts made to cut the galloping subsidy bill.  
While acknowledging the fact that 90  per cent of requirement of phosphatic fertilizers is met through 
imports due to non -availability of raw material s in the country, the Department has not specifically 
mentioned about the efforts contemplated to address the issues of technological innovation, e nergy 
efficiency measures, updation of machinery and skill development of workers in order to reduce cost 
of production so that all the fertilizer companies do not feel any difficulty in fixing MRP at reasonable 
price in competitive market.   The Committee feel that such measure would reduce the dependence 
on imports of fertilizers as the cost o f indigenously manufactured fertilizers , especially non -
phosphatic fertilizers, would be lesser than that of imported fertilizers and ultimately reduce the 
subsidy bill.   
 
D. ASESSED REQUIREMENT AND AVAILABILITY OF FERTILIZERS 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 8. 
 
14. Emphasizing the need to devise a foolproof mechanism for proper and equitable distribution of 
fertilizers in all parts of the country, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 "The Committee note that equitable distribution of fertilizers in  all parts of the country is an important 
criteria for facilitating increased productivity in agriculture sector.  At present, the Department of 
Fertilizers is required to ensure availability of urea, as per the requirement assessed by the 
Department of Ag riculture and Cooperation. The Committee note that the movement of fertilizers is 
monitored throughout the country by an on -line web based monitoring system (FMS), still the 
farmers are facing great difficulty in getting the fertilizers on time and also th ey are facing the 
problem of artificial scarcity/shortage in some parts of the country.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should devise a foolproof mechanism for 
proper and equitable distribution of fertilizers in all parts of the country especially in remote, hilly and 
inaccessible areas.  Also, the Department of Fertilizers should make serious efforts to collaborate 
with the State Governments to tackle the problem of artificial shortage and punish hoarders an d 
black marketers." 
 
15. In reply to all the aforesaid para, the Department of Fertilizers have stated as under :-  
 
 "There may be some stress in fertilizer availability in case of smaller States because of non 
availability of adequate warehouse capacity.  As a result of this, the States lift fertilizers as and when 
required. 
 As per Clause 4 (a) of the Fertilizer (Control) Order – Display of stock position of fertilizers – Every 
dealer, who makes or offers to make a retail sale of any fertilizers, shall p rominently display in his 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
13 
place of business – the quantities of opening stock of different fertilizers held by his on each day.  
Any person violating this mandatory provision of FCO is held liable to be proceeded under the 
provisions of FCO and Essential C ommodities Act.  The State Governments  as enforcement 
agencies are adequately empowered to take appropriate action against the offenders who indulge in 
any kind of malpractices viz., hoarding etc. 
 
Under clause 21 of the Fertilizer Control Order (FC)), 19 85, it is mandatory to print the maximum 
retail price on each bag of fertilizers whether under statutory price control or out of the purview of the 
statutory price control.  No person shall charge higher than the price printed on the bag.  Any person 
violating this mandatory provision of FCO is held liable under the provisions of FCO and Essential 
Commodities Act.  The State Governments as enforcement agencies are adequately empowered to 
take appropriate action against the offenders who indulge in any kind of malpractices. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
16. The Committee in their earlier recommendation had stated that the Department of Fertilizers 
should devise a foolproof mechanism for proper and equitable distribution of fertilizers in all parts of 
the country especially in remote, hilly and inaccessible  areas.  In this regard, the Department in their 
Action Taken Replies have stated that there may be stress in availability of fertilizers in case of 
smaller States because of non -availability  of adequate ware house capacity.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Department of Fertilizers should take up this issue with State 
Governments.  The Committee feel that fertilizer companies can play an important role in this regard.  
Fertilizer companies may set up warehouses in coordination with State Governments or through 
Public Private Partnership in the States where adequate warehousing facility is not available.  
The Committee, however, feel that the fair and equitable distribution of fertilizers in different p arts of 
the country is neglected.   The Committee note that the movement of fertilizers is monitored .  
However, the Committee are not satisfied over the real working of the system in tracking the 
demands and availability of fertilizers in different parts of  the country and recommend to work 
towards making the system robust and foolproof.   
 
 The Committee had noted that Department of Fertilizers should make serious efforts to 
collaborate with the State Governments to tackle the problem of artificial shortage  and punish 
hoarders and black -marketeers.  In this regard, the Committee are perturbed to note that in the 
Action Taken Replies, the Department has merely stated that the State Governments as enforcement 
agencies are adequately empowered to take appropria te action against the offenders who indulge in 
any kind of malpractices viz., hoarding etc.  The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate that the 
earlier recommendation  of the Committee should be implemented seriously and desire that the 
Department should  closely monitor commission of different malpractices and proactively ensure 
timely and equitable distribution of fertilizers throughout the country.  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
14 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 1. 
 
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS 
 
 At present, there are 56 large fertilizer plants manufacturing a wide range of 
nitrogenous, phosphatic and complex fertilizers in the country.  Out of these, 47 units 
produce nitrogenous, phosphatic and complex f ertilizers and 9 units manufacture 
ammonium sulphate as bye -product.  The Committee observe that production of 
fertilizers in the country has been more or less stagnant for the last one decade, whereas 
the imports are increasing to meet the growing demand of fertilizers in the country.  The 
Committee note that the installed capacity has been 120.61 lakh MT of nitrogenous and 
56.59 lakh MT of phosphatic nutrients.  The growth of fertilizer industry has not kept pace 
with the growing requirement of the fertil izers as the country is by and large import 
dependent for meeting requirements of critical phosphatic inputs such as rock phosphate 
and phosphoric acid.  Paucity of raw materials, lack of long term availability of natural 
gas, high cost of imported RLNG ga s and volatility in prices have impeded growth of the 
fertilizer industry.  These impediments are matter of serious concern.  However, keeping 
in view the vital role played by the chemical fertilizers in the successful agriculture 
production in the country , the Committee recommend that there is urgent need to take 
suitable steps to overcome the impediments/maladies in the growth of fertilizer industry 
so that there is self-sufficiency and sustained growth of fertilizer industry. 
 
 Lack of adequate availability of inputs including natural gas required for production 
of fertilizers and limited resources are the major hindrances in achieving self -sufficiency 
in fertilizer sector.  In the absence of ready availability of potash sources in the country, 
the entire demand of potassic fertilizers for direct application as well as for production of 
complex fertilizers is being met through imports.  The Committee have been informed 
that the surveys and explorations are being carried out to find potash and provide 
indigenous source of potash.  The Committee hope that the Department of Fertilizers 
would continue their best efforts in exploration of indigenous raw materials for the 
fertilizer industry.  Considering the vital role played by chemical fertilizers as one of th e 
key inputs for the success of agriculture output in the country, the Committee feel that 
there is an urgent need for more suitable steps to be taken by the Department to ensure 
a sustained growth of industry as a whole.  
 
 The Committee also desire that the Department should vigorously pursue the 
issues regarding adequate allocation of natural gas and gas pipeline connectivity with 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  The Committees are of the view that with the 
assured allocation of natural gas to the  fertilizer sector, the expansion and revamping 
process of existing and new fertilizer projects could be completed at the earliest which in 
turn would avoid cost and time overruns.  At the same time, a balanced use of fertilizers 
(NPK) is also essential fo r increasing agricultural productivity in the country.  The 
Committee would also like to recommend that expeditious measures need to be taken by 
the Department for capacity addition programmes so as to achieve self -sufficiency to 
fertilizer sector. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 More than 90% of the requirement of phosphatic Fertilizers of the country is met 
through import of finished fertilizers/intermediates/raw materials.  The source of potash in 
the country is non -existent.  At present, almost all the DAP/ NPK manufacturing plants 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
15 
meet their requirement of the raw material based on imported sources.  Presently, the 
country has 84 SSP manufacturing units, which use various grades of rock phosphate 
notified by Department of Fertilizers for manufacturing SSP, R ajasthan State Mines and 
Minerals Ltd.(RSMML) and the Maton Mines of Hindustan Zinc Ltd., Udaipur, Rajasthan 
are the two sources of rock phosphate for manufacturing SSP. The low grade rock 
phosphate of Madhya Pradesh State Mines is used by beneficiating ro ck phosphate by 
M/s Krishna Phoschem Ltd., Madhya Pradesh, M/s BEC Fertilizers Ltd., Chattisgarh and 
M/s Shiva Global Industries Ltd.  For upgrading the qualtity of the rock phosphate to put it 
for manufacturing SSP. 
 
 Department of Agriculture and Coopera tion, vide its notification dated 10.05.2011 
has redefined SSP from 16% to 14.5% P2O5 (water soluble).  Resultantly, the SSP 
manufacturers may blend high grade rock phosphate of the imported sources with the 
low grade rock phosphate of the country to produ ce SSP of the FCO standards.  
Department of Fertilizers is also taking up with the state Government of Rajasthan to 
prospect and explore further indigenous sources of rock phosphates.  The State 
Government of Rajasthan has also been asked by DoF to open it  for private entities.  
Department of Fertilizers has also taken up with the State Governments of Rajasthan, 
Chattisgarh and Uttar Pradesh to explore possibilities of prospecting and mining rock 
phosphate indigenously.  However, no results has come to ligh t in this direction.  
However, the proposal of M/s Ugar Sugar Works Ltd., for inducting to the low grade 
potash (14% K) produced out of the molasses of the sugar cane factories is under 
consideration with Department of Fertilizers for bringing it under the  NBS.  This product 
has already been inducted in the FCO. 
 
[Department of Fertilizers OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 2. 
 
ELEVENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN 
 
 The Committee note from the Plan Outlay and Expenditure during the first four 
years of Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007 -08, 2008 -09, 2009 -10 and 2010 -11) for the 
Department of Fertilizers that for the years 2007 -08, 2008 -09, 2009-10 the total actual 
expenditure was at Rs. 264.26 crore, Rs. 745.03 crore and Rs. 711.24 crore, respectively 
and the RE for 2010 -11 was Rs. 2262.05 crore while the BE for 2011 -12 is Rs. 3550.22 
crore totaling Rs. 7532.80 crore which is less than 50% of the allocation, i.e. Rs. 
20627.87 c rore made for the entire Five Year Plan.  The Committee are inclined to 
conclude that either requisite funds were not made available to the Department every 
year of the plan period or the Department failed to the utilize fully the available funds. 
 
 The Co mmittee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need for proper planning 
and drawing up realistic estimates and timely and prudent use of approved outlays.  The 
Department of Fertilizers should endeavour to impress upon the Planning Commission 
and Ministry of Finance to allocate adequate funds for the various schemes/programmes 
that are asked for based on the proper estimates.  The Committee also feel that there 
should be optimum utilization of the funds which have been allocated for the various 
programmes and projects envisaged to be achieved in Eleventh Five Year Plan.  
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
16 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 The approved outlay of 11 th Five Year Plan is Rs.20627.87 crores.  This consists 
of Rs.1492 crores as Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) and Rs.19135.87 crores as 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) generated by the companies from their 
own resources.  GBS of Rs.1492 crores were provided for two schemes namely, revival 
of sixk PSUs (Rs.607 crores) and capital subsidy for conversion (Rs.885 crores).  Later 
on the capital subsidy schemes for conversion of four urea plants based on FO/LSHS 
was not pursued and conversion of urea plants were financed through a non -plan 
scheme.  Hence, allocation of Rs.885 crore became redundant.  DoF has suggested to 
Planning Commission to re-allocate the amount under the Head “conversion” for making 
corpus fund for acquiring resources abroad.  Of the allocation of Rs.607 crores for the 
revival of sick PSEs the funds have been made available to three PSEs namely, BVFCL, 
FACT, MFL.  The total funds made available by the Planning Commission during 11 th 
Five Yeaqr Plan  are Rs.875.65 crore which is more than the original allocation under 
GBS.  It may therefore be seen that while Planning Commission provided adequate 
funds for meeting t he requirement of three PSUs,  namely, BVFCL, FACT and MFL, 
shortfall did occur in the realization of the Plan projections insofar as capital expenditure 
from IEBR is concerned by the respective profit making PSUs. 
 
 As mentioned above, bulk of outlay proj ections during 11 th Five Year Plan was 
supposed to be met by profit making companies through their own resources for various 
projects during the Five Year Plan period.  There is a shortfall in meeting these 
projections during the 11 th Five Year Plan.  It m ay be mentioned that 11 th Plan 
projections for IEBR were made at the beginning of the 11 th Five Year Plan keeping in 
view the investment environment, policy framework expected during medium and likely 
international environment.  These projections were indicative based on economic outlook 
prevailing at that time and expectations from PSUs.  Every year, respective profit making 
companies re-casted their actual expenditure in each year depending upon international 
environment policy collections, economic viability and priority of requirements set for that 
year. 
 
 The main reasons for shortfall in IEBR realization are as follows: 
 
 In cse of RCF, an outlay of Rs.2699.74 was provided for additional Ammonia-Urea 
(Thal Expansion) Project by the expenditure could no t be incurred by Rashtriya 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (RCF) due to uncertainty about sourcing of gas.  Further an 
outlay of Rs.2596.25 was provided for revival of Durgapur and Talcher units and the 
expenditure on the scheme could not be incurred due to absenc e of favourable policy for 
new investment in Urea sector. 
 
 In case of NFL, the projected capital expenditure of Rs.6050.75 was revised to 
Rs.3993.75 crore during Mid-term appraisal of the 11th Five Year Plan due to exclusion of  
revival of Barauni unit which was earlier to be executed by National Fertilizers Limited.  It 
was taken from NFL and entrusted to Joint Venture Company (M/s UVL).  The Plan 
outlay was further revised due to revision in project cost for changeover of feedstock 
project s at FO based units and capacity enhancement of Urea project of Vijaipura. 
 
 In case of KRIBHCO, it intended to set up an additional stream of Ammonia Urea 
Plant at existing fertilizers complex at Hazaria.  However, in absence firm availability of 
Gas on long term basis  and impact of investment policy of the Government, the project 
was not undertaken.  KRIBHCO initially wanted to invest Rs.3000 crores on revival of 
Gorukhpur Plant at the time of formulation of 11 th Five Yea Plan.  However, this project 
was also not under taken since Government has now proposed different financial model 
for revival of closed units of FCIL / HFCL. 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
17 
 In view of deviation from the projected outlay to the actual expenditure under IEBR 
during 11th Five Year Plan, PSUs are asked to make realistic  assessment of requirement 
of expenditure and availability of finance through IEBR.  Department will continue to 
monitor in an effective manner such scheme proposed by the companies and would 
initiate required follow up action. 
 
 As desired, Department of Fertilizers will endure to impress upon the Planning 
Commission to allocate adequate funds for the plan schemes under GBS after careful 
and realistic assessment of the requirement.  It will further monitor the utilization of funds 
so allocated with the vie w to utilize them in most  optimal way based on economic 
efficiency and projected outcome of these schemes. 
 
[Department of Fertilizers OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II] 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 5. 
 
DIRECT SUBSIDY TO FARMERS 
 
 The Committee are constrained to point out that despite their repeated 
recommendations in earlier Reports, Government have not achieved the long cherished 
goal of payment of subsidy directly to farmers.  The Committee note that the Government 
had constituted in February 2011, a Task Fo rce under Chairmanship of Shri Nandan 
Nilekhani, Chairman, Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) to recommend and 
implement a solution for direct transfer of subsidies on fertilizers among other things to 
the intended beneficiaries.  The Committ ee understand that the Task Force has since 
submitted its Report to the Government.  The Committee hope that further follow up 
action in this regard would be taken at the earliest so as to find ways and means for 
providing subsidy direct to farmers.  The p recise action taken in this regard may be 
communicated to the Committee. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
The Government has constituted a Task Force under the chairmanship of Shri Nandan 
Nilekani, Chairman, Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) to re commend and 
implementation a solution of direct transfer of subsidies on kerosene, LPG & fertilizers to 
intended beneficiaries.   The Task Force submitted its interim Report on 5 th July‟2011 to 
the Finance Ministry.  The Report is available on the  web sit e of Finance Ministry 
(www.finmin.nic.in).  The Task Force in its interim report has recommended a phased 
approach to the issue.  Phase -I, due to be implemented by Dec.‟2011, is being 
developed as mobile FMS(m -FMS), w hich will extend the FMS through SMS based, 
IVRS based and web -based applications to facilitate the tracking of fertilizers till the 
receipt at the last point, i.e. at the retailer level, from whom the farmer buys the fertilizer. 
 
 The information visibility at the last point will be there on a Transparent portal and 
availability can then be seen on real time basis by the farmers.  The Task Force, in 
phase – II, has recommended subsidy disbursement to the Retailer, who will continue to 
sell the fertilizer to the farmers at subsidized MRP , which paying the full cost of fertilizers 
(including subsidy received)  to the companies / wholesale.  In Phase – III, the task force 
has recommended the transfer of subsidy to farmer.  However, this phase will be 
implemented when once AADHAR numbers are given to all farmers, beneficiaries 
entitlements are prescribed and AADHAR enable payments are made.  The NIC is 
developing the software for Phase I with fertilizer companies assisting in the 
implementation.  
 
[Department of Fertilizers OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II] 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
18 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 6. 
 
NUTRIENT BASED SUBSIDY 
 
 The Committee have been informed that the Government has introduced the first 
phase of Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) policy and potassic fertilizers in Apri l 2010.  The 
subsidy on fertilizers will be determined on the basis of nutrient subsidy fixed by the 
Government and the nutrient contained in the fertilizers.  The NBS regime is expected to 
bring about a balanced use of fertilizers and also given a boost t o indigenous production 
of fertilizers.  The Committee recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should 
closely monitor the implementation of the policy for its success and fruitful results.  The 
Committee also recommend that the Department should take steps for the 
implementation of this policy which is likely to increase quality and fertility of the soil and 
agricultural productivity as well as attaining self-sufficiency of fertilizers in the country.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 An Inter Ministerial C ommittee has been constituted under  the Chairmanship of  
Secretary (Fertilizer) under the Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy, which inter - alia, 
recommends rate of subsidy and inclusion of new fertilizers in the Policy.  Resultantly, 
DoF has announced NBS rate s during 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 on the basis of the 
recommendations of the IMC, which are based on the prices and availability of the 
Fertilizers in the international market.  As per the Nutrient Based Subsidy  Policy the 
MRP of the P & K fertilizer has been left open to be fixed by the manufacturers / 
importers of the fertilizers at reasonable level.  It has been observed that the prices of the 
fertilizers / raw material in the international market in the recent past has increased, 
which has resulted in the increase in the MRP of the fertilizers. 
 
 After implementation of the NBS w.e.f. 1.4.2010, several new grades of fertilizers 
have been included in the scheme thereby increasing the number of grades to 25 under 
the scheme.  Under the NBS, additional subsidy is also given for Boron and Zinc 
fortification  which encourages the companies to at micro nutrients in the fertilizers which 
is beneficial for the farmers. 
 
 India is 90% import dependent in Phosphatic fertilizer sector and its raw material 
and is 100% im port dependent on Potash sector.  To attain self sufficiency in the 
Phosphatic and Potasic sector,  the Department is trying very hard to acquire assets 
abroad in order to have long term supply of fertilizers / raw material at reasonable prices. 
 
 NBS scheme is being monitored by IMC so that it serves the purpose for which 
was it implemented. 
 
[Department of Fertilizers OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II] 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 7. 
 
FEEDSTOCK POLICY/ ALLOCATION OF GAS TO FERTILIZERS INDUSTRY 
 
 The Committee o bserve that the total requirement of natural gas for existing 20 
units is 40.92 mmscmd which is being met from the supplies under APM Gas, JV gas, 
PMT gas, RIL gas and RLNG gas.  An Empowered Group of Ministers (EGOM) was 
constituted in 2007 to examine and  decide issues of gas pricing and commercial 
utilization of gas under new Exploration Licensing Policy.  The Committee were also 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
19 
informed by the Department of Fertilizers that as per assurance given by the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas, most of the naphtha/fuel oil  based plant and closed fertilizer 
plants will get the gas pipeline connectivity by 2009 -10/2011-12.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised about the status report in this regard.  At the same time the 
Committee expect the Department of  Fertilizers to vigorously pursue the matter with the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas so that effective and expeditious steps are taken 
by them to achieve these targets.   
 
 The Committee need hardly emphasize that pricing and firm availability of na tural 
gas for existing and new units of fertilizer companies are the pre -requisites to increase 
their indigenous production and would, therefore, desire the Department to play a 
proactive role in association with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas t owards 
allocation of gas for the existing and new fertilizer plants in the country. 
 
 The Committee are constrained to point out that the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (M oPNG) has been non -committal on supplying gas on long term basis at 
an agreed price to the proposed new investments in the fertilizer sector as has been 
repeatedly requested by Department of Fertilizers.  Also, no decision on nomination of a 
single nodal agency has been taken by the Government to supply gas to fertilizer 
industries and to address various issues such as gas contracts, take or pay liabilities, 
variable gas pricing, gas shortfalls etc.  The Committee also regret to observe that no 
specific decision has been taken regarding the issue of nominating GAIL (India) Limited 
as the nodal authority for supply of gas to fertilizer industry.  The Committee are of the 
view that the Department of Fertilizers should continue to pursue the matter vigorously 
with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (M oPNG) on the both aspects i.e.  supply 
of natural gas to fertilizer industry as per fixed schedule and nomination of a nodal 
agency for supply of gas to the fertilizer industry.  The Committee would like to be 
informed of the precise action taken in this regard within three months of the presentation 
of the Report. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
As desired by the Committee, the above comments of Committee were 
communicated to Ministry of Petroleum & Natural gas regarding pricing and firm 
allocation of gas to fertilizer sector and appointment  of GAIL(India) Limited as the nodal 
authority.  The issue is pending for decision by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.   
 
[Department of Fertilizers OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II] 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 9. 
 
PERFORMANCE OF PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS 
 
 There are nine Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), one multi -state cooperative 
society and one joint sector company under the administrative control of the Department 
of Fertilizers.  Out of this, Krishak Bharati cooperative Limited (KRIBHCO), the mul ti-
State cooperative society and three PSUs, viz. National Fertilizers Limited (NFL), 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF) and Projects and Development (India) 
Limited (PDIL) are profit making units.  Three PSUs, viz. Fertilizers and Chemicals  
Travancore Limited (FACT), Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) and Brahmaputra Valley 
Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL) are loss making units.  Besides, two PSUs, viz. 
Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd. (FCI) and Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Ltd.  
(HFCL) are lying closed after incurring losses continuously over a period of time.  Non -
availability of surplus funds, outdated machinery causing increased cost of production, 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
20 
poor energy efficiency, non-recruitment of experienced and qualified technical manpower 
are the other factors on account of which some PSUs have been facing losses year after 
year.  Non -availability of natural gas has also been the main impediment.  The 
Committee, however, have been informed that some initiatives have been taken by t he 
Government to examine the technical and economic feasibility for revival of the sick 
PSUs.  The Committee also note that there has been negligible growth of the fertilizer 
sector during the last decade.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that Departme nt 
and all PSUs should make efforts for taking suitable  measures to overcome the 
constraints and for improving capacity utilization, energy conservation methods and also 
to bring down manpower and administrative expenditure.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
The following steps have been taken by the Fertilizer PSUs to overcome 
constraints and for improving capacity utilization, energy conservation methods and to 
bring down manpower and administrative expenditure; 
 
National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) 
To cut down  energy consumption, NFL has undertaken Ammonia Feedstock 
Changeover Projects at its three FO based units at Nangal & Bhatinda in Punjab and 
Panipat in Haryana.  These projects shall result in reduction in energy consumption, 
substitute high cost FO with l ow cost natural gas and substantial reduction in Govt. 
subsidy outgo.  The company has undertaken energy saving and urea capacity 
enhancement project at Vijaipur -I & II units in Madhya Pradesh.  These projects shall 
result in increase in urea capacity by 1 6% at Vijaipur -I & by 23% at Vijaipur -II unit i.e. 
urea capacity shall increase by 3.37 lakh MT. The company over a period of ten years 
has brought down its Manpower from 6602 as on 31.03.2001 to 4596 as on 31.03.2011.   
 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizes Limited (RCF) 
RCF is a leading profit making  Mini -Ratna fertilizer and Chemical manufacturing 
company engaged in manufacturing of variety of products such as Ujwala urea and 
complex fertilizer Suphala.  Since inception, RCF has economically and safely op erated 
2 dozen chemical and fertilizer plants for the past four and half decade at Trombay.   
RCF always strives for upkeep of the plants through modernization and 
upgradation of technology.  Company has recently modernized its Ammonia -V, Nitric 
Acid, Meth anol and ANP plants. This has facilitated plants to sustain operations and 
meet technological challenges of improved efficiency, lower energy consumption and 
maintain/excel environmental norms. It has resulted in achieving highest standards of 
safety and product quality.  
RCF is continuously reviewing the workforce of its various plants and departments 
in its endeavour to rationalize and optimize the same. Company‟s productivity in terms of 
manpower has always been exceptionally high. Govt. has allocated ga s on priority basis 
to RCF. 
 
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizers Chemicals Limited (BVFCL) 
The company is operating its Namrup -II unit and Namrup –III plants which are 
based on old and vintage technology. These urea units consume high energy as 
compared to present day plants. Both the plants have outlived their life resulting repeated 
machine breakdowns.  There is also constraints in availability of original spares and 
surplus funds preventing the company to take up regular maintenance replacement of 
critical ma chine parts.  All the problems led to lower capacity utilisation and higher 
energy consumption. 
The company has taken various steps to overcome the constraints and improve capacity. 
(i)  An in -depth internal study of critical areas of plants causing production  
limitations has been carried out.  Based on the study a short/medium term 
action plan has been drawn up. Funds have been made available in phases 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
21 
from GOI as Plan/Non Plan loan under Renewal & Replacement Schemes for 
carrying renovation jobs. 
(ii)  Various renovation/replacement of equipments have already been carried out 
which have led to savings in energy. With this , the performance of the 
company is expected to improve significantly. 
(iii)  BVFCL has already initiated steps for financial restructuring of the comp any. 
M/s Haldor Topsoe has been appointed as Process Licensor for 
comprehensive study of Ammonia plants and M/s PDIL for Urea plant and off -
sites/utilities, situated at  Namrup -II and namrup III plant. The report of the 
Process Licensor has been received and under examination in the company. 
 
Madras Fertilizers Limited(MFL) 
With the amendment in NPS-III policy restricting the reduction in fixed cost to 10% 
from 1.4.2009 onwards, the company‟s Urea operations became viable.  The company‟s 
operations for the year 2010-11 ended with a profit of Rs. 169.86 crore against profit of 
Rs. 6.88 crore in the previous year mainly on account of better production performance 
and lower energy consumption in urea operations coupled with one time settlement 
benefit from Financial Institutions.   
MFL is implementing the projects of conversion of feedstock from naphtha to 
natural gas. The provision is also being kept to enable processing of both naphtha and 
natural gas depending upon the availability. Award of work has been issued to M/s HTAS 
for carrying out engineering Design package and the work is under process. M/s PDIL 
has been proposed to be the EPCM contractor for this project. 
The annual urea production of the company has been 4.79 LMT ( 98.4% cap) 
during 2010 -11 which is the highest surpassing the previous best of 4.73 LMT during 
2006-07.  Annual Specific Energy consumption of 7.492 Gcal/MT urea is the lowest, the 
previous record being 7.769 Gcal/MT in 2004-05. Annual Specific energy consumption of 
10.334 Gcal/MT Ammoni a is the Lowest, the previous record being 10.411 Gcal/MT in 
2004-05.   
During the year Marketing performance of the company shows that the company 
sold a total of 4.74 lakh MT of fertilizers compared to 4.41 lakh MT last year.  The total 
strength of MFL as on 31.3.2011 is 765 as against 802 for the period ending 31.3.2010. 
 
Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) 
During the year 2010 -11, FACT have achieved considerable improvement in the 
production. The production of Ammonium Sulphate increased  to 2.03LMT as against 
1.79LMT in 2009 -10 and production of Caprolactum is 0.44LMT in year 2010 -11 as 
against 0.38LMT in 2009 -10. However, Financial performance of the company for the 
year 2010 -11 also improved showing loss of Rs. 49.33 crore as against th e loss of 
Rs.103.84 crore during the year 2009-10.  
The company is gearing up to switch over to LNG which is expected to be 
available by 2012 at Kochi. Company plans to expand its NP production levels by 
1000TPD and also re -establish Urea production with 1 500 TPD Urea plant. DPR for 
these ventures is being prepared and the company is examining funding ventures like 
inviting Expression of Interest from Public sector companies for equity participation in 
these venture. 
For financial restructuring of the compa ny, it has been directed to get a thorough 
study by M/s Deloitte and submit a fully tide up proposal in this regard. 
 
FCI Aravali Gypsum and Minerals India Limited (FAGMIL) 
M/s. FCI Aravali Gypsum and Minerals India Limited (FAGMIL) is engaged in 
mining and marketing of Minerals Gypsum which is used for reclaiming Sodic Soil. The 
Minerals Gypsum is also used as fertilizer in Agriculture as a sulphur Nutrient. 
 The company has earned profit (PBT) of Rs. 19.89 crore during the year 2010 -11 
as against Rs. 15.8 7 crore in the previous year. The company‟s sale turnover has been 
61.48 crore during the years 2010-11 as against 45.60 crore in the previous year. 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
22 
 
Projects and Development & India Limited (PDIL) 
PDIL is mainly engaged in design, engineering and consulta ncy services and also 
producing catalyst for the fertilizers and refinery industries. During the year 2010 -11 
company has earned a profit (PBT) of Rs. 31.78 crore against profit of Rs. 21.21 crore in 
the previous year. 
 
HFCL and FCIL 
 Pursuant to the decis ion dated 30th Oct. 2008 of the Cabinet, an Empowered 
Committee of Secretaries (EC oS) under the Chairmanship of Secretary (F) was 
constituted to evaluate all options for revival of closed units of Fertilizer Corporation of 
India Limited (FCIL) and Hindusta n Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFCL) and make 
suitable recommendations. Based on the recommendations of the ECOS, a proposal 
was sent to CCEA, which approved the same in its meeting held on 4.8.2011 with the 
stipulation that Board for Industrial and Fin ancial Restructuring (BIFR) proceedings be 
expedited and thereafter, the matter including changes, if any, required in bid 
parameters, be placed before the Committee for a final decision. BIFR in their meeting 
held on 18.8.2011 considered the issue and  di rected State Bank of India, the Operating 
Agency (OA), to examine the DRS in consultation with Department of Fertilizers and 
submit their recommendations within 3 months.   
 
[Department of Fertilizers OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II] 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 10. 
 
CLOSED PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS (PSUs) 
 
 Out of the nine Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), Hindustan Fertilizers 
Corporation Limited (HFCL), Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL), BVFCL and FCIL are sick 
units.  Out of these four, the units of FCIL an d HFCL are presently lying closed since 
2002.  MFL and BVFCL are operational but are sick companies under the administrative 
control of the Department of Fertilizers.  The Committee have been given to understand 
that an Empowered Committee of Secretaries ( ECOS) was constituted in October 2008 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Fertilizers) and Secretaries of Department of 
Expenditure, Department of Disinvestment, Planning Commission, Department of Public 
Enterprises and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural G as as Members to look into all the 
financial model for revival of each of the closed units.  Similarly, initiatives have also 
stated to have been taken by the Government to wipe out the accumulated losses of 
MFL and BVFCL and to make these PSUs commerciall y viable till availability of gas 
around 2011 -12.  The Committee would like the Department of Fertilizers to take 
effective and expeditious steps to canalize and implement the whole revival process for 
the closed and loss -making PSUs.  The details of such a revival package may be 
intimated to the Committee within three months of presentation of the Report.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
The status of revival of HFCL & FCIL and Financial Restructuring of MFL and 
BVFCL are as under; 
 
Revival of HFCL and FCIL: 
Pursuant to the decision dated 30th oct. 2008 of the Cabinet, an Empowered 
Committee of Secretaries (ECOS) under the Chairmanship of Secretary (F) was 
constituted to evaluate all options for revival of closed units of Fertilizer Corporation of 
India Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFCL) and make 
suitable recommendations. Based on the recommendations of the ECOS, a proposal 
was sent to CCEA, which approved the same in its meeting held on 4.8.2011 with the 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
23 
stipulation that Board for  Industrial and Financial Restructuring (BIFR) proceedings be 
expedited and thereafter, the matter including changes, if any, required in bid 
parameters, be placed before the Committee for a final decision. BIFR in their meeting 
held on 18.8.2011 considere d the issue and  directed State Bank of India, the Operating 
Agency (OA), to examine the DRS in consultation with Department of Fertilizers and 
submit their recommendations within 3 months.   
 
Restructuring of BVFCL. 
For financial restructuring of the BVFC L, company has appointed M/s Haldor 
Topsoe as Process Licensor for comprehensive study of Ammonia plants and M/s PDIL 
for Urea plant and off -sites/utilities, situated at  Namrup -II and namrup III plant.  A 
comprehensive proposal for revival of the company will be prepared based on the 
technical study report of by Process Licensor M/s Halder Topsoe and PDIL. A thorough 
study at the existing Namrup -II and Namrup -III plants has already been carried out by 
them and they have submitted a draft reports in August 2011. In the reports, energy 
saving schemes as well as required renovation to operate the plants at sustained Load 
have been suggested. The report is under examination in the company.  
 
Restructuring of MFL: 
With regard to restructuring of MFL it may be me ntioned that M/s PDIL has 
submitted its report and recommended the conversion of GOI loan into equity and waiver 
of outstanding interest liability towards GOI.  The views of foreign promoter NICO 
(Holding 25.77% equity stake) has also been received, they h ave opposed for sale of 
assets and conversion of Govt. Loan into Equity. 
Since MFL is a sick company and BIFR has appointed State Bank of India as a 
Operating Agency for submitting a Financial restructuring proposal for MFL, the report of 
PDIL and the views of Foreign promoter NICO was forwarded to SBI for consideration. 
State Bank of India (SBI) had considered the viability of the proposal and views of 
foreign promoter NICO and submitted the report on the financial restructuring package of 
MFL. The Board o f Directors of the company considered to report of the OA and 
approved it.   
 After considering the views of the Board of MFL, NICO and Operating Agency, a 
BRPSE note for financial restructuring of MFL was circulated for inter -ministerial 
comment. The comments have been received and are under consideration. 
 
[Department of Fertilizers OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II] 
 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
24 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
25 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 3. 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS ALLOCATION 
 
 The Committee are of the view that the non-plan expenditure of the Department 
need to be kept under control.  While the allocation under then non-plan head (RE) 
reached a peak of Rs. 1,00,491.16 crore during 2008 -09, the figures for the financial 
years 2009-10 to 2010-11 are Rs. 56,600.50 and R s. 57,860.00 crore respectively.  The 
Department has failed to provide any satisfactory response to a specific query as to how 
to deep the Non -Plan expenditure under control.  While the Committee agree that 
farmers need to be protected from price volatilit y in the international market and other 
negative factors, the need to rein in the ballooning expenditure under the Non -Plan 
allocation cannot be over -emphasized.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should take steps on a priority basis  to address this issue and intimate the 
measures taken in this regard to them.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 Government of India, Department of Fertilizers has introduced Nutrient Based 
Subsidy Policy in continuation of the erstwhile concession scheme for decontrolled 
Phosphatic & Potassic Fertilizers w.e.f. 1.4.2010.  This policy has been introduced in the 
context of Nation‟s Food Security, declining response of agricultural productivity to 
increase fertilizer usage and to ensure balance application of fertilizers in the country.  As 
per this policy, fixed rate of subsidy of the nutrients of Nitrogen (N), Phosphate (P), 
Potash (K) and Sulphar (S) per kilogram/per tonne is fixed by the Government based on 
the recommendations of the Inter Ministerial Committe e under the Nutrient Based 
Subsidy Policy.  These rates based on the international prices of the 
Fertilizers/intermediates/raw materials and exchange rates.  As per this policy, a fixed 
rate of subsidy is announced annually and the MRP of P&K fertilizers h as been left open 
to be fixed by the manufacturers/importers at the reasonable level.  Resultantly, the 
rise/fall of the prices of fertilizers/intermediates/raw material and the exchange rate in the 
international market had a direct bearing on the cost of the fertilizers, which results into 
higher MRP of the P&K fertilizers.  Under the Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy, when the 
rates of subsidy amount is fixed, the quantum of subsidy increases only with the increase 
iin the consumption of the fertilizer.  The increase in the prices of the fertilizers in the 
international marker leads to increase in the MRP. 
 
 Prior to the introduction of the Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy w.e.f. 1.4.2010, the 
MRP of the P & K Fertilizers covered under the concession scheme was f ixed by the 
Government of India, which was much below the actual cost of the fertilizers.  Any rise / 
fall of the prices of fertilizers/intermediates/raw material and the exchange rate in the 
international market had the direct bearing on the cost of the f ertilizers, which resulted 
into higher subsidy of the p&K Fertilizers. 
 
 More than 90% of the requirement of P&K fertilizers of the country is met through 
imports.  The sources of Potash in the country is non -existent.  Accordingly, the 
escalation / de-escalation of the prices of the fertilizers in the international market is to be 
borne by the farmers under Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy or by the Government under 
the erstwhile concession scheme for decontrolled phosphatic & potassic fertilizers.  The 
country doesn‟t have any control on the volatility of the prices of the fertilizers in the 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
26 
international market.  Since the subsidy is fixed, the volatility of price in the international 
price has direct bearing on MRP of fertilizers.  Since under th NBS policy , the subsidy is 
fixed on annual basis, long term contracting is possible  and therefore it reduces the 
volatility of prices of fertilizers in the country in comparison to international market.  
 
[Department of Fertilizers OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 4. 
 
SUBSIDY / CONCESSION ON FERTILIZERS 
 
 The Committee note that the total subsidy disbursed on fertilizers has increased 
from Rs. 28,019.55  crore in  2006-07 to Rs. 64,032.29  crore in 2 009-10 and Rs. 
52,840.73 crore in 2010-11 (BE).  The total subsidy released on urea has increased from 
Rs. 17,721.43 crore in the year 2006-07 to Rs. 24,340.73 crore in the year 2010-11 (BE).  
The subsidy on P&K fertilizers has increased from Rs. 10,298.12 crore in the year 2006 -
07 to Rs. 28,500.00 crore in the year 2010 -11 (BE).  The Committee‟s examination has 
revealed that the increase in subsidy bill is due to higher consumption of fertilizers and 
also the rise was du e to the increase in international prices of imported fertilizers and 
increase in the cost of inputs of indigenous fertilizers during the year 2006-07 to 2010-11.  
Considering all these facts,  the Committee desire that concerted efforts are needed to 
cut the galloping subsidy bill.  Needless to say, that in view of increased consumption of 
fertilizers and international prices of fertilizer, inputs and finished fertilizers, there is an 
urgent need for technological innovation, state of the art machinery, re ducing the cost of 
production, energy efficiency measures, experienced and qualified technical manpower 
and optimum capacity utilization so as to reduce our dependence on imports and 
increase the indigenous production of fertilizers.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 More than 90% of the requirement of the phosphatic fertilizers and its raw 
materials in the country is met through imports.  Since NBS has been implemented on 
P&K fertilizers in which a fixed subsidy is decided on annual basis taking into 
consideration of the international prices and affordability of farmers.  The MRP of 
fertilizers has been allowed to be fixed by companies at reasonable level depending 
upon demand and supply balance.  In this scenario, companies needs to  minimise the 
cost of production so as to reduce its MRP in the country and be competitive. 
 
[Department of Fertilizers OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 8. 
 
ASESSED REQUIREMENT AND AVAILABILITY OF FERTILIZERS 
 
 The Committee note that equitable distribution of fertilizers in all parts of the 
country is an important criteria for facilitating increased productivity in agriculture sector.  

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
27 
At present, the Department of Fertilizers is  required to ensure availability of urea, as per 
the requirement assessed by the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation. The 
Committee note that the movement of fertilizers is monitored throughout the country by 
an on-line web based monitoring system (FMS), still the farmers are facing great difficulty 
in getting the fertilizers on time and also they are facing the problem of artificial 
scarcity/shortage in some parts of the country.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Department of Fe rtilizers should devise a foolproof mechanism for 
proper and equitable distribution of fertilizers in all parts of the country especially in 
remote, hilly and inaccessible areas.  Also, the Department of Fertilizers should make 
serious efforts to collabora te with the State Governments to tackle the problem of 
artificial shortage and punish hoarders and black marketeers. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
There may be some stress in fer tilizer availability in case of smaller States 
because of non availability of adequate warehouse capacity.  As a result of this, the 
States lift fertilizers as and when required. 
 
As per Clause 4 (a) of the Fertilizer (Control) Order – Display of stock pos ition of 
fertilizers – Every dealer, who makes or offers to make a retail sale of any fertilizers, shall 
prominently display in his place of business – the quantities of opening stock of different 
fertilizers held by his on each day.  Any person violating this mandatory provision of FCO 
is held liable to be proceeded under the provisions of FCO and Essential Commodities 
Act.  The State Governments  as enforcement agencies are adequately empowered to 
take appropriate action against the offenders who indulge in any kind of malpractices 
viz., hoarding etc. 
 
Under C lause 21 of the Fertilizer Control Order (FC)), 1985, it is mandatory to 
print the maximum retail price on each bag of fertilizers whether under statutory price 
control or out of the purview of the st atutory price control.  No person shall charge higher 
than the price printed on the bag.  Any person violating this mandatory provision of FCO 
is held liable under the provisions of FCO and Essential Commodities Act.  The State 
Governments as enforcement a gencies are adequately empowered to take appropriate 
action against the offenders who indulge in any kind of malpractices. 
 
[Department of Fertilizers OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II] 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
28 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE 
 
Recommendation Sl. No./Para No. 11. 
 
INDIAN FERTILIZER JOINT VENTURE ABROAD 
 
 Due to constraints in the availability of requisite raw materials including gas in the 
country, the Government is stated to have been encouraging  Indian companies to 
establish joint venture production facilities with buy -back arrangement in other countries, 
which are rich in fertilizer resources.  In this regard, the Committee note with satisfaction 
that the Government has been encouraging Indian c ompanies to establish joint venture 
projects in other countries which have rich resources of natural gas and rock phosphate 
as it would help in augmenting the supply of fertilizers.  The Committee, however, 
observe that only a token amount of Rs.1 lakh has been allocated to joint venture abroad 
in BE 2010-11 and in the BE of 2011 -12.  To encourage more joint ventures abroad, the 
Committee feel that more amount should be allocated in the budgetary provisions under 
the head.  The Committee recommend that the Government should encourage these 
initiative and explore the possibilities of new joint ventures which would help in making 
available assured sources of supply of raw materials to the fertilizer industries.  The 
Committee also desire that some incentives s hould be given to the Indian companies to 
explore and establish joint ventures abroad. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
The possibilities of having access to the Natural Resources required for fertilizers 
and setting up of Joint Ventures fertilizer projects in t he Countries rich in fertilizer 
resources, is being explored.  The token provision of Rs. 1 lakh for joint ventures abroad 
was kept in the BE 2010 -11 and BE 2011 -12 with a view to keep the head alive with the 
consideration that in case of some concrete dev elopment in this regard, Department of 
Expenditure / Planning Commission would be requested for requisite funds.  As regards 
providing incentives for the Indian Fertilizer entities for exploration and establishing joint 
ventures abroad, the same was addressed in the investment policy of 2008, which is now 
being considered for revision by a Committee of Secretaries under Planning 
Commission.    
 
[Department of Fertilizers OM No.5(1)/2011-Fin.II] 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;        GOPINATH MUNDE, 
13th MARCH, 2012                      Chairman, 
23 Phalguna, 1933 (SAKA)     Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
29 
 
APPENDIX – I 
MINUTES  
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2011-12) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 0 5 March, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 
hrs. in Room No.53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
 
Shri Raghunandan Sharma  - In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prabhatsinh  Pratapsinh Chauhan 
3. Smt. Paramjit Kaur Gulshan 
4. Shri Yashbant N.S. Laguri 
5. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
6. Shri O.S. Manian 
7. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup 
8. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
9. Shri Tufani Saroj 
10. Shri Raju Shetti 
11. Shri Om Prakash Yadav 
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
13. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
14. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani 
15. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
16. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
i) Shri C. S. Joon   - Joint Secretary 
ii) Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
30 
2. As the Chairman could not attend the sitting due to pre -occupation, the members 
chose Shri Raghunandan Sharma, MP and a member of the Committee, to act as the 
Chairman.  The Acting Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the following 
draft Action Taken Reports : 
 
(i) ***  ***  ***   ***   *** 
 
(ii) Draft on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Eighteenth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (2011-12) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Departme nt 
of Fertilizers);   
 
(iii) & (iv) ***   ***       ***        ***     
 
4. After some discussion, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee with 
minor amendments as indicated in the Annexure-I, II, III and IV respectively.   
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*** Matters not related to this Report. 
 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
31 
Annexure-II 
 
[Please see para 4 of the minutes] 
Recom. 
No. Page No. Para 
No. Line Amendments/ modifications 
 
8 
 
13 
 
16 
 
10 from 
the top 
 
Substitute " ………. The Committee 
…………… parts of the country." 
By "The Committee, however, feel that 
the fair and equitable distribution of 
fertilizers in different parts of the country 
is neglected." 

 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Committee Reports\22 Report (DFG 2011-12 Fertilizer)\22 Report (Fertilizers).Doc 
32 
APPENDIX – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTEENTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (2010-11) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-12)’ OF THE 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF 
FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 11 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government:- 
 (Vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos. 1,2,5,6,7,9 and 10)   
07 
Percentage of Total 63.63% 
III Observation / Recommendation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.No. Nil) 
 
00 
Percentage of Total 0% 
IV Observation / Recommendation in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.No. 3,4 and 8)  
03 
Percentage of Total 27.27% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are of interim nature:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.No.1)  
01 
Percentage of Total 9.10% 
 