1 
 
  
 
40 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY FOURTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
OF THE COMMITTEE ON 'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14)'   
OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS)] 
 
 
FORTIETH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December, 2013 / Agrahayan 1935, (Saka) 
  


2 
 
CC&F No. -40 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY FOURTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
OF THE COMMITTEE ON 'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14)'   
OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2013 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  18.12.2013 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayan 1935, (Saka)  


3 
 
iii 
CONTENTS 
 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-14)  ii 
INTRODUCTION iii 
Chapter I Report  1 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government.  
17 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
26 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply  of the 
Government have not been accepted by the committee and which 
require reiteration 
27 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
31 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2013-14) held on 24 October, 2013. 
35 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty Fourth Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2013-14) on ‘Demands for Grants (2013 -2014)’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals). 
37 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri S. Alagiri  
3. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
4. Shri P.P. Chauhan  
5. Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
6. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
7. Shri S.K. Nurul Islam 
8. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
9. Shri Paswan Kamlesh  
10. Shri  Amarnath Pradhan 
11. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
12. Shri Tufani Saroj 
13. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
14. Shri Raju Shetti 
15. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
16. Shri  D. Venugopal 
17. Shri Sai Prathap Annayyagari 
18. Vacant 
19.  Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
24. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
26. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
27. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
28.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
29.  Vacant 
30.  Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Nishant Mehra   - Committee Officer 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
  

5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2013 -14) 
having been authorised  by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
the Fortieth  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Co mmittee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2012 -13) on 'Demands 
for Grants (2013 -14)'  of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
 
2. The Thirty -Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 30 April, 2013.   The Action 
Taken Replies of Government to all observations/recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 24 July, 2013.   The Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2013-14) considered the Action Taken Report and adopted the same at their 
sitting held on 24 October, 2013. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
   24 October, 2013                                               GOPINATH MUNDE 
   2 Kartika, 1935 (Saka)                                           Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2012-13) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
‘Demands for Grants (2013-14)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and  Fertilizers (Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 30.4.2013. In 
all, the Committee made 12 Observations / Recommendations in the said Report. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish replies to the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report within three months from the 
date of presentation of the Repor t, i.e. by 31.7.2013. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the 12 Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from  the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals vide their O.M. No.16( 3)/2013-Fin.I dated 24.7.2013.  
Accordingly, the Replies have been examined and categorized as follows:-  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government- 
 Rec. Nos. 1, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11 and 12.                          (Total =7) 
            Chapter-II  
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply-  
Rec. No. Nil         (Total =0) 
            Chapter-III  
 
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration-  
      Rec. Nos. 3 and 6       (Total=2) 
            Chapter-IV  
 
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  final replies of the 
Government are still awaited- 
Rec. Nos. 2, 8 and 10.                 (Total =3) 
            Chapter-V  
  

7 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the                   
Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and the 
Final Replies in respect of Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter 
V for which final replies are still awaited should be furnished expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. Expeditious implementation of measures to ensure sustained growth in 
chemicals and petrochemicals sector.  
 
Recommendation No.1 
5. Emphasizing the  need for  concerted efforts and expeditious implementation of 
various initiative undertaken by the Department to ensure sustained growth in chemicals 
and petrochemicals sector, the Committee had recommended as under:   
                     
“The Committee o bserve with concern that the share of the chemicals and 
petrochemicals sector in the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the country had 
declined from 2.27% during 2009-10 to 2.12% during 2010-11.  The annual growth 
rate of GDP of this sector during 2010 -11 at 1.3%, was also very low as compared 
to 8.4% in the Indian Economy.  The Committee further note that the growth rate of 
production of major chemicals has sharply came down to 2.5% during 2011 -12 
from 6.78% recorded during the previous year.  According to t he Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals’ Indian economy is integrated with the world 
economy and therefore, the Indian chemical sector has also been affected by the 
global slowdown, which was witnessed by the world economy in 2008 -09 and 
again in 201 1-12.  However, the Committee have also noted that as a result of 
stimulus package in December, 2008 and January, 2011, the growth rate of major 
chemicals in 2009 -2010 and 2010 -11 have shown positive growth rate over the 
previous year.  While there is no d oubt that negative global trends have affected 
India, much of the responsibility nevertheless lie with the Government and the 
proactive steps taken by them to check the slow -down in the Chemical Sector.  In 
this regard,  the C ommittee have noted the various  initiatives undertaken by the 
Department to ensure sustained growth in the sector, which includes 
establishments of PCPIR projects in four States, implementation of the Industrial 
Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme (IIUS) for existing industrial clusters, 
deregulation and de -licensing of the chemical sector except for highly hazardous 

8 
 
chemicals and formulation of the National Chemical Policy 2012 (NCP-2012).  The 
Committee expect that all these measures would be implemented expeditiously 
and concerted efforts would be made at all levels to achieve the Department’s own 
projected growth rates of 10% and 12.6% for the chemicals and petrochemicals 
sectors respectively for the 12th Five Year Plan period.  The Committee also expect 
to be apprised of the progress made in the matter.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
6. In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“Government has approved four PCPIRs to be established in Vishakhapatnam -
kakinada region in Andhra Pradesh, Dehrej in Gujarat, Paradeep in Orissa  and 
Cuddalore and Nagapattinam districts of Tamil Nadu.  Government has also set up 
a monitoring committee to oversee the implementation of the PCPIRs and regular 
meetings are being convened to monitor the progress of implementation. 
Government expects investment to the extent of Rs.7,62,894 crore in these 
PCPIRs.  Estimated investment to the extent of Rs. 1,80,000 crores has been 
incurred in these regions. 
These PCPIRs would provide world-class infrastructure for setting up of the 
Petroleum, Petrochemicals and Chemical Units. Department of Industrial Policy 
and Promotion (DIPP) has implemented the Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation 
Scheme (IIUS) for the chemical estates.  The chem ical Industry is already 
delicensed except for few hazardous chemicals.  With the materialization of 
PCPIRs in the country, it is envisaged that growth rates in the chemicals and 
petrochemicals sector would increase significantly.” 
   
Comments of the Committee 
7.  The  Committee  had noted that the annual growth rate of the chemical and 
petrochemicals sectors during 2010 -11 was very low and unsatisfactory as 
compared to the overall growth rate of the Indian economy during the same 
period. The Committee  had also noted that the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals had projected growth rates of 10% and 12.6% for the chem icals 
and petrochemicals sector s respectively for the 12 th Five Year Plan period (2012 -
2017). The Committee had, therefore, recommended for expeditious 
implementation of the Department’s own initiatives to achieve the growth targets. 

9 
 
However, the   response of the Department  in its Action Taken Repl y does not 
reflect their concerted and coordinated efforts  to achieve the projected growth 
targets. Their reply  is  largely confined to establishment of PCPIRs  which are 
having long gestation period and is silent about  the efforts made or being made 
by them  for expeditious implementation of the various initiat ives taken by them 
to check the slow -down and  to   achieve the projected growth rate of 10 -12 
percent in the sector s during the 12 th Plan period. In view of the foregoing, the 
Committee r eiterate their concerns over slow  growth rate  in the chemicals and 
petrochemicals sector s and expect that the Department  would   take 
comprehensive and effective  measures for expeditious implementation of its own 
initiatives with a view to achieve   the targeted growth rate in the sector s  during 
the 12th Plan period. The Committee would like to be apprised of  about the details 
of the  measures  taken or being undertaken by the Department in this regard.  
B.      Expeditious finalization and  implementation of National Chemical Policy 
2012.  
Recommendation No. 2 
8.  While noting  that the proposed National Chemical Policy 2012 (NCP -2012) 
envisage a road map for sustained growth for the sector , the Committee had 
recommended as under:-  
 
“The Committee observe that the proposed National Chemical P olicy 2012-(NCP-
2012) envisag e a road map for sustained growth with a vision for 2020 and 
therefore, the same forms an important component of the Department’s plan to 
revive the chemical sector.  The Committee further observe that the Department is 
still in the process of consultation  with all stakeholders and that the Policy is yet to 
be finalized on the basis of the comments received from various 
Ministries/Departments as well as industry.  The Committee also note that focus of 
the proposed policy is to formulate actionable programme s, schemes, policies and 
guidelines so as  to strengthen areas of competitive advantages, sustainable and 
eco-friendly developments, growth of exports, strengthening R&D and  
infrastructural development through PCPIRs, etc.  The Committee believe that the 
implementation of the proposed policy will go a long way to ensure a sustain ed 
growth for the sector.  The C ommittee, therefore, recommends the Department 
should take all steps and make vigorous efforts to expedite the process of 
consultation with all stakeholders and finalise and implement the policy without any 

10 
 
delay during the current year itself.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard.” 
 Reply of the Government 
 
9.  In its action taken  reply  to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) formulated a draft National 
Chemical policy for Chemical Sector which has been posted on the website o f the 
Department to solicit comments from the stakeholders.  The first round of 
consultation has already taken place in 2012 with all the stakeholders, including 
industry associations, and the Ministries concerned.  Based on the feedback and 
inputs receive d, DCPC shall be holding further discussions with the industry, 
academia and Government Departments concerned.”  
   
Comments of the Committee 
10.  The  Committee had  observed that the proposed National Chemical P olicy 
2012-(NCP-2012) envisage a road map for sustained growth with a vision for 2020 
and therefore, the same forms an important component of the Department’s plan 
to revive the chemical sector. Accordingly, the Committee   had recommended for 
expediting the process of consultation with all stake holders with a view  to 
finalise and  implement the Policy during the current year itself.  However, the 
Committee note from  the Action Taken Reply  of the Government  that  the 
process of consultation   in the matter  is still under progress and that based on 
the feedback and inputs received, the Department shall be holding further 
discussions with the industry, academia and the Government Departments 
concerned. However, t here is no indication or resolve on the part of the  
Department  to finalise and implement  the proposed policy  during the current 
year itself as recommended by the Committee. The Committee regret to note that 
the Department   has not felt it necessary to furnish its expla nation for the delay  
on the issue to the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate its earlier 
recommendation to expedite the process of  consultation and that concerted and 
coordinated efforts be made   to finalise and  implement the Policy  during the 
current  year itself. The Committee expect to be appri sed of the progress made in 
this regard.   
 

11 
 
C.  Need for timely and optimal  utilization of allocated funds 
Recommendation No. 3 
11.  Expressing dissatisfaction over the performance of the Department in terms of 
meeting financial targets and utilization of  funds during 2012 -13, the Committee had 
recommended as under:-  
 “The Committee observe that the performance of the Department in terms of 
meeting financial targets and utilization of funds is not satisfactory during the year 
2012-13.  While the Departmen t claimed overall percentage achievement of 
96.61% with respect to Revised Estimates for the year (as on 11 th March 2013), 
the achievement rate in terms of utilization of funds for CIPET at 13%, IPFT at zero 
percent and other New Schemes of Petrochemicals at 0.70% was especially 
dismal.  The Committee are anguished to note that there is a tendency to rush the 
utilization of funds during the last 2-3 months of the financial year, which may often 
cause injudicious use of funds.  The Committee are not convinced with the 
explanation of the Department that this was due to late finalization of the 12 th Plan 
outlays by the Planning Commission.  The fact that the plan outlays were not 
finalized in time also reflect the lack of concer ted and coordin ated efforts on the 
part of the Department to get cleared the proposals/schemes of the Department by 
the IFD and the Planning Commission for plan assistance.  Therefore, it would not 
be justified to put the entire responsibility for the delay in finalization of plan outlays 
only on the Planning Commission.  The under utilization of funds allocated also 
shows that the Department was not ready with the quick action plan for their 
activities before hand for optimal utilization of funds as soon as the plan outlays 
were finalized by the Planning Commission The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should take all necessary steps so that the funds 
allocated for the schemes are utilized fully on t ime for its optimal results. The 
committee are of the view that the practice of bunching of activities and utilization 
of funds at the fag end of financial year should be discouraged to avoid its irrational 
and injudicious use and instead the funds allocat ed should be utilized at regular 
intervals under the well thought action plan of the Department.  Needless to say, 
any delay in execution of the projects under plan leads to unavoidable cost and 
time overruns besides the same also defeats the intended purp ose for which the 
schemes/plans were formulated by the Department.  Therefore, the failure of the 
Planning Commission in finalization of the 12 th Plan outlays within a reasonable 
time frame for the projects/schemes envisaged by the Department has its serio us 

12 
 
repercussion as the same dislocate the whole process of implementation and 
timely execution of the projects/schemes.  The Committee expect the Department 
to convey the Committee’s concerns on this matter to the Planning commission.” 
Reply of the Government 
 
12.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“Planning Commission has been apprised about the Committee’s concern 
regarding finalization of the 12th Five Year Plan outlays.”  
  
Comments of the Committee 
13.   The  Committee had  expressed their dissatisfaction over the dismal 
performance of the Department in terms of meeting financial targets and 
utilization of funds. The Committee were also  anguished  to note  that there was a 
tendency to rush the utilization of funds during the last 2-3 months of the financial 
year, often leading to injudicious use of funds. Accordingly, the Committee were 
of the view that  utilization of funds at the fag  end of financial year should be 
avoided  and the same  should be utilized at regular intervals under the well 
thought action plan of the Department . However, i n its Action Taken Reply , the 
Department  has not elaborated its action plan for optimum and tim ely utilization 
of funds allocated to them under the  various schemes and has conveniently  tried 
to shift the onus  on the Planning Commission  for  its failure to utilize the funds 
timely and optimally. The Committee strongly feel that the  Department can  not 
absolve themselves from their primary responsibility to formulate the action plan 
and to focus their expeditious implementation. The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
its earlier recommendation  that the funds allocated  should be utilized optimally 
and timely with a view to avoid its  irrational and injudicious use at the fag end of 
the financial year.  In this regard , the Department should spell out specific action 
plan and the execution carried out so far, which may also be communicated to the 
Committee at the earliest.  
 
 
 
 

13 
 
D.  Detailed blue print on setting up Plastic Waste Management Centres.   
Recommendation No. 6 
14.  Emphasizing the need to expedite the setting up of Plastic Waste Management 
Centres (PWMCs) and the need for detailed blue print for implementing the same,  the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee observe that CIPET is a premier institution of national importance 
devoted to academic, technology support and research (ATR)  activities for the 
growth of plastics and allied industries in the country.  On the issue of plastic waste 
management, which assumes great importance in a rapidly urbanizing India, 
CIPET’s role mainly relates to technological support and awareness campaigns.  In 
this regard, the Committee had earlier recommended on the need to set up Plastic 
Waste Management Centres (PWMC s) all over the country.  However, the 
Committee are anguished and distressed to note that no visible progress has been 
made by the Department in this regard.  The proposed PWMC to be set up in Delhi 
is still held up due to problems in land acquisition.  This shows the lack of will and 
the failure of the De partment to implement the recommendation of the Committee 
on the issue.  The Committee expect the CIPET to take a more proactive role in 
setting up of Plastic Waste Management Centres (PWMCs) all over the country.  
Given its technological advantage,  CIPET is well placed to play a key role in urban 
management through plastic waste disposal  and recycling.  The committee, 
therefore, recommend that CIPET, under the aegis of the Department, should 
come up with a detailed blueprint on setting u p Plastic Waste M anagement 
Centres throughout the country in coordination with the concerned Departments, 
State Governments and municipal bodies in a time bound manner.  In this regard, 
the Committee note the Department’s ATR to the Committee’s 26 th Report wherein 
it was mentioned that the Department is in the process of preparing the framework 
for establishment of PWMCs in Public Private Partnership mode.  The Committee 
therefore, expect the Department to expedite the process and the framework be 
executed on  a priority ba sis.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action plan and the progress made in this regard.”   
  
Reply of the Government 
 
15.  In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 

14 
 
“The Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology (CIPET) is a premier 
institution, fully devoted to manpower training and technology support services to 
the plastics and allied industries.  CIPET is imparting various academic and skill 
development training programmes in the field of plastics engineering and 
technology.  To impart skill upgradation training and demonstration in the field of 
Plastics Waste Recycling, CIPET set -up a model Plastics Waste Management 
Centre (PWMC) at Guwahati in 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The management & handling of municipal solid waste including post -consumer 
plastic waste in various cities/towns of the country falls under the domain of the 
concerned Municipal Authority as per the Municipal Solid Wastes (Management & 
Handling) Rules, 2000.  To deal specifically with issues related to the management 
of the post -consumer plastic waste, Ministry of Environment and Forests notified 
Plastics Waste (Management & Handling) Rules 2011 on 4 th February 2011 and   
further amended on 2 nd July 2011, under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. As 
per these Rules, the Municipal authority shall be responsible for setting -up, 
operationalization and co -ordination of the waste management system and for 
performing the associated functions, namely:- (i) to ensure safe collection, storage, 
segregation, transportation, processing and disposal of plastics waste; (ii) to 
ensure that no damage is caused to the environment during this process (iii) to 
ensure setting up of collection centres for plastic waste in volving manufacturers; 
(iv) to ensure its channelization to recyclers; (v) to create awareness amongst all 
stakeholders about their responsibilities; (vi) to engage agencies or groups working 
in waste management including waste pickers; and (vii) to ensure  that open 
burning of plastics waste is not permitted.  The concerned Municipal authority have 
to involve local manufacturers, on the lines of Extended Producer’s Responsibility, 
for setting up of plastic waste management system. 
 
The PWMC set up by the Ce ntral Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology 
(CIPET) at Guwahati in 2009 is primarily a training, technology and demonstration 
centre which aims to impart training in academic and technological processes in 
the field of Plastics Waste Recycling a s a part of the various academic courses 
being offered by CIPET.  It is not a Plastics Waste Management Centre, ‘per se’ for 
handling and management of urban post -consumer plastic waste, which is an 
integral part of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) and its coll ection, segregation and 
disposal fall under the domain of respective Municipal Authority/State Government, 
under the Municipal Solid Waste (Management of Handling) Rules 2000 and 
Plastic Waste (Management of Handling) Rules 2011. 

15 
 
 
The Department is conducting various awareness programmes/technical seminars 
through CIPET/ other organisations in various parts of the country on plastics 
recycling and different technology options for recycling of plastic waste 
management, which are atte nded by representatives of different State 
Governments, Municipal Authorities concerned industrial associations, media and 
other stakeholders.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
16.  While noting  the increasing importance of proper plastic waste 
management in a rapidly urbanizing India , the Committee had  desired CIPET to 
take a more proactive role in setting up o f Plastic Waste Management Cent res 
(PWMCs) all over the country.  The  Committee had, therefore,  recommended that 
CIPET,   under the aegis of the Department, should come out with a detailed 
blueprint on setting u p of  PWMCs throughout the country in coordination with 
the concerned Departments, State Governments and municipal bodies in a tim e 
bound manner.  In  their 26 th Report on Demands for Grants (2012 -13), the 
Committee had also recommended that PWMCs should b e established in each   
districts of the country with special focus on urban areas .  However, in its Action 
Taken Reply,  the  Department   has stated that the management and handling of 
municipal solid waste including post -consumer plastic waste in various 
cities/towns of the country falls under the domain of the concerned Municipal 
Authority as per the Municipal Solid Wastes (M anagement & Handling) Rules, 
2000.  It  has  also been  stated that the PWMC set up by the Central Institute of 
Plastics Engineering and Technology (CIPET) at Guwahati in 2009 is primarily a 
training, technology and demonstration centre  and is not a Plasti cs Waste 
Management Centre, ‘per se’ for handling and management of urban post -
consumer plastic waste.  Thus, the Committee  regret to note that   instead of  
coming  out with any framework to set up PWMCs  all over the country, the 
Department has put  the e ntire onus on the municipal authorities/ State 
Governments for management and handling of solid waste including plastic 
waste. However, the   Committee  are not entirely convinced with the explanation 
of the Department on the issue and they are of the strong view that  Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals, being the nodal authority, can not escape their 
responsibility in the matter. Keeping in  view the  importance and the  imperative 
need for proper management of solid waste including plastic waste in the country, 
the entire onus in this regard should not be le ft only on municipal bodies/State 

16 
 
Governments.  It is for the  Department to shoulder the responsibility and  
coordinate  with  CIPET  and other stakeholders to set  up    PWMCs in the 
country. The Committee, therefore reiterate  their recommendation on the issue 
and desire that the matter be taken up  and pursued vigorously with State 
Governments/municipal bodies  etc. The Committee expect the  Department to  
clearly spell out its action plan in this regard.  
E.  Early enactment of comprehensive law on the  lines of  European Union’s 
REACH to regulate chemicals sector.  
Recommendation No. 8 
17.  Stressing the need for a comprehensive law on the lines of the European Union’s 
Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) to 
regulate the chemicals sector in India, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 “The Committee observe that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
has taken preliminary steps towards enacting a comprehensive law on the lines of 
the European  Union’s Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of 
Chemicals (REACH) to  regulate the chemicals sector in India by circulating a 
Status Paper to the stakeholders, soliciting their comments in December, 2012.  
The Department is awaiting responses from the stakeholders.  The need for 
consolidation of Acts and Rules governing the  chemicals sector on the lines of 
REACH also find a prominent mention in the Department’s Draft National Chemical 
Policy – 2012.  As a result of various measures undertaken by the Department for 
the growth and development of the chemical sector, the growth  of national 
economy is also likely to increase.  However, the Committee is concerned about 
the hazardous effects of chemicals on environment as well as on human beings 
and feel the urgent need for a comprehensive legislation to take care of the matter.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should expedite the 
process of consultation and pursue the matter vigorously so that the proposed law 
may be enacted as early as possible.  The Committee desire to be kept informed 
about the follow up action taken in this regard.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
18.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 

17 
 
“Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals had prepared a status pap er on 
Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) 
legislation of the European Union for examining the requirement of a similar 
legislation and circulated to various stakeholders including various associations 
and concerned Departments of Government of India.  The responses are still 
awaited and they have been reminded again on 21 st May 2013 to provide their 
response expeditiously.  The Department is planning to hold a consultative 
meeting of all the stakeholders to expedite the process of consultation for taking 
the matter forward.”   
Comments of the Committee 
19.  The  Committee had expressed concern about the hazardous effects of 
chemicals on environment as well as on human beings and the urgent need for a 
comprehensive legislation to take care of the matter.  Accordingly, the Committee 
had recommended that the Department pursue the matter vigorously and should 
expedite the process of consultation with all stakeholders  so that the proposed 
law may be enacted as early as possible . In its Action Taken Re ply, the 
Department  has stated that responses from  the stakeholders on the status paper 
circulated on the proposed legislation  are  still awaited . The Department has also 
stated that it  is planning to hold a consultative meeting of all the stakeholders to 
expedite the process of consultation for taking the matter forward . However, the 
Committee are  not satisfied with the pace of progress in the matter keeping in 
view the urgent need to regulate the chemicals sector primarily with a view to  
check its hazardous effects on environment including on human beings.  The 
Committee, theref ore,   expect that  the process of  proposed  consultation be 
expedited and the matter be pursued vigorously with all concerned in a time 
bound manner so that the proposed legislation be enacted with out further delay.  
The Committee expect the Government to apprise them of further progress in this 
regard.   
F.  Need to expedite  the  progress  of  PCPIR  projects.  
Recommendation No. 10 
20.  Expressing concern over the slow progress in implementation of the PCPIR 
projects and stressing the need to expeditiously implement Department’s own 
recommendations regarding the same, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 “The Committee observe that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
has made certain specific recommendations for consideration and 

18 
 
recommendation by the High Powered Committee with a view to improve the pace 
of growth of the PCPIRs and improve their viability, based on an in -depth 
examination of the policy and wide ranging consultations with industry, State 
Government and other interested parties.  These recommendations, inter alia,  
stressed on the need for clear and unconditional commitments from the anchor 
tenant and the concerned State Government before the project is sanctioned; need 
for custom duty exemption on hydrocarbon feedstock for the project; provision of 
50% GoI funding of certain items; specification of clear timelines for e xecution of 
the project, etc.  T hese recommendations are to be considered by the High 
Powered Committee chaired by the Cabinet secretary.  In this regard, during their 
study visit to Andhra Pradesh PC PIR, the Committee had expressed their concern 
over the slow progress of implementation of the projects primarily due to non -
investment by the anchor tenant and therefore, the Committee stressed the need 
for resolving all issues with the anchor tenant. The  Committee, therefore, believe 
that the proposed measures as recommended by the Department, if properly 
implemented, will help in effective and timely execution of the P CPIR projects.  
Therefore, the C ommittee recommend that the Department should pursue th e 
measures vigorously with the High Powered Committee for final decision in the 
matter.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the recommendations/decision 
of the High Powered Committee taken thereon.  The Committee also expect the 
Department to continue to vigilantly monitor the progress of the PCPIR projects in 
all the four States of Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu so that 
further delays in the implementation of these projects may be avoided.” 
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
21.  In its act ion taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The draft note for consideration of High Powered Committee was circulated to 
various Departments/ Ministries for their comments/views.  The same will be sent 
to High Powered Committee after incorporating the comments/views.”   
 
Comments of the Committee 
22.  The Committee had noted certain specific recommendations made by the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals to ensure effective and timely 
execution of the PCPIR projects and recommended that the Department should 

19 
 
pursue the measures vigorously with the H igh Powered Committee for final 
decision in the matter . In its  Action taken Reply , the Department has  stated that  
the draft note for consideration of High Powered Committee was circulated to 
various Departments/ Ministries for their comments/views  and the  same will be 
sent to the High Powered Committee after incorporating the comments received.  
The Committee regret to note the  casual response of the Department  which does 
not reflect the seriousness, regularity and the urgency with which the matter need 
to be pursued with a view to expedite  the implementation and execution  of the 
PCPIR projects.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation  
and  stress the need to accord utmost importance and p riority for  execution of 
PCPIR projects .  The Committee expect t he Department to  undertake periodic 
reviews at  the  highest level in order to give impetus to early implementation of 
PCPIR projects . The Committee desire that the matter  may be  vigorously pursued 
by the Department with all con cerned. The Committee would like to be   apprised  
of the time plan and progress made in this regard.   
 
G. Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd (HOCL)  and Hindustan Insecticides Ltd. 
(HIL) 
Recommendation No. 11 
23. Emphasizing the need for proactive steps to check the slow down in the chemicals 
and petrochemicals sector and achieve the Department’s own projected growth rates of 
10% and 12.6% for the two sectors respectively in the 12 th Plan period, the Committee 
had recommended as under:-   
                      
“The Committee note that a study for exploring various options for forming an 
alliance or merger between HOCL and Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd. 
(RCF), a PSU under the Department of Fertilizers have been initiated for better 
productivity and financial results.  The proposed alliance aim to make proper use of 
1060 acres of vacant land belonging to HOCL at Rasayani to set up a new 
chemical and fertilizer plants.  However, a final decision is yet to be taken.  In this 
regard, the Committee desire that the decision on the matter may be expedited so 
that vacant land of HOCL may be put to productive use for the benefit of both the 
units.  The Committee also note that HOCL had suffered a loss to the tune of R s. 
78.07 crore during 2011 -12 and the Committee, therefore, recommend that 
effective measures should be taken by the Department to check such losses in the 

20 
 
future. The action taken by the Department in this regard may also be 
communicated to the Committee at the earliest. 
Regarding Hindustan Insecticides Ltd. (HIL), the Committee observe that the 
company has ventured into new areas and is implementing projects related to 
Seeds business and Indoor Residual Spray, etc.  the Committee expect that those 
projects may be implemented vigorously.  The Committee also observe that HIL 
has also projects related to control of malaria, dengue fever and other dreaded 
tropical diseases.  The Company’s project to manufacture long lasting insecticidal 
net for vector control is still in its initial stage.  The Committee feel that these 
projects should be given utmost importance and priority with a view to control 
effectively the tropical diseases like malaria, dengue, fever etc. which periodically 
affect the large number of pe ople in the country and recommend that these 
projects may be pursued with vigour and zeal.  The Committee desired to be 
regularly apprised of any new developments relating to these projects.” 
 
  Reply of the Government 
 
24.  In its action taken  reply  to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“A study was conducted by Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd. (RCF) through 
M/s. Delloitte on the possibility of a merger/alliance between HOCL and RCF. This 
was also discussed between the Department of Fertilizers and Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals. The Board of Directors of RCF decided against any 
merger with HOCL.  Further, the Board of RCF decided that in the event of any 
joint venture, th ere should be a third party so that the joint venture does not 
become a subsidiary of RCF.  In view of these developments, the joint 
venture/merger with RCF is unlikely to happen. 
 
A review of HOCL was conducted by Minister of State (Ind. Charge) Chemicals  & 
Fertilizers, on 10 th May 2013.  The management of HOCL has been directed to 
prepare a revival plan.  HOCL is working on several options.  
 
Regarding Committee’s observations on Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL), it is 
submitted that as desired and di rected by the Committee, all projects such as 
seed business & indoor spray, control of malaria, dengue fever and other dreaded 
tropical diseases, manufacture of long lasting insecticidal net for vector control are 

21 
 
being implemented by giving them utmost im portance and priority, and the 
Committee will  be apprised of any new development relating to these projects.” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
25.   The  Committee had expressed their desire that the decision on the 
proposed merger/alliance between Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd (HOCL)   and 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers ( RCF) be expedited so that vacant land of 
HOCL may be put to productive use for the benefit of both the units .  In its Action 
Taken Reply, the Department  has stated that the proposed merger between HOCL 
and RCF is unlikely to happen as the Board of Directors of RCF  had decided 
against any merger with HOCL. The Department has also stated that the 
management of HOCL were directed to prepare a revival plan and HOCL is 
working on several options. In view of the foregoing, it is imperative that vigorous 
and coordinated  efforts be made  to expedite the revival plan of HOCL in a time 
bound manner and it may also be ensured that the company may not make huge 
losses. The Committee expect to be apprised of  the progress made in this regard.  
As for Hindustan Insecticides Ltd (HIL), the Committee are satisfied to note that 
as per their direction,   all projects such as seed business & indoor spray, control 
of malaria, dengue fever and other dreaded tropical diseases, manufacture of long 
lasting insecticidal net for vector control are being implemented by giving them 
utmost importance and priority . The Department has also stated that the 
Committee will be  apprised of any new development relating to these projects.  
The Committee expect the Department to act accordingly in the matter.  
  

22 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
  
 The Committee observe  with concern that the share of the chemicals and 
petrochemicals sector in the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the country had declined 
from 2.27% during 2009-10 to 2.12% during 2010 -11.  The annual growth rate of GDP of 
this sector during 2010-11 at 1.3%, was also very low as compared to 8.4% in the Indian 
Economy.  The Committee further note that the growth rate of production of major 
chemicals has sharply came down to 2.5% during 2011 -12 from 6.78% recorded during 
the previous year.  According to the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals’ Indian 
economy is integrated with the world economy and therefore, the Indian chemical sector 
has also been affected by the global slowdown, which was witnessed by the world 
economy in 2008 -09 and again in 2011 -12.  However, the Committee have also noted 
that as a result of stimulus package in December, 2008 and January, 2011, the growth 
rate of major chemicals in 2009 -2010 and 2010-11 have shown positive growth rate over 
the previous year.  While there is no doubt that negative global trends have affected India, 
much of the responsibility nevertheless lie with the Government and the proactive steps 
taken by them to check the slow -down in the Chemical Sector.  In this regard, the 
committee have noted the various initi atives undertaken by the Department to ensure 
sustained growth in the sector, which includes establishments of PCPIR projects in four 
States, implementation of the Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme (IIUS) for 
existing industrial clusters, deregulation and de-licensing of the chemical sector except for 
highly hazardous chemicals and formulation of the National Chemical Policy 2012 (NCP -
2012).  The Committee, expect that all these measures would be implemented 
expeditiously and concerted efforts wo uld be made at all levels to achieve the 
Department’s own projected growth rates of 10% and 12.6% for the chemicals and 
petrochemicals sectors respectively for the 12 th Five Year Plan period.  The Committee 
also expect to be apprised of the progress made in the matter. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Government has approved four PCPIRs to be established in Vishakhapatnam -
kakinada region in Andhra Pradesh, Dehrej in Gujarat, Paradeep in Orissa  and 
Cuddalore and Nagapattinam  districts of Tamil Nadu.  Government has also set up a 

23 
 
monitoring committee to oversee the implementation of the PCPIRs and regular meetings 
are being convened to monitor the progress of implementation. Government expects 
investment to the extent of Rs.7, 62,894 crore in these PCPIRs.  Estimated investment to 
the extent of Rs. 1,80,000 crores has been incurred in these regions. 
 
These PCPIRs would provide world -class infrastructure for setting up of the 
Petroleum, Petrochemicals and Chemical Units. Department of Industrial Policy and 
Promotion (DIPP) has implemented the Industrial Infrastructure Upgradation Scheme 
(IIUS) for the chemical estates.  The chemical Industry is already delicensed except for 
few hazardous chemicals.  With the materialization of PC PIRs in the country, it is 
envisaged that growth rates in the chemicals and petrochemicals sector would increase 
significantly.  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
F. No. 16 (3)/2013- Fin.1  dated 24.7.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation No. 4 
 
  The Committee note  that as per the instruction of the Planning Commission at 
least 10% of the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) should be earmarked for development 
of north -eastern States.  The Department has an outlay of Rs. 1200 crore for 2012 -14 
(BE) of which Rs. 1000 crore is for AGCP.  Thus according to the Department the outlay 
for  the NE region is 83.33% of the total outlay for the year 2013 -14, though only Rs. 120 
crore has been shown in the Head meant for NE region.  However, the Committee are of 
the view that the AGCP is located in Assam and therefore the benefits as a result therefor 
would largely be confined to the people of Assam instead to the entire region of NE State 
and Sikkim.  Therefore claim of the Department in this regard does not seem to be  
justified.   T he Committee, therefore, stress that 10% of allocated funds as per the 
mandate should be utilized for the development of all Northeastern States.  The 
Committee, recommend that the Department should prioritize their action plan and 
diversify its activities and projects for the development of the entire northeast region.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan of the Department in this regard. 
 
 
  

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Keeping in view the promotional, facilitatory and regulatory role of the Department 
in development of chemical & petrochemical sector, the public sector investment 
proposed through plan schemes is quite limited.  This may be appreciated from the fact 
that during 2012 -13 and 2013 -14, plan allocation o n the largest scheme of the 
Department i.e. AGCP, constituted more than 88% and 83% respectively of the overall 
outlay.  Nevertheless keeping in view the recommendations of the Standing committee, 
the Department assures the Committee that it would continue  to endeavor to meet the 
stipulation of 10% allocation for the North Eastern region. 
  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
F. No. 16 (3)/2013- Fin.1  dated 24.7.2013] 
   
 
Recommendation No. 5 
  The Committee note that AGCP is the biggest project undertaken by the 
Department in terms of fund allocation.  The success or failure of the project, therefore, 
mirrors the quality and competence of the Department itself.  The original cost of the 
project of Rs. 5460.61 crore in April 2006 has increased over the time to Rs.8920 crore as 
on 16.11.2011.  However, after encountering numerous cost and time overruns, the 
Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP) is expected on course to be commissioned by 
December, 2013.   The Committee hope that the project will indeed be completed and 
commissioned as per the revised schedule.  The Committee expect the Department to 
keep a constant vigil on the progress of the project so as to avoid any further delays and 
cost overruns of the project.  The Committee also note that the substantial number of jobs 
are likely to be generated directly or indirectly by the project.  In this regard, the 
Committee reiterate its earlier recommendation that employment of locals be prioritized 
as far as it is practicable for meaningful and sustainable growth and development of the 
region.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Department shares the concern of the Committee that the project needs to be 
completed and commissioned as per the revised schedule.  The project has achieved 
overall physical progress of 92.8% and construction progress of 84.4% as on 15-06-2013.  
To en sure smooth execution of the project, the physical and financial progress of the 
project is monitored by the Monitoring committee under the chairmanship of Secretary 

25 
 
(C&PC).  Further, Principal Secretary to Prime Minister also regularly reviews the 
progress of Assam Gas Cracker Project.  Shri Shrikant Kumar Jena, Hon’ble Ministers of 
State, Chemicals & Fertilizers (Independent Charge) also held a review meeting recently 
to assess the progress of the project.  So far as backlog in construction is concerned, 
Brahmaputra Cracker & Polymer Limited (BCPL) and Engineers India Limited (EIL), the 
Engineering Project Management Consultant (EPMC) responsible for project execution, 
have been advised to deploy adequate resources and to strictly adhere to the revised 
project schedule. 
 On the issue of giving priority to locals in employment, it is intimated that as on 
date 271 executives are on the rolls of BCPL, of which more than 60% are from North 
East Region.  Most of the workers engaged by contractors for the project are locals. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
F. No. 16 (3)/2013- Fin.1  dated 24.7.2013] 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
  The Committee observe that the Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology 
(IPFT) has taken effective/corrective steps with regard to fund utilisations in particular and 
streamlining of the procurement process in general and that the Institute has genera ted 
record revenues during 2012.  The Committee hopes that the Institute will keep up with 
the momentum of growth and emerge as a leading Institute in the field of pesticide 
formulation technology.  The Committee also note, from the Department’s  ATS to th e 
Committee’s 31 st Report that the IPFT has initiated various steps to reduce its 
dependence on non -plan funds and generate revenue internal revenue internally, 
including the plan to build a Corpus Fund of Rs. 10 crore through internal revenue 
generation.  However, the Committee desire that these measures be executed 
expeditiously by IPFT.  The Committee further observe that the IPFT plans to utilize its 
allocated budget of Rs. 4.34 crore for the current year for, inter alia, capital support for 
activities related  to Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), 
National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) and Bureau 
of Indian Standards  (BIS) activities for the analysis of pesticides and their residues.  For 
the 12th Plan period, the Institute has sanctioned projects relating to development of user 
and environment friendly water dispersible granule formulation of highly toxic, broad 
spectrum and effective pesticides to reduce their toxicity, management of termi te, 
indigenous technologies, etc.  However, the Committee note that these projects have not 
yet been accorded ‘in principle’ approval by the Planning Commission.  The Committee 
view these projects to be of crucial importance to the country and, therefore, recommend 

26 
 
that the Department should pursue the matter with the Planning Commission vigorously 
for early approval and IPFT should effectively carry out these project for the benefit of the 
farmers and the agricultural sector at large.  The Committee desire  to be apprised of the 
progress made in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals shares the views of the 
Committee with regard to self -sustainability of IPFT through internal revenue generation 
and building a corpus fund therefore.  IPFT has been advised to initiate groundwork for 
building of Corpus Fund.  In addition, IPFT has been asked to make a detailed analysis 
and projection of targets for internal revenue generation for the current year 2013 -14 as 
also duly prioritize its plan fund requirement to enhance the internal revenue generation 
capacity of the organization.  The competent authority has approved 12 th Plan allocation 
of Rs. 15 crore for IPFT.  The plan funds for the year 2013 -14 (Rs. 4.34 crore), to  meet 
the requirement of capital support and projects to be taken up by IPFT.  During 2013 -14, 
an amount of Rs. 2.875 crore has already been released to the organization till date.    
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
F. No. 16 (3)/2013- Fin.1  dated 24.7.2013] 
   
Recommendation No. 9 
 The Committee observe that plastic is an important material which is used in most 
of the consumer and industrial applications as a replacement of metals and other 
materials and thus it has led  to resource conservation and reduced deforestation 
and energy consumption.  However, its non -biodegradable properties and indiscriminate 
littering of plastic carry bags and other packaging materials and consequent environment 
degradation have led to negative publicity for the entire plastic products.  According to the 
Department, the plastics by nature are chemically inert materials and do not harm 
environment and health.  The Ministry of Environment and Forest have also not prohibited 
the use and promotion of plastics.  The Committee also observe that while the 
Department, through CIPET and the Federations of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry (FICCI), have been carrying out awareness campaigns amongst the public 
regarding the benefits of plastics, certain States and municipal bodies have put restriction 
on the use of plastic carry bags.  However, keeping in view of various advantages and the 
benefits of use of plastics, the Committee feel that the Department should need to make 
concerted and vigorous efforts to spread the social message about the benefits of plastics 
which not only facilitate energy consumption but also in the process check deforestation.  

27 
 
Simultaneously, the stakeholders also need to be explained on various aspects relating to 
proper waste management and recycling/reprocessing of plastics in coordination with all 
concerned.  In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend to taken action 
accordingly in the matter.  The Committee would also like to be apprised o f the action 
taken by the Department in this regard. 
   
Reply of the Government 
 
  The ban on Plastics is mainly restricted to “one time use and throw” carry bags in 
certain states.  Today, the application spectrum of plastics has been widened and plastics 
play a vital role in all the key Sectors of Indian economy viz., Agriculture, Aero space, 
Building & Constructions, Packaging, Teletronics, IT, Medicals, etc. 
 
 This Department is propagating the message through CIPET and other 
organisations about plastics & its usefulness, safe disposal mechanisum, effective 
management of waste through recycling, technological options, environment regulations, 
etc., to all the stakeholders viz., general public, NGOs media, municipal authorities, local 
manufacturers, district officials, industry associations, etc. 
 
 The Department has recently held semina rs at Delhi, Hyderabad & Varanasi and 
plans to hold several such seminars at different places across the country in 2013-14.  
  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
F. No. 16 (3)/2013- Fin.1  dated 24.7.2013] 
   
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 The Committee note that a study for exploring various options for forming an 
alliance or merger between HOCL and Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd. (RCF), a 
PSU under the Department of Fertilizers have been initiated for better  productivity and 
financial results.  The proposed alliance aim to make proper use of 1060 acres of vacant 
land belonging to HOCL at Rasayani to set up a new chemical and fertilizer plants.  
However, a final decision is yet to be taken.  In this regard, th e committee desire that the 
decision on the matter may be expedited so that vacant land of HOCL may be put to 
productive use for the benefit of both the units.  The Committee also note that HOCL had 
suffered a loss to the tune of Rs. 78.07 crore during 201 1-12 and the Committee, 
therefore, recommend that effective measures should be taken by the Department to 

28 
 
check such losses in the future. The action taken by the Department in this regard may 
also be communicated to the Committee at the earliest. 
 
  Regarding Hindustan Insecticides Ltd. (HIL), the Committee observe that the 
company has ventured into new areas and is implementing projects related to Seeds 
business and Indoor Residual Spray, etc.  the Committee expect that those projects may 
be implemented v igorously.  The Committee also observe that HIL has also projects 
related to control of malaria, dengue fever and other dreaded tropical diseases.  The 
Company’s project to manufacture long lasting insecticidal net for vector control is still in 
its initia l stage.  The Committee feel that these projects should be given utmost 
importance and priority with a view to control effectively the tropical diseases like malaria, 
dengue, fever etc. which periodically affect the large number of people in the country an d 
recommend that these projects may be pursued with vigour and zeal.  The Committee 
desired to be regularly apprised of any new developments relating to these projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A study was conducted by Rashtriya Chemicals &  Fertilizers Ltd. (RCF) through 
M/s. Delloitte on the possibility of a merger/alliance between HOCL and RCF. This was 
also discussed between the Department of Fertilizers and Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals. The Board of Directors of RCF decided a gainst any merger with HOCL.  
Further, the Board of RCF decided that in the event of any joint venture, there should be a 
third party so that the joint venture does not become a subsidiary of RCF.  In view of 
these developments, the joint venture/merger with RCF is unlikely to happen. 
  A review of HOCL was conducted by Minister of State (Ind. Charge) Chemicals & 
Fertilizers, on 10th May 2013.  The management of HOCL has been directed to prepare a 
revival plan.  HOCL is working on several options.  
 Regarding Committee’s observations on Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL), it is 
submitted that as desired and directed by the Committee, all projects such as seed 
business & indoor spray, control of malaria, dengue fever and other dreaded tropical 
diseases, man ufacture of long lasting insecticidal net for vector control are being 
implemented by giving them utmost importance and priority, and the Committee will 
apprised of any new development relating to these projects. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
F. No. 16 (3)/2013- Fin.1  dated 24.7.2013] 
 
 
    

29 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation No. 12 
 The Committee observe that the settlement of compensation claims regarding the 
Bhopal Gas Tragedy is still an ongoing process.  The Committee also note, vide the 
Department’s Action Taken Replies to the Committee’s 26 th Report, that the research  
and treatment of the next gene ration victims of the Gas Tragedy which was entrusted to 
the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has been progressing with the setting up 
of the National Institute for Research in Environmental Health (NIREH) at Bhopal.  In this 
regard, the Committee  desire that efforts should now focus on settling of all remaining 
claims on a priority basis.  While it is absolutely important that all genuine victims should 
get compensation, the process of settlement of claims cannot linger on indefinitely.  The 
committee, therefore, recommend that concerted and coordinated efforts may be made 
by the Department to ensure settlement of genuine claims of the victims of the Bhopal 
Gas Tragedy expeditiously without any further delay and also would like to know progress 
made on the research started above. 
   
Reply of the Government 
 
 Disbursement of original compensation to all eligible 5,74,376  cases has been 
completed and Rs. 1548.57 crore has been awarded/disbursed.  Pro -rata compensation 
as ordered by the Supreme Court on 26.10.2004 has been disbursed amongst 5,62,907 
cases as on 30.4.2013 and the application moved by the O/o Welfare Commissi oner to 
treat the remaining 11,469 cases as closed is still pending in the Supreme Court.  Out of 
an amount of Rs. 874.28 crore approved by the Government to be provided as ex -gratia 
to identified categories of victims, an amount of Rs. 706.43 crore has b een disbursed till 
30.4.2013.  Office of the Welfare Commissioner is taking necessary measures including 
holding Mega Adalats for expeditious disbursement of ex -gratia cases.  Periodic reviews 
are being conducted by Secretary (Chemicals & Petrochemicals) t o speed up the process 
of disbursal of ex-gratia. 
 
 With regard to research work being carried out by ICMR’s 31 st Institute, namely, 
National Institute for Research in Environmental Health (NIREH) at Bhopal, six 
Consultants have been appointed to start per taining to clinical, therapeutic, 
epidemiological and genetic research on MIC affected population as well as on health 

30 
 
hazards due to exposure to various chemicals in the environment, which has already 
been taken on pilot scale.  Long term Epidemiological research on gas exposed 
population to study the socio demographic profile and morbidity is under progress.  The 
study was initiated by ICMR in the year 1985 and is still being continued with same 
protocol and same cohort.  A Technical Report on Population Based Long Term 
Epidemiological study, incorporating data pertaining to 1996 to 2011 has been prepared 
and submitted for approval to Epidemiological Review Group.  Three Expert Groups, 
namely, Epidemiological Group, Clinical Group and Basic Research Group have been set 
up by DG, ICMR for assessing and reviewing the research project proposals received by 
NIREH.  Seven research proposals have been approved in principle by the Committee of 
chairpersons of these groups headed by DG, ICMR.    
   
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
F. No. 16 (3)/2013- Fin.1  dated 24.7.2013] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT WANT 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
-- NIL-- 
 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
  
Recommendation No. 3 
 
 The Committee observe  that the performance of the Department in terms of 
meeting financial targets and utilization of funds is not satisfactory during the year 2012 -
13.  While the Department claimed overall percentage achievement of 96.61% with 
respect to Revised Estimates for  the year (as on 11 th March 2013), the achievement rate 
in terms of utilization of funds for CIEPT at 13%, IPFT at zero percent and other New 
Schemes of Petrochemicals at 0.70% was especially dismal.  The Committee are 
anguished to note that there is a tendency to rush the utilization of funds during the last 2-
3 months of the financial year, which may often cause injudicious use of funds.  The 
Committee are not convinced with the explanation of the Department that this was due to 
late finalization of the 1 2th Plan outlays by the Planning Commission.  The fact that the 
plan outlays were not finalized in time also reflect the lack of concerned and coordinated 
efforts on the part of the  Department to get cleared the proposals/schemes of the 
Department by the IFD and the Planning Commission for plan assistance.  Therefore, it 
would not be justified to put the entire responsibility for the delay in finalization of plan 
outlays only on the Planning Commission.  The under utilization of funds allocated also 
shows that the Department was not ready with the quick action plan for their activities 
before hand for optimal utilization of funds as soon as the plan outlays were finalized by 
the Planning Commission The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department 
should take all necessary steps so that the funds allocated for the schemes are utilized 
fully on time for its optimal results. The committee are of the view that the practice of 
bunching of activities and utilization of funds at the fag end of financial ye ar should be 
discouraged to avoid its irrational and injudicious use and instead the funds allocated 
should be utilized at regular intervals under the well thought action plan of the 
Department.  Needless to say, any delay in execution of the projects unde r plan leads to 
unavoidable cost and time overruns besides the same also defeats the intended purpose 
for which the schemes/plans were formulated by the Department.  Therefore, the failure 
of the Planning Commission in finalization of the 12 th Plan outlays within a reasonable 
time frame for the projects/schemes envisaged by the Department has its serious 
repercussion as the same dislocate the whole process of implementation and timely 

33 
 
execution of the projects/schemes.  The Committee expect the Department t o convey the 
Committee’s concerns on this matter to the Planning commission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Planning Commission has been apprised about the Committee’s concern 
regarding finalization of the 12th Five Year Plan outlays.   
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
F. No. 16 (3)/2013- Fin.1  dated 24.7.2013] 
  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 The Committee observe that CIPET is a premier institution of national importance 
devoted to academic, technology support and research (ATR) activities for the growth of 
plastics and allied industries in the country.  On the issue of plastic waste management, 
which assumes great importance in a rapidly urbanizing India, CIPET’s role mainly relates 
to technological support and awareness campaigns.  In this regard, the Committee had 
earlier recommended on the need to set up Plastic Waste Management Centres (PWMC) 
all over the coun try.  However, the Committee are anguished and distressed to note that 
no visible progress has been made by the Department in this regard.  The proposed 
PWMC to be set up in Delhi is still held up due to problems in land acquisition.  This 
shows the lack of will and the failure of the Department to implement the recommendation 
of the Committee on the issue.  The Committee expect the CIPET to take a more 
proactive role in setting up of Plastic Waste Management Centers (PWMCs) all over the 
country.  Given its  technological advantage,  CIPET is well placed to play a key role in 
urban management through plastic waste disposal  and recycling.  The committee, 
therefore, recommend that CIPET, under the aegis of the Department, should come up 
with a detailed blueprint on setting up Plastic Waste Management Centers throughout the 
country in coordination with the concerned Departments, State Governments and 
municipal bodies in a time bound manner.  In this regard, the Committee note the 
Department’s ATR to the Committe e’s 26 th Report wherein it was mentioned that the 
Department is in the process of preparing the framework for establishment of PWMCs in 

34 
 
Public Private Partnership mode.  The Committee therefore, expect the Department to 
expedite the process and the framework be executed on  a priority basis.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action plan and the progress made in this regard. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology (CIPET) is a premier 
institution, fully devoted to manpower training and technology support services to the 
plastics and allied industries.  CIPET is imparting various academic and skill developm ent 
training programmes in the field of plastics engineering and technology.  To impart skill 
upgradation training and demonstration in the field of Plastics Waste Recycling, CIPET 
set-up a model Plastics Waste Management Centre (PWMC) at Guwahati in 2009. 
  
 The management & handling of municipal solid waste including post -consumer 
plastic waste in various cities/towns of the country falls under the domain of the 
concerned Municipal Authority as per the Municipal Solid Wastes (Management & 
Handling) Rules, 2000.  To deal specifically with issues related to the management of the 
post-consumer plastic waste, Ministry of Environment and Forests notified Plastics Waste 
(Management & Handling) Rules 2011 on 4th February 2011 and   further amended on 2nd 
July 2011, under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. As per these Rules, the Municipal 
authority shall be responsible for setting -up, operationalization and co -ordination of the 
waste management system and for performing the associated functions, namely: - (i) to 
ensure safe collection, storage, segregation, transportation, processing and disposal of 
plastics waste; (ii) to ensure that no damage is caused to the environment during this 
process (iii) to ensure setting up of collection centres for plastic waste involv ing 
manufacturers; (iv) to ensure its channelization to recyclers; (v) to create awareness 
amongst all stakeholders about their responsibilities; (vi) to engage agencies or groups 
working in waste management including waste pickers; and (vii) to ensure tha t open 
burning of plastics waste is not permitted.  The concerned Municipal authority have to 
involve local manufacturers, on the lines of Extended Producer’s Responsibility, for 
setting up of plastic waste management system. 
 
 The PWMC set up by the Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology 
(CIPET) at Guwahati in 2009 is primarily a training, technology and demonstration centre 
which aims to impart training in academic and technological processes in the field of 
Plastics Waste Recycling as a  part of the various academic courses being offered by 
CIPET.  It is not a Plastics Waste Management Centre, ‘per se’ for handling and 

35 
 
management of urban post-consumer plastic waste, which is an integral part of Municipal 
Solid Waste (MSW) and its collect ion, segregation and disposal fall under the domain of 
respective Municipal Authority/State Government, under the Municipal Solid Waste 
(Management of Handling) Rules 2000 and Plastic Waste (Management of Handling) 
Rules 2011. 
 
 The Department is conducting various awareness programmes/technical seminars 
through CIPET/ other organisations in various parts of the country on plastics recycling 
and different technology options for recycling of plastic waste management, which are 
attended by representatives of different State Governments, Municipal Authorities 
concerned industrial associations, media and other stakeholders. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
F. No. 16 (3)/2013- Fin.1  dated 24.7.2013] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
  
Recommendation No. 2 
  The Committee observe that the proposed National Chemical policy 2012 -(NCP-
2012) envisage a road map for sustained growth with a vision for 2020 and therefore, the 
same forms an important component of the Department’s plan to revive the chemical 
sector.  T he Committee further observe that the Department is still in the process of 
consultation with all stakeholders and that the Policy is yet to be finalized on the basis of 
the comments received from various Ministries/Departments as well as industry.  The 
Committee also note that focus of the proposed policy is to formulate actionable 
programmes, schemes, policies and guidelines so as  to strengthen areas of competitive 
advantages, sustainable and eco-friendly developments, growth of exports, strengthening 
R&D and  infrastructural development through PCPIRs, etc.  The Committee believe that 
the implementation of the proposed policy will go a long way to ensure a sustained growth 
for the sector.  The committee, therefore, recommends the Department should take a ll 
steps and make vigorous efforts to expedite the process of consultation with all 
stakeholders and finalise and implement the policy without any delay during the current 
year itself.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) formulated a draft National 
Chemical policy for Chemical Sector which has been posted on the website of the 
Department to solicit comments from the stakeholders.  The first round of consultation 
has already taken place in 2012 with all the stakehold ers, including industry associations, 
and the Ministries concerned.  Based on the feedback and inputs received, DCPC shall 
be holding further discussions with the industry, academia and Government Departments 
concerned.   
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
F. No. 16 (3)/2013- Fin.1  dated 24.7.2013] 
   
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  

37 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 The Committee observe that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
has taken preliminary steps towards enacting a comprehensive law on the lines of the 
European  Union’s Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of Chemicals 
(REACH) to regulate the chemicals sector in India by circulating a Status Paper to the 
stakeholders, soliciting their comments in December, 2012.  The Department is awaiting 
responses from the stakeholders.  The need for consolidation of Acts and Rules 
governing the chemicals sector on the lines of REACH also find a prominent mention in 
the Department’s Draft National Chemical Policy – 2012.  As a result of various measures 
undertaken by the Department for the growth and development of the chemical sector, 
the growth  of national economy is also likely to increase.  However, the Committee is 
concerned about the hazardous effects of chemicals on environment as well as on human 
beings and feel the urgent need for a comprehensive legislation to take care of the 
matter.  T he Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should expedite the 
process of consultation and pursue the matter vigorously so that the proposed law may 
be enacted as early as possible.  The Committee desire to be kept informed about the 
follow up action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
           Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals had prepared a status paper on 
Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) legislation 
of the European Union for examining the requirement of a similar legislation and 
circulated to various stakeholders including various associations and concerned 
Departments of Government of India.  The responses are still awaited and they have 
been reminded again on 21 st May 2013 t o provide their response expeditiously.  The 
Department is planning to hold a consultative meeting of all the stakeholders to expedite 
the process of consultation for taking the matter forward.                                                             
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
F. No. 16 (3)/2013- Fin.1  dated 24.7.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation No. 10 
 The Committee observe  that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
has made certain specific recommendations for consideration and recommendation by 
the High Powered Committee with a view to improve the pace of growth of the PCPIRs 

38 
 
and improve their viability, based on an in -depth examination of the policy and wide 
ranging consultations with industry, State Government and other interested parties.  
These recommendations, inter alia, stressed on the need for clear and unconditional 
commitments from the anchor tenant and t he concerned State Government before the 
project is sanctioned; need for custom duty exemption on hydrocarbon feedstock for the 
project; provision of 50% GoI funding of certain items; specification of clear timelines for 
execution of the project, etc.  the se recommendations are to be considered by the High 
Powered Committee chaired by the Cabinet secretary.  In this regard, during their study 
visit to Andhra Pradesh PCPIR, the Committee had expressed their concern over the 
slow progress of implementation of  the projects primarily due to non -investment by the 
anchor tenant and therefore, the Committee stressed the need for resolving all issues 
with the anchor tenant. The Committee, therefore, believe that the proposed measures as 
recommended by the Department , if properly implemented, will help in effective and 
timely execution of the PCPIR projects.  Therefore, the committee recommend that the 
Department should pursue the measures vigorously with the High Powered Committee for 
final decision in the matter.  T he Committee would like to be apprised of the 
recommendations/decision of the High Powered Committee taken thereon.  The 
Committee also expect the Department to continue to vigilantly monitor the progress of 
the PCPIR projects in all the four States of And hra Pradesh, Orissa, Gujarat and Tamil 
Nadu so that further delays in the implementation of these projects may be avoided. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The draft note for consideration of High Powered Committee was circulated to 
various Departments/ Ministries for their comments/views.  The same will be sent to High 
Powered Committee after incorporating the comments/views.  
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
F. No. 16 (3)/2013- Fin.1  dated 24.7.2013] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
 
New Delhi;                GOPINATH MUNDE 
 24 OCTOBER  2013       CHAIRMAN  
2 KARTIKA1935 (SAKA)        STANDING COMMITTEE ON   
           CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  

39 
 
Appendix – I 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 24 October, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. 
in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Shri  Gopinath Munde    -    Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri S. Alagiri 
3. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
4. Shri Prabhatsingh P. Chauhan 
5. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
6. Shri SK. Nurul Islam 
7. Shri Shakti Mohan Malik 
8. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
9. Shri Amarnath Pradhan 
10. Shri Tufani Saroj 
11. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar  
12. Shri Raju Shetti 
13. Shri D. Venugopal 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
15. Smt. Naznin Faruque 
16. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
17. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
18. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
19. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
20. Shri Ishwar Singh 
 
Secretariat 
  
Smt. Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary  
Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up the following draft Reports for consideration: 
a) Draft Action Taken Report o n the action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -fourth report (15 th 
Lok Sabha) on “Demand for Grants 2013 -14” of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals.  
 
b) Draft Action Taken Report on the action t aken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -fifth report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) on “Demand for Grants 2013 -14” of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals. 

40 
 
 
4. The draft Report relating to the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals was 
adopted by the Committee without any amendments.  However, the draft Report relating 
to the Department of Pharmaceuticals was adopted with some amendments as indicated 
in the Annexure.  
 
5. The Committee decided to seek opinion of stake holders and the public at large on 
the subject ‘Jan Aushadhi Scheme’ by giving advertisements in print and electronic 
media. 
 
6. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential change s, if any, 
arising out of the factual verification of the Report by the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals and Department of Pharmaceuticals of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers and present the same to both Houses of Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

41 
 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
  
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT (15 TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2012-13) 
ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013 -2014)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS).  
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 12 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11 and 12)   
7 
Percentage of Total 58.33% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation  No. Nil)  
 
0 
Percentage of Total Nil 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 3 and 6)  
2 
Percentage of Total 16.67%  
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are still awaited:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 2, 8 and 10) 
 
3 
Percentage of Total 25% 
 