1 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
  
   
14 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2010-11) 
 
 
    FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA  
 
 
 
 
„PRODUCTION AND AVAILABILITY OF MEDICINES TO DEAL WITH SWINE FLU‟ 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government  on Observations/ Recommendation contained in the Fifth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers    
(2009-10) on 'Production and Availability of Medicines to deal with Swine Flu']  
 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2011/ Sharvana 1933,  (Saka) 
 
 


2 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
CC&F No.14 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2010-11) 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
„PRODUCTION AND AVAILABILITY OF MEDICINES TO DEAL WITH SWINE FLU‟ 
 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government  on Observations/ Recommendation contained in the Fifth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers    
(2009-10) on 'Production and Availability of Medicines to deal with Swine Flu']  
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 04 .08.2011 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 04 .08.2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2011/ Sharvana 1933,  (Saka) 

3 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-11) ………………………………... (iii) 
INTRODUCTION. …………………………………………..………………………… (v) 
CHAPTER I Report ……………….…………………………………………….. 1 
CHAPTER II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
20 
CHAPTER III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
29 
CHAPTER IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee…………………………………………………………. 
30 
CHAPTER V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited ……………………… 
33 
 
APPENDICES 
 
i Minutes of  the Tenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2010-11) held on 31 May 2011 
40 
Ii Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2010-11) held on 18 July, 2011 
42 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (15th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2009-10) on „Production and Availability of Medicines to deal 
with Swine Flu‟ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals).  
44 

4 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2010-11) 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Smt. Susmita Bauri  
3 Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle  
4 Shri Prabhatsinh P. Chauhan  
5 Smt. Santosh Chowdhary  
6 Shri K.D. Deshmukh  
7 Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar  
8 Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
9 Shri Madhu Koda  
10 Shri N. Peethambara Kurup  
11. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato  
12 Shri Jagdambika Pal  
13 Shri Tapas Paul  
14 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
15 Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  
16 Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar  
17 Shri Ajit Singh  
18 Shri N. Chaluvaraya Swamy  
19 Shri Narendra Singh Tomar  
20 #Dr. Manda Jagannath 
21  Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Silvius Condpan  
23 Smt. Naznin Faruque  
24 Shri A.A. Jinnah  
25 Shri Brijlal Khabri  
26 Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani  
27 Shri Raghunandan Sharma  
28 Dr. C.P. Thakur  
29 &Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
30 &Shri Abani Roy  
 31 &Shri Biswajit Daimary 
  
SECRETARIAT   
1. Shri N. K. Sapra   - Secretary 
2.  Shri Ashok Sarin   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri  C.S.Joon   - Director 
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Additional Director 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
&  NOMINATED W.E.F. 21.09.2010 
#      NOMINATED W.E.F. 04.10.2010 

5 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairma n, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  (2010-11)  
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf present 
this Fourteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (F ifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (2010 -11) on „ Production and Availability of Medicines to 
deal with Swine Flu ‟ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals).  
 
2. The Fifth Report of  the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 15 
December, 2009.  Action Taken Replies of the Government to all observations/  
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 15 December 2009 and 
updated replies on 16 September, 2010.   The Standin g Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2010-11) considered the updated Action Taken Replies received from the 
Government and adopted the Draft Action Taken Report thereon at their sitting held on 
18 July 2011. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in 
Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Comments of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                    Gopinath Munde 
28 July, 2011                                                                                      Chairman, 
6 Shravana, 1933 (Saka)              Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 

6 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabh a) of the Committee on „Production 
and Availability of Medicines to deal with Swine Flu‟ of the Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 15 
December, 2009. The Report contained 15 Observations/ Recommendations. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) were 
requested to furnish replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fifth Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Repor t, i.e., by 
14 March 2010. The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 15 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Pharmaceuticals vide their 
O.M. No.5/57/2009 -Pl-I/III dated 29 March, 2010. However, in view of the recent 
onset of Swine Flu cases in the country, the Department were again requested to 
furnish updated Action Taken Replies as well as furnish the latest measures taken by 
them to con trol the Swine Flu through LSS Office Memoranda  dated 16.08.2010, 
27.08.2010 and 08.09.2010.  They have furnished their updated Action Taken 
Replies on 16.09.2010 through their OM  - F.No.35022/48/2010-PI-III.  These have 
been categorized as follows :- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government :- 
 Sl.Nos. 45, 47, 48, 49, 54, 56, 57 and 58     (Total = 8)  
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s reply :- 
 Sl.No. 55        (Total = 1)  
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  and which 
require reiteration :- 
 Sl.Nos.44, 46 and 53      (Total = 3)  
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature :- 
 Sl.Nos. 50, 51 and 52       (Total = 3)  
Chapter-V 
 

7 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and the final replies in 
respect of the Observations / Recommendations  for which only interim replies 
have been furnished by the Ministry should be furnished expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken  by the Government on 
some of their  Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit 
comments.  
A. ROLE OF DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS AND NATIONAL 
PAHARMACEUTICALS PRICING AUTHORITY FOR ENSURING EASY 
AVAILABILITY AND AFFORDABILITY O F THE MEDICINES FOR 
EFFECTIVE TREATMENT OF SWINE FLU 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.1, Para No.44) 
5. The Committee in para 44 of their original Report had observed that the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals had been  engaged in the production and availability 
of drugs for the treatment of Swine Flu. With the cooperation of the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare, they had been regularly monitoring the availability position of 
Shikimic Acid and Oseltamivir API which was  used for the production of drug i.e. 
Oseltamivir or Tami Flu and Oseltamivir Capsules. The Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare ha d also procured stocks of drugs at the instance of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals. Six pharma companies ha d volunteered to maintain adequate 
quantity of drugs to deal wit h Swine Flu. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
had also permitted the retail sale of Oseltamivir capsules , w.e.f., 19 September 2009. 
However, regarding the price control of the drug meant for the treatment of Swine Flu, 
the Committee had observed that the Pharmaceutical Companies ha d been given 
liberty to sell the medicine at a price decided by them though within a “reasonable 
limit”. The Committee had felt that reasonable limit is too broad and vague a term 
which could be conveniently manipulated by the Pharmaceutical Companies for their 
own gain and at the cost of the common  man. Further, chances of medicines for the 
treatment of Swine Flu becoming costlier c ould not be ruled out in view of the high 
volatility of the prices of raw material, especially when these were to be imported from 
China. Thus, in such a scenario, leaving the pharma industry to fix the price of the 
medicines on their own, albeit within a reasonable limit, d id not seem to be an 
appropriate decision.  While appreciating the initi atives taken by the Department in 
persuading the Ministry of Finance for exemption of Customs Duty on Oseltamivir and 
Shikimic Acid and Excise Duty on indigenously produced Oseltamivir API and 
capsules, the Committee had recommended that the Government sho uld have 

8 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
initiated immediate appropriate measures to ensure easy availability as well as 
affordability of the medicines for effective treatment of Swine Flu, particularly in view 
of increase in cases with the onset of winter. 
 
 
6. In reply to the aforesaid  para, the Department of Pharmaceuticals have stated 
as under:- 
“Oseltamivir is a non-scheduled medicine and not covered under DPCO, 1995. 
In respect of drugs – not covered under the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 
1995, i.e., the non -scheduled drugs, manufa cturers fix the prices by 
themselves without seeking the approval of Government/NPPA.  Such prices 
are normally fixed depending on various factors like the cost of bulk drugs 
used in the formulation, cost of excipients, cost of R&D, cost of utilities/packin g 
material, sales promotion costs, trade margins, quality assurance cost, landed 
cost of import , etc., As a part of price monitoring activity, NPPA regularly 
examines the movement in prices of non -scheduled formulations. The monthly 
reports of ORG IMS and the information furnished by individual manufacturers 
are utilized for the purpose of monitoring prices of non-scheduled formulations. 
Wherever a price increase beyond 10% per annum is noticed, the 
manufacturer is asked to bring down the price voluntarily failing which, subject 
to prescribed conditions action is initiated under paragraph 10(b) of the DPCO, 
1995 for fixing the price of the formulation in public interest . This is an ongoing 
process.”   
 
7. The Committee in their earlier Report had recommended that the 
Government should have initiated immediate appropriate measures to ensure 
easy availability as well as affordability of the medicines for effective treatment 
of Swine Flu.  However, the Reply of the Government is silent about taking any 
initiative to ensure easy availability of the medicines, and, talks about the 
affordability factor only. 
   
The Committee are unhappy to note that the Department has ignored the 
foremost part of their recommendation. They, therefore, advise the Department 
to stop furnishing incomplete and inconclusive replies which not only  raise 
fingers on the functioning of the Depar tment but also waste  the precious time 
of the Committee in reiterating their earlier recommendation for the actual 
action to be taken by the Department on the ignored or missed out portion.  
 
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Government should initiate 
immediate appropriate measures to ensure easy availability of the medicines 
for Swine Flu  and expect the complete reply in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
B. NEED TO SET UP SUFFICIENT NUMBER OF LABORATORIES IN SWINE 
FLU VULNERABLE STATES/ UTs 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.3, Para No.46) 
 
8. The Committee in para 46 of their original Report had observed that they were 
highly concerned to note that although Mahara shtra had reported maximum number 
of Swine Flu cases, it had only three Laboratories to detect such cases. In this regard, 
the Committee had found that Delhi which ranks number two in reported Swine Flu 
cases and Tamil Nadu which ha d reported fewer cases o f Swine Flu had seven 
Laboratories each whereas other States ha d either one or two Laboratories.  The 
Committee had felt  that several cases of Swine Flu in various States might have 
remained undetected for want of adequate Laboratories/detection centres.  They, 
therefore, had impressed upon the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers to take up the 
matter at the appropriate level urgently so that sufficient number of Laboratories are 
set up especially in Swine Flu vulnerable States/UTs, for early detection and  timely 
treatment of such pandemic disease.  As some States ha d only one or two 
Laboratories, the Committee had recommended that Private Laboratories m ight be 
appropriately encouraged to supplement the efforts of the Government for detection 
of Swine Flu cases. 
 
 
9. In reply to the aforesaid para, the Department of Pharmaceuticals have stated 
as under:-  
“Availability of testing laboratories comes under the purview of Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare. They have informed that testing for pandemic in Fluenza 
can only be done in Bio Safety Level (BSL) – 3 laboratory or a Bio Safety – 2 
Laboratory with BSL -3 precautions. From the two testing laboratories (NCDC, Delhi 
and National Institute of Virology, Pune) available prior to July, 2009 the number of 
laboratories were expanded to 18.  Subsequently, it was further expanded to 44. 
Among these 18 are in private sector.” 
 
10. The main crux of the original Recommendation of the Committee  was 
that the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers should take up the matter a t the 
appropriate level urgently to ensure that sufficient number of labs are set up, 
especially, in Swine Flu vulnerable States/ Union Territories for early detection 
and timely treatment of Swine Flu. The Committee had  also pointed out that 
Maharashtra was having maximum number of cases and having only three labs 
as compared to Delhi and Tamil Nadu which are at No. 2  and 3 places , 
respectively, having 7 labs in each State. However, the reply of the Government 
only mention about the existing number of labs  as compared to number of labs 
available prior to July 2009 and does not mention about any efforts/ progress 

10 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
made by the Ministry concerned, especially, after the Recommendation of the 
Committee was made to remove the disparity or imbalance in the number o f 
reported cases of Swine Flu vis-à-vis number of labs available in a particular 
State/ UT. 
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry concerned should 
do the needful to remove the prevailing disparity or imbalance in the reported 
number of cases vis-à-vis number of available labs for detection of Swine Flu in 
each State/ UT at the earliest and apprise the Committee about the progress in 
this regard.  
 
C. NEED TO ENSURE PROACTIVE MEDICATION OF THE CLOSE 
CONTACTS OF THE SWINE FLU AFFECT ED  INDIVIDUALS TO COUNTER 
THE SPREAD OF SWINE FLU 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.5, Para No.48) 
 
11. The Committee in para 48 of their original Report had noted  that Oseltamivir 
has  also been given to family members who came into contact with  patients affected 
by swine flu to break the transmission cycle and to provide protection to the 
individual. To effectively combat the menace of Swine Flu in the country, more so 
during the recent spurt of the disease in the national capital, the Committee had 
urged upon all the conc erned agencies to ensure that the system of giving 
Oseltamivir to the close contacts of the Swine Flu affected individuals is encouraged 
proactively so that the transmission cycle of the H1N1 virus could be countered. 
 
12. In reply to the aforesaid para, t he Department of Pharmaceuticals have stated 
as under:- 
  “Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has informed that in order to stop the 
spread of H1N1 virus, Chemoprophylaxis was  the strategic  intervention 
followed by all States/ UT Administrations to delay community spread.” 
 
 
13. The Committee in the original Report had urged upon all the concerned 
agencies to ensure that the system of giving Oseltamivir to the close contacts 
of the S wine Flu affected individuals w ere encouraged proactively so that the 
transmission cycle of the H1N1 virus was countered. 
The Committee find from the reply of the Government that the 
chemoprophylaxis was the strateg ic intervention followed by all the States/ U T 
Administrations to delay community spread.   In order to know the suc cess/ 
failure rate of this chemoprophylaxis intervention, the Committee would like to 
be apprised of the feedback which the concerned Ministries have been 

11 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
gathering from all the States/ UTs Administration to determine the effectiveness 
of the same from the  records that whether any close contacts/ family members 
coming in contact with the patient also got affected with the disease State/ UT - 
wise or there are no known cases of that kind of proliferation.  
 
D. NEED TO PRODUCE OSELTAMIVIR FROM AN ALTERNATE/ N ON-
SHIKIMIC ROUTE TO AVOID DEPENDENCY ON CHINA FOR ITS RAW 
MATERIAL 
Recommendation (Sl.No.6, Para No.49) 
 
14. The Committee in para 49 of their original Report had noted that the medicine 
for the treatment of Swine Flu was being made from Shikimic Acid whi ch was 
extracted from the seeds of Star Anise (illicium vernum) an evergreen Chinese plant.  
Besides Star Anise, Shikimic Acid was also produced from the leaves of Ginkgo 
Biloba tree. For Shikimic Acid India is dependent on China because plants from which 
Shikimic Acid was extracted, grow in China.  Moreover, availability of Shikimic Acid 
depended upon the seasonal output of Star Anise crop.  What had concerned the 
Committee was the fact that both the raw materials , i.e., Star Anise and leaves of 
Ginkgo Biloba tree were in short supplies, as had been admitted by the Department.  
However, they had drawn consolation from the Department‟s statement that some 
alternate and sustainable sources were being explored to produce medicines for the 
treatment of Swine Flu. As a result, ICMR had been  conducting research to produce 
this drug in the country through non -Shikimic route.  NIPER, Mohali h ad also 
submitted a Research proposal for producing Oseltamivir from an alternate route. The 
Committee had recommended that the Government should extend all possible help to 
these Research Organisations in their endeavour besides encouraging other similar 
premium institutions to follow suit so that any crisis in future regarding the availability 
of medicines for the treatment of Swine Flu could be  averted.  
 
15. In reply to the aforesaid para, the Department of Pharmaceuticals have stated 
as under:- 
“ICMR has initiated steps to produce Shikimic Acid in India by exploring all 
options involving appropriate / competent groups which can do required R&D 
and develop production technology for manufacture of the compound.  The 
Council invited proposals in the identified areas and has sanctioned 4 Projects. 
 
NIPER has reported that efforts are being made to look for alternative  source 
of this Phyto-Chemical to meet this demand. In this direction two plant sources 
were explored as potential source of Shikimic Acid. The experimental design 
was planned around following two approaches : 
 
1. Available plant source: The plants available in the nearby area were analyzed 
for the  availability of Shikimic acid naturally. More  than 50 plants were  

12 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
screened by LC-MS for this purpose. The plant which was judged as the most 
economic source  was selected on the basis of  abundance in  the region,  
availability of biomass throughout the year, easy harvesting and  total Shikimic 
Acid contents. The selected plant was subjected for isolation of Shikimic Acid 
on lab scale  that will be  extended to pilot scale in coming days. The methods  
will be  fine tuned to enhance the effici ency and economy for isolation of  
Shikimic Acid. 
 
 2.  Intervention : The Shikimic  Acid can be  obtained from plant sources after 
intervention of  Shikmic Acid pathway using a broad  spectrum herbicide. A 
number of weedy plant species were screened and treated with the herbicide  
and Shikimic Acid content were analyzed by LC-MS. It was  observed that the 
application of herbicide has enhanced Shikimic Acid contents. 
  
The accumulation of Shikimic Acid varies depending upon the  concentration of 
herbicide applied, days after application, stage of plant ( vegetative or  
reproductive) and  weather conditions (temperature, humidity  of soil and  air, 
etc). The method is being fine tuned on these lines so the plant material can be 
harvested year round.”  
 
16. In addition t o the above reply, the Department have also stated through their 
updated reply, dated 16.09.2010 as under: 
 
“The representative of ICMR has informed in the Task Force Meeting that four 
research projects have been initiated by them to evaluate the potential  of 
indigenous manufacture of Shikimic acid in India. 
 
1. Microbial fermentation method utilizing Citrobacter to produce Shikimic 
acid (Dept. of Microbiology, UDSC, New Delhi). 
2. Isolation of Shikimic acid from Indian plants ( Araucaria excelsa  and 
Calophyllum a petalum) isolated from western ghats (NIPER, 
Chandigarh). 
3. Hairy root culture of Indian plants to produce Shikimic acid through plant 
tissue culture in bioreactor (IIT, Delhi). 
4. Isolation of Shikimic acid from other plants and biotransformation of 
Quinate to shikimate using enzymatic biotransformation (NCL, Pune). 
 
ICMR is till exploring to fund research project to clone and express Shikimic 
acid pathways so that it can be produced in recombinant E. coli system. 
 
The Progress on the above projects made so far  as reported by ICMR is as 
under : 
 
1. Microbial source has been explored at Dept. of Microbiology, Delhi 
University to produce Shikimic Acid. Citrobacter species have been  
identified and grown to produce Shikimic Acid through fermentation.    
 
A strain of C itrobacter sp. Which has been selected after an exhaustive 
screening produces 0.6 g/L of shikimic acid. The Production was 
estimated by TLC and HPLC procedures. Subsequently, for enhancing 
the production of shikimic acid one variable at a time approach was  
attempted, wherein, 1.8h/l of shikimic acid was achieved when the 
medium contained ammonium sulphate as a nitrogen source. 
Subsequently, when ammonium sulphate was replaced by aspraragine, 

13 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
production enhanced to 4.3 g/L of shikimic acid. This study was 
attempted upto 2L flask. Furthermore, the produced shikimic acid was 
purified by crystallization process and the purity of crystals was 
confirmed by NMR. Scale up study was attempted on 10, 14,30 L 
bioreactors which resulted in 3.5 g/L of shikimic acid. Resu lts are 
encouraging and further optimization will lead to successful shikimic 
acid production. 
                                                                                                                                 
2. Optimization of extraction proce dures are on at NIPER to extract 
Shikimic acid from Araucaria excelsa plant leaves. 
 
3. Plant cell culture system has been established at IIT Delhi using 
Indigenous plant from western Ghats to produce Shikimic acid through 
in vitro tissue culture. 
 
4. NCL Pune h as started very actively in two areas : isolation of different 
plant sources to produce shikimic acid and isolation of microorganism to 
biotransformation quinate to Shichimic acid 
 
They are analyzing concentration of shikimic acid in leaves and seeds of pl ant 
varieties common in India. Around 80 types of seeds and 20 types of leaves 
have been analyzed so far. 
 
The Angiosperm seeds analyzed so far contain only traces of shikimic acid. 
Dry leaves of Gymnosperms are found to contain 0.2 to 1.5% shikimic acid b ut 
some of the plants are grouped in “rare and endangered” species. 
Dry pods of “Chakriful or Badalful or Bardana” ( Illicium sp.) used in spices, 
available locally, have been found to contain around 5% shikimic acid. 
 
They have also screened 55 microbial b elonging to bacteria, yeast and fungi 
for biotransformation of quinic acid to shikimic acid but the results so far are 
negative. 
The work on screening plant and microbial varieties is continuing. 
 
Further, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and  Research under 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has informed that they are working on the 
following two projects : 
 
1. Proposal to ascertain the commercial potential of the method for 
domestic production of “Shikimik Acid”. 
 
Under this project, an alternative d omestic source for the shikimic acid is 
explored from the plants. The experiments are conducted on two fronts : 
 
 
a. Available plant sources which accumulate the shikimic acid naturally in 
the aerial parts. 
b. Intervention experiments for accumulation of shikimi c acid by the use of 
broad spectrum herbicide. 
 
2. Production and Availability of Medicines to deal with Swine Flu     
 
In view of the Swine Flu outbreak in the country in 2009, NIPER has initiated a 
small research project titled “ Targetting Hemaglutinin of H1N1 Virus: Rational 
Design and Syntheses of Anti-influenza Molecules”. 

14 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
 
17. The Committee in the ir original Report had observed that both the raw 
materials, namely, seeds of star Ani se plant and leaves of Ginkgo B iloba tree 
from which Shikimic Acid was extracted for producing Oseltamivir medicine for 
the treatment of Swine Flu were in short supply from China, and , that some 
alternate and sustainable sources were being explored to produce medicines 
for the treatment of Swine Flu. As a result, Indian Council for Medical Research 
(ICMR) has been conducting research to produce this drug in the country 
through non -Shikimic route. National Institute of Pharmaceuticals Education 
and Research ( NIPER), Mohali ha d also submitted a Research proposal for 
producing Osel tamivir from an alternate route. The Committee had 
recommended that the Government should extend all possible help to these 
Research Organisations in their endeavour besides encouraging other similar 
premium institutions to follow suit so that any crisis i n future regarding the 
availability of medicines for the treatment of Swine Flu could be averted.   
 The Department in their reply have stated that ICMR has initiated steps to 
produce Shikimic Acid in India and has invited proposals in the identified areas 
and has sanctioned four projects while NIPER has explored two plant sources 
as potential source of Shik imic Acid and fine tuning the method to harvest the 
plant material year round.  
The Committee appreciate the initiative and efforts being made by ICMR/ 
NIPER to look for alternate source(s) of this Phyto -chemical known as Shikimic 
Acid to meet its demand to produce medicine for the treatment of Swine Flu as 
desired by the Committee.  However, it is not clear from the reply of the 
Government whether the Dep artment has encouraged other premium 
institutions in Government and private sectors alike as recommended by the 
Committee or all the efforts are restricted to ICMR/ NIPER in this direction. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the details such as fun ds allocated, 
tenure, Organizations/ Institutions involved, and the positive outcome of the 4 
projects sanctioned by the Council as well as similar details about the efforts 
being done by NIPER  in getting success in selected two plants for isolation of 
Shikimic  Acid and fine tuning the methods to enhance the efficiency and 
feasibility for isolation of the same, through the further action taken reply of the 
Government in this regard. 
 
 
 

15 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
E. NEED TO MAKE INDIA SELF-RELIANT FOR PRODUCING MEDICINE FOR 
SWINE FLU 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.7, Para No.50) 
18. The Committee in para 50 of their original Report had observed that It was a 
matter of serious concern that the Department of Pharmaceuticals ha d not kept track 
of the means adopted by other countries like USA and  Mexico to cope with the 
availability of Shikimic Acid or measures taken by them to find alternate route for 
production of Oseltamivir.  As it ha d been established that the H1N1 virus ha d 
penetrated India from foreign land, it would have been prudent on the  part of the 
Department to maintain appropriate international data with regard to their efforts 
towards availability/production of Oseltamiviror or alternatives thereto.  However, even 
then,  it was not too late. The Committee had impressed upon the Departm ent to 
urgently initiate a study to gauge the dependency of other countries upon China for 
Shikimic Acid and the alternate route, if any, adopted by them to produce Oseltamivir.  
The Committee were confident that a comparative assessment would immensely help 
the Research Organisations like ICMR and NIPER in their endeavours towards 
making India self-sufficient in producing Oseltamivir medicine to counter Swine Flu. 
 
19. In reply to the aforesaid para, the Department of Pharmaceuticals have stated 
as under:- 
“The Department has written to three Research Agencies and has requested 
them to indicate their willingness or otherwise for conducting this study, the 
time required for completing this study and the fees chargeable for this.  After 
getting the response fro m these Agencies, the suitable Agency for conducting 
the study will be selected.  
 
In the meantime, the Deputy Industrial Advisor in the Department has also 
been requested to conduct this study.  He has submitted the report.  He has 
reported that commercial production of Oseltamivir starts from the biomolecule 
Shikimic Acid harvested from  Chinese star anise  with a limited  worldwide 
supply. Due to its  limited supply searches for alternative synthetic routes 
preferably skipping  Shikimic Acid are  underway and to  date several such 
routes have been published. In the  total synthesis of Oseltamivir,  control of  
Stereochemistry is important; the molecule has  three stereo centers and the 
sought after isomer is only 1 of 8 stereoisomers. 
 
The current production method is  based on research  by Gilead Sciences 
starting from naturally  occurring quinic  acid and that of  Hoffmann-La Roche 
starting from Shikimic Acid. The current production method include  two 
reaction steps with potentially hazardous azides. A  reported azide – free 
Roche synthesis of Tami Flu is given by  Karpt/ Trussardi  synthesis. Other 
reported routes published are:  
i) Corey synthesis  
ii) Shibasaki synthesis  

16 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
iii) Fukuyama synthesis 
 
Commercial production from alternative routes have not been reported in 
literature”.  
 
20. In addition to the above reply, the Department have also stated through their 
updated reply dated 16.09.2010 as under:- 
 
“In order to get a study conducted to gauge the dependency of other countries 
upon China for Shikimic Acid and the alternate route, i f any, adopted by them 
to produce Oseltamivir, based on information received from FICCI Department 
of Pharmaceuticals has written to three Research Agencies and has requested 
them to indicate their willingness or otherwise alongwith other terms and 
conditions for conducting this study.  Reply from all the three agencies have 
not been received.  The matter is being pursued with them.  The Department 
has also written to two more research agencies and letters to WHO and 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare have also been sent. “ 
 
 
21. The Committee in their original Recommendation had impressed upon 
the Department to urgently initiate a study to gauge the dependency of other 
countries upon China for Shikimic Acid and the alternate route, if any, adopted 
by them to produce Oseltamivir and had opined that a comparative assessment 
would immensely help the Research Organisations like ICMR and NIPER in 
their endeavours towards making India self -sufficient in producing Oseltamivir 
medicine to counter Swine Flu.  The De partment in their reply have stated that 
they have written to three Research Agencies and has requested them to 
indicate their willingness or otherwise along with other terms and conditions 
for conducting this study, the time required for completing this s tudy and the 
fees chargeable for this. After getting the response from these Agencies, the 
suitable Agen cy for conducting the study would  be selected.   As per the 
updated information , the r eply from all the three a gencies have not been 
received and the matter is being pursued with them.  The Department has also 
written to two more research agencies and letter s to WHO and Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare have also been sent.  
As this matter is lingering on for quite a long period  sans any positive 
results so far, t he Committee desire that the whole process of selection of 
suitable agency for conducting the study as per the earlier recommendation of 
the Committee and completion of the study should be completed in stipulated 
time frame of six months and the Committee be apprised of the outcome in this 
regard. 
 

17 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
F. NEED TO ESTABLISH BETTER COORDINATION AND COOPERATION 
AMONG MINISTRIES/ DEPARTMENTS DEALING WITH SWINE FLU 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.8, Para No.51) 
22. The Committee in para 51 of their original Report  had expressed their 
displeasure over the fact that details were reportedly not available with the Directorate 
General of Commercial Intelligence (DGCIS), Kolkata regarding the quality and value 
of medicines and Shikimic Acid imported on the plea that ther e was no specific code 
for Swine Flu in the classification system. They had also expressed their unhappiness 
since similar information which was also sought from the Department of Revenue by 
the Department of Pharmaceuticals ha d not been furnished.  The Com mittee had 
pointed out that when so many Ministries/Departments ha d been entrusted with the 
responsibility to check the spread of Swine Flu, there must be a proper coordination 
and cooperation amongst themselves to perform the respective assigned task 
effectively. But, in the instant case, despite the efforts of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals to get relevant information, the other concerned 
Ministries/Departments did not oblige.  The Committee had taken a strong exception 
to the callouness on the part of the Department of Revenue on such an important 
issue and had recommended that henceforth any information sought by one 
Department from the other should invariably be furnished in a time bound manner in 
order to facilitate further follow up action for deali ng with Swine Flu. The Committee 
had directed the Department of Revenue to institute an internal enquiry to fix the 
responsibility for this negligence and  take punitive action against the erring officials.  
The Committee had advocated the need for a close coordination and cooperation at 
sufficiently high level amongst all the concerned Ministries/Departments and had 
desired the Department of Pharmaceuticals to play a proactive role in the process. 
 
23. In reply to the aforesaid para, the Department of Pharm aceuticals have stated 
as under:- 
“The observations of the Committee have been conveyed to Department of 
Revenue and Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics, 
Kolkata. The recommendation of the Committee regarding proper coordination 
and cooperation amongst the Departments has been noted for compliance.” 
 
 
24. The Committee in their original recommendation had expressed their 
displeasure over the fact that details were reportedly not available with the 
Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence (DGCIS), Kolkata regarding the 
quality and value of medicines and Shikimic Acid imported on the plea that 

18 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
there was no specific code for Swine Flu in the classification system. They had 
also expressed their unhappiness since similar informatio n which was also 
sought from the Department of Revenue by the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
had not been furnished.  The Committee had taken a strong exception to the 
callouness on the part of the Department of Revenue on such an important 
issue and had recommended that henceforth any information sought by one 
Department from the other should invariably be furnished in a time bound 
manner in order to facilitate further follow up action for dealing with Swine Flu. 
The Committee had directed the Department of  Revenue to institute an internal 
enquiry to fix the responsibility for this negligence and take punitive action 
against the erring officials. The Committee had advocated the need for a close 
coordination and cooperation at sufficiently high level amongst all the 
concerned Ministries/Departments and desired the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals to play a proactive role in the process.  The Department in 
their reply have stated that the observations of the Committee had been 
conveyed to Department of Revenue and  Directorate General of Commercial 
Intelligence and Statistics, Kolkata. The recommendation of the Committee 
regarding proper coordination and cooperation amongst the Departments has 
been noted for compliance. 
 
 The Committee are pained to point out that m ere conveying the relevant 
recommendation to the Department of Revenue and Directorate General of 
Commercial Intelligence  (DGCIS), does not serve much purpose unless the 
responses/ replies of the concerned Department/ Directorate are obtained by 
the convey ing Department and reported back to the Committee as feedback 
towards the befitting action the each one has taken and the outcome thereon.  
Moreover, the term “noted for compliance” is too vague and general phrase . 
The Committee are interested to know the a ctual progress/ outcome of their 
recommendation. The Committee hope that the Department would furnish their 
reply indicating the specific action taken on the recommendations of the 
Committee. 
 

19 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
G. NEED TO TAKE EFFECTIVE STEPS TO  WARD OFF HOARDING OF 
SHIKIMIC ACID 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.9, Para No.52) 
25. The Committee in para 52 of their original Report had observed that they were 
perturbed to note the self contradictory reply given by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals in respect of the hoarding of Shikimic  Acid by the traders.  At one 
place it had been stated that the possibility of hoarding of Shikimic Acid c ould not be 
ruled out in view of it being under the Open General Licence (OGL) policy whereas, 
elsewhere it ha d been mentioned that the Open Licence Po licy would prevent any 
monopolistic facilities such as hoarding.  The two statements were needed to be 
reconciled. The Committee had desired that if according to the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, there was any loophole in the existing OGL policy which migh t be 
taken advantage of by the traders to hoard Shikimic Acid, they should have taken up 
the matter with the Department of Commerce to revise the Licence Policy so as to 
make it transparent and foolproof in order to ward off any possibility of hoarding of 
Shikimic Acid.  
 
26. In reply to the aforesaid para, the Department of Pharmaceuticals have stated 
as under:- 
  “DGFT has informed that domestic availability of Shikimic acid and Oseltamivir, 
was closely monitored through exports and imports of the above p roducts. 
Even during the high phase of Swine Flu, no need of policy change on 
importability of these two products was felt except the need for close 
monitoring of imports and exports.  Further, no instance of hoarding of these 
products was reported.” 
 
27. The Committee in their original recommend ation had desired that if 
according to the Department of Pharmaceuticals, there was any loophole in the 
existing OGL policy which might be taken advantage of by the traders to hoard 
Shikimic Acid, they should have taken up the matter with the Department of 
Commerce to revise the Licence Policy so as to make it transparent and 
foolproof in order to ward off any possibility of hoarding of Shikimic Acid. 
The Department in their reply have stated that Directorate General of 
Foreign Trade ( DGFT) has informed that domestic availability of Shikimic acid 
and Oseltamivir, was closely monitored through exports and imports of the 
above products. Even during the high phase of Swine Flu, no need of policy 
change on importability of  these two products was felt except the need for 
close monitoring of imports and exports. Further , no instance of hoarding of 
these products was reported. 

20 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
The Committee also note from the reply that during high phase of Swine 
Flu, DGFT felt the need for cl ose monitoring of imports and exports of Shikimic 
Acid and Ose ltamivir in order to monitor domestic availability of these 
products. The Committee are also aware that Shikimic Acid is extracted from 
the seeds of Star Anise and also from the leaves of Ginkgo Biloba tree and both 
of these raw material are in short supplies as admitted by the Department.  
However, the Department is exploring the alternate non -shikimic Acid route to 
produce Oseltamivir domestically, sans any breakthrough, yet, in this direction. 
 The Committee are of the opinion that monitoring of domestic availability 
of Shikimic Acid and Oseltamivir through  close monitoring of its imports and 
exports is an ongoing process and needs to be done regularly and, as and 
when the domestic  availability of these two products are found to be affected, 
DGFT may restrict the exports of these two products till normalcy in domestic 
availability is restored/ regained or a real breakthrough  in finding an alternate 
non-shikimic Acid route is achieved in India. 
 
H. CENTRAL PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKING S IN PHARMA SECTOR 
SHOULD START  PRODUCING SWINE FLU MEDICINE 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.10, Para No.53) 
28. The Committee in para 53 of their  original Report had noted that at present 
the Government do not have any plan to get into the production of Oseltamivir API 
through Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSE) for the reason that they ha d not 
found it economically viable for the PSUs at this stage to enter into production of the 
drug. In this context, the Committee had fo und that six private Pharmaceutical 
Companies were engaged in the supply of Oseltamivir 75 mg capsules in the country.  
Four of these companies, viz. Hetero Drugs, Cipla, Ranbaxy and Strides Areolab 
have facilities for indigenous production of Oseltamivir f rom its raw material i.e. 
Shikimic Acid. Out of the remaining two Companies, Roche has no local production in 
India and is supplying Oseltamivir capsules by importing the same from their 
corporate set up.  The other Company, viz. NATCO has only formulation capability of 
the capsules based on Oseltamivir API. The Committee had acknowledged the efforts 
made by the Private Sector in producing/supplying medicines for the treatment of 
Swine Flu. They were, however, disappointed to find that there was no move on the 
part of the Government to produce the Oseltamivir medicine through their PSUs on 
the plea of it s being not economically viable.  The Committee were not convinced by 
the Government ‟s logic since production of one specific thing which has been 
commercially/economically viable for one Sector c ould not be otherwise for another 

21 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
Sector, more so when the Private Sector does not opt for anything that is 
economically unviable. In Committee‟s view, cost alone could not be always the prime 
factor particularly when dealing with a pandemic situation like Swine Flu which had 
taken so many precious lives.  Moreover, the Committee had dreaded a situation 
where the Private Sector, for some unforeseen circumstances, was not able to 
produce Oseltamivir at all or curtail its production and the Government ha d no 
contingency plan in place to deal with the situation.  Prudence, therefore, had required 
the Government to gear up their preparedness to ensure availability of Oseltamivir 
medicine in any eventuality, notwithstanding the  commercially viability factor. As it is 
life saving drug, the Department of Pharmaceuticals should have entrusted to one of 
its PSUs the job of production of Oseltamivir despite the same being unviable.  Such 
company should be compensated suitably, if necessary, through budgetary grant.  
 
29. In reply to the aforesaid para, the Department of Pharmaceuticals have stated 
as under:- 
“PSU Division of the Department of Pharmaceuticals has informed that 
Oseltamivir is a patented drug.  The pharma CPSUs do not have  API 
manufacturing facilities to produce Oseltamivir.  As such, it is not being 
manufactured by Pharma CPSUs.  The CPSUs also do not have the generic 
composition to launch their own brand.” 
 
30. The Committee in their original recommendation had observed the  
efforts made by the Private Sector in producing/supplying medicines for the 
treatment of Swine Flu. They were, however, disappointed to find that there was 
no move on the part of the Government to produce the Oseltamivir medicine 
through their PSUs on the  plea of it being not economically viable. The 
Committee were not convinced by the Government‟s logic since production of 
one specific thing which has been  commercially/economically viable for one 
Sector c ould not  be otherwise for another Sector, more  so when the Private 
Sector did not opt for anything that was economically unviable. 
 The Committee had desired as Oseltamivir is life saving drug, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals should entrust to one of its PSUs the job of 
production of Oseltamivir despit e the same being unviable. Such company 
should be compensated suitably, if necessary, through budgetary grant. 
The Department in their reply have stated that PSU Division of the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has informed that Oseltamivir is a patented 
drug. The pharma CPSUs do not have API manufacturing facilities to produce 
Oseltamivir. As such, it is not being manufactured by Pharma CPSUs. The 
CPSUs also do not have the generic composition to launch their own brand. 

22 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
The Committee are not convinced again with the reply of the Government 
that Oseltamivir is a patented drug.  The pharma Central Public Sector 
Undertakings (CPSUs) do not have Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients ( API) 
manufacturing facilities to produce Oseltamivir.  They do not have the generic 
composition to launch their own brand and as such, it is not being 
manufactured by pharma CPSUs.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the facts/ reasons when six private sector companies who volunteered for 
production and availability of Oseltamivir AP I and capsules could develop, 
acquire and create AP I manufacturing facilities/ generic composition to 
produce and launch Oseltamivir why CPSUs failed to respond positively and 
actively to fight the pandemic In Fluenza and save their own countrymen by 
following the footsteps of these six companies, by overcoming the bottlenecks 
coming in the way to produce and make available life saving drug as a welfare 
measure and serving the cause of humanity for which the very same CPSUs 
were created and established in the  country. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and expect the CPSUs to behave in a 
matured and seasoned way and come out with concrete plan of action to meet 
any contingency in this regard.  This will allow the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals to honour its own earlier committed contemplation before the 
Committee that in case the Swine Flu spreads further, production of 
Oseltamivir capsules by the pharma PSUs may be considered.  
 
I. NEED TO HAVE A JOINT TASK FORCE TO COMBAT SWINE FLU 
 
Recommendation (Sl.No.15, Para No.58) 
31. The Committee in para 58 of their original Report had been informed by the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals and the Department of Health and Family Welfare 
that Swine Flu cannot be combated in isolation as preventio n and treatment of Swine 
Flu is a multidisciplinary approach.  In this context, the Committee had found that 
while the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has been closely associated with the 
prevention and treatment of Swine Flu, the production and the a vailability of Tami Flu 
has been  the concern of the Department of Pharmaceuticals.  The Ministries of 
Commerce and Industry and Finance have also been closely associated with the 
import and export of Shikimic  Acid used for the finished product, i.e., Oseltamivir. 
Further, the Ministry of Human Resource Development ha d also been entrusted with 
the responsibility to ensure that the Guidelines issued by the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare in schools were properly implemented. The Committee had also noted 

23 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
that the role of the Department of Animal Husbandry was also solicited to ward off 
any possibility of bird Flu being con strued as Swine Flu. However, what had 
concerned the Committee was the admission of the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
that there was some overlapping in the allocation of the role and responsibilities to the 
different Ministries/Departments. The Committee had, therefore, reiterate d that there 
should be proper coordination and cooperation among various 
Ministries/Departments while pursuing  a common cause.  The Committee had again 
liked the Government to ensure that all the concerned Ministries/Departments work in 
tandem so that the multidisciplinary task assigned to them to combat Swine Flu could 
be performed with utmost finesse.  They had, t herefore, recommend ed that a task 
force comprising senior representatives of all the concerned ministries / departments / 
organizations / research agencies should meet periodically and monitor such 
pandemic situation continuously to ensure easy and afforda ble medicines to all those 
who needed it. Appropriate urgent attention was also required with a view to taking 
suitable steps as there were reports of mutation of H1N1 virus. 
 
32. In reply to the aforesaid para, the Department of Pharmaceuticals have stated 
as under:- 
“A Task force has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary, 
Department of Pharmaceuticals with representatives from various Ministries/  
Departments as its members.  The first meeting of the Task Force has been 
held on 12.3.2010.” 
 
33. In addition to the above reply, the Department have also stated through their 
updated reply dated 16.09.2010 as under:- 
 “As per the recommendation of the Standing Committee, a Task force has 
been constituted in the Department of Pharmaceuticals u nder the 
chairmanship of Joint Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals with senior 
representatives of concerned Ministries/ Departments and organizations as its 
members.  Periodic meetings of the Task Force are held  to monitor the 
pandemic situation so a s  to ensure the easy and affordable  availability of 
medicines to all those who need it. 
Six meetings of the Task Force have been held so far.  As per  information 
provided by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) during these 
meetings, they have initiated steps to produce Shikimic  acid  in India by 
exploring possible options involving appropriate/ competent groups which can 
do required R&D and develop production technology for commercially viable 
manufacture of the compound.  ICMR had invited pro posals for the purpose  
and has sanctioned 4 projects.  These projects are presently in the research 
mode. 
  As per the information provided by Drug Controller General (India), Ministry of 
Health has allowed  Retail sale of Oseltamivir and Zanamivir Capsul es under 
certain specific conditions specified under Schedule „X‟ to Drugs & Cosmetics 
Rules.  This medicine was introduced in major outlets of schedule „X‟ Licensed 
shops . 

24 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
   The representative of M/s Zydus Cadila has informed the Task Force that  
H1N1 vaccine manufactured by them  is  a single dose vaccine  in injectible  
form which gives protection for one year.  It has already been launched in the 
Indian  market on 3 rd June, 2010.  He has also  informed that they have 
sufficient stock ready with them.   
   The representative of M/s Panacea has informed that they have completed 
clinical trials for their H1N1 vaccine and their vaccine is safe for all age groups.  
They are going to submit the report to Drug Controller shortly.   
   The representative of M/ s Serum Institute has informed that their Intranasal 
H1N1 vaccine has been licensed and is available in the market.  Clinical trials 
for their Inactivated H1N1 vaccine have been successfully completed and the 
company has got the Marketing Authorization and  Manufacturing License from 
DCG(I).” 
  
34. The Committee in their original  recommendation had desired the 
Government to ensure that all the concerned Ministries/Departments work in 
tandem so that the multidisciplinary task assigned to them to combat Swine Flu 
could be performed with utmost finesse. They, therefore, had recommended 
that a task force comprising senior representatives of all the concerned 
ministries / departments / organizations / research agencies should meet 
periodically and monitor such pan demic situation continuously to ensure easy 
and affordable medicines to all those who need it. Appropriate urgent attention 
was also required with a view to taking suitable steps as there were reports of 
mutation of H1N1 virus. 
The Committee note from the reply of the Government that a Task Force 
comprising senior representatives of all the concerned Ministries/ Departments 
and Organizations as its members, have been constituted under the 
Chairmanship of Joint Secretary, Department of P harmaceuticals and till 
16.09.2010, six meetings of the Task Force have been held so far.  However, it is 
not clear from the reply whether concerned organizations/ research agencies 
involved with the issues related to prevention/ treatment of Swine Flu have 
been given due incl usion/ representation  in the Task Force as has been 
recommended by the Committee or it has been ignored by the Department.  
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the above mentioned point 
as well as the complete list / Composition of the Task Force, scheduled 
periodicity of meetings, if any, alongwith the details of six meetings held so far, 
such as, dates, venue and duration of each of the six meetings, representatives 
who attended/ did not attend each of the meeting, and contributions/ 
suggestions made by them, summary of things discussed, etc.  
….. 

25 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation  
 
The  Committee  note  that  three types  of  preventive  measures  have  been  
taken by the  Government to check  the  spread  of Swine  flu.  These are   
i) screening  at  Airports , sea  ports  and six  international  check points.  
ii)  Early detection – issuing guidelines for opening large number of screening   
centers and   
iii) Quarantine measures.  However,  most of the  centers/ agencies which  are  
supposed  to implement  the  above  measures  fall under  the purview of the  
Ministry of  Health  and  Family  Welfare . The  role of the  Department  of  
Pharmaceuticals in this  regard is  confined  only  to  make  available  medicine 
for  quarantine purpose.  Thus , the  overall  responsibility of  the Ministry of  
Health and  Family  Welfare increases  manifold to ensure  meaningful  and 
effective  implementation of the  measures adopted  to preve nt  the  spread  of  
Swine  flu.  Nevertheless, the  role  and  responsibilities  of the  Department  of  
Pharmaceuticals  in this  regard  are  no less  important  as they have  been  
entrusted  with  the  task of  making  available  medicines for  quaran tine  
purpose which is  meant  for the  medical and  para - medical  staff  who are  
prone  to be  affected  by the  H1N1 virus.  Needless to say , both the 
Ministries  should, therefore, act in  unison  so that  the  objectives  of  the 
measures  initiated  to  contain the  spread  of Swine  flu are  truly achieved.  
 
(Para No. 45) 
Reply of the Department 
 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has informed that an Inter Ministerial Task 
Force (IMTF) has been constituted in that Ministry.  In this Task Force, Department 
of Pharmaceuticals is represented by its Secretary.  All inter sectoral issues are 
discussed in IMTF. 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Pharmaceuticals  in their Action Taken Replies dated  
16 September  2010 has stated 'No Change'.  
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 
 
Recommendation 
 
The Committee  note  that  the  Ministry of  Health and Family  Welfare  hav e  
issued  Guidelines  to the  educational  institutions,  laboratories and hospitals  to 
take  adequate  preventive  measures  against  the  spread   of  Swine   flu 
pandemic  in the  country, the moot  point  is  whether  such  Guidelines  are  being  
followed   in letter  and  spirit.  The  Committee  are  apprehensive  of their proper  
adherence  since  the  Ministry have  nowhere mentioned  any  mechanism  to 

26 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
monitor effective  implementation of the  Guidelines .  They are,therefore,  of the  
view  that  mere  issuance  of  Guidelines  will serve  no purpose  unless  a system  
is  developed  to get  appropriate  feedback  on the  implementation  aspect  based 
on  which  further  follow up  action can  be  taken .  Since there has  been a  rapid 
increase  in  Swine  flu  cases  recently, the  Committee  would  like  the  Ministry of  
Health  to  examine  whether the issued  Guidelines  need  a revision. For  instance,  
instead of  discouraging  people  not  affected  with  the  H1N1  virus  to visit  
crowded  places  like  Cinema  Halls  and  Shopping  Malls  appeal  could  be made  
to the  people  affected  with or having  symptoms  of  Swine  flu  to exercise  self – 
restraint in  not  visiting crowded  places/ offices/ schools / colleges  in the  intere st 
of their  fellow  citizens. 
 
(Para No. 47) 
Reply of the Department 
 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has informed that Joint Monitoring Group 
under the Chairmanship of DGHS, Government of India monitored the outbreak and 
revised the guidelines as and  when necessary.  There have been constant 
interaction by Ministry of Health with the States for implementing the guidelines.  
Officers of the rank of Additional Secretary/Joint Secretary and also technical 
officers from DGHS visited the States to identify the gaps and fill them. 
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Pharmaceuticals  in their Action Taken Replies dated 16 
September 2010 has stated 'No Change'.  
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 
 
Recommendation  
 
The  Committee  note  that  Oseltamivir is also  given  to family members  who 
come  into  contact  with  a patient to break the  transmission cycle  and to provide   
protection  to  the individual. To effectively  combat  the  menace of  Swine  flu in  
the  country, more  so during  the  recent  spurt  of  the  disease  in the  national  
capital,  the  Committee would  urge upon all  the  concerned  agencies  to ensu re 
that the system of  giving  Oseltamivir  to the  close  contacts  of the  Swine  flu 
affected  individuals is encouraged  proactively so that  the  transmission  cycle  of  
the  H1N1  virus is  countered. 
(Para No. 48) 
 
Reply of the Department 
 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has informed that in order to stop the 
spread of H1N1 virus, Chemoprophylaxis was  the strategic  intervention followed  
by all States /UT Administrations  to  delay  community spread. 
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 
 
 

27 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Pharmaceuticals  in their Action Taken Replies dated 16 
September 2010 has stated 'No Change'.  
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 
Recommendation  
 
The  Committee  note  that  the  medicine  for the  treatment of  Swine  flu is  made  
from  Shikimic  Acid  which  is  extracted  from the seeds of  Star  Anise  (illicium 
Vernum)   an  ever green  Chinese  plant.  Besides  Star  A nise ,  Shikimic  Acid  is 
also  produced  from the leaves of  Ginkgo Biloba  tree. For  Shikimic  acid  India  is  
dependent  on  China  because  plants  from which  Shikimic  acid  is  extracted  
grow  in  China. Moreover, availability of  Shikimic  acid  depends upon  the 
seasonal  output of  Star  Anise  Crop.  What  concerns   the Committee is the  fact 
that  both  the raw  material ie.  Star  Anise  and leaves  of  Ginkgo  Biloba  tree   
are  in short  supplies , as  admitted  by the  Department.  Howe ver,  they  draw  
consolation  from the  Department‟s  statement that  some  alternate  and  
sustainable  sources are  being  explored  to produce  medicines  for the  treatment  
of Swine  flu.  As  a result ,  ICMR  is  conducting  research  to produce  this  drug in 
the  country through non - Shikimic  route. NIPER , Mohali  has  also   submitted  a  
Research  Proposal  for  producing  Oseltamivir  from an  alternate  route. The  
committee  recommend  that the  Government  should  extend  all  possible  he lp  to 
these  Research  Organizations in their  endeavor besides  encouraging  other  
similar premium  institutions to follow  suit  so that  any  crisis  in  future  regarding  
the availability  of medicine for  the treatment of  Swine  flu is  averted. 
 
(Para No. 49) 
Reply of the Department 
 
ICMR has initiated steps to produce Shikimic Acid  in India by exploring all 
options involving appropriate / competent groups which can do required R&D and 
develop production technology for manufacture of the compound .  The Council 
invited proposals in the identified areas and has sanctioned 4 Projects. 
 
NIPER has  reported that efforts are  being  made to look for alternative  source of  
this Phyto - Chemical to meet this  demand. In  this  direction two plant sources  
were  explored as  potential  source of  Shikimic  acid.  The  experimental  design 
was  planned  around  following two  approaches : 
 
1. Availability plant  source: The  plants  available  in the  nearby  area  were  
analyzed  for the  availability  of  Shikimic  acid naturally. More  than  50 plants were  
screened  by LC-MS for this  purpose. The  plant which  was  judged  as  the most  
economic source  was  selected on the basis of  abundance in  the region,  
availability of  biomass  throughout  the ye ar, easy harvesting and  total  shikimic 
acid  contents. 
The  selected  plant  was  subjected  for  isolation of  Shikimic  acid  on lab scale  
that will be  extended  to pilot  scale  an  coming  days. The methods  will be  fine  
tuned  to enhance the efficiency  and  economic for  isolation of  Shikimic acid. 
 
2.  Intervention : The Shikimic  acid  can be  obtained  from  plant  sources  after  
intervention of  Shikmic  acid  pathway using a broad  spectrum  herbicide.  A 
number  of  weedy  plant species  were  screened  and  treated  with  the  herbicide   
and  Shikimic acid content  were  analyzed  by  LC -MS. It was  observed  that  the 
application  of  herbicide  has  enhanced  Shikimic  acid  contents. 

28 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
  
The accumulation of  Shikimic acid  varies  depe nding  upon the   concentration of  
herbicide  applied,  days  after  application, stage of plant (Vegetative or  
reproductive ) and  weather  conditions  (temperature, humidity  of  soil and  air  
etc). The method  is  being  fine  tuned  on these  lines  so the  plant material can be  
harvested  year  round."  
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The representative of ICMR has informed in the Task Force Meeting that four 
research pro jects have been initiated by them to evaluate the potential of 
indigenous manufacture of Shikimic acid in India. 
 
1. Microbial fermentation method utilizing Citrobacter to produce Shikimic acid 
(Dept. of Microbiology, UDSC, New Delhi). 
2. Isolation of Shik imic acid from Indian plants ( Araucaria excelsa  and 
Calophyllum apetalum) isolated from western ghats (NIPER, Chandigarh). 
3. Hairy root culture of Indian plants to produce Shikimic acid through plant tissue 
culture in bioreactor (IIT, Delhi). 
4. Isolation of Shikimic acid from other plants and biotransformation of Quinate to 
shikimate using enzymatic biotransformation (NCL, Pune). 
 
ICMR is till exploring to fund research project to clone and express Shikimic acid 
pathways so that it can be produced in recombinant E. coli system. 
 
The Progress so far of the above projects as reported by ICMR is as under : 
 
1. Microbial source has been explored at Dept. of Microbiology, Delhi University to 
produce Shikimic Acid. Citrobacter species have been  identified and grow n to 
produce Shikimic Acid through fermentation.  A strain of Citrobacter sp. Which 
has been selected after an exhaustive screening produces 0.6 g/L of shikimic 
acid. The Production was estimated by TLC and HPLC procedures. 
Subsequently, for enhancing the production of shikimic acid one variable at a 
time approach was attempted, wherein, 1.8h/l of shikimic acid was achieved 
when the medium contained ammonium sulphate as a nitrogen source. 
Subsequently, when ammonium sulphate was replaced by aspraragine, 
producton enhanced to 4.3 g/L of shikimic acid. This study was attempted upto 
2L flask. Furthermore, the produced shikimic acid was purified by crystallization 
process and the purity of crystals was confirmed by NMR. Scale up study was 
attempted on 10, 14,30 L bioreactors which resulted in 3.5 g/L of shikimic acid. 
Results are encouraging and further optimization will lead to successful shikimic 
acid production. 
                                                                                                                                 
2. Optimization of extraction procedures are on at NIPER to extract Shikimic acid 
from Araucaria excelsa plant leaves. 
 
3. Plant cell culture system has been established at IIT Delhi using Indigenous 
plant from western Ghats to produce Shikimic acid through in vitro tissue culture. 
 
4. NCL Pune has started very actively in two areas : isolation of different plant 
sources to produce shikimic acid and isolation of microorganism to 
biotransformation quinate to Shichimic acid 
 

29 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
They are anal yzing concentration of shikimic acid in leaves and seeds of plant 
varieties common in India. Around 80 types of seeds and 20 types of leaves have 
been analyzed so far. 
 
The Angiosperm seeds analyzed so far contain only traces of shikimic acid. 
Dry leaves o f Gymnosperms are found to contain 0.2 to 1.5% shikimic acid but 
some of the plants are grouped in “rare and endangered” species. 
Dry pods of “Chakriful or Badalful or Bardana” (Illicium sp.) used in spices, available 
locally, have been found to contain around 5% shikimic acid. 
They have also screened 55 microbial belonging to bacteria, yeast and fungi for 
biotransformation of quinic acid to shikimic acid but the results so far are negative. 
The work on screening plant and microbial varieties is continuing. 
 
Further, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research under 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has informed that they are working on the following 
two projects : 
 
1. Proposal to ascertain the commercial potential of the method for domestic 
production of “Shikimik Acid”. 
 
Under this project, an alternative domestic source for the shikimic acid is explored 
from the plants. The experiments are conducted on two fronts : 
 
a. Available plant sources which accumulate the shikimic acid naturally in the 
aerial parts. 
b. Intervention experiments for accumulation of shikimic acid by the use of broad 
spectrum herbicide. 
 
2. Production and Availability of Medicines to deal with Swine Flu     
 
In view of the Swine Flu outbreak in the country in 2009, NIPER has initi ated a small 
research project titled “ Targetting Hemaglutinin of H1N1 Virus: Rational Design and 
Syntheses of Anti-influenza Molecules.  
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 
 
Recommendation 
 
The  Committee note that  sufficient  quantities of  the Tami flu drug have  been  
given  to the State  Governments to ensure its  availability in all the treatment   
centers and there is  reportedly  no gap in the  demand  and supply of  the 
medicine. However, in view of the   rare  nature  of  the  raw  material used  to 
produce  Tami flu,  the Committee  would  like  the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
to initiate a survey on their  own  to assess the situation instead  of  waiting  for the 
State  Government  to bring  to the  Department‟s notice  any  gap in the  demand  
and  supply of  Tami flu. This is all  the more necessary to avert  the wastage of the 
precious  medicine  in  view of having  adequate buffer  stock  in anticipation . 
 
(Para No. 54) 
 
Reply of the Department 
 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is responsible to ensure that sufficient 
quantities of Tamiflu drug have been given to the State Governments to ensure its 

30 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
availability in all the treatment centres and there is reportedly no gap in the demand 
and supply of the medicine.  If at all the situation is required to be assessed, it can 
be taken up in the Task Force meeting which has been constituted under 
Department of Pharmaceuticals with representatives from various Ministries/ 
Departments 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Pharmaceuticals  in their Action Taken Replies dated 16 
September 2010 has stated 'No Change'.  
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 
 
Recommendation 
 
The  Committee  observe that  the  NPPA  have  issued   an order  under the  
Essential  Commodities   Act directing  the  six  known  manufacturers  and  any  
other   company  providing Oseltamivir  based  for mulation packs,  to  furnish  a 
daily report on  the  quantitative  details  of  Oseltamivir  API and  Oseltamivir based 
formulation  packs to  which the  manufacturers  are  complying. The  Committee 
wish that this  order is  being  complied  with  in  le tter and  spirit. While  India is not 
only  stated  to be  self  sufficient  in the production  of Oseltimivir  capsule but also  
exporting  the  same  to  various  developing   countries as well as  to  France,  a 
developed  country.  According  to the  D epartment of  Pharmaceuticals, the 
Directorate  General  of  Foreign  Trade  monitors the  export  of  medicines  on  
weekly basis. The Committee, however,  would  like  the Government  to ensure 
that the  export of such  vital  medicine  does not  affect  the  easily availability  for 
indigenous  consumption. 
(Para No. 56) 
Reply of the Department 
 
As per the decision taken in the Inter Ministerial Task Force on Avian and 
Pandemic Influenza, the Department of Pharmaceuticals have been asked to 
request the domestic manufacturers of Oseltimivir API to keep a stock of 100 kgs. at 
their disposal  all the time.  This stock would be used only as per the directions of 
Department of Pharmaceuticals.  Whenever, any shortage has been reported from 
any part of the coun try, the Government has seen that required quantity of 
medicines used for the treatment of HINI have been sent to that area. 
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Ph armaceuticals in their Action Taken Replies dated 16 
September 2010 has stated 'No Change'.  
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 
 

31 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
Recommendation 
 
The Committee  understand  that  an indigenous  vaccine for  prev ention of  Swine  
Flu is likely  to be  introduced in the market  by  March  2010 . Before  that  some  
international  manufacturing  companies may  launch their  own  vaccines  for which 
the Government  are  in dialogue  with  all the  international manuf acturing  
companies for procuring  interim  quota  for  front  line health workers  to protect  
them  against  Swine  Flu. The  Committee  are  of  the  considered  view  that the  
steps  taken  by the  Department  of  Health  Research and ICMR  for  indig enous  
production of vaccine  as well as  procuring ad  hoc  quota  with  the  international  
manufacturers especially for  front  line  health workers  are  measures  in  the  right 
direction  and  should  be  expeditiously persisted  with.  The committee,   further  
desire  that  the Department of Pharmaceuticals, the  Department of  Health  
Research, ICMR  and  Department of Biotechnology  should  make concerted  
efforts  to make  the  indigenous  production of  Swine  Flu  vaccine  a big  success  
to nip  the disease in  the  bud. 
(Para No. 57) 
 
Reply of the Department 
 
The directions of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  DCG(I) has 
informed that Swine Flu vaccine manufactured by Sanofi Aventis will be available by 
the end of March, 2010 to targeted/selected population in the country. 
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The representative of M/s Zydus Cadila has informed the Task Force that  
H1N1 vaccine manufactured by t hem  is  a single dose vaccine  in injectible  form 
which gives protection for one year.  It has already been launched in the Indian  
market on 3 rd June, 2010.  He has also  informed that they have sufficient stock 
ready with them.   
 
The representative of  M/s Serum Institute has informed that their  Intranasal H1N1 
vaccine has been licensed and is available in the market.  Clinical trials for their 
Inactivated H1N1 vaccine have been successfully completed and the company has 
got the Marketing Authorization  and Manufacturing License from DCG(I) and this 
vaccine is also available in the market. 
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 
 
Recommendation 
 
The Committee  have  been  informed by  the  Department  of Pharmaceuticals  and 
the  Department of  Health and  Family  Welfare  that  Swine Flu  cannot  be  
combated  in  isolation  as  prevention  and  treatment  of  Swine  flu is a  multi 
disciplinary  approach. In this  context ,  the  committee  find that  while  the Ministry 
of  Health and  Family  welfare  are  closely  associated  with  the prevention and  
treatment of  Swine  Flu, the production and  the availability  of  Tami flu is the 
concern of the  Department of  Pharmaceuticals. The Ministries of  Commerce an d  
Industry and  Finance  are also  closely  associated  with  the import  and  export  of  
Shikimic Acid  used  for  the  finished  product,  i.e  oseltamivir . Further, the Ministry 
of  Human  Resource  Development  have  also been  entrusted  with the  

32 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
responsibility to ensure that the  Guidelines  issued  by the Ministry of  Health and 
Family Welfare  in Schools are  properly implemented. The Committee also note 
that the role of  the  Department of  Animal  Husbandry is also solicited  to ward  off 
any possibility of  bird  flu  being  construed  as  Swine  Flu.  However,  what  
concerns the Committee is the  admission of the Department of Pharmaceuticals  
that  there is  some  overlapping in  the  allocation of  the  role  and  responsibilities 
to the different  Ministries/ Departments.  The  Committee, therefore, reiterate  that  
there should  be  proper  coordination and  cooperation  among  various Ministries / 
Departments  while  pursuing  a  common  cause. The  Committee  would  again 
like  the  Gov ernment  to ensure  that all the  concerned  Ministries/Departments  
work in  tandem so that the  multidisciplinary task assigned  to them  to combat 
Swine  Flu are  performed  with  utmost  finesse. They, therefore,  recommend that  
a task  force  compris ing  senior representatives  of all the  concerned  ministries/  
departments/organizations/  research agencies should  meet  periodically and  
monitor  such  pandemic  situation  continuously to ensure  easy and  affordable  
medicines  to all those  who  n eed  it.  Appropriate urgent  attention is  also  
required  with a view  to taking  suitable  steps  as there are  reports  of  mutation  of  
H1N1 virus. 
(Para No. 58) 
 
Reply of the Department 
 
A Task force has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Jo int Secretary, 
Department of Pharmaceuticals with representatives from various 
Ministries/Departments as its members.  The first meeting of the Task Force has 
been held on 12.3.2010. 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
As per the recommendation of the Standing Committee, a Task force has been 
constituted in the Department of Pharmaceuticals under the chairmanship of Joint 
Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals with senior representatives of concerned 
Ministries/ Departments and organizations as its members.  Periodic meetings of 
the Task Force are held  to monitor the pandemic situation so as  to ensure the 
easy and affordable  availability of medicines to all those who need it. 
 
Six meetings of the Task Force have been held so far.  As per  information provided 
by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) during these meetings, they 
have initiated steps to produce Shikimic  acid  in India by exploring possible options 
involving appropriate/ competent groups which can do required R&D and develop 
production technology for commercially viable manufacture of the compound.  ICMR 
had invited proposals for the purpose  and has sanctioned 4 projects.  These 
projects are presently in the research mode. 
 
As per the information provided by Drug Controller General (India), Ministry of 
Health has allowed  Retail sale of Oseltamivir and Zanamivir Capsules under 
certain specific conditions specified under Schedule „X‟ to Drugs & Cosmetics 
Rules.  This medicine was introduced in major outlets of schedule „X‟ Licensed 
shops . 
 
The representative of M/s Zydus Cadila has informed the Task Force that  H1N1 
vaccine manufactured by them  is  a single dose vaccine  in injectible  form which 
gives protection for one year.  It has already been launched in the Indian  market on 

33 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
3rd June, 2010.  He has also  informed that they have sufficient stock ready with 
them.   
 
The representative of M/s Panacea has informed that they have completed clinical 
trials for t heir H1N1 vaccine and their vaccine is safe for all age groups.  They are 
going to submit the report to Drug Controller shortly.   
 
The representative of M/s Serum Institute has informed that their  Intranasal H1N1 
vaccine has been licensed and is availabl e in the market.  Clinical trials for their 
Inactivated H1N1 vaccine have been successfully completed and the company has 
got the Marketing Authorization and Manufacturing License from DCG(I). 
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 

34 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
CHAPTER - III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO  
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLY  
 
Recommendation 
 
The  Committee  have  been  given  to  understand   that the  medicine( Tami flu) 
can also  be used  for the  treatment  of  avian/ seasonal influenza/  flu.  Hence, the  
possibility of  Tami flu  drug being  administered  to the  patients  having  Swine flu 
like  symptoms  without  waiting  for the  confirmation of the  presence  of the  H1N1 
virus  in  them  cannot be  entirely  ruled  out. In such a situation ,  onus lies  with 
the  Department of Pharmaceuticals  and the Ministry of  Health  and  Family 
Welfare  to  take  suitable  measures  to ensure that  the  drug  meant  for  the  
treatment of Swine  flu is used  appropriately  only after confirming  the presence of  
H1N1  virus in the  flu/ influenza  affected  people. 
 
(Para No. 55) 
Reply of the Department 
 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has informed that the guidelines issued by 
them rec ommend treatment with Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) after clinical assessment.  
The mild cases are not treated with the drug but followed up.  Moderate cases and 
those with co-morbid conditions are put on Oseltamivir treatment without testing. 
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Pharmaceuticals  in their Action Taken Replies dated 16 
September 2010 has stated 'No Change'.  
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation 
 
The  Committee  note  that the  Department  of Pharmaceuticals  are  engag ed  in the 
production and  availability  of  drugs  for the  treatment of  Swine  flu.  With the  
cooperation of  the Ministry of  Health and Family  Welfare, they  are  regularly  
monitoring  the  availability of  position of  Shikimic  acid  and  Oseltam ivir  API which  
are  used  for  the production of  drug ie.  Oseltamivir  or  Tamiflu and  Oseltamivir 
Capsules.   The  Ministry of  Health and  Family Welfare  have  also procured stocks 
of  drugs  at the  instance of  the Department of  Pharmaceuticals.   Six Pharma 
companies have volunteered to maintain adequate quantity of drugs to deal with 
Swine flu.  The Ministry of  Health and  Family  Welfare have  also  permitted the  
retail  sale  of  Oseltamivir  capsules  w.e.f  19 September 2009.  However, reg arding  
the  price  control of the  drug  meant  for the  treatment of  Swine  flu,  the  committee 
observe that the  Pharmaceutical Companies  have  been  given liberty to sell the  
medicine at   a price  decided by them  though  within  a “reasonable  li mit”.  The  
Committee  feel that  reasonable  limit  is too  broad  and  vague  a term  which  could  
be  conveniently  manipulated  by the  Pharmaceutical Companies  for  their  own  
gains  and  at the  cost  of  the common man.  Further,  chances of  med icines  of the 
treatment of  Swine  flu becoming costlier  can not  be  ruled  out in view of  the  high  
volatility of the  prices of  raw  material, especially  when these  are  imported  from  
China . Thus  in such  a  scenario, leaving  the pharma  industry to fix the  price of  the 
medicine  on their  own ,  albeit  within , a  reasonable  limit, does not seem  to be  an 
appropriate decision. While  appreciating  the initiatives  taken by the Department in 
persuading  the Ministry of  Finance  for  exe mption of  Customs Duty  on  Oseltamivir 
and  Shikimic acid  and  Excise Duty on   indigenously produced  Oseltamivir  and  
Shikimic  acid  and  Excise Duty on  indigenously  produced  Oseltamivir API and  
capsules, the   Committee  recommends  that the  G overnment  should  initiate  
immediate  appropriate  measures to ensure   easy availability  as well as  affordability 
of  the medicines  for  effective  treatment of Swine  flu. Particularly in view  of  
increase  in case with  the  onset  of winter. 
(Para No. 44) 
Reply of the Department 
 
Oseltamivir is a non-scheduled medicine and not covered under DPCO, 1995.  In 
respect of drugs – not covered under the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995 i.e. the 
non-scheduled drugs, manufacturers fix the prices by thems elves without seeking the 
approval of Government/NPPA.  Such prices are normally fixed depending on various 
factors like the cost of bulk drugs used in the formulation, cost of excipients, cost of 
R&D, cost of utilities/packing material, sales promotion co sts, trade margins, quality 
assurance cost, landed cost of import etc.  As a part of price monitoring activity, NPPA 
regularly examines the movement in prices of non -scheduled formulations.  The 
monthly reports of ORG IMS and the information furnished by i ndividual 
manufacturers are utilized for the  purpose of monitoring prices of non -scheduled 
formulations.  Wherever a price increase beyond 10% per annum is noticed, the 
manufacturer is asked to bring down the price voluntarily failing which, subject to 
prescribed conditions action is initiated under paragraph 10(b) of the DPCO, 1995 for 
fixing the price of the formulation in public interest . This is an ongoing process.    
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 

36 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Pharmaceuticals  in their Action Taken Replies dated 16 
September 2010 has stated 'No Change'.  
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 
 
Recommendation 
 
The  Committee are highly  concerned  to  note  that although  Maharashtra  has  
reported maximum  number of  Swine  flu cases,  it has only three  Laboratories  to 
detect  such  cases. In  this  regard  the  Committee  find  that  Delhi  which  ranks  
number two in  reporte d  Swine flu cases  and  Tamil Nadu  which  has  reported  
fewer  cases   of  Swine  flu has  seven  Laboratories each whereas  other  states 
have either  one  or  two Laboratories   .  The  Committee     feel that  several  
cases  of  Swine  flu  in  vari ous  states  might  have  remained undetected  for  
want  of  adequate  Laboratories  / detection centers .   They,therefore,  impress  
upon the Ministry of  Chemicals and Fertilizers  to take  up the  matter  at  the 
appropriate  level urgently so that  s ufficient  number of  Laboratories  are  set  up 
especially in  Swine  flu vulnerable  states/UTs,  for  early  detection and  timely  
treatment  of such pandemic  disease.  As  some  states  have  only one  or  two  
Laboratories , the  Committee recommend  that  Private  Laboratories  may be  
appropriately encouraged  to supplement the efforts  of  Government for  detection 
of Swine  flu  cases. 
(Para No. 46) 
Reply of the Department 
 
 
Availability of testing laboratories comes under the purview of Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare. They have informed that testing for pandemic influenza 
can only be done in Bio safety level (BSL) – 3 laboratory or a Bio Safety – 2 
Laboratory with BSL-3 precautions.  From the two testing laboratories (NCDC, Delhi 
and National Institute of Virology, Pune) available prior to July, 2009 the number of 
laboratories were expanded to 18.  Subsequently, it was further expanded to 44. 
Among these 18 are in private sector. 
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Pharmaceuticals  in their Action Taken Replies dated 16 
September 2010 has stated 'No Change'.  
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 
 
Recommendation 
 
The  Committee note  that  at  present  the Government do not  have  any plan  to 
get  into the  production of  Oseltamivir  API  through Central  Public  Sector 
Enterprise (CPSE ) for the  reason that  they have  not  found it economically viable 
for  PSUs at  this  stage  to enter  into production  of the  drug.  In this context, the  
Committee  find that six  private  Pharmaceutical Companies are engaged in the 
supply of  Oseltamivir  75 mg  Capsules in  the country. Four of these  companies , 

37 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
viz. He tero  Drugs,  Cipla,  Ranbaxy and Strides  Areolab  have facilities for 
indigenous  production  of  Oseltamivir  form its  raw  material i.e. Shikimic  Acid.  
Out of the remaining  two  Companies, Roche has  no local production in India and 
is supplying  Oseltamivir  Capsules  by importing the same  from their  corporate set 
up.  The other  company,  viz .  NATCO has only formulation capability of the 
capsules  based on  Oseltamivir  API.  The  Committee acknowledge  the  efforts  
made  by  the Private  Sec tor in producing / supplying  medicines for  the treatment 
of  Swine  flu. They are, however,  disappointed to find that there is no move on the 
part of the Government to produce the Oseltamivir  medicine  through their  PSUs 
on the  plea of it being  not  economically viable.  The  Committee are  not  
convinced  by the  Government‟s, logic  since  production  of one  specific  thing 
which is  Commercially/  economically  viable  for  one sector cannot  be  otherwise 
for other  sector , more so  when  the  private  sector does not  opt  for anything that 
is  economically un -viable .  In  Committee‟s view  cost  alone  cannot  be  always 
the prime  factor  particularly when the dealing  with  a  pandemic situation like  
Swine  flu which  has  taken so many  p recious lives.  Moreover,  the Committee 
dread a  situation where  the Private  Sector, for some  unforeseen  circumstances, 
is not able  to produce  Oseltamivir  at all curtail  its  production and  the  
Government have no  contingency  plan in place  to  deal with  the situation.  
Prudence, therefore, requires the Government to gear up their  preparedness  to 
ensure availability of  Oseltamivir  medicine in any  eventuality , notwithstanding the 
Commercially viability  factor.  As it is life  saving  drug , the  Department of 
Pharmaceuticals  should entrust  to  one of  its  PSUs the job of production of 
Oselltamivir despite  the same  being  unviable.  Such company should  be 
compensated  suitably, if  necessary,  through budgetary  grant.    
(Para No. 53) 
Reply of the Department 
 
PSU Division of the Department of Pharmaceuticals has informed that 
Oseltamivir is a patented drug.  The pharma CPSUs do not have API manufacturing 
facilities to produce Oseltamivir.  As such, it is not being manufactured by Pharm a 
CPSUs.  The CPSUs also do not have the generic composition to launch their own 
brand. 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Pharmaceuticals  in their Action Taken Re plies dated 16 
September 2011 has stated 'No Change'.  
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 
 
 

38 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
CHAPTER - V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation 
 
It is  a matter of  serious  concern  that the  Department  of  Pharmaceuticals has  
not  kept  track  of the  means adopted  by other  countries like  USA  and  Mexico 
to cope  with  the  availability  of Shikimic  Acid  or  measures  taken  b y them  to 
find  alternate  route  for production of Oseltamivir.  As it has  been  established  
that the H1N1 virus has  penetrated India  from  foreign  land,  it would  have  been 
prudent on the part of the  Department  to maintain  appropriate  interna tional  data  
with regard  to their  efforts  towards  availability/ production of  Oseltamivir  or  
alternatives  thereto.  However,  even now it is not too  late.  The Committee 
impress upon the  Department  to urgently  initiate a study to gauge  the  
dependency of other countries  upon  China  for  Shikimic Acid and  the  alternate 
route , if any,  adopted  by them to produce Oseltamivir. The  Committee  are  
confident that  a comparative  assessment  would  immensely  help  the Research 
Organizations  like  ICMR and NIPER  in their  endeavors towards  making  India 
self – sufficient in producing Oseltamivir  medicine  to counter   Swine  flu. 
 
(Para No. 50) 
Reply of the Department 
 
The Department has written to three Research Agencies and has requested 
them to indicate their willingness or otherwise for conducting this study, the time 
required for completing this study and the fees chargeable for this.  After getting the 
response from these Agencies, the suitable Agency for conducting the study will be 
selected.  
 
In the meantime, the Deputy Industrial Advisor in the Department has also been 
requested to conduct this study.  He has submitted the report.  He has reported that 
commercial production of  Oseltamivir  starts  from the  biomolecule  Shikimic  a cid  
harvested from  Chinese  star anise  with  a limited  worldwide  supply.  Due  to its  
limited  supply  searches  for  alternative  synthetic  routes  preferably skipping  
Shikimic  acid are  underway and to date  several  such  routes  have  been  
published. In the  total synthesis of Oseltamivir,  control of  Stereochemistry is  
important;  the  molecule has  three  stereo  centers  and  the sought  after  isomer  
is  only 1 of  8 streoismers. 
 
The  current  production method is  based on research  b y  Gilead  Scinces  starting  
from naturally  occurring quinic  acid  and that of  Hoffmann - La  Roche  starting  
from  Shikimic acid.  The  current  production method include  two  reaction  steps  
with  potentially  hazardous  azides. A  reported  azide – free  Roche  synthesis  of  
Tami flu is given by  Karpt/ Trussardi  synthesis .  Other reported routes published 
are:  
(I) Corey synthesis  
(II) Shibasaki  synthesis  
(III) Fukuyama synthesis 
 
Commercial production from alternative  routes have not been reported in literature. 
  
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 

39 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
 
 In order to get a study conducted to gauge the dependency of other 
countries upon China for Shikimic Acid and the alternate route, if any, adopted by 
them to produce Oseltamivir, based on information received from FICCI Department 
of Pharmaceuticals has written to three Research Agencies and has requested 
them to indicate their willingness or otherwise alongwith other terms and condition s 
for conducting this study.  Reply from all the three agencies have not been received.  
The matter is being pursued with them.  The Department has also written to two 
more research agencies and letters to WHO and Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare have also been sent. 
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 
 
Recommendation 
 
The  Committee  express their  displeasure over the fact  that  details are  
reportedly  not  available  with  the Directorate  General  of  Co mmercial Intelligence 
(DGCIS),  Kolkata  regarding  the quality and  value  of medicine and Shikimic Acid 
imported  on the  plea  that there is no  specific  code for  Swine  flu in the  
classification system.  They also  express their  unhappiness  since  similar 
information which was also  sought  from the  Department  of  Revenue  by the 
Department of  Pharmaceuticals  has  not been furnished.  The Committee would  
like  to point out that when  so many Ministries / Departments have  been  entrusted  
with  the  responsibility to check the spread  of  swine  flu, there must  be  a proper 
coordination and  cooperation amongst  themselves  to perform  the respective 
assigned  task effectively.  But in the instant  case,  despite the  efforts  of the 
Department  of Pharmaceuticals to get  relevant  information,  the  other  concerned 
Ministries/ Department  did not  oblige. The  Committee  take  a strong exception to  
the callousness  on the part of  the Department  of Revenue  on such  an important  
issue  and   recommend   that  henceforth any  information  sought  by one 
Department from the  other  should  invariably  be  furnished  in  a time  bound  
manner in order  to facilitate  further  follow up  action for dealing  with  Swine  Flu. 
The  Committee direc t  the Department of Revenue to institute  an internal  enquiry 
to  fix  the  responsibility for this  negligence  and  take  punitive  action  against the 
erring  officials.  The Committee  advocate  the need  for  a  close  coordination and 
cooperation a t  sufficiently high level  amongst all the  Concerned Ministries/ 
Department  and  desire  the  Department of  Pharmaceuticals  to play a proactive  
role  in  the  process. 
 
(Para No. 51) 
Reply of the Department 
 
The observations of the Committee have bee n conveyed to Department of 
Revenue and Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics, 
Kolkata.  The recommendation of the Committee regarding proper coordination and 
cooperation amongst the Departments has been noted for compliance. 
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Pharmaceuticals  in their Action Taken Replies dated 16 
September 2010 has stated 'No Change'.  
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 

40 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
 
Recommendation 
 
The  Committee are  perturbed  to note  the self  contradictory  reply  given  by  the  
Department of Pharmaceuticals in respect of the  hoarding  of  Shikimic  Acid  by 
the  traders. At one  pla ce  it has  been  stated that the possibility of  hoarding  of  
Shikimic   Acid  cannot be  ruled out in view  of it  being  under the Open  General 
Licence (OGL)   policy  whereas, elsewhere it has  been mentioned  that the  Open 
Licence policy would prevent any  monopolistic facilities such as  hoarding. The two  
statements  need  to be  reconciled. The  Committee desire that if  according to the  
Department of  Pharmaceuticals, there is any  loophole in the  existing OGL policy  
which might  be  taken ad vantage of  by the  traders  to hoard Shikimic  Acid, they 
should  take  up the  matter  with  the  Department of  Commerce to  revise  the 
Licence  Policy so as  to make  it  transparent  and  foolproof in order  to ward  off 
any  possibility  of  hoarding  of  Shikimic  Acid. 
 
(Para No. 52) 
Reply of the Department 
 
DGFT has informed that domestic availability of Shikimic acid and Oseltamivir, 
was closely monitored through exports and imports of the above products.  Even 
during the high phase of Swine flu,  no need of policy change on importability of 
these two products was felt except the need for close monitoring of imports and 
exports.  Further no instance of hoarding of these products was reported. 
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.5/57/2009-PI-I/III  
dated 29.3.2010) 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Pharmaceuticals  in their Action Taken Replies dated 16 
September  2010 has stated 'No Change'.  
 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals O.M. No.35022/48/2010/PI-I/III  
dated 16.9.2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 New Delhi;                                                    Gopinath Munde 
28 July, 2011                                                                                   Chairman, 
6 Shravana, 1933 (Saka)              Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 

41 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
 
Appendix – I 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2010-11) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 31 May, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to 1630 
hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
Dr. Manda Jagannath  - Acting Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
3. Shri Prabhatsinh P. Chauhan  
4. Smt. Santosh Chowdhary  
5. Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar  
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
7. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup  
8. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato  
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal  
10. Shri Tapas Paul  
11. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
12. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  
13. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar  
RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri A.A. Jinnah  
15. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani  
16. Shri Raghunandan Sharma  
17. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
18. Shri Abani Roy  
19. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
 
Secretariat   
1. Shri Ashok Sarin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C. S. Joon   - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Additional Director 
 

42 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
2. As the Chairman could not attend  the sitting due to pre -occupation, the 
members chose Dr. Manda Jagannath,  a member of the Committee, to act as the 
Chairman.  The Acting Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption  the following 
draft Action Taken Reports : 
(i) Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Fifth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on ‘Production and Availability of 
Medicines to deal with Swine Flu’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
 
(ii) ***  ***  ***  ***  
 
(iii) ***  ***  ***  ***  
 
(iv) ***  ***  ***  ***  
 
4. After some deliberation the adoption/ consideration of the above mentioned 
Reports was deferred to a later date.   
 
 
   The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*** Matters not related to this Report. 

43 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
 
 
Appendix – II 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2010-11) 
 
THIRTEENTH SITTING 
(18.07.2011) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday from 1500 hours to 1600 hours. 
Present 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  - Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
3. Shri Prabhatsinh P. Chauhan  
4. Smt. Santosh Chowdhary  
5. Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
6. Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar  
7. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
9. Shri Tapas Paul 
10. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
11. Shri N. Chaluvaraya Swamy 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Silvius Condpan 
13. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
14. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani 
15. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
16. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
17. Shri Abani Roy  
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Sarin   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri C. S. Joon   - Director 
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  

44 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
 
 
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Governmen t on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on „Production and Availability of 
Medicines to deal with Swine Flu‟ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals);  
 
(ii), (iii), (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii)  ***  ***  ***  ***   
 
4. The Committee adopted the draft reports with minor amendments and 
authorized the Chairman to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
   The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*** Matters not related to this Report. 

45 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\14 Report\14 Report.Doc 
 
 
Appendix – III 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (2009-10) ON „PRODUCTION AND AVAILABILITY OF 
MEDICINES TO DEAL WITH SWINE FLU‟ OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS 
AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 15 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos.45, 47, 48, 49, 54, 56, 57 
and 58)   
08 
Percentage of Total 53% 
III Observation / Recommendation which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.No.55) 
 
01 
Percentage of Total 7% 
IV Observation / Recommendation in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos.44, 46 and 53)  
03 
Percentage of Total 20% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are of interim nature:-  
 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl.Nos.50, 51 and 52) 
 
03 
Percentage of Total 20% 
 
 
 