    
15 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2010-11) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers] 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2011/Sharvana, 1933 (Saka) 


 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
2 
 
CC&F No. 15 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2010-11) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 04.08.2011 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  04.08.2011 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2011/Sharvana, 1933 (Saka) 


 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
3 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2010-11) 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Smt. Susmita Bauri  
3 Shri Udayanraje Bhonsle  
4 Shri Prabhatsinh P. Chauhan  
5 Smt. Santosh Chowdhary  
6 Shri K.D. Deshmukh  
7 Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar  
8 Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
9 Shri Madhu Koda  
10 Shri N. Peethambara Kurup  
11. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato  
12 Shri Jagdambika Pal  
13 Shri Tapas Paul  
14 Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
15 Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  
16 Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar  
17 Shri Ajit Singh  
18 Shri N. Chaluvaraya Swamy  
19 Shri Narendra Singh Tomar  
20 #Dr. Manda Jagannath 
21  Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Silvius Condpan  
23 Smt. Naznin Faruque  
24 Shri A.A. Jinnah  
25 Shri Brijlal Khabri  
26 Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani  
27 Shri Raghunandan Sharma  
28 Dr. C.P. Thakur  
29 &Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
30 &Shri Abani Roy  
 31 &Shri Biswajit Daimary 
  
SECRETARIAT   
1. Shri N. K. Sapra   - Secretary 
2.  Shri Ashok Sarin   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri  C.S.Joon   - Director 
4. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
&  NOMINATED W.E.F. 21.09.2010 
#      NOMINATED W.E.F. 04.10.2010 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
4 
 
  
                                                                
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-11) ………………………………... (iii) 
Introduction. …………………………………………………..………………………… (v) 
Chapter I Report ……………….………………………………………………….. 1 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
11 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
27 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee………………………………………………………………. 
28 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited …………………………………… 
31 
 
APPENDICES 
I Statement showing requirement, availability and sales of urea, 
DAP, MOP and NPK 
 
II. Minutes of Tenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2010-11) held on 31 May 2011 
32 
III. Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2010-11) held on 18 July, 2011 
37 
IV. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (15th Lok Sabha) 
of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2009-10) on 
„Demands for Grants (2010-2011)‟ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
39 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2010 -11) 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf present 
this Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations / recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2010 -11) on „Demands for Grants 
(2010-11)‟ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
 
2. The Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 26 April, 2010.  The Action Taken replies 
of Government to all observations / recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 9 August, 2010.  Subsequently, at the behest of the Committee, the 
Department vide LSS OM dated 3 June 2011 was requested to furnish latest/ updated  
Action Taken replies on the previous Action Taken replies in order to cover any new 
development that might h ave occurred.  Accordingly, t he Department furnished their 
updated Action Taken replies on 22  June 2011. The Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (2010 -11) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 18 
July 2011. 
 
3. An analysis  of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommendations  of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
28 July, 2011                                               Gopinath Munde 
6 Shravana, 1933 (Saka)                                                     Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
6 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Sixth Report (Fif teenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 26 April 2010.  The Report contained 9 Observations / 
Recommendations. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were requested 
to furnish replies to the Observations  / Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report 
within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e. by 26 July 2010. The 
Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 9 Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from  the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers , Department of Fertilizers vide their O.M. No.5( 3)/2010-Fin-II 
dated 9 August 2010.  Subsequently, at the instance of the Committee the Department of 
Fertilizers were requested on 03.06.2011 to furnish updated Action Taken Replies  
regarding the details about the Supplementary Demands for Grants obtained by the 
Department durin g 2010 -11.  Accordingly, t he Department have furnished their Action 
Taken Replies on 22.06.2011.  
 
The categorization of the Action Taken Replies of the Government is as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 Sl.Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8 and 9 
(Total =07) 
Chapter-II  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government‟s replies  
 Sl.No. NIL. 
(Total =NIL) 
Chapter-III  
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply  of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration  
 Sl.Nos. 6 and 7 
(Total =02) 
Chapter-IV  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are of interim nature 
 Sl.Nos. NIL  
(Total =NIL) 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
7 
 
Chapter-V  
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report should be furnished 
expeditiously.   
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action take n by the Government o n some of 
their Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. DIRECT PAYMENT OF SUBSIDY TO THE POOR AND THE MARGINAL 
FARMERS.  
 
Recommendation Sl.No.4 
 
5. The Committee in their earlier Reports ha d recommended from time to time for 
achievement of long cherished goal of direct payment of subsidy to the poor and the 
marginal farmers.  The Committee had been informed that fertilizer industry agreed to 
work with the Department of Fertilizers to conduct  a study and find a solution.  
Thereafter, a Group of Ministers (GoM) was formed in May 2007 under the Chairmanship 
of Minister of Agriculture to look into the sustainable use of fertilizers and all aspects of 
fertilizer subsidy regime including the option  of direct fertilizer subsidy to farmers.  The 
Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2010 -11 had again stressed the need to move to 
a system of direct transfer of subsidy to the farmers. 
 
6. The Secretary, Department of Fertilizers while deposing before th e Committee 
had stated that there were certain difficulties viz. getting the clear details regarding land 
holding and ownership data, proper distribution of fertilizers at retailer point, detailed 
study regarding pattern and ratio of direct subsidy, identi fying the actual farmers for 
payment of direct subsidy to farmers.  The Committee had pointed out that despite their 
repeated recommendations in earlier Reports, Government could not achieve the long 
cherished goal of payment of subsidy directly to farmers .  The Committee had desired 
that the Department should come out with a proposal so as to ensure payment of subsidy 
direct to the farmers.  Details of such a proposal may be submitted to the Committee 
within three months of the presentation of the Report.  
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
8 
 
The Ministry in their action taken note stated as under:- 
 
“Department of Fertilizers is examining the feasibility and manner of transfer of 
direct subsidy to the farmers in the second phase of NBS, however, a few 
constraints/problems, which are apprehe nded include that of robust land records 
in many States, different types of land tenures, fixation of quantum of subsidy 
based on requirement of farmer, vis -à-vis cropping pattern, soil requirement, land 
size etc. and also issues of handling liquidity requ irements of fertilizer companies, 
putting in place subsidy transfer mechanism to retailers. However, the Department 
is in the process of finalizing the modalities of a Pilot Project in 5 States across the 
country to examine the feasibility of disbursing di rect subsidy to the farmers, in 
due course, by mapping and tracking the movement of fertilizers, initially, to the 
last point, i.e. the retailer, from whom the farmer buys the fertilizer.  Once the 
pilot/proof of concept is proved, and the modalities of ca pturing farmer related 
data finalized, the feasibility of disbursing subsidy directly to the farmer will 
emerge.” 
 
The Department of Fertilizers in their Action Taken Replies dated 22.06.2011 has stated 
as under:- 
 
"The Government has set up a Task Force u nder the chairmanship of Shri 
Nandan Nilekeni, Chairman, UIDAI on transfer of direct subsidy on kerosene, LPG 
and fertilizers to intended beneficiaries, which has been mandated to implement a 
mechanism for transfer of direct subsidy in fertilizers, includi ng, inter -alia, to 
identify and suggest the required changes in the existing systems, processes and 
procedures, IT frameworks and supply chain management.  The Task Force is 
also to oversee and evaluate the implementation of the solutions proposed on pilot 
based through the concerned implementing Ministries.   
 
 Following this, the Department of Fertilizers has appointed National Informatics 
Centre (NIC) to implement the phase I of the mandate regarding making available 
information visibility at the point of sale to the farmer (retailer).  This phase I will be 
completed in December 2011, after which, phase II, dealing with transfer of 
subsidy at the last point sale (to the retailer or to the retailer on receipt of 
fertilizers) will be implemented.  Phase III  on implementation of direct subsidy to 
farmers will be undertaken when once the Unique Identification Nos. (AADHAR 
Nos.) are issued to the farmers and AADHAR enabled payments are tested." 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
9 
 
 
7. At the instance of the Committee the Department of Fertilizer s has furnished the 
following information vide their OM dated 22.06.2011 regarding Supplementary 
Demands for Grants under the various Heads during 2010-11 in respect of various 
schemes relating to subsidies:- 
 
(Major Head ) 
“2401”-Crop Husbandry 
00.105- Manures and Fertilizers 
14 –Payment for concessional sale of indigenous  
Decontrolled fertilizers 
14.00.33 – Subsidies   
       Amount Rs (in crores ) 
Budget Allocation       13000  
2nd  Batch of supplementary     4000   
3rd Batch       3650 
Total        20650 
 
(Major Head ) 
“2401”-Crop Husbandry 
00.105- Manures and Fertilizers 
14 –Payment for concessional sale of imported 
Decontrolled fertilizers 
15.00.33 – Subsidies  
       Amount Rs (in crores) 
Budget Allocation      15500 
2nd  Batch of supplementary     1000   
3rd Batch       4350 
Total        20850 
 
(Major Head) 
“2401”-Crop Husbandry 
00.106- Import of Fertilizers 
02-Import of Urea          
02.00.33 – Subsidies  
       Amount Rs (in crores) 
Budget Allocation      8360.00 
1st Re-appropriation        (-)4.05 
2nd Re-appropriation                              (+) 900.00 
Total        9255.95  
  
 
The Department has further stated that a s against the Budget allocation in Demand s for 
Grants for the year 2010 -11 under various Head s the pending liabilities of various  
companies had exceeded, hence further allocation of Budget was made available in 2 nd 
& 3rd supplementary Demands for Grants. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
8. The Committee in their earlier recommendation  had recommended that the 
Ministry should take concre te steps to achieve the long cherished goal of direct 
payment of subsidy to the poor and marginal farmers.  In this regard , the Ministry 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
10 
 
in their action taken reply have stated that they are facing few impediments in 
implementation of the direct payment of  subsidy to the poor and t he marginal 
farmers and that the modalities of pilot project of feasibility of direct subsidy to 
farmers in 5 States across the country  is being finalized .   The Committee are 
dismayed over the delay in finalizing the scheme for so long and strongly reiterate 
that the steps for implementation of direct subsidy to the poor and marginal 
farmers should be expedited in an urgent manner so that the benefits reach to the 
poor and marginalized farmers at the earliest.  With regard to direct subsidy to the 
farmers the Committee hope that the Task Force constituted under the 
chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nelikani would give its full report at the earliest and 
all the three phase s of the direct subsidy to farmers will be completed within the 
time frame and the benefits of direct subsidy is available by the farmers at the 
earliest. 
 
The Committee note that the Budget allocation under Major Head '2401' crop 
Husbandry, sub -head "Payment for concessional sale of indigenous Decontrolled 
fertilizers" was of Rs.13000 crore, the 2nd batch of supplementary was of Rs.4000 
crore and 3rd batch of supplementary was of Rs.3650 crore.  The total of 2nd batch 
supplementary and 3rd batch is at Rs.7650 crore.  The Committee further note that 
the budget allocation under sub -head "Payment for concessional sale of imported 
decontrolled fertilizers" was at Rs.15500 crore, the 2nd batch supplementary was at 
Rs.1000 and 3rd batch was at Rs.4350 crore.  The total of 2nd and 3rd batch 
supplementary was at Rs.5350 crore.  T he Committee also observe that the budget 
allocation under sub -head "import of Urea" was at Rs.8360 crore.  The 1st re -
appropriation was at Rs.(-) Rs.4.05 crore and 2nd re -appropriation was at Rs.(+) 900 
crore and the total re-appropriation was at Rs.895.95 crore.  
 
 The Committee are unhappy with the fact that the Department of Fertilizers is 
not making prudent decisions and projections for allocation of Demands for Grants 
and is asking for more Supplementary Grants during the financial year.  They, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should take more realistic decision in 
making projections and allocations for Demands for Grants. The Committee hope that 
Government would take a realistic view in the matter particularly keeping into 
account the need for  ensuring the liability on account of subsidy , so that the 
Supplementary Demands for Grants do not increase year after year.  On their part, the 
Department of Fertilizers should also keep a strict watch and control over factors 
impacting budgetary allocations and expenditure thereon.  
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
11 
 
B. ALLOCATION OF GAS FOR EXISTING AND NEW FERTILIZER PLANTS IN 
THE COUNTRY 
 
Recommendation Sl.No. 6 
 
9. The Committee had been informed that out of 28 urea units in the country, 20 
units are gas based; 4 units based on Naphth a and 4 on Fuel Oil (FO)/Low Sulphur 
Heavy Stock (LSHS) as feedstock.  The total requirement of natural gas for existing 20 
units is 40.92 mmscmd, which is being met from the supplies under APM Gas, PMT Gas, 
JV gas and RLNG gas.  The Committee note d that s ix fertilizer companies have 
proposed to undertake expansion of their existing units but expressed concern regarding 
pricing and firm availability of gas before taking final investment decision.  An 
Empowered Group of Minsters(EGoM) was constituted in 2007  to examine and decide 
issues of gas pricing and commercial utilisation of gas under New Exploration Licensing 
Policy.  The Committee were also informed by the Department of Fertilizers that as per 
assurance given by the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas , most of the Naphtha/fuel oil 
based plants and closed fertilizer plants will get the gas pipeline connectivity by 2009 -
10/2010-11.  The Committee expected the Department of Fertilizers to vigorously pursue 
the matter with the Ministry of Petroleum and Nat ural Gas so that effective and 
expeditious steps are taken by them to achieve these targets. 
 
10. The Committee had emphasised that pricing and firm availability of natural gas for 
existing and new units of fertilizer companies are the pre -requisite to inc rease their 
indigenous production and would, therefore, desire the Department to play a proactive 
role in association with the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas towards allocation of gas 
for the existing and new fertilizer plants in the country. 
11. The Committee regretted to observe that no specific decision has been taken by 
the Department regarding the issue of nominating GAIL (India) Limited as the nodal 
authority for supply of gas to fertilizer industry.  The Committee, therefore, desire d that 
the decision in the matter should be taken up on priority basis and precise action taken in 
this regard be intimated to the Committee within three months.        
 
The Ministry in their action taken reply stated as under:- 
 
“The issue of nominating GAIL (India) L imited as the nodal authority for supply of 
gas to fertilizer industry was proposed to Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.  
However, no decision in the matter has been received from the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas.  
 
Further, it is submitted that the Department of Fertilizers in the meeting held on  
23-04-2010 at the level of Secretary(F) discussed the proposal for amendments in 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
12 
 
the policy for new investments in urea sector and long term off  take of urea from 
joint venture abroad which was notified  on 4 September 2008.   A decision has 
been taken in this meeting that in view of the uncertainty of gas prices in future 
and its futuristic long -term requirements, observing the consensus of 
stakeholders, DOF may consider to appoint GAIL as the Aggregator  to procure 
gas from indigenous as well as international resources by a transparent route for 
fertilizer sector subject to a decision at competent level.  The above decision has 
been communicated to Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas for consideration and  
necessary action.“  
 
The Department of Fertilizers in their Action Taken Replies dated 22.06.2011 has stated 
as under:- 
 
 "Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has constituted an Inter-Ministerial 
Committee under chairmanship of Dr. Saumitra Chaudhuri, M ember Planning 
Commission to formulate a policy for pooling of Natural Gas prices and devise 
pool operating guidelines to make the policy operational.  The first meeting of the 
Committee was held on 23 rd March 2011 and the second meeting of the Inter -
Ministerial Committee was held on 13.05.2011.  The issues are still under 
consideration of Inter-Ministerial Committee." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
12. The Committee are unhappy  to note that the Ministry in their action taken 
note have not given any speci fic reply to the recommendation  of the Committee.  
The Committee also regret to note that the Ministry have  not played a very 
proactive role in pursuing  the matter with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas for pricing and firm allocation of gas for new and existing fertilizer plants in 
the country.  The Committee are also disappointed to note that despite emphasis  
laid by the Committee on appointment of GAIL (India) Limited as the nodal 
authority for supply of gas to fertilizer industry, still no decision has been taken in 
this regard.  The Committee note that in the updated reply Department have stated 
that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas have constituted an Inter-Ministerial 
committee under chairmanship of Dr. Saumitra Chaudhari, Member Planning 
Commission to  formulate a policy for pooling of Natural Gas prices and devising  
pool operating guidelines to make  the policy operational.  Two meetings of the 
Inter-Ministerial Committee have been held on 23rd March 2011 and on 13th May 
2011.  The Committee further note that issues are still under consideration of Inter-
Ministerial Committee.  The Committee, therefore, express their unhappiness that 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
13 
 
no feasible solution or decision has been taken with regard to the pricing and firm 
availability of Natural Gas for existing and new units of fertilizer companies which 
are pre -requisite to increase the indigenous production of fertilizers.   The 
Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate  implementation of the earlier 
recommendation of the Committee and  desire that the Ministry should take urgent 
steps to exp edite the work in both aspects namely pricing and firm allocation of 
gas and appointment of GAIL (India) Limited as the nodal autho rity.  The 
Committee are of the view  that the Ministry should work in tandem with the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas for expediting both the matters at the 
earliest.   
 
 
C. IMPLEMENTATION OF MECHANISEM FOR EQUITABLE DISTRIBUTION OF 
FERTILIZERS 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.7 
 
13. The Committee note d that the Department of Fertilizers m onitors availability of 
fertilizers at the State level and the State governments are responsible for equitable 
distribution of subsidized fertilizers within the States.  Fertilizer companies were advised 
to draw supply plan of subsidized fertilizers in con sultation with the States‟ Agriculture 
Department and comply with the given supply plan on month -to-month basis.  The 
movement of fertilizers is monitored throughout the country by an on -line web based 
monitoring system ( www.urvarak.co.in) also called as Fertilizer Monitoring System 
(FMS).  The FMS is being used very effectively  to monitor the availability of fertilizers 
namely urea, DAP,MOP and NPK fertilizers in all the districts in the country.  As  in some 
States, the farmers were  facing acute difficulty in getting urea, Potash, DAP etc., the 
Committee, desire d that Central Government should devise a foolproof mechanism for 
proper and equitable distribution of fertilizers in all parts of the country especially in 
remote, hilly and inaccessible areas.  Further to tackle the problem of artificial shortage, if 
any, created in some region, special efforts may be made to provide adequate quantity of 
fertilizer so that the farmers are not left at the mercy of hoarders and black marketers.  
The Committee desired to be apprised of the complaints received regarding artificial 
shortage of fertilizers during the last three years and their location together with suitable 
corrective action taken by the Department to check the same. 
 
The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated as under:- 
 
“The Government has introduced a Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy in 
respect of Phosphatic & Potassic fertilizers w.e.f. 1.4.2010.  Under the NBS, 20% 
of the decontrolled fertilizers pr oduced/imported in India will now be in the 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
14 
 
movement control under the Essential Commodities Act 1955(ECA).  Department 
of Fertilizers will regulate the movement of these fertilizers to bridge the supplies 
in under -served areas. For proper and equitable di stribution of fertilizers in all 
parts of the country especially in remote, hilly and inaccessible areas such as for J 
&K, Himachal Pradesh and N E region, DOF has issued instructions to all the 
concerned companies to dispatch fertilizers (Urea, DAP, MOP a nd NPK)) in such 
a manner in order to ensure its availability in each and every corner of states. 
As per clause 21 of the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985, it is mandatory to 
print the maximum retail price on each bag of fertilizers whether under statu tory 
price control or out of the purview of the statutory price control.  No person shall 
charge price higher than the price printed on the bag.  Any person violating this 
mandatory provision of FCO is held liable under the provisions of FCO and 
Essential Commodities Act. The State Governments as enforcement agencies, 
are adequately empowered to take appropriate action against the offenders who 
indulge in any kind of malpractices. 
As regards complaints relating to artificial shortage of fertilizers during t he last 
three years, Department of Fertilizer s initiated some positive corrective measures 
and movement of 50 million tonnes of fertilizers is possible with daily movement of 
about 60 r ailway rakes along with about 20% movement by road trailers and 
dispatch of railway rake through additional notional rake points. Statement 
showing requirement, availability and sale of Urea, DAP, MOP and NPK during 
the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 and 2009-10 are enclosed – Appendix-I.” 
 
The Department of Fertilizers in their Action Taken Replies dated 22.06.2011 has stated 
as under:- 
 
"No change except in the Statement for the year 2010-11" 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
14. The Committee are unhap py to note that the Ministry have  not put any 
substantial eff ort in solving the prob lem of artificial shortage of fertilizers and no 
special steps have been taken to provide adequate quantity of fertilizers to the 
farmers.    Merely stating that movement of 50 million ton nes of fertilizers is possible 
with daily movement of 60 railway rak es along with about 20 per cent movement by 
road trailers etc. does not  clarify that the issues have been taken up with the Ministry 
of Railways and other concerned authorities.   The Committee, therefore, desire an 
unambiguous statement by the Department  of Fertilizers categorically dwelling upon 
the measures taken by them to check artificial shortage of fertilizers. 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
15 
 
The Committee observe from Appendix I that for last 3 years states like Jharkhand, 
J&K, Uttarakhand and Assam have been consistently falling  short in the requirement 
of fertilizers.  It seems that the Department of Fertilizers has not made any concrete 
effort for bridging the gap between demand and supply of fertilizers specially in the 
remote, hilly and inaccessible areas of the country.  The  Committee observe that for 
the year 2007 -2008 states such as J&K, Jharkhand, Assam and Chattisgarh had 
shortage of fertilizers namely in urea, and in DAP/MOP.  Further, in the year 2008 -09, 
2009-10 and in the year 2010 -11, Jharkhand, Assam, Orissa, J&K and West Bengal 
have shown no improvement in the availability of fertilizers as per their requirement.   
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take steps to improve the situation 
with regard to availability of fertilizers in all the states and especially in those states 
where there has been consistent shortage of  fertilizers in last 3 years and the 
availability of fertilizer has not been as per the requirement of the se states.  The 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation  that the Ministry sh ould develop 
and implement an effective mechanism for judicious and equitable distribution of 
fertilizers.  The Committee expect that the Ministry will make serious efforts to see 
that there is proper distribution of fertilizers according to the requiremen t of each 
state and the farmers specially poor and marginal farmers do not suffer for the want 
of fertilizers. 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
16 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation Sl.No.1 
 
At present there are 56 large siz e fertilizer plants in the country manufacturing a 
wide range of nitrogenous, phosphatic and complex fertilizers.  Besides, there are 72 
medium and small -scale units operational in producing Single Super Phosphate (SSP).  
India is the third largest fertilizer producer in the world with the installed capacity as on 31 
March 2009 reaching a level of 120.61 lakh MT of nitrogenous and 56.59 lakh MT of 
phosphatic nutrients.  However, the growth of fertilizer industry is based on the 
production capacity, producti on and sale of fertilizers in the country.  The gap between 
the demand and indigenous production is met through import.  The Committee are of the 
view that due to stagnant consumption of fertilizers during Ninth Plan period, no incentive 
for increase in pr oduction capacities within the country was provided and sudden 
increase in demand and consumption thereafter led to heavy strain on indigenous 
production facilities and have also increased our dependence upon imports. 
 
 Lack of adequate availability of inputs including natural gas required for production 
of fertilizers and limited resources are the major bottlenecks in achieving self -sufficiency 
in the fertilizer sector.   In the absence of commercially exploitable potash sources in the 
country, the entire demand of potassic fertilizers for direct application as well as for 
production of complex fertilizers is being met through imports.  However, keeping in view 
the vital role played by chemical fertilizers as one of the key inputs for the success of 
agriculture in the country, the Committee feel that there is an urgent need for suitable 
steps to be taken by the Department to ensure a sustained growth of the fertilizer 
industry as a whole. 
 
 The Committee in this regard desire that Department should vigorously pursue the 
issues regarding adequate allocation of natural gas and gas pipeline connectivity with the 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.  The Committee are of the view that with the 
assured allocation of natural gas to the fertilizer sector, the expans ion and revamping 
process of existing and new fertilizer projects could also be completed at the earliest 
which would avoid cost and time overruns.  At the same time, a balanced use of 
fertilizers (NPK) is also essential for increasing agricultural product ivity in the country.  
Consequently, the Committee feel that expeditious measures  need to be taken by the 
Department to remove all bottlenecks and hurdles in capacity addition programmes so as 
to achieve self sufficiency in fertilizer sector. 
 
Reply of the Department 
The allocation of natural gas from KG -D6 field has been made by the Empowered 
Group of Ministers(EGoM) on commercial utilisation of gas under NELP in its meeting 
held from time to time.   Fertilizer Sector has been accorded the highest priorit y while 
making said allocation.  All the existing gas based fertilizer plants have been allotted gas 
to ensure their full capacity utilisation.  The EGoM in its meeting held on May 28, 2008 
discussed the demand of natural gas for Expansion projects, Reviva l of closed fertilizer 
plants, conversion of Naphtha based & Fuel Oil based fertilizer plants and decided that it 
would be given the highest priority at that stage and the gas requirement will be met from 
production in subsequent years.  Further, in the EG oM meeting held on October 27, 
2009, it was decided that such plants would be supplied natural gas as and when they 
are ready to utilize the gas.   

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
17 
 
The companies have been regularly requesting the Department of Fertilizers for 
firm allocation of gas at pre determined fixed prices from domestic gas sources .  The 
constraints indicated by the fertilizer company are under examination  of Department of 
Fertilizers and a proposal for amendments in the New Investment Policy notified on 4 th 
September 2008 is under co nsideration to facilitate the investments in urea sector 
leading self reliance in urea sector. 
 
The issue of allocation of gas for the future feedstock change, revamp, expansion, 
revival and Greenfield projects as well as providing pipeline connectivity to  all existing 
plants has been taken up by Department of Fertilizers with Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas.  
 
 So far as balanced use of fertilizers(NPK) for increasing productivity in the country 
is concerned, the Government has notified the Nutrient Ba sed Subsidy (NBS) policy on 
4th March 2010 for Phosphatic and Potassic(P&K) fertilizers w.e.f. 1-4-2010.  
 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 9.8.2010) 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Fertilizers in their Action T aken Replies dated 22.06.2011 has 
stated as under:- 
 
"The Group of Ministers (GOM) constituted to review the fertilizer policy had discussed 
the proposal submitted by the Department of Fertilizers for formulation of policy for 
existing urea units beyond Stage-III of New Pricing Scheme (NPS) as modified NPS-III in 
urea sector, Amendments to the New Investment Policy 2008 for new investments and 
other related issues, in the meeting of Group of Ministers held on 5 th January 2011.  The 
GoM decided to constitute  a Committee under chairmanship of Dr. Saumitra Chaudhuri, 
Member Planning Commission with Secretary (Fertilizers), Secretary (Expenditure), 
Secretary (DAC) and Secretary (Petroleum) as members.  The committee has examined 
the proposal for introduction of NBS in urea, including various options therefore and 
made suitable recommendations." 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 22.6.2011) 
Recommendation Sl.No.2 
 The Committee note that for the Eleventh Five Year Plan(2007 -12), Planning 
Commission has approved an outlay of Rs. 20,627.87 crore consisting of Rs. 1,492.00 
crore as Domestic Budgetary support and Rs. 19,135.87 crore as Internal and Extra 
Budgetary Resources(IEBR).  These allocations are to be utilized for taking up the 
approved schemes of underperforming fertilizer PSUs and research activities by 
renowned technical/research institutes.  The Committee have been informed that three 
major projects, viz. revival of sick and closed fertilizer units, capital subsidy for 
conversion of f eedstock changover projects and S&T schemes have been taken up by 
the Department during the Eleventh plan period.  However, the Committee have 
observed that the allocation during each of the year  from 2007 -2008 to 2009 -10 was 
drastically reduced at RE sta ge from that of BE stage i.e. (Rs.1,037.96 crore to 
Rs.439.18 crore in 2007 -08, Rs.1,878.93 crore to Rs.699.17 crore in 2008 -09 and 
Rs.2,269.56 crore to Rs.1,024.16 crore for   2009 -10).  The Committee have genuine 
apprehensions that the Annual Plan for 20 10-11 is likely to meet the same fate.  The 
Committee were informed that actual money could not be spent for reasons of 
technological and technical market related issues which, however, do not prima facie 
appear to be convincing.  The Committee are of the view that the Department has not 
exercised due diligence while preparing the budget estimates.  The Committee feel that a 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
18 
 
more realistic plan could have been drawn up had due diligence been exercised at the 
level of the Planning Commission or the Department  
  
The Committee, therefore, feel that there is an urgent need for proper planning 
and drawing up realistic estimates and timely and prudent use of approved outlays.  The 
Department of Fertilizers should also endeavour to impress upon the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance to allocate necessary funds for the various 
schemes / programmes that are asked for based on the proper estimates.  
 
Reply of the Department 
 
Most of the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) allocated by Planning Commission 
was sp ent during the year, however short fall occurred in Internal & Extra Budgetary 
Resources (IEBR) projections which is generated by companies themselves.   The 
companies have been asked to plan, project and utilize Plan expenditure in most 
effective manner w ith due diligence.   During the quarterly review meetings held under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary  (F)  it was impressed upon the companies that they 
should realistically project their Annual Plan expenditure and all steps should be taken to 
meet the Plan  expenditure targets.  Companies have assured that they will try to achieve 
the projected Plan expenditure during 2010-11 and realistic projections would be made in 
future.  Department of Fertilizers will further review Plan expenditure during  Review 
Meetings with the PSU under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Fertilizers) on regular 
basis. Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser and Economic Advisor   will also review 
Plan expenditure from time to time on a regular basis.   
 
Regarding allocation of adequate  funds by Planning Commission it may be 
mentioned that Planning Commission allocate funds out of total  allocation made by the 
Finance Ministry for the  Annual Plan of all the Departments of Government of India 
(GOI).   Planning Commission will be apprised of the views of the Standing Committee at 
the time of Annual Plan discussions. 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 9.8.2010) 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Fertilizers in their Action Taken Replies dated 22.06.201 1 has 
stated 'No Change'. 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 22.6.2011) 
Recommendation Sl.No.3 
 
 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the total subsidy disbursed 
on fertilizers has increased from Rs. 12,808 crore in 2001-02 to     Rs. 57,056 crore in 
2009-10.  The total subsidy released on urea has increased from Rs. 8,304 crore in the 
year 2001-02 to Rs. 25,258 crore in the year 2009 -10.  Similarly, on P&K fertilizers, the 
fertilizer subsidy has increased from Rs. 4,504 crore in the year 2001 -02 to Rs. 31,798 
crore in the year 2009 -10.  The Committee‟s examination has revealed that only 6.1% of 
the increase in subsidy bill is due to higher consumption of fertilizers while the rest, 
93.9% rise was due to the increase  in international prices during the year 2001 -2009.  
Considering all these facts, the Committee desire that concerted efforts are needed to 
cut the galloping subsidy bill.  Needless to say that in view of increased consumption of 
fertilizers and internatio nal prices of fertilizer inputs and finished fertilizers, there is an 
urgent need for technological innovation, state of the art machinery reducing the cost of 
production, energy efficiency measures, experienced and qualified technical man power 
and optimu m capacity utilization so as to reduce our dependence on imports and 
increasing the indigenous production of fertilizers. 
  

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
19 
 
 
Reply of the Department 
Government has taken various measures to increase indigenous production of 
fertilizers and to reduce import of fertilizer in India.  In order to reduce the subsidy bill, the 
Government has introduced Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy w.e.f. 1 -4-2010 for 
decontrolled P&K fertilizers and w.e.f. 1 -5-2010 for SSP.  Keeping in view the increasing 
consumption of fertiliz ers in the country vis a vis increasing international price of input, 
the Government has notified on 4 th  September 2008 a policy for New Investments in 
urea sector and long terms offtake of urea from Joint Venture abroad to attract 
investments in urea sector.  New Investments will not only increase the energy efficiency, 
optimum utilisation of capacity but also reduce the cost of production through 
technological innovation. The fertilizer Industry has responded positively towards the 
New Investment Policy by initiating investment decision for revamp of existing capacities.  
The fertilizer units like IFFCO -Aonla – I & II, IFFCO -Phulpur – I & II, Chambal Fertilizers 
and Chemicals Limited (CFCL) – Gadepan – I&II, Nagarjuna Fertilizers and Chemicals 
Limited (NFCL) – Kakinada – I & II and the unit of Tata Chemicals Limited - Babrala have 
informed regarding availability of additional production of urea after revamp. Further, 
RCF, Thal; KRIBHCO- Hazira and NFL, Vijaipur have  undertaken revamp of their units.    
As regards expansion projects, six companies viz. IFFCO, KRIBHCO, Rashtriya 
Chemicals  and Fertilizers Limited, INDO -GULF Fertilizers Limited, TATA Chemicals 
Limited and Chambal Fertilizers and Chemicals Limited have proposed to undertake 
expansion of their units.  However, these units have expressed concern regarding pricing 
and firm availability of gas before taking final investment decision to undertake expansion 
of their existing units.  M/s Matrix Group Company, Mumbai has proposed to Department 
of Fertil izers for setting up of a Greenfield Gas Based Ammonia -Urea project in 
BURDWAN District, West Bengal of one million metric tonne per annum (1 Mn MTPA), 
based on Coal Bed Methane(CBM) Gas which will be supplied to them by Essar Oil 
Limited‟s Raniganj CBM block.  Besides, the revival of closed units of FCIL/HFCL is also 
under consideration of Government.   
 
 The issue of firm availability of natural gas to fertilizer sector and the pricing of gas 
has been taken up with the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.   The demand of natural 
gas for conversion of Naphtha -based & fuel oil -based fertilizers plants for expansion & 
revamp of fertilizer plants and revival of closed fertilizers plants, the EGOM has decided 
that they would be supplied natural gas as and when they are ready to utilize the gas.    
 
 The companies have intimated that due diligence is being carried out by them for 
making investment decisions for expansion units, but they are awaiting financial closures 
as they have been regularly requesting the Gov ernment for either firm allocation of gas 
at predetermined fixed prices from domestic gas sources or insulate the industry from 
any additional liability arising due to increase in delivered price of gas by correspondingly 
increasing the floor prices.  In absence of any commitment on allocation of natural gas at 
fixed prices or protecting the industry from any rise in gas prices, a proposal to amend 
the policy for new investments in urea sector, notified on 4 th September 2008, is under 
consideration of Department of Fertilizers. 
 
 The country is largely import dependent for meeting its Phosphatic and Potassic 
(P& K) fertilizers requirements, subsidy outgo for P&K fertilizers is dependent to a large 
extent on international prices.  However, three main factors have impact on subsidy 
outgo, namely (a) quantum of increase in fertilizers consumption (b) Maximum Retail 
Prices for P&K fertilizers; and (c) international prices of P&K fertilizers such as DAP, 
MAP, TSP and fertilizer inputs such as rock phosphate, phosp horic acid, ammonia, 
sulphur/sulphuric acid, etc.   Increase in the subsidy outgo for P&K fertilizers from Rs. 
4504  crore in the year 2001 -02 to Rs. 31, 798 crore in 2009 -10 can be seen in the 
background of all the three factors. 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
20 
 
 
 There has been substant ial increase in consumption of P&K fertilizers in 2009 -10 
over 2001-02 as depicted in the table below.  As such, increase in subsidy  outgo due to 
increase in consumption is a major factor: 
 
Year-wise consumption of P&K fertilizers 
Year Consumption in lakh MT 
DAP NPK SSP MOP 
2001-02 61.81 49.63 26.05 19.92 
2002-03 54.33 48.10 24.99 18.60 
2003-04 55.20 47.57 25.44 16.47 
2004-05 60.79 55.08 25.49 23.14 
2005-06 65.00 67.00 24.00 27.00 
2006-07 69.24 74.64 28.06 23.93 
2007-08 75.55 58.50 19.97 27.92 
2008-09 99.04 71.22 28.06 43.46 
2009-10 108.21 80.58 29.44 40.9 
% Increase in 2009-10 
over 2001-02 
75.07 62.36 13.01 105.32 
  
 Maximum Retail Prices of the P&K fertilizers indicated by the Government in 
February 2002 has remained constant till 17 th June 2008, despite huge increase in 
international prices of P&K fertilizers and fertilizer inputs.  This resulted in absorption of 
the increase in prices by the Government as part of the Subsidy for P&K fertilizers and 
farmers remained insulated from the volati lity.  In fact, the prices of the Complex 
fertilizers were revised downwardly w.e.f. 18 th June 2008 with reduction of an average of 
Rs. 1300 per MT,  further increasing the subsidy outgo. 
  
Average international prices (US$C&F) of fertilizers and fertilize r inputs for P&K 
fertilizers have shown substantial increase in 2009-10 over 2001-02, as follows:- 
 
Years DAP MOP Rock 
Phosphate 
Phosphoric 
Acid 
Ammonia Sulphur 
2001-02 174 121 55 349 145 34 
2009-10 404 460 150 775 303 95 
% increase 132 280 173 122 109 179 
    
 As such, increase in subsidy in the P&K fertilizers in 2009 -10 over 2001 -02 is 
attributable to all the three factors, namely increase in consumption, absence of increase 
in MRP in proportion to increase in total cost of fertilizers and increase i n international 
prices. 
 
 To ensure food security, Government has commitment to provide fertilizers to the 
farmers at reasonable and affordable prices; subsidy for P&K fertilizers is an important 
component of this policy.  However, to encourage balanced fe rtilization and use 
efficiency of fertilizers, let the dynamics of demand -supply influenced use of fertilizers 
and regulate subsidy outgo, Government has introduced Nutrient Based Subsidy(NBS) 
policy for P&K fertilizer w.e.f. 1 st  April 2010.  As per this policy, the prices the P&K 
fertilizers have been decontrolled and w.e.f. 1 st April 2010 the MRP of P&K fertilizers is 
being fixed and announced by the companies.  However, to ensure that fertilizers are 
available to the farmers at reasonable and affordable  prices, NBS for 2010 -11 has been 
fixed by the Government in such a manner that MRP fixed by the companies w.e.f. 1 st  
April 2010 has increased only marginally by Rs. 30 per bag (Rs. 600 per MT) over the 
MRP that prevailed as on 31 st March 2010.  In fact, MRP of MOP has not changed and 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
21 
 
MRP of SSP  and Ammonium Sulphate has decreased w.e.f. 1 st April 2010.  Further, 
imported complex fertilizers not included under the subsidy for P&K fertilizers hitherto 
have been included under the NBS Scheme for P&K fertili zers hitherto have been 
included under the NBS w.e.f. 1 st April 2010 and imported complex fertilizers are being 
made available  to the farmers at subsidized prices.  
 
 It is expected that since the rate of Nutrient Based  Subsidy under the NBS policy 
is being fixed on annual basis (unless there is need to review the same), as against the 
monthly rate followed earlier, this will encourage the producers/importers to enter into 
long term arrangements for supply of fertilizers and fertilizer inputs, which would  provide 
security of supply of material and would stabilizes prices in the international market.  A 
large number of Indian producers and importers are already entering into long term joint 
venture and offtake arrangements in foreign countries for supply of  Phosphatic and 
Potassic fertilizers and fertilizer inputs.  Government is encouraging both public and 
private sector fertilizers and mining entities in India to enter into long term joint venture 
production and offtake  arrangements in foreign resource ri ch countries to ensure supply 
and stabilize prices. 
 
 NBS has provided enhanced subsidy for Single Super Phosphate (SSP) of Rs. 
4400 per MT for 2010 -11, as against the subsidy of Rs. 2000 per MT earlier.  It is 
expected that this will encourage more capaci ty utilization and production of SSP now in 
the country that was the case earlier.  On an average, capacity utilization of the SSP 
plants in the country is about 35 -38 % for the last few years.  It is expected that under 
NBS policy there would be substanti al increase in production of SSP which has at 
present installed capacity of about 75 LMT. 
 
 Since, NBS provides annual based subsidy, the un/underutilized capacity of 
Phosphatic plants is also expected to increase.   For example, IFFCO -Paradeep unit 
which produces DAP and complex fertilizers and is one of the largest capacity has been 
running on an average of 58 -60% capacity  utilization for last several years.  It has now 
made technological improvements and secured source of rock supply.  IFFCO -Paradeep 
has announced that it would achieve more than 90% capacity utilization soon.  Similarly, 
with stability in policy and subsidy rates, other phosphate production capacity are also 
expected to come up.   
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 9.8.2010) 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Fertilizers in their Action Taken Replies dated 22.06.2011 has 
stated as under:-. 
 
 
"In so far as para 3 of the reply as above is concerned,  t he Group of Ministers (GOM) 
constituted to review the fertilizer policy had discussed the proposal submitted by the 
Department of Fertilizers for formulation of policy for existing urea units beyond Stage -III 
of New Pricing Scheme (NPS) as modified NPS -III in urea sector, Amendments to the 
New Investment Policy 2008 for new investments and other related issues, in the 
meeting of Group of Ministers held on 5 th January 2011.  The GoM decided to constitute 
a Committee under chairmanship of Dr. Saumitra Chaudhuri, Member Planning 
Commission with Secretary (Fer tilizers), Secretary (Expenditure), Secretary (DAC) and 
Secretary (Petroleum) as members.  The committee have examined the proposal for 
introduction of NBS in urea, including various options therefore and have made suitable 
recommendations." 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 22.6.2011) 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
22 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.4 
 
 The Committee in their earlier Reports had recommended from time to time for 
achievement of long cherished goal of direct payment of subsidy to the poor and the 
marginal farmers.  The Committee have been informed that fertilizer industry agreed to 
work with the Department of Fertilizers to conduct a study and find a solution.  
Thereafter, a Group of Ministers (GoM) was formed in May  2007 under the 
Chairmanship of Minister of Agriculture to look into the sustainable use of fertilizers and 
all aspects of fertilizer subsidy  regime including the option of direct fertilizer subsidy to 
farmers.  The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech 2010 -11 has again stressed the 
need to move to a system of direct transfer of subsidy to the farmers.   
 
 The Secretary, Department of Fertilizers while deposing before the Committee  
stated that there were certain difficulties viz.  getting the  clear details regarding land 
holding and ownership  da ta, proper distribution of fertilizers at retailer point, detailed 
study regarding pattern and ratio of direct subsidy, identifying the actual farmers for  
payment of direct subsidy to farmers.  The Committee are constrained to point out that 
despite their  repeated recommendations in earlier Reports, Government could not 
achieve the long cherished goal of payment of subsidy directly to farmers.  The 
Committee desire that the Department should come out with a proposal so as to ensure 
payment of subsidy direct to the farmers.  Details of such a proposal may be submitted to 
the Committee within three months of the presentation of the Report. 
  
Reply of the Department 
Department of Fertilizers is examining the feasibility and manner of transfer of 
direct subsidy  to the farmers in the second phase of NBS, however, a few 
constraints/problems, which are apprehended include that of robust land records in many 
States, different types of land tenures, fixation of quantum of subsidy based on 
requirement of farmer, vis-à-vis cropping pattern, soil requirement, land size etc. and also 
issues of handling liquidity requirements of fertilizer companies, putting in place subsidy 
transfer mechanism to retailers. However, the Department is in the process of finalizing 
the modalities of a Pilot Project in 5 States across the country to examine the feasibility 
of disbursing direct subsidy to the farmers, in due course, by mapping and tracking the 
movement of fertilizers, initially, to the last point, i.e. the retailer, from whom th e farmer 
buys the fertilizer.  Once the pilot/proof of concept is proved, and the modalities of 
capturing farmer related data finalized, the feasibility of disbursing subsidy directly to the 
farmer will emerge. 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 9.8.2010) 
Further reply of the Department 
The Department of Fertilizers in their Action Taken Replies dated 22.06.2011 has 
stated as under:- 
 
"The Government has set up a Task Force under the chairmanship of Shri Nandan 
Nilekeni, Chairman, UIDAI on transfer of direct subsidy on kerosene, LPG and fertilizers 
to intended beneficiaries, which has been mandated to implement a mechanism for 
transfer of direct subsidy in fertilizers, including, inter -alia, to identify and suggest the 
required changes in the existing systems, processes and procedures, IT frameworks and 
supply chain management.  The task force is also to oversee and evaluate the 
implementation of the solutions proposed on pilot based through the concerned 
implementing Ministries.   
  
Following this, the Department of Fertilizers has appointed National Informatics 
Centre (NIC) to implement the phase I of the mandate regarding making available 
information visibility at the point of sale to the farmer (retailer).  This phase I will be 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
23 
 
completed in December 2011, after which, phase II, dealing with transfer of subsidy at 
the last point sale (to the retailer or to the retailer on receipt of fertilizers) will be 
implemented.  Phase III on implementation of direct subsidy to farmers will be 
undertaken when once the Unique Identification Nos. (AADHAR Nos.) are issued to the 
farmers and AADHAR enabled payments are tested." 
 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 22.6.2011) 
Recommendation Sl.No.5   
The Committee have been inform ed that the Government has introduced the first 
phase of  Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy for phosphatic and  potassic fertilizers in 
April 2010. Under this policy, the subsidy on fertilizers will be determined on the basis of 
nutrient subsidy fixed by  the Government and the nutrients contained in the fertilizers.  
The Nutrient Based Subsidy policy will help to increase the indigenous production of 
domestic raw material of phosphatic and potassic fertilizers in the country besides 
encouraging entreprene urs to make fresh investment in the prospecting and mining of 
the raw materials required for this.  The Committee expect the Department to closely 
monitor  the implementation of this policy which is likely to increase the agricultural 
productivity as well as attaining self-sufficiency of phosphatic fertilizers in the country.   
  
Reply of the Department 
The perusal of the details of the MRP fixed by various companies for Phosphatic & 
Potassic fertilizers (P&K fertilizers) w.e.f. 1.4.2010 indicates that the MRP of the 
fertilizers is more or less at the level maintained earlier. An average increase of Rs. 30 
per bag has taken place. In the case of MOP, the companies such as IPL and PPL have 
not increased the MRP from the previous level of Rs. 4455 per MT. In t he case of 
Ammonium Sulphate, GSFC has reduced the price. The MRP of SSP also stands 
reduced by Rs. 70 per bag approximately by fixing the MRP at Rs. 3200 per MT. The 
manufacturers have entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with 
Department of Fertilizers to sell SSP at Rs. 3200 per MT during 2010 -11. DOF has given 
instructions to the fertilizer companies to print both the MRP fixed by them and the 
Central Government subsidy on each bag in addition to other statutory requirements. 
Selling of the f ertilizers at prices higher than the MRP is a punishable offence under the 
Essential Commodities Act. The State Governments have been requested to gear up its 
machinery to ensure the sale of the fertilizers at the MRP printed on the bags and to 
prevent hoarding and profiteering.  The State Governments have also been requested to 
ensure that the fertilizers are not smuggled into the neighbouring countries.  The State 
Governments are required to test the samples of the fertilizers in regard to quality of the 
fertilizers at the retail and wholesale points. The State Governments have been asked to 
strengthen the mobile/static soil testing laboratories and issuance of soil health cards so 
as to encourage use of soil specific fertilizers under the NBS. Further, th e State 
Governments have been requested to activate appropriate District Vigilance Committees 
with the objective of ensuring easy availability of fertilizers at reasonable prices and 
prevent wastage of subsidy due to any illegal activity. The State Governm ents have also 
been asked to test the samples of SSP alongwith the team of the Projects & 
Development India Ltd (PDIL).  
 
Based on the Inter Ministerial Committee Meeting, certain other fertilizers covered 
under the FCO are also proposed to be introduced i n the Nutrient Based Subsidy. The 
distribution and movement of fertilizers along with import of finished fertilizers, fertilizers 
inputs and production by indigenous units is monitored through the Fertilizer Monitoring 
System. The availability of the ferti lizers is ensured in all the States based on the 
requirement thereof. The NPK complex fertilizers have also been allowed to be imported 
under the NBS. The manufacturers of customized fertilizers have also been allowed to 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
24 
 
source subsidized fertilizers for m anufacturing customized fertilizer. The manufacturers 
and importers have also been allowed to transport their fertilizers from plants and ports 
by road. Specific guidelines have also been issued by the Department to the SSP 
manufacturers to claim Nutrient Based Subsidy. 
 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 9.8.2010) 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Fertilizers in their Action Taken Replies dated 22.06.2011 has 
stated as under:- 
 
"The Government has announced rates of  NBS of the year 2011 -12. A comparative 
statements regarding rates of NBS for the year 2010-11 and 2011-12 is as under:  
 
(a). Nutrient Based Subsidy Per Kilo Gram of Nutrients  
                                                                                     (Amount in Rs.) 
[ 
(b). Per MT Nutrient Based Subsidy 
                                                                                                          (Amount in Rs per MT) 
Sl. 
No. 
Nutrients  (Notification dated 
16.3.2010) NBS per Kg of 
nutrient (2010 -11) from 
1.4.2010 to 31.12.2010 
(Notification dated 
1.12.2010) NBS per Kg of 
nutrient Jan -March 2011 
(2010-11) 
(Notification dated 
5.5.2011) w.e.f. 
1.4.11 to 31.3.12 
1. „N‟ 23.227 23.227 27.153 
2. „P‟ 26.276 25.624 32.338 
3. „K‟ 24.487 23.987 26.756 
4. „S‟ 1.784 1.784 1.677 
Sl. 
No. Fertilizers 
(Notification dated 
16.3.2010)  Nutrient Based 
Subsidy per MT 
(2010-11) 
(Notification dated 
1.12.2010) Nutrient Based 
Subsidy per MT 
Jan-March 2011 (2010-11) 
(Notification 
dated 5.5.2011) 
w.e.f. 1.4.11 to 
31.3.12 
1. DAP 16268 15968 19763 
2 DAP Lite (16 -
44-00)  
- 14991(from 1.2.2011) 18573 
3. MAP 16219 15879 19803 
4. TSP 12087 11787 14875 
5. MOP 14692 14392 16054 
6 SSP  4400 4296+200 5359 
7 16-20-0-13 9203 9073 11030 
8 20-20-0-13 10133 10002 12116 
9 23-23-0-0 11386 11236 13686 
10 10-26-26-0 15521 15222 18080 
11 12-32-16-0 15114 14825 17887 
12 14-28-14-0 14037 13785 16602 
13 14-35-14-0 15877 15578 18866 
14 15-15-15-0 11099 10926 12937 
15 20-20-0-0 9901 9770 11898 
16 28-28-0-0 13861 13678 16657 
17 17-17-17-0 12578 12383 14662 
18 19-19-19-0 14058 13839 16387 
19 16-16-16-0 11838 (w.e.f. 1.7.2010 
inducted into NBS on 
6.8.2010) 
11654 13800 
20 Ammonium 
Sulphate 
(20.0-0-0-23)  
5195 5195 5979 
21 15-15-15-09 11259 (w.e.f. 1.10.2010) on 
22.12.2010 
11086 13088 
22 24-24-0-0 11881 (w.e.f. 1.10.2010) on 
22.12.2010 
11724 14278 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
25 
 
 
(c). Provisional amount of concession has been allowed w.e.f. 1.4.2010 by DOF pending the 
recommendations of the Tariff Commission to the companies, as below:   
Name of the 
Company Grades of Fertilizers 
Notification dated 29.4.2011) Revised 
Amount of additional compensation 
(provisional) in Rs. per MT 
FACT (Cochin) 20-20-0-13 (APS) (Udyogmandal 
and Cochin) 
3121 
 Ammonium Sulphate (20.6 -0-0-13) 
(Udyogmandal) 
3658 
MFL, Manali 20-20-0-13 (APS) 5434 
 17-17-17-0  4640 
GNVFC, Bharuch 20-20-0-0 (ANP) 2534 
 
(d)  Per MT additional subsidy for fortified fertilizers with secondary and micro -
nutrients as per FCO has also been allowed as follows during 2010-11 and 2011-12: 
  
Sl. No. Nutrients for fortification as 
per FCO 
Additional subsidy per MT of fortified 
fertilizers during 2010-11 and 2011-12 
(in Rs. Per MT) 
1. Boron „Bn‟ 300 
2. Zinc „Zn‟ 500 
 
(e) As per guidelines dated 21.4.2011 applicable w.e.f. 1.1.2011, freight subsidy 
under NBS on the decontrolled subsidized fertilizers (except SSP) for rail movement is 
paid as per actual claim. Secondary freight for the P&K fertilizers (except SSP) is paid in 
line with the “Uniform Freight” applicable for urea. Freight for direct road move ment is 
subject to lower of actual claim and equivalent rail freight. Direct road movement is 
allowed to a maximum distance of 500 KM. For the purpose of admissibility of equivalent 
rail freight for direct road movement, following rates would be applicable:  
 
Movement (KM) Rate Rs. per 
MT 
Upto 100 108 
101-200 183 
201-300 256 
301-400 327 
401-500 400 
 
        In addition to the NBS for SSP already announced, a lump sum freight of Rs. 200 
PMT is provided.  
 
2. Maximum Retail Prices (MRPs): -  Under the Nu trient Based Subsidy scheme  
regime, Maximum Retail Price has been left open i.e. it has be  fixed by the fertilize 
companies depending upon market.  However, as directed by the Government, under the 
Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) policy for decontrolled Pho sphatic and Potassic (P&K) 
fertilizers implemented w.e.f 1 st April 2010, subsidy for the nutrients „N‟, „P‟, „K‟ & „S‟ for 
2010-11 and 2011 -12 has been fixed by the IMC in such a manner that the MRPs of 
Phosphatic and Potassic fertilizers, as far as possib le, would be near the MRPs that 
prevailed before NBS so that the farmers are not adversely affected.  Accordingly, the 
Government has fixed rates of NBS for the year 2011-12 ( w.e.f. 1.4.2011 to 31.3.2012).   
 
3. With Introduction of NBS and free retail pr ices of P&K fertilizers, the 
manufacturers/importers are generally encouraged to augment production and import to 
meet the requirements. Requirements of fertilizers for both Kharif 2011 has been firmed 
up.  

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
26 
 
 
4. Expansion of basket of subsidized fertilizers and balanced fertilization of soil:- 
As approved by the Government, the IMC can recommend inclusion of new fertilizers 
under the NBS regime based on application of manufacturers/ importers and its need 
appraisal by the Indian Council for Agricultural Rese arch (ICAR). Accordingly, as 
recommended by IMC, the following four grades of new fertilizers under the NBS: 
 (i) 16-16-16-0 (included w.e.f. 1.7.2010) 
(ii) 24-24-0-0( included w.e.f. 1.10.2010) 
(iii) 15-15-15-9 ( included w.e.f. 1.10.2010) 
(iv) DAP lite (16-44-0-0) (included w.e.f. 1.2.2011) 
 
It is expected that the inclusion of abovementioned new grades of fertilizers would bring 
more product competition and supply of various fertilizer nutrients based on their 
production and availability in the international market. " 
 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 22.6.2011) 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.8 
 
 The Committee‟s examination has revealed that out of nine Public Sector Fertilizer 
Companies under the administrative control of Department of F ertilizers, Fertilizer 
Corporation of India(Ltd.)(FCIL), Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Limited(HFCL), 
Madras Fertilizers Ltd.(MFL) and Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizers Corporation 
Ltd.(BVFCL) are sick units.  Out of these four, the units of FCIL and HFCL  are presently 
lying closed since 2002.  MFL and BVFCL are operational but sick companies.  The 
Committee have been given to understand that an Empowered Committee of 
Secretaries(ECOS) was constituted in November 2008 under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary(Fertilizers) and Secretaries of Department of Expenditure, Department of 
Disinvestment, Planning Commission, Department of Public Enterprises and Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas as Members to look into all the financial models for revival of 
each of the closed units.  Similarly, initiatives have also been taken by the Government to 
wipe out the accumulated losses of MFL and BVFCL and to make these PSUs 
commercially viable till availability of gas around 2011 -12.  The Committee would like the 
Department of  Fertilizers to take effective and expeditious steps to canalize and 
implement the whole revival process for the closed and loss -making PSUs.  The details 
of such a revival package may be intimated to the Committee within three months of 
presentation of this Report.  
  
Reply of the Department 
The loss making/ sick closed fertilizer PSUs are BVFCL,  MFL, FCIL and HFCL.   
The steps taken by Government to improve their performance are as follows :- 
A. Measures to Revive the closed units of FCIL/HFCL. 
 The Gove rnment had taken a decision on 12th April, 2007 to examine the 
feasibility of reviving the closed units of FCIL and HFCL subject to the confirmed 
availability of gas.  The revival of the closed fertilizer units through brown field projects 
subject to confi rmed availability of gas have been found feasible, the Government on 
30th October 2008, considered the proposal of the Department of Fertilizers for revival of 
Barauni Unit of Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation through a Special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV) viz. Ur varak Videsh Limited (UVL) which is promoted by National Fertilizers 
Limited (NFL), Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF) and Krishak Bharti 
Cooperative Limited (KRIBHCO).  The UVL Board after considering all aspects of revival 
of Barauni Unit, conveyed that in the current policy dispensation with respect to Urea, the 
revival of Barauni  unit of M/s HFCL is not feasible . 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
27 
 
  
The Government also accorded approval for constitution of an Empowered 
Committee of Secretaries (ECOS) to look into all the f inancial models for revival of each 
of the closed units.  The Committee would also look into various linkages including gas 
for facilitating revival of the closed units.   The Committee will submit its 
recommendations including the model for revival of eac h of the closed units, to the 
Government.   Pursuant to the decision dated 30.10.2008, an Empowered Committee of 
Secretaries (ECOS) was constituted on 7.11.2008 under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(Fertilizers) and Secretaries of Department of Expenditure, Department of Disinvestment, 
Planning Commission, Deptt. of Public Enterprises and Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas as Members to look into all the financial models for revival of each of the closed 
units. 
 
The Committee in its first meeting on 05.12.2 008 had approved the Terms of 
Reference (TOR) for consultants and that FCIL and HFCL should finalize appointment of 
consultants as per the TOR already approved. 
 
The second meeting of the ECOS was held on 24.08.2009 in which various 
financial models for re vival were considered.  M/s Deloitte India Pvt. Ltd. have been 
selected as Project Advisers for implementation of the selected options for revival of the 
closed units of Sindri, Ramagundam, Talcher and Gorakhpur in respect of FCIL and 
Durgapur Unit of HFCL . M/s PDIL has been appointed by HFCL as Consultant for 
evaluation of existing assets of the closed units and certification through Registered 
Valuer.  ECOS has advised to obtain the approval of CCEA for the recommended 
Revenue Sharing Model for revival before implementation of the same.  In the mean-time 
proposals have also been received by consortium of GAIL/Coal India Limited 
(CIL)/Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF) for considering of transferring 
assets of Talcher Unit free from any liabi lities on nomination basis. Similar proposal has 
also been received from SAIL for Sindri and from KRIBHCO for Ramagundam. The 
proposal of these CPSUs  and recommendation of ECOS are under consideration in the 
Department of fertilizers. 
 
Revival of Barauni Unit of HFCL : The Government, considered the proposal of the 
Department of Fertilizers for revival of Barauni Unit of Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation on 
30th October, 2008, through a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV), promoted by fertilizer 
PSUs/Cooperatives.   
  Accordingly, "Urvarak Videsh Limited", a Joint Venture company promoted by 
NFL, RCF & KRIBHCO has initiated necessary steps for the Revival of Barauni Unit of 
HFCL by setting up a Brown Field Ammonia/Urea Project.  M/s UVL have undertaken 
various pre-project activities like environmental clearance, request for waiver of electricity 
dues by Bihar State Electricity Board, Valuation of Assets, preparation of Techno -
Economic Feasibility report by M/s PDIL and fully tied up proposal by consultant M/s 
Price Water House Coopers (PWC). For environment clearance , UVL has engaged M/s 
PWC.  On the basis of report of M/s PWC, M/s. UVL vide their letter dated 7.04.2010 
have expressed that the revival of Barauni Unit by UVL is not feasible under the present 
policy dispensation. 
 
BVFCL:  The Government has taken the following steps: 
a) Financial Restructuring : The proposals for financial restructuring of BVFCL 
included Second Revised Project Cost and time of the Namrup revamp Project besides 
de-rating of Namrup-II and other dispensations for making the company financially viable. 
The proposals were taken up for consideration by the Government in February, 2009.   
The Government decided that appropriate support may continue to be provided to the 
Project till such time a comprehensive proposal is brought up before the Committee after 
requisite appraisals & consultations. Recently in march, 2010, Government has approved 
the final revamp cost of Rs. 635.53 Cr. Of namrup revamp project. This will enable 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
28 
 
recognition of actual  fixed costs for urea production for BVFCL, thereby reducing the 
under recovery on fixed cost for urea. The measure will increase subsidy disbursement 
to BVFL by around Rs. 20 Cr. P.A. 
 
b) Study of plants by Process Licensor: To comply with the directives of Government  
for submission of a comprehensive proposal after due appraisal, a Notice Inviting Tender 
NIT was floated to reputed process licensors for carrying out an in depth study of the 
plants and suggest measures for sustained operation of the Plants . Rs.8.00 Crores has 
been earmarked for the study. The response of NIT was not encouraging. However offer 
of M/s Cassale has been found technically suitable and with some clarification price bid 
was opened. The price quoted by the Party was 1.5 times higher than estimated cost and 
a final decision is under consideration. 
 
c) MOU with NFL: There is acute shortage of qualified and experienced persons in 
BVFCL. To address the problem a MOU has been entered with NFL for Management 
Contract for 3 years on 7th Au gust 2009 with objective of turnaround of the Company 
and convert BVFCL into a profit centre. NFL will provide technical support for efficient 
operation of the plants, for maintenance, planning and execution of jobs, on -site training 
of BVFCL personnel by NFL specialists and assistance for carrying out health study of 
the plant.  
 
d) Plan Funds :  BVFCL has received plan/non -plan loans for schemes under 
„Renewal & Replacement‟ for replacement/procurement of capital items during last three 
years and current financial year as given below. 
 
Year Type of Fund Amount  
2006-07 Loan (Plan) Rs. 10 Crores 
 
2007-08 
 
Loan (Plan) Rs. 7.47 Crores 
Loan (Non-Plan) Rs. 20.96 Crores 
2008-09 Loan (Plan) Rs. 19.98 Crores 
2009-10 Loan (Plan) Rs. 65.00 Crores 
2010-11(Budgeted) Loan (Plan) Rs. 45.00 Crores 
 
MADRAS FERTILIZERS LIMITED 
In February, 2008, MFL entrusted a study to M/s. Deloitte  to suggest financial 
restructuring/dispensation package to ensure long term viability of MFL, who submitted 
its report in July, 08.    The view in Department of Fertilizers (DOF) was to consider the 
option-II suggested in the report of M/s Deloitte envisaging amendments in NPS III policy 
resulting in increased subsidy for MFL and financial restructuring of MFL by converting 
outstanding GOI loan into equity and waiver of interest.   
 The Government has approved the amendment to NPS -III Policy for restricting 
reduction in fixed costs to 10% on 25.06.2009.  Based on the amended NPS III policy, 
additional compensation due to MFL is about Rs 3, 073/MT of Urea. With the said 
implementation of change in NPS policy, the original projected loss is expected to come 
down substantially. The urea operations of MFL have become viable after the said 
amendment to NPS -III. The company is about to start produ ction of Complex Fertilizer 
(20-20-0-13), which is a viable proposition under the current Concession Scheme for 
Complex Fertilizers.  
  
However, financial restructuring is required to wipe out the accumulated losses 
and to keep the operations of MFL commer cially viable till availability of gas around 
2011-12, with minor modifications to Plants. The issue of financial restructuring is under 
discussion with the foreign promoters NICO who are holding 25.77% equity stake. To 
support the revival from technical p oint of view, M/s Projects and Development India Ltd. 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
29 
 
(PDIL) had been entrusted with the job of providing the methodology for reviving MFL.  
The report of PDIL is under examination. 
Plan Funds/Loans have been provided to MFL for renewal and replacement 
schemes as follows:                
                                                                                                           
YEAR AMOUNT  (RS. CRORE) 
2006-07 9.00 
2007-08 9.00 
2008-09 12.97 
2009-10 96.99 
2010-11 ( budgeted) 74.50 
 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 9.8.2010) 
Further reply of the Department 
The Department of Fertilizers in their Action Taken Replies dated 22.06.2011 has 
stated as under:- 
 
"Revival of HFCL and FCIL: 
Fourth Meeting of ECOS had taken place on 3.3.2011 to consider some reservations 
raised by the consortium of PSUs. Based on the recommendations of the ECOS, a draft 
CCEA note was circulated for inter -ministerial comments. After considering the 
comments of concerned Ministries/Departments,  the CCEA note on Revival of closed 
units of HFCL and FCIL has been finalized and forwarded to Cabinet Secretariat vide OM 
dated 10/6/2011 for placing it before cabinet committee of Economic Affairs. 
 
Restructuring of BVFCL. 
With regard to study  of plant by Process Licensor,  Bid, received from M/s Cassale 
Switzerland was much above the estimated cost, accrodingly  the Board took a decision 
to float fresh NIT. The fresh NIT was refloated on 4/8/2010. As no response was received 
till last date of the receip t, the last date was extended up to 30.09.2010. Two parties 
responded to the NIT and the technical bids were opened on 12th Oct. 2010.  BVFCL 
appointed M/s Haldor Topsoe  as Process Licensor for comprehensive study of Ammonia 
plants and M/s PDIL for Urea p lant and off -sites/utilities, situated at  Namrup -II and 
namrup III plant. The final report is expected to be received by July 2011. 
Restructuring of MFL: 
 
As regards  restructuring of MFL, M/s PDIL has submitted their report and 
recommended the conversion  of GOI loan into equity and waiver of outstanding interest 
liability towards GOI.   
 
Due to its negative networth the company was referred to BIFR in 2007 and in its 
hearing on 4/2009 it was declared as sick. BIFR has appointed State Bank of India as a 
Operating Agency for submitting a Financial restructuring proposal for MFL.  
State Bank of India (SBI) had submitted the financial restructuring proposal of MFL after 
considering the views of foreign promoter NICO and PDIL report. The report was 
approved in Board meeting of MFL held on 19.10.2010.  
  
After considering the views of the Board of MFL, NICO and Operating Agency, a BRPSE 
note for financial restructuring of MFL was circulated for inter -ministerial comment. The 
comments have been received and are under consideration." 
 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 22.6.2011) 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
30 
 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.9 
 
 The Committee note that there are nine Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), one 
multi-State Cooperative Society(KRIBHCO) and one Joint Secto r Company(Indian 
Potash Limited) under the administrative control of Department of Fertilizers.  Out of this, 
Krishak Bharati Cooperative Limited(KRIBHCO), the multi -State cooperative society and 
three PSUs, viz. National Fertilizer Limited(NFL), Rashtriya  Chemicals and Fertilizers 
Limited(RCF) and Projects and Development (India) Limited (PDIL) are profit making 
units.  Three PSUs, viz. Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited(FACT), Madras 
Fertilizers Limited (MFL) and Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Co rporation Limited (BVFCL) 
are loss making units.  Besides, two PSUs, viz. Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd. (FCI) 
and Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Limited (HFCL) are lying closed after incurring 
losses continuously over a period of time.  Non -availability of natural gas, outdated 
machinery, lack of skilled and qualified manpower are the main bottlenecks in their 
capacity addition programmes/ schemes.  The Committee‟s examination also revealed 
that the performance of certain PSUs in relation to imple mentation of 
schemes/programmes during the first three years of the 11 th Plan Period has not been 
satisfactory.  These PSUs are either closed or incurring losses continuously year after 
year.  The Committee are of the view that these losses are not only af fecting the physical 
and financial performance of the company but also depriving it for achieving their plan 
targets set for the remaining two years of  the Eleventh Plan period.  The  Committee, 
therefore, desire the  Department to appoint a panel to go i nto the perennial problem of 
sick PSUs in the fertilizer sector and present to this Committee a status paper indicating 
inter-alia the revival plan for these PSUs within the next six months.   
  
 
Reply of the Department 
The loss making/sick closed fertiliz er PSUs are BVFCL, MFL, FCIL and HFCL.  
The assessment of the present financial performance of these companies are as under:- 
 
"BRAHMAPUTRA VALLEY FERTILIZER CORPORATION LTD(BVFCL) 
In the case of BVFCL, the company had been incurring losses since its incep tion. The 
company has two running plants at Namrup -III and II.  At Namrup -III, the losses are 
mainly on account of higher energy consumption than the norms, non -recognition of 
increase in salary and wages of employees under NPS.II and non -recognition of the total 
capital costs incurred during revamp.  It is therefore, required that the capital costs for 
revamp be recognized for Namrup-III as a special dispensation for BVFCL.   
Namrup-II which was commissioned on 22.11.2005 is incurring losses due to low 
capacity utilization on account of limitation of gas.  These losses will increase further if 
the Namrup -II unit is brought under NPS and clubbed with any group as its energy 
consumption is much higher as compared to other gas based units.  It is therefore, 
required to be treated separately for the calculation of concession rate based on the 
erstwhile Retention Price Scheme (RPS) mechanism till completion of NPS -III. 
Turnaround of the company requires financial restructuring, removing of technical 
limitations and availability of fund to carry out the identified jobs.  
The proposals for financial restructuring of BVFCL included Second revised project cost 
and time of the Namrup revamp project besides de -rating of Namrup II and other 
dispensations for making the c ompany financially viable. With the proposed 
dispensations, it is expected that both the units of the company will have a positive rate 
of Internal Return in the even of adequate availability of gas to run both the plants at 
100% capacity utilization.  How ever, when the desired quantity of gas is not available, 
which is the case today and is also expected to continue in near future, the efficiency of 
Namrup-II unit will fall considerably as it will operate only at 40% capacity and it will incur 
losses.  The  losses of Namrup -II can be partially cross subsidized by the return on 
Namrup-III unit but the overall operation of the company will continue to be in losses. 
Therefore, there is a need for special dispensation to company by way of financial 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
31 
 
restructuring to make the overall operation of the profitable.  The details of efforts of the 
government to sustain BVFCL are given in reply to recommendation no. 8 above. 
 
MADRAS FERTILIZERS LIMITED (MFL)  
MFL incurred losses of   Rs 114.78 Cr in 2006 -07, Rs 134.85 C r in 2007 -08 and 
Rs.145.38 Cr in 2008 -09. The accumulated loss as on March 31, 2009 is Rs. 793.93 Cr 
against paid up Capital plus reserves of Rs.174.53 Cr. The company has been declared 
sick by the BIFR in the hearing dated 02.04.2009 and State Bank of Ind ia has been 
appointed as the operating agency. The major reasons for the losses are  
(a) High investment in revamp of Ammonia and Urea Plants between 1993 and 1998 
and technology related problems thereafter. 
(b) Non-implementation of the recommendations of  the Tariff Commission for Pricing 
of Complex Fertilizers from April 2002, leading to under recovery of costs under 
the Price Concession Scheme (PCS). 
(c) Reduction in subsidy income due to introduction of New Pricing Scheme (NPS) for 
Urea from 1/4/2003 and withdrawal of outlier benefit from 1/10/2006. 
(d) Reduction in credit limits by Commercial Banks due to poor financials. 
(e) Liquidity crisis affecting procurement of raw materials for Urea and NPK and 
spares for normal maintenance of Plants. 
 To address the problems of MFL, the Government has amended the New Pricing 
Scheme-III for Urea w.e.f. 01.04.2009. Based on the amended NPS III policy restricting 
the reduction in fixed cost to 10% w.e.f. 01/04/2009, additional compensation of Rs 
3,073/MT of Urea is being made to MFL. With the said additional compensation, the 
projected loss of Rs 160.98 Cr. for the year 2009 -10 may come substantially  assuming 
production of 4 LMT during 09 -10 (4,00,000 MT x Rs 3,073/MT).  However, it may be 
added that the NPS -III is due to end by March, 2010 and therefore, the recent 
amendment will benefit MFL only during 2009 -10.   The company is also started 
production of NP 20-20-0-13, which is a viable proposition under the current Concession 
Scheme for Complex Fertilizers.  
Besides, Government has approved Plan Expenditure of Rs.95 Cr. during 09-10 for MFL, 
for renewal/repair and replacement of critical machinery items, which is expected to 
improve operational efficiency and prevent breakdowns.   
The issue of financial restructuri ng is under discussion with the foreign promoters NICO 
who are holding 25.77% equity stake.  
To support the revival from technical point of view, M/s Projects and Development India 
Ltd. (PDIL) had been entrusted with the job of providing the methodology fo r reviving 
MFL. 
 
Financial Performance Of The Closed Fertilizer Corporation Of India Limited(FCIL) 
And Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Ltd(HFCL) 
FCIL and HFCL, are sick PSUs, both having closed Fertilizer Units.  Therefore, there is 
no physical performan ce in respect of these PSUs.  T he Government has already 
decided to explore all the options for their revival (the details are given in reply to 
recommendation no. 8 above)."  
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 9.8.2010) 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Fertilizers in their Action Taken Replies dated 22.06.2011  has 
stated as under:-  
 
"No change, except status of financial reconstructing of MFL as explained in reply to 
recommendation No.8". 
 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 22.6.2011) 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
32 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
 
Recommendation Sl.No. 
 
NIL 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
33 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
  
Recommendation Sl.No.6 
 
 The Committee have been informed that out of 28 urea units in the country, 20 
units are gas based; 4 units based on Nap htha and 4 on Fuel Oil (FO)/ Low Sulphur 
Heavy Stock (LSHS) as feedstock.  The total requirement  of natural gas for existing 20 
units is 40.92 mmscmd, which is being met from the supplies under APM Gas, PMT Gas, 
JV gas, RIL gas and RLNG gas.  The Committe e note that six fertilizer companies have 
proposed to undertake expansion of their existing units but expressed concern regarding 
pricing and firm availability of gas before taking final investment decision.  An 
Empowered Group of Ministers (EGOM) was cons tituted in 2007 to examine and decide 
issues of gas pricing and commercial utilization of gas under new Exploration Licensing 
Policy.  The Committee were also informed by the Department of Fertilizers that as per 
assurance given by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, most of the naphtha / fuel 
oil based plant and closed fertilizer plants will get the gas pipeline connectivity by 2009 -
10 / 2010 -11. The Committee expect the Department of Fertilizers to vigorously pursue 
the matter with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas so that effective and 
expeditious steps are taken by them to achieve these targets. 
  
The Committee hardly need to emphasise that pricing and firm availability of 
natural gas for existing and new units of fertilizer companies are the pre -requisites to 
increase their indigenous production and would, therefore, desire the Department to play 
a proactive role in association with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas towards 
allocation of gas for the existing and new fertilizer plants in the country. 
  
The Committee regret to observe that no specific decision has been taken by the 
Department regarding the issue of nominating GAIL (India) Limited as the nodal authority 
for supply of gas to fertilizer industry. The Committee, therefore , desire that the decision 
in the matter should be taken up on priority basis and precise action taken in this regard 
be intimated to the Committee within three months.   
  
 
Reply of the Department 
 
The issue of nominating GAIL (India) Limited as the nodal  authority for supply of 
gas to fertilizer industry was proposed to Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.  However, 
no decision in the matter has been received from the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas.  
2. Further, it is submitted that the Department of  Fertilizers in the meeting held on 
23-04-2010 at the level of Secretary(F) discussed the proposal for amendments in the 
policy for new investments in urea sector and long term offtake of urea from joint venture 
abroad which was notified on 4 th September 2008.   A decision has been taken in this 
meeting that in view of the uncertainty of gas prices in future and its futuristic long -term 
requirements, observing the consensus of stakeholders, DOF may consider to appoint 
GAIL as the Aggregator to procure gas f rom indigenous as well as international 
resources by a transparent route for fertilizer sector subject to a decision at competent 
level.  The above decision has been communicated to Ministry of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas for consideration and necessary action. 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 9.8.2010) 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
34 
 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Fertilizers in their Action Taken Replies dated 22.06.2011 has 
stated as under:- 
 
 "Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has constitu ted a Inter -Ministerial 
Committee under chairmanship of Dr. Saumitra Chaudhuri, Member Planning 
Commission to formulate a policy for pooling of Natural Gas prices and devise pool 
operating guidelines to make the policy operational.  The first meeting of th e Committee 
was held on 23 rd March 2011 and the second meeting of the Inter -Ministerial Committee 
was held on 13.05.2011.  The issues are still under consideration of Inter -Ministerial 
Committee." 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 22.6.2011) 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.7 
 
 The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers monitors availability of 
fertilizers at the State level and the State governments are responsible for equitable 
distribution of subsidized fertilizers within the Sta tes. Fertilizer companies are advised to 
draw supply plan of subsidized fertilizers in consultation with the States‟ Agriculture 
Department and comply with the given supply plan on month to month basis. The 
movement of fertilizers is monitored throughout t he country by an on -line web based 
monitoring system ( www.urvarak.co.in) also called as Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS).  
The FMS is being used very effectively to monitor the availability of fertilizers namely 
urea, DAP, MoP and NPK fertilizers in all the districts in the country.  As in some States,  
the farmers are facing acute difficulty in getting urea, Potash, DAP etc., the Committee, 
desire that Central Government should devise a foolproof mechanism for prope r and 
equitable distribution of fertilizers in all parts of the country especially in remote, hilly and 
inaccessible areas.  Further, to tackle the problem of artificial shortage, if any, created in 
some region, special efforts may be made to provide adequ ate quantity of fertilizer so 
that the farmers are not left at the mercy of hoarders and black marketeers. The 
Committee would like  to be apprised  of the complaints received regarding artificial 
shortage of fertilizers  during the last three years and th eir location together with suitable 
corrective action taken by the Department  to check the same.  
  
Reply of the Department 
The Government has introduced a Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy in respect 
of Phosphatic & Potassic fertilizers w.e.f. 1.4.2010 .  Under the NBS, 20% of the 
decontrolled fertilizers produced/imported in India will now be in the movement control 
under the Essential Commodities Act 1955(ECA).  Department of Fertilizers will regulate 
the movement of these fertilizers to bridge the supplies in under-served areas. For proper 
and equitable distribution of fertilizers in all parts of the country especially in remote, hilly 
and inaccessible areas such as for J &K, Himachal Pradesh and N E region, DOF has 
issued instructions to all the conce rned companies to dispatch fertilizers (Urea, DAP, 
MOP and NPK)) in such a manner in order to ensure its availability in each and every 
corner of states. 
 
 As per clause 21 of the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985, it is mandatory to 
print the maximum r etail price on each bag of fertilizers whether under statutory price 
control or out of the purview of the statutory price control.  No person shall charge price 
higher than the price printed on the bag.  Any person violating this mandatory provision 
of FCO is held liable under the provisions of FCO and Essential Commodities Act. The 
State Governments as enforcement agencies, are adequately empowered to take 
appropriate action against the offenders who indulge in any kind of malpractices. 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
35 
 
As regards complain ts relating to artificial shortage of fertilizers during the last 
three years, Department of Fertilizer initiated some positive corrective measures and 
movement of 50 million tones of fertilizers is possible with daily movement of about 60 
Railway rakes al ong with about 20% movement by road trailers and dispatch of railway 
rake through additional notional rake points. Statement showing requirement, availability 
and sale of Urea, DAP, MOP and NPK during the years 2007 -08 and 2008-09 and 2009-
10 are enclosed.  
 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 9.8.2010) 
Further reply of the Department 
 
The Department of Fertilizers in their Action Taken Replies dated 22.06.2011  has 
stated as under:-  
 
"No change except in the Statement for the year 2010-11." 
 
(Department of Fertilizers O.M. No.5(3)/2010-Fin-II  
dated 22.6.2011) 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
36 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE 
 
 
Recommendation Sl.No.  
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                    Gopinath Munde 
28 July, 2011                                                                                   Chairman, 
6 Shravana, 1933 (Saka)              Standing Committee on 
                                                                                        Chemicals and Fertilizers 

APPENDIX-I 
STATEWISE AVAILABILITY & SALE OF UREA, DAP & MOP 
               (Qty. in LMTs) 
2007-08 UREA DAP MOP 
STATE REQUIREMENT AVAILABILITY SALES REQUIREMENT AVAILABILITY SALES REQUIREMENT AVAILABILITY SALES 
ANDHRA PRADESH 27.50 26.84 25.12 8.24 7.16 7.15 5.55 4.52 4.50 
KARNATKA 12.80 13.63 12.54 5.80 4.54 4.50 4.00 3.70 3.58 
KERALA 1.40 1.44 1.34 0.28 0.18 0.18 1.40 1.19 1.16 
TAMILNADU 9.85 9.68 9.16 4.25 3.35 3.35 4.90 4.85 4.77 
GUJARAT 17.25 18.37 17.93 5.80 6.76 6.47 1.70 1.82 1.79 
MADHYA PRADESH 13.75 14.76 14.31 7.50 6.82 6.34 1.10 0.76 0.74 
CHHATTISGARH 5.90 6.17 5.87 1.70 1.38 1.35 0.74 0.69 0.62 
MAHARASHTRA 21.20 23.05 21.39 7.05 6.45 6.29 3.05 3.46 3.23 
RAJASTHAN 14.70 13.83 13.21 6.05 5.51 4.50 0.23 0.23 0.19 
HARYANA 18.75 19.30 18.47 5.85 6.80 5.36 0.50 0.34 0.29 
PUNJAB 25.00 26.97 26.46 8.00 9.14 6.81 0.95 0.58 0.57 
UTTAR PRADESH 55.00 54.37 52.72 15.50 14.89 13.20 3.00 1.27 1.14 
UTTARANCHAL 2.30 2.42 2.31 0.32 0.23 0.23 0.18 0.05 0.05 
HIMACHAL PRADESH 0.61 0.60 0.60 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.05 0.05 
JAMMU & KASHMIR 1.40 1.19 1.15 0.84 0.33 0.33 0.28 0.07 0.07 
BIHAR 20.00 19.40 18.56 4.25 3.30 3.07 2.05 1.19 1.07 
JHARKHAND 2.10 1.67 1.58 0.90 0.75 0.74 0.13 0.08 0.08 
ORISSA 5.50 5.19 4.58 1.25 1.79 1.72 1.20 1.05 1.01 
WEST BENGAL 12.95 12.45 11.56 4.55 3.80 3.78 4.00 2.76 2.73 
ASSAM 2.30 1.99 1.93 0.70 0.08 0.08 0.85 0.40 0.40 
ALL INDIA 271.70 274.26 261.71 89.21 83.40 75.55 36.13 29.28 28.28 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
38 
 
 
CUMULATIVE AVAILABILITY OF FERTILISERS DURING THE YEAR 2008-09 (APRIL'08 TO MARCH'09) 
 
 (Qty. in LMTs) 
2008-09 Urea DAP MOP Complex 
State Requirement Availability Requirement Availability Requirement Availability Requirement Availability 
Andhra Pradesh 27.50 27.84 8.50 9.98 5.85 6.27 20.50 16.50 
Karnataka 13.50 12.88 6.05 8.12 4.55 5.14 11.17 8.44 
Kerala 1.49 1.68 0.31 0.24 1.33 1.53 1.72 1.85 
Tamil Nadu 10.37 11.28 4.31 3.85 4.84 5.95 3.62 3.55 
Gujarat 18.65 18.69 7.10 8.24 1.90 2.26 4.39 4.92 
Madhya Pradesh 15.75 13.83 8.25 8.31 1.20 1.17 4.35 2.20 
Chhattisgarh 5.40 5.23 1.75 2.31 0.77 0.95 1.31 1.23 
Maharashtra 23.25 22.84 8.60 10.19 3.70 5.17 15.65 10.40 
Rajasthan 15.10 13.21 5.60 5.90 0.33 0.32 1.42 0.67 
Haryana 19.90 17.59 6.00 6.69 0.46 0.47 0.67 0.31 
Punjab 25.50 26.28 8.10 8.82 0.95 0.98 1.01 0.59 
Himachal Pradesh 0.65 0.66 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.06 0.44 0.40 
Jammu & Kashmir 1.35 1.28 0.80 0.59 0.33 0.14 0.00 0.01 
Uttar Pradesh 55.00 55.74 15.50 15.12 2.50 2.79 10.50 7.44 
Uttarakhand 2.30 2.22 0.35 0.31 0.18 0.08 0.45 0.51 
Bihar 21.25 18.33 4.25 4.12 1.90 2.28 3.60 2.59 
Jharkhand 2.00 1.57 1.05 0.80 0.13 0.16 0.40 0.38 
Orissa 5.50 4.74 2.00 1.89 1.35 1.53 2.88 2.66 
West Bengal 13.00 11.94 4.86 4.03 4.15 4.80 7.49 7.29 
Assam 2.40 2.30 1.03 0.14 1.06 1.08 0.30 0.06 
All India 281.34 270.88 94.83 99.78 37.86 43.34 92.32 72.26 
Note: DOF started monitoring of complex fertiliser w.e.f. Kharif, 2008. 
     No change 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
39 
 
 
CUMULATIVE REQUIREMENT, AVAILABILITY & SALES OF FERTILISERS DURNG THE YEAR 2009-10 (APRIL TO MARCH) 
 
08.04.2010                 (Qty. in LMTs) 
2009-10 UREA DAP MOP COMPLEX 
STATE REQUIRE- 
MENT 
AVAILAB- 
ILITY 
SALES REQUIRE- 
MENT 
AVAILAB- 
ILITY 
SALES REQUIRE- 
MENT 
AVAILAB- 
ILITY 
SALES REQUIRE- 
MENT 
AVAILAB- 
ILITY 
SALES 
Andhra Pradesh 27.50 26.16 25.95 9.75 8.89 8.85 6.60 6.07 6.01 20.50 18.69 18.15 
Karnataka 13.75 13.77 13.77 8.20 8.46 8.46 5.15 6.12 6.08 11.20 10.95 10.76 
Kerala 1.63 1.53 1.53 0.35 0.30 0.30 1.54 1.57 1.54 1.90 2.12 2.05 
Tamil Nadu 11.50 9.98 9.98 4.25 2.94 2.94 5.84 5.14 5.12 4.00 6.18 6.13 
Gujarat 18.75 18.21 18.12 8.00 7.64 7.62 2.30 2.86 2.69 4.72 4.20 4.01 
Madhya Pradesh 15.25 16.00 15.93 8.50 9.52 9.47 1.20 1.67 1.43 3.55 2.48 2.43 
Chhattisgarh 5.48 5.27 5.27 1.77 2.65 2.65 0.84 0.96 0.90 1.42 1.04 1.04 
Maharashtra 24.75 22.87 22.87 12.50 13.83 13.82 5.60 7.07 7.06 14.00 11.25 11.13 
Rajasthan 15.10 13.37 13.15 6.50 5.86 5.85 0.35 0.55 0.42 1.37 0.78 0.78 
Haryana 19.65 18.05 17.95 7.00 6.66 6.66 0.52 0.90 0.90 0.45 0.48 0.48 
Punjab 25.50 24.65 24.46 8.50 8.08 8.06 0.91 1.00 1.08 0.55 0.57 0.55 
Himachal Pradesh 0.67 0.54 0.54 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.07 0.05 0.05 0.50 0.38 0.38 
Jammu & Kashmir 1.40 1.22 1.22 0.78 0.48 0.48 0.26 0.18 0.18 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh 55.00 53.64 53.08 17.00 16.51 16.49 2.85 3.47 3.43 8.50 9.47 9.40 
Uttarakhand 2.15 2.33 2.33 0.40 0.38 0.38 0.13 0.04 0.04 0.45 0.41 0.40 
Bihar 19.00 17.04 17.03 4.50 3.98 3.97 2.10 2.26 2.26 3.10 2.68 2.68 
Jharkhand 2.05 1.50 1.50 1.15 0.82 0.82 0.15 0.17 0.17 0.50 0.69 0.68 
Orissa 5.75 4.61 4.59 2.25 2.24 2.21 1.70 1.31 1.27 3.00 2.28 2.24 
West Bengal 13.00 11.71 11.71 4.80 4.56 4.55 4.15 4.97 4.97 7.50 8.39 8.39 
Assam 2.60 2.56 2.56 0.35 0.22 0.22 1.26 0.97 0.97 0.06 0.06 0.06 
All India 281.90 265.97 264.48 106.98 104.09 103.92 43.85 47.60 46.74 87.73 83.38 82.03 
      
No 
change       
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
40 
 
 
CUMULATIVE REQUIREMENT, AVAILABILITY and Sales of Urea, DAP, MOP & NPK during 2010-11 (April 10 to March 11) in FMS 
 
(Qty. in LMTs) 
2010-11 UREA DAP MOP COMPLEX 
STATE REQUIRE- 
MENT 
AVAILAB- 
ILITY 
SALES REQUIRE- 
MENT 
AVAILAB- 
ILITY 
SALES REQUIRE- 
MENT 
AVAILAB- 
ILITY 
SALES REQUIRE- 
MENT 
AVAILAB- 
ILITY 
SALES 
Andhra Pradesh 28.50 31.73 31.30 11.00 10.40 10.36 6.60 6.09 6.04 20.50 22.12 21.88 
Karnataka 14.00 14.28 14.28 8.60 8.46 8.42 5.65 4.24 4.14 11.20 13.78 13.51 
Kerala 1.90 1.44 1.44 0.35 0.42 0.41 1.55 1.58 1.56 2.50 2.28 2.22 
Tamil Nadu 11.50 10.23 10.15 4.25 3.20 3.19 5.84 4.74 4.72 4.25 6.91 6.83 
Gujarat 19.50 21.26 21.19 8.40 8.11 8.09 2.30 2.02 2.02 4.83 6.62 6.55 
Madhya Pradesh 16.75 17.05 16.92 10.00 10.94 10.92 1.45 1.36 1.33 3.69 3.55 3.52 
Chhattisgarh 5.70 5.56 5.54 2.84 2.41 2.41 1.06 0.96 0.94 1.40 1.32 1.32 
Maharashtra 25.25 25.52 25.51 16.70 14.35 14.31 6.75 6.52 6.37 14.80 17.98 17.92 
Rajasthan 15.60 15.73 15.70 7.00 7.20 7.16 0.55 0.35 0.28 1.18 1.40 1.37 
Haryana 19.65 18.75 18.38 7.20 7.40 7.37 0.70 0.66 0.66 0.55 0.69 0.69 
Punjab 26.00 27.61 27.17 9.25 9.04 9.01 1.06 1.06 0.96 0.70 1.05 1.03 
Himachal Pradesh 0.64 0.61 0.61 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.07 0.04 0.04 0.50 0.41 0.41 
Jammu & Kashmir 1.50 1.28 1.27 0.85 0.81 0.81 0.36 0.19 0.19 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh 57.60 55.08 54.51 19.60 17.71 17.64 3.70 2.17 1.92 9.45 10.61 10.30 
Uttarakhand 2.20 2.24 2.23 0.40 0.28 0.28 0.09 0.05 0.05 0.50 0.57 0.57 
Bihar 19.50 16.96 16.94 4.75 4.60 4.59 2.30 2.00 1.97 3.35 3.14 3.11 
Jharkhand 2.10 1.36 1.35 1.10 0.66 0.65 0.15 0.08 0.06 0.85 0.36 0.36 
Orissa 5.75 4.74 4.57 2.50 2.20 2.19 1.90 1.36 1.32 3.00 2.33 2.31 
West Bengal 13.00 11.26 11.26 5.10 4.64 4.62 4.00 3.29 3.23 8.25 8.95 8.76 
Assam 2.60 2.50 2.50 0.60 0.29 0.27 1.30 0.96 0.96 0.05 0.11 0.11 
All India 290.79 284.62 282.23 120.92 113.09 112.87 47.80 39.83 38.91 92.00 104.39 102.98 
 

 
 
Appendix – II 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2010-11) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 31 May, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to 1630 
hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
 
Dr. Manda Jagannath  - Acting Chairman 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
3. Shri Prabhatsinh P. Chauhan  
4. Smt. Santosh Chowdhary  
5. Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar  
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
7. Shri N. Peethambara Kurup  
8. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato  
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal  
10. Shri Tapas Paul  
11. Shri Ponnam Prabhakar  
12. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat  
13. Shri Narendra Singh Tomar  
RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri A.A. Jinnah  
15. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani  
16. Shri Raghunandan Sharma  
17. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
18. Shri Abani Roy  
19. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Shri Ashok Sarin   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri C. S. Joon   - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Additional Director 
 
2. As the Chairman could not attend the sitting due to pre -occupation, the members 
chose Dr. Manda Jagannath,  a member of the Committee, to act  as the Chairman.  The 
Acting Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption  the following 
draft Action Taken Reports : 
(i) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
42 
 
(ii) Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers). 
 
(iii) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
 
(iv) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
 
 
4. After some deliberation the adoption/ consideration of the above mentioned 
Reports was deferred to a later date.   
 
 
   The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*** Matters not related to this Report. 
 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
43 
 
Appendix – III 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2010-11) 
THIRTEENTH SITTING 
(18.07.2011) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday from 1500 hours to 1600 hours. 
Present 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Susmita Bauri  
3. Shri Prabhatsinh P. Chauhan  
4. Smt. Santosh Chowdhary  
5. Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
6. Adv. Ganeshrao Nagorao Dudhgaonkar  
7. Shri Baidya Nath Prasad Mahato 
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
9. Shri Tapas Paul 
10. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
11. Shri N. Chaluvaraya Swamy 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Silvius Condpan 
13. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
14. Prof. Anil Kumar Sahani 
15. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
16. Shri Parshottam Khodabhai Rupala 
17. Shri Abani Roy  
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Secretary 
2. Shri Ashok Sarin   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri C. S. Joon   - Director 
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following draft Reports :- 
(i) *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** *** 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on D emands for Grants 
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers);   
(iii), (iv), (v), (vi) and (vii)       ***  ***  ***  ***   
4. The Committee adopted the draft reports with minor amendments and authorized 
the Chairman to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
   The Committee then adjourned. 
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
*** Matters not related to this Report. 

 
C:\Documents and Settings\Administrator\Desktop\Report 2011\15 Report\15 Report.doc 
44 
 
Appendix – IV 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2009-10) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-11)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 09 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.Nos.  1,2,3,4,5,8 and 9)   
07 
Percentage of Total 77.78% 
III Observation / Recommendation which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.No. Nil) 
 
00 
Percentage of Total 00 
IV Observation / Recommendation in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation at Sl.No. 6 and 7)  
02 
Percentage of Total 22.22% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are of interim nature:-  
 
(Vide Recommendations at Sl.Nos. Nil) 
 
00 
Percentage of Total 00 
 