1 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
 
 
42 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY THIRD REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
OF THE COMMITTEE ON 'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14)'   
OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS)] 
 
 
FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
18 December, 2013/ Agrahayan 1935, (Saka) 
  


2 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
CC&F No. -42 
 
REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY THIRD REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
OF THE COMMITTEE ON 'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14)'   
OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2013 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.12.2013 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
18 December, 2013/ Agrahayan 1935, (Saka) 
 
 
 


3 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
 
CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-14)  
INTRODUCTION 
Chapter I Report  
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply  of the 
Government have not been accepted by the committee and which 
require reiteration 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
 APPENDICES 
I. Requirement, Availability and Sales of Fertilizers  during the year 
2012-13 (April'12 To  March'13 along with Stock Pre-Positioned) 
II. Policy/guidelines dated 3.5.2013  issued by the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  
III. Minutes of Sitting of the  Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2013-14) held on 11.12.2013. 
IV. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Third Report (15 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers ( 2013-14) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2013 -2014)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers). 
 

4 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
  
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri S. Alagiri  
3. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
4. Shri P.P. Chauhan  
5. Shri K.D. Deshmukh 
6. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
7. Shri S.K. Nurul Islam 
8. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
9. Shri Paswan Kamlesh  
10. Shri  Amarnath Pradhan 
11. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
12. Shri Tufani Saroj 
13. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
14. Shri Raju Shetti 
15. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
16. Shri  D. Venugopal 
17. Shri Sai Prathap Annayyagari 
18. Vacant 
19.  Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
24. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
26. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
27. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
28.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
29.  Vacant 
30.  Vacant 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Nishant Mehra   - Committee Officer 
 
 

5 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2013 -14) 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Repo rt on their behalf, the 
Forty-Second  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -Third Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2013 -14) on 
'Demands for Grants (2013 -14)'  of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers).  
 
2. The Thirty-Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 30 Apr il, 2013.   The 
Action Taken Replies of Government to all observations/recommendations contained 
in the Report were received on 04 July, 2013.   The Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (2013 -14) considered the Action Taken Report and 
adopted the same at their sitting held on 11 December, 2013. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -Third  Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
11 December, 2013                                                  GOPINATH MUNDE 
20 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                                      Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
  

6 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
   
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the T hirty-Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department 
of Fertilizers) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 30.4.2013. In all, the Committee 
made 10 Observations / Recommendations in the Report. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of  Fertilizers) were 
requested to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Thirty-Third Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, 
i.e., by 30.07.2013. The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 
10 Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report have been received 
from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) vide their 
O.M. No. F.No.5(1)/2013-Fin.II dated 04.07.2013 . These have been categorized as 
follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have be en accepted by the 
Government:  
 
 Sl.Nos. 2,3,6,8,9 and 10       (Total =6 )   
          Chapter II  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply : 
  
Sl.No. Nil           (Total =Nil)  
           Chapter III  
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee : 
  
Sl.Nos. 4 and 7       (Total =2)  
          Chapter IV  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final repli es of the 
Government are of still awaited: 
  
Sl.Nos.1 and 5        (Total =2)  
Chapter V  
 
 

7 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
1.3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I, Chapter IV in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
Chapter V for which final replies are still awaited, of this Report, should be 
furnished expeditiously. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/ Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit 
comments. 
A.  NEW INVESTMENT POLICY (NIP) 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
1.5 Stressing the need to increase the production of indigenous production of 
fertilizers, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee note that presently India is 3rd largest fertilizer producer in the 
world and the substantive demand of urea is met through indigenous 
production which is 224.69 LMT during  the year 2012 -13 (up to February  
2013). However, the 90% demand of phosphoric fertilizer is met through 
imports either in the form of finished fertilizers or raw material due to absence 
of viable phosphatic mines in the country but for potash, the country  is fully 
dependent on imports. Over the years, there has been a sharp increase in 
consumption of fertilizers due to various factors like good monsoon combined 
with increase irrigation facilities, increased area under cultivation, better 
awareness of usage  of fertilizers amongst farmers and better purchasing 
power in rural areas. However, the Committee are distressed to note that the 
indigenous production of fertilizers has not increased with the growing 
requirement of fertilizer in the country primarily du e to non -availability or 
limited availability of raw material/inputs as well as lack of new investment in 
urea sector, which is again owing to constraints in the availability of domestic 
natural gas. 
  The Committee also note that the Government has recent ly notified 
New Investment Policy (NIP) -2012 on 02.01.2013 to facilitate fresh 
investment in urea sector to achieve self sufficiency in the sector. The 
Committee hope that as a result of investment in the sector under the NIP - 
2012, indigenous production of urea will increase. In fact under this policy, the 
Government has received 15 investment proposals from various fertilizer 
companies which are under consideration of the Department. The Committee 

8 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
expect and recommend that all these investment proposals may be examined 
actively and finalised by the Department expeditiously. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
  The Committee also note that there is an urgent need for the 
development of suitable commercial process for extraction of potash 
domestically in order to reduce the dependence of fertiliser units on import of 
potash. The extensive deposits of Gluconite san d containing potash have 
been detected in various parts of the country and a study is being conducted 
by the Indian School of Mines regarding efficient process for optimum 
extraction of potash content from the Gluconite sand. In this regard, the 
Committee would like the Department to monitor the study and impress upon 
the Indian School of Mines to complete the study and give its findings with in a 
fixed time frame. The Committee desire that the progress made in this regard 
may also be apprised to them."  
 
Reply of the Government 
1.6 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 
"Consequent upon the approval of the announcement of New Investment 
Policy 2012 which was notified by the Ministry in January, 2013 Department of 
Fertilizers (DoF) had received 15 investment proposals from various fertilizer 
companies.  The policy stipulates that all those units, which come into 
production within 5 years from the date of notification would be covered un der 
the policy. The policy provides for guaranteed buy-back of Urea for a period of 
8 years from the start of production for which subsidies/incentives will be 
given by the Government. 
       Presently there is annual demand and supply gap of around 6 0 to 70 
LMT (likely to reach around 8 0 to 9 0 L MT by the end of 2016 -17) in 
indigenous production after taking into account 2 0 L MT of Urea from 
OMIFCO, which is being met through imports.  If all the proposals materialize 
at one go within the stipulated period of  5 years it would create a capacity far 
more excess than the requirement and with no option for the Government but 
to buy the product.  It would unnecessarily put heavy burden on the subsidy 
outflows. 
      As per para 13 of the New Investment Policy 20 12, all the urea units 
who plan to set up urea unit in the country are required to mandator ily provide 

9 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
information at beginning and completion of each sta ge of the project as given 
at Annexure-2 of the said policy.  Accordingly, the Department of Fertilizers 
has requested aforementioned companies to submit the broad stages for 
setting up urea project.  This is also required to assess the demand and 
production gap in the country as well as the cost of gas expected to be used 
in production of urea from new investments. 
       The matter regarding new capacity creation was discussed in the 
Department of Fertilizers and a need was felt to move cautiously in giving 
approvals to the fresh proposals and in order to meet the immediate/projected 
demand of 2016 -17, the DoF can at the most consider four new proposals 
adding upto 5 0 LMT after taking into account the capacity addition in PSUs 
(both revival and Brownfield expansion) as well as projects in the private 
sector which are already in progress and will be commissioned in 2013 -14. 
However, for transparency  and equity, a need was felt to lay an objective 
criterion for selection of these proposals and a Group of Officers has been 
constituted to deliberate and decide on an objective criteria to select four 
projects and import planning of urea in future. The first meeting of the Group 
of Officer has taken place on 14th May, 2013.  
 In respect of extraction of Potash, the Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad 
has comp leted the study and submitted its report to M/s FAGMIL, a PSU 
under the Department of Fertilizers.  M/s FAGMIL is examining the viability of 
gluconite mining to extract Potash.  The Department will take appropriate 
action as per findings of M/s FAGMIL in this regard."  
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.7 The  Committee  had noted that New Investment Policy (NIP) - 2012 was 
notified by the Government  on  02.01.2013  to facilitate fresh investment in 
urea sector to achieve self sufficiency in the sector.  Under this policy,   the 
Government had  received 15 investment propos als from various fertilizer 
companies which are under consideration of the Department. The Committee  
had, therefore, recommended that all these investment proposals may be 
examined actively and finalised by the Department expeditiously. In their 
Action Tak en Reply, the Department has stated that  if all the proposals are 
materialized  at one go within the stipulated period of 5 years,  it would create 
a capacity far more excess than the requirement and with no option for the 
Government but to buy the product  which  would unnecessarily put heavy 

10 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
burden on the subsidy outflows. The  Department, therefore, propose to  move 
cautiously in giving approvals to the fresh proposals and to meet the 
immediate/projected demand of 2016 -17. The  Department can at the most 
consider four new proposals adding upto 50 LMT after taking into account the 
capacity addition in PSUs (both revival and Brownfield expansion) as well as 
projects in the private sector which are already in progress and will be 
commissioned in 2013 -14. For transparency and equity, a Group of Officers 
has been constituted to deliberate and decide on an objective criteria to select 
four projects and import planning of urea in future. The first meeting of the 
Group of Officer has taken place on 14 th May, 2013. In view of the foregoing, 
the  Committee expect that  the objective criteria for selection of investment 
projects would be finalized  cautiously but expeditiously and thereafter, on the 
basis of the objective criteria, the investment proposals would be  actively 
examined and finalized on priority basis with a view to meet the immediate and 
the projected demand of urea in the country with in the next five years . In  
respect of extraction of Potash,  the Committee note from the  Action Taken 
Reply  that the  Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad has completed the study and 
submitted its report to M/s FAGMIL, a PSU under the Department of Fertilizers. 
M/s FAGMIL is examining the viability of gluconite mining to extract Potash. 
The Department will take appropriate ac tion as per findings of M/s FAGMIL in 
this regard.  However, the  Committee regret to note that no time lines  have 
been fixed  for submission of its findings by the M/s FAGMIL.  The Department 
has also not elaborated its action plan to arrive at its  final decision  in the 
matter. The C ommittee, therefore, recommend  that the viability of gluconite 
mining to extract potash may be examined expeditiously   with in a fixed  time 
frame. The Committee would like to be  apprised  of the action plan of the 
Department and the  progress made in this regard. 
 
B. NON-PLAN EXPENDITURE 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
1.8 While stressing the need to check the huge non-plan expenditure, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee are constrained to note that the actual non -plan expenditure 
during the year 2010-11 was Rs.65859.08 crore (gross), for the year 2011 -12, 
Rs.74588.52 crore and for the year 2012 -13, Rs.63974.24 crore as on 31st 

11 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
January, 2013. The Committee we re informed that since budget allocations 
for the year 2012 -13 were less than requirement, the shortfall is likely to be 
carried over to the next financial year. The huge non -plan expenditure is 
primarily due to mounting fertilizer subsidy being granted un der NBS policy. 
The subsidy on P&K fertilizer during the year 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 was Rs. 
41500 crore and Rs.36107.94 crore respectively. The Committee were 
informed that all high cost Naptha /FO/LSHS based urea units have been 
directed for conversion to g as based units to reduce the indigenous cost of 
urea which in turn reduce the subsidy being granted under the NBS policy. 
The Committee expect that the Department would expedite the process of 
conversion of existing Naptha /FO/LSHS based urea units to gas so that the 
non-plan expenditure could be checked.  
 The Committee are also distressed to note that as the proposal to set 
up brown field plant could not be finalized by BVFCL, the demand for GBS 
was reduced from BE Rs. 94.61 crore to just Rs.2.00 crore du ring 2012-13 for 
meeting the pre-project activities. But even the pre -project activities could not 
be undertaken due to non -finalization of brown field projects. The Committee 
feel that being the only fertilizer company/ industry of North -East, it becomes 
crucial for BVFCL to set up its brown field project on time which would in turn 
help in development and growth of North -Eastern region. The Committee 
expect the Department, being the administrative controller, to take effective 
steps to expedite the finali sation of proposed brown field plant of BVFCL with 
in a fixed time frame. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard.  
  The Committee note that there has been a steady increase of subsidy 
on imported fertilizers from Rs.13716.12 crore in 2011 -12 (AE) to 
Rs.15,544.64 crore in the year 2013 -14 (BE). According to the Department of 
Fertilizers, the increase of subsidy on imported fertilizers for the year 2013 -14 
is due to increase in the estimated requirement of imported u rea during 2013-
14 vis -à-vis 2011 -12 and the higher Rupee/ US dollar exchange rate as 
compared to 2011 -12. The Committee are of the view that the increasing 
subsidy on imported fertilisers could be reduced if the domestic production of 
fertiliser is adequately increased to meet the growing demand of our farmers. 
The development of commercial process to extract potas h from internal 
resources like g luconite sand would also greatly help in not only meeting the 
demand of potash of our farmers but in turn would also help to reduce the 

12 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
mounting subsidy on imported fertiliser. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should make an action plan to augment the 
domestic production of fertiliser."  
 
Reply of the Government 
1.9 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 
"The Department of Fertilizers has requested the Naphtha/FO/LSHS based 
P&K fertilizer manufacture rs namely M/s FACT, MFL and GNVFC to convert 
their feedstock to gas based unit. These companies have taken appropriate 
steps towards conversion of their plant to gas based unit. However, these 
units are yet to receive the commitment from Government for adequate supply 
of gas to these units as per their requirements. 
 In respect of extraction of Potash, the Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad 
has comp leted the study and submitted its report to M/s FAGMIL, a PSU 
under the Department of Fertilizers.  M/s FAGMIL is examining the viability of 
Gluconite mining to  extract Potash.  The Department will take appropriate 
action as per findings of M/s FAGMIL in this regard.  
 The current status regarding conversion of existing Naptha/FO/LSHS 
based Urea Units is given as under :- 
Status of  Fuel Oil based  Ammonia Feedstock Changeover Projects at 
Panipat & Bathinda, NFL 
 Zero date for both the projects is 29th January 2010. 
 Mechanical completion achieved on 4 th November 2012 at Bathinda and 9 th 
November 2012 at Panipat against the contractual date of 33 mont hs from zero date 
i.e. 28th October 2012. 
 Ammonia plants handed over after purging to L&T (LSTK Contractor) on 14 th 
November 2012 at Panipat and 28 th November 2012 at Bathinda for hook -up / tie-in 
& commissioning activities. 
 Ammonia production started on 9 th January 2013 at Bathinda and 11 th January 2013 
at Panipat. 
 Commissioning achieved on 16th January 2013 at Bathinda and 24 th January 2013 at 
Panipat against the scheduled date of 28 th January 2013 as per Government 
approval. 

13 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
 The hook -up / tie -in and comm issioning activities were completed in Panipat and 
Bathinda within the contractual time period of 90 days from handing-over of Ammonia 
plant. 
 Presently, both Panipat and Bathinda plants have achieved 100% daily rated 
capacity of 900 MTPD of Ammonia and 155 0 MTPD of Urea and optimization of 
energy consumption is being carried out by LSTK Contractor M/s L&T and the 
Licensor M/s HTAS. 
 Presently, plants are under Sustained Load and Guaranteed Test Run stage and the 
process of declaration of commercial production is being initiated.   
Status of Ammonia Feedstock Changeover Project at Nangal, NFL 
 Zero date for the feedstock changeover project is 29th January 2010. 
 On completion of mechanical erection and pre -commissioning activities required for 
Mechanical Completion, Plant shut-down for hook-up / tie-in and commissioning was 
taken on 15 th February 2013. Contractual date for achieving Mechanical Completion 
was 28th October 2012. Project was to be commissioned by 28th December 2012. 
 Presently, Ammonia plant  hook-up / tie -in job has been completed.  Revamped 
Ammonia plant is under start up and Ammonia production is expected to be achieved 
shortly. 
Status of Naphtha based Ammonia Feedstock Changeover Projects  
Kanpur Fertilizers and Chemicals Limited (KFCL) 
Gas Sale Agreement signed with GAIL on 8 th November 2012 for supply of 
RLNG w.e.f. 1 st July 2013. The company started production from one stream 
in June 2013 while the production from other two streams will start very soon 
on gas. 
Zuari Agro Chemicals Limited 
On February 12, 2013, Company has signed unbundled Gas Supply 
Agreement with GAIL . Due to delay in laying of cross country pipeline and 
also delays in pre -commissioning and commissioning activities at Gas 
Terminal of GAIL, the Gas  could be delivered to Fertilizer plant at Goa only 
effective from February 15, 2013. 
Southern Petro-chemical Industries Corporation Limited (SPIC) 
Basic Engineering work has been completed . Urea plant would be ready to 
receive gas from November 2013.  SPIC has signed a MoU with GA IL and 
IOC to get RLNG either from Cochin or Chennai.  
Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (MCFL) 
Gas pipeline connectivity from Petronet LNG terminal at Kochi to Mangalore is 
expected to be completed in April, 2014.  The fertilizer plant will be read y to 

14 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
receive the gas when the pipeline connectivity is established.  Gas Sale 
Agreement (GSA) with IOC and Gas Transmission Agreement (GTA) with 
GAIL have been signed on 16th February, 2011.  
Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) 
The project is proposed to be im plemented in January 2014 and trial 
production will commence from February 2014. After firming up the gas 
supplier, based on Techno-Commercial evaluation, MFL has to enter into Gas 
Transportation Agreement (GTA) and Gas Sales Agreement (GSA). 
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL) 
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL), a urea 
manufacturing loss making company under the administrative control of this 
Department has submitted a Techno -Economic Feasibility Re port for 
installation of a new Brownfield Ammonia Urea plant (4 th unit) at Namrup in 
Dibrugarh district of Assam. Planning Commission accorded ‘in -principle’ 
approval in August 2012.  Cost of the project has been projected to be 
Rs.3311.09 Crores with equit y component of Rs.815.67 Crores.  The Plant 
would be of 8.4 lakh MT capacity with specific energy consumption of 5.2 
G.cal/MT of urea.  In a meeting held on 21 st March 2013 under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (Fertilizers), BVFCL was asked to get the 
valuation of its assets. After submission of valuation report of the assets, the 
transaction structure will be decided.  M/s Price Waterhouse Coopers Pvt. Ltd. 
has been appointed as Consultant for open analysis, feasibility analysis of the 
options and suggesting m ost suitable option.  BVFCL has appointed a 
Government approved valuer for assets valuation.  The report of the asset 
valuer is awaited." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.10 The Committee had noted that the  huge non -plan expenditure is 
primarily due to mounting fertilizer subsidy being granted under NBS policy . 
With a view  to reduce the indigenous cost of urea which in turn reduce the 
subsidy being granted under the NBS policy, the  Committee were informed 
that all high cost Naptha /FO/LSHS based urea units have  been directed for 
conversion to gas based units. The Committee had, therefore,  expected that 
the Department would expedite the process of conversion of existing Naptha 
/FO/LSHS based urea units to gas based units. In its Action Taken Reply, the 
Department has stated that Naphtha/FO/LSHS based P&K fertilizer 

15 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
manufacturers namely M/s Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited 
(FACT), Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL)  and Gujarat Narmada Valley 
Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (GNVFC) have been requested  to convert their 
feedstock to gas based unit s. These companies have taken appropriate steps 
towards conversion of their plant to gas based unit s. However, the Committee 
regret to note that these units are yet to receive the commitment from 
Government for supply of gas to these units as per their requirements.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the matter may be pursued vigorously with 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas  and other concerned authorities  
with a view to get  firm commitment o f  supply of gas to the aforesaid units. 
The Committee further hoped that conversion of the feedstock from 
Naphtha/FO/LSHS based fertilizer manufacturing units to gas based units  
would  be done expeditiously in a time bound manner.  
The Committee also felt that it is crucial for Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer 
Corporation Limited (BVFCL), to set up its brown field project on time which 
would in turn help in development and growth of North -Eastern region. The 
Committee had, therefore, expected that  the Department w ould  take effective 
steps to expedite the finalisation of proposed brown field plant of BVFCL with 
in a fixed time frame.  In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated that 
BVFCL has submitted a Techno -Economic Feasibility Report for installation of 
a new Brownfield Ammonia Urea plant (4th unit) at Namrup in Dibrugarh district 
of Assam for which Planning Commission had accorded ‘in -principle’ approval 
in August 2012. In a meeting held on 21 st March 2013 under the Chairmansh ip 
of Secretary (Fertilizers), BVFCL was asked to get the valuation of its assets  
done. After submission of valuation report of the assets, the transaction 
structure will be decided. M/s Price Waterhouse Coopers Pvt. Ltd. has been 
appointed as Consultant f or open analysis, feasibility analysis of the options 
and suggesting most suitable option. BVFCL has appointed a Government 
approved valuer for assets valuation. The report of the asset valuer is awaited. 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee expect the Department to actively 
pursue  and expedite the process to set up its brown field project with in a 
fixed time  frame  which would in turn help in development and growth of 
North-Eastern region. The Committee would like to apprised of the progress 
made in this regard. 
In respect of  extraction of potash from g luconite mining, the Committee 
have already given its comments at para 1.7 above. 

16 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
 
C. DIRECT SUBSIDY TO THE FARMERS 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
1.11 Stressing the need for implementation of direct subsidy to the farmers  in a 
time bound manner, the Committee had  recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note that the Department is following a phased approach for 
direct disbursement of fertiliser subsidy to the intended beneficiaries. The 
implementation of Phase -I has already been made operational and 
subsequent phases of project i.e.; Phase -II, Phase -III and Phase -IV will be 
implemented once the implementation of Phase -I is stabilized. The project 
mechanism to transfer the subsidy directly to intended beneficiarie s will also 
be formulated and implemented once Phase -I is stabilized. In this regard, the 
Committee were informed that 12 districts across 11 states have been 
selected for the Phase -II pilot project based on Aadhaar penetration, fertilizer 
consumption, geo graphical variance, dealers network as well as 
implementation status on Phase -I. The Committee expect the Government to 
keep strict vigilance and monitoring on the implementation of this particular 
phase as it would pave the  way for wide implementation of direct subsidy to 
the farmers in the country. The Committee are, therefore, hopeful that the 
Phase-II pilot project will be successful and recommend that feedback from 
these 12 districts in respect of Phase -II of the scheme be analys ed critically 
and on th at basis , the scheme be implemented in the entire country. The 
Committee also reiterate its earlier recommendation that all the phases of 
direct subsidy transfer should be implement in a time bound manner so that 
there is no undue delay in the transfer of the benefits of direct subsidy to the 
farmers, which would in turn check the corruption, close the loopholes and 
profligacy in subsidies. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.12 In reply to  the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 "Department of Fertilizers is following a phased approach in direct 
disbursement of fertilizer subsidy to the intended beneficiaries.  

17 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
Implementation of Phase-I has already been made operational and 
subsequent phases will be implemented once implementation of Phase -I is 
stabilized. Technical Consultant of Department of Fertilizers, i.e. National 
Informatics Centre has completed the development of Phase -II mFMS 
application which is enabled to run on Point of Sale (PoS) devices, mobiles, 
personal computers as well as tablets. Final User Acceptance Test (UAT) was 
conducted on 18.03.2013. The testing of application is in progress and would 
be completed before deployment in the pilot districts. 
  In the DBT Executive Committee meeting held on 06.05.2013 taken by 
Principal Secretary to PM, it has been informed that National Committee on 
DBT has decided that transferring food and fertilizer subsidy through DBT is 
not under consideration at present. Therefore, Deptt. of Fertilizers could focus 
on other aspects of the system they are putting in place for the time being.  
Therefore, DoF is planning to start pilot for Phase-II in select districts. 
 In a meeting with fertilizer companies, chaired by Secretary (Fert.) on 
30.04.2013, it has been decided to roll out 6 pilot districts of mFMS Phase -II 
out of 12 pilot districts in June / July 2013.  The pilot is being conducted by 
LFS (Lead Fertilizer Suppliers) of the six States. The cost of the pilot would be 
met from the incentive money of Rs.50/mt for the retailer." 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.13 The Committee had noted that the Department is following a phased 
approach in direct disbursement of fertilizer subsidy to the  intended 
beneficiaries. Implementation of Phase -I has already been made operational 
and subsequent phases will be implemented once phase -I is stabilized.  
However, the Committee are distressed  to note from the Action Taken Reply 
of the Government  that National Committee on DBT (Direct Benefits Transfer)  
has decided on 06.05.2013 that transferring food and fertilizer subsidy through 
DBT is not under consideration at present and therefore, the Department could 
focus on other aspect of the system which  are being  put in place for the time 
being. The response of the Government also does not indicate the resolve on 
the part of the Department  to implement the DBT scheme in the interest of the 
farmers in the country . The  Committee are of the view that the ulti mate 
objective of the scheme is to give the benefit of subsidy direct to the farmers  
and therefore, to keep this end in view,   it is essential for   the Department to 

18 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
continue to make consistent and vigorous efforts in coordination  with all 
stake holders to   work out the  modalities   to give the benefit  of the subsidy 
direct  to the farmers without further delay. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the  efforts and the  initiatives  taken by the Depart ment in this 
regard. 
 
D. NUTRIENT BASED SUBSIDY 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
1.14 Emphasizing on t he improved implementation of Nut rient Based Subsidy, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 "The Committee note that Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) on decontrolled 
phosphatic (P) & potassic (K) fertilizers was put in to effect from 1st April, 
2010. Under the NBS policy, a fixed amount of subsidy decided on annual 
basis is provided to each grade of subsidised P&K fertilisers depending on its 
nutrient content. Since th e country is largely dependent on imports for P&K 
fertiliser in the form of finished fertiliser or its raw material and subsidy being 
fixed, any rise or fall in international prices of P&K fertilisers and its inputs 
have effect on MRP of these fertilisers in the country. Further, variation in 
exchange rate also affects the delivered prices of these fertilisers. The 
Committee further note that under the NBS policy, fertiliser companies have 
been allowed to fix MRP at reasonable level.  
  The Committee were i nformed that as at present, there is no 
mechanism under the policy to monitor and enforce reasonableness of MRP. 
However, in order to monitor the MRP of fertilizers fixed by the companies, the 
Department proposed to bring in a policy note that will address  the issue of 
MRP. The Committee therefore, recommend that Department of Fertilizers 
should expedite the formulation of mechanism in a time bound manner to 
monitor and enforce the fertilizer companies to fix MRP of fertilisers produced 
by them at reasonable level.  
  The Committee also note that a study of NBS policy is also being 
undertaken through a consultancy firm. The study will cover all aspects of 
NBS policy including its evaluation viz-a-viz price rise and its effect on balance 
fertilization of soil . The Committee expect that the Department of Fertilizer 
would take steps to expedite the study of NBS regime so that it would be 

19 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
improved implementation of NBS policy. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard.“ 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.15 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 
"The Department has issued policy/guidelines dated 3.5.2013 (copy enclosed  
as Appendix-I) under which it will be mandatory for all fertilizers companies to 
furnish the certified cost data in prescribed format for monitoring of MRPs of 
P&K fertilizers fixed by them. The Department is in the process to finalise a 
suitable mechanism to determine the reasonableness of MRP fixed b y the 
fertilizer companies under the NBS Policy.  
 The Department is in the process of appointing a consultant to study 
the NBS policy. The study will also look into, among others, the causes of 
price rise of P&K fertilizers and make suggestions. The study  will be of 3 
month’s duration."  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.16 The Committee had noted that there is no mechanism under the policy 
to monitor and enforce reasonableness of MRP  fixed by the fertilizer  
companies for the fertilizers produced by them . The Committee had, therefore, 
recommended that the Department of Fertilizers should expedite the 
formulation of mechanism in a time bound manner to monitor and enforce the 
fertilizer companies to fix MRP of fertilisers produced by them at reasonable 
level.  In its Action Taken Reply, the  Department has  informed that 
policy/guidelines dated 3.5.2013 has since been issued under which it will be 
mandatory for all fertilizers companies to furnish the certified cost data in 
prescribed format for monitoring of MRPs of P&K fertilizers fixed by them.  
Further, the  Department is in the process to finalise a suitable mechanism to 
determine the reasonableness of MRP fixed by the fertilizer companies under 
the NBS Policy.  However, the Department has not indicated the  time by which 
such mechanism is likely to be finalised. The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
its earlier recommendation that the Department should expedite the 
formulation of mechanism in a time bound manner to monitor and enforce the 
fertilizer companies to fix MRP of fertilizers produced by them at reasonable 

20 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
level. As regards study of NBS regime, the  Department  has stated that 
appointment of  a consultant to study the NBS policy is under process. The 
study will look into, among others, the causes of pri ce rise of P&K fertilizers 
and make suggestions. The study will be of 3 month’s duration.   However, the 
Committee are not satisfied with the  pace of progress in the matter . Since   it  
is essential on urgent basis  to  evaluate  the  impact  of NBS regime on price 
rise of P&K fertilizers , the Committee, therefore, desire that  the process of 
appointment of consultant for the purpose be expedited with out any further 
delay.  The  Committee also  hope that the  time line proposed for the study on 
NBS regime would be strictly adhere to , enabling  the Department to come out 
with its  corrective measures /suggestions   to improve the NBS policy on the 
basis of the findings of  the proposed evaluation of the NBS regime . The 
Committee would like to be   apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
 
E. CONVERSION TO GAS BASED UNITS 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
1.17 Stressing the need for speedy conversion of Naptha/FO/LHS units to Natural 
gas/LNG gas units, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
 "The Committee note that natural gas has been the preferred feed stock for 
manufacture of urea and at present natural gas based plants account for 80% 
of urea capacity, naptha is used for 9% urea and balance 11% capacity is 
based on fuel oil and LSHS as fee d stock. Natural gas is not only clean and 
effective source of energy but the same is also considerably cheaper and 
more cost effective in term of manufacturing cost of urea. As per the policy 
announced in January, 2004, new urea projects, expansion of exi sting urea 
units and capacity through de -bottlenecking/revamp/modernisation will be 
allowed/recognised if the urea  is manufactured by using natural gas/CNG as 
feedstock. A policy for conversion of existing Naptha /FO/LHS based units to 
natural gas / LNG as feed stock has also been formulated in January, 2004 
which encourages early conversion of non- gas urea units to natural gas/CNG 
units. The Committee also note that pursuant to the said policy, out of 8 
Naptha/FO/LHS urea units, 5 have been converted to gas based units.  
 The three units of NFL i.e. Panipat, Bhatinda and Nangal and Bharauch 
unit of GNVFC, which are FO/LSHS based, have been converted in to gas but 

21 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
the allocation of gas to these units is under consi deration of the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas. Out of the four Naptha based units, the Zuari Agro 
Limited has started production partly on gas since February, 2013 and the full 
production on gas will start from April, 2013. The other three Naptha bas ed 
units i.e. MFL, SPIC and MCFL are yet to be converted to gas. Thus, the 
Committee are anguished to note the slow progress in the conversion of 
Naphtha/FO/LHS units to gas based units as a result of which non -gas based 
units continue to produce high cost  urea and consequently, there is no 
reduction in subsidy being granted by the Government. In view of the 
mounting burden of subsidy, the Committee reiterate its earlier 
recommendation of reducing the increase in subsidy and state that 
Department of Fertili zers should take adequate steps to expedite process of 
conversion of the Naphtha/FO/LHS based units in to gas based units with in a 
fixed time frame. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard.  
  The Committee further note  that pricing and firm availability of natural 
gas for existing and new units of fertilizer companies are the pre -requisites for 
indigenous production of urea. The concern of the fertiliser units to protect 
them from any additional liability arising due to  increase in the delivered price 
of gas has been addressed in the NIP -2012. The Committee would, therefore, 
desire the Department to play a proactive role in association with all 
stakeholders viz. Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. GAIL and fertiliser 
units to meet the requirement of fertiliser sector on priority basis. The Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas has informed that whenever, new gas is found 
in the country, the same will be allocated to fertiliser units on priority basis. 
The Committee wer e also informed that three units of NFL viz. Nangal, 
Bhatinda and Panipat have been connected with gas pipeline. The MFL has 
not taken any step for gas pipeline connectivity. The Committee stress that 
the Department should vigorously pursue the issues rega rding adequate 
allocation of natural gas and gas pipeline connectivity with Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas. If felt necessary, the fertiliser units may be 
advised to use imported RLNG in case of non availability of domestic natural 
gas. Further, the Committee reiterates its earlier views that with the assured 
allocation and pricing of natural gas to the fertilizer sector, the expansion and 
revamping process of existing and new fertilizer projects could be completed 
at the earliest which in turn would  avoid cost and time overruns. The 

22 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
Committee would like to recommend that expeditious and effective measures 
may be taken by the Department for capacity addition programmes so as to 
achieve self -sufficiency in fertilizer sector. The Committee would like to  be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.18 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
"Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (GNVFC):  
M/s GN VFC is an enterprise of the State Government of Gujarat.  
Implementation work has been completed from quite some time and the plant 
is ready for starting commissioning activities since last week of September 
2012. The company has requested for a llocation of Natural Gas and its 
source since long.  The entity has also sought permission to run the plant on 
RLNG and consider its cost as pas s through cost for working out cost of 
production of Urea for subsidy purpose.  Based on request and discussions 
carried out with DoF several times, the company had entered into agreement 
for supply of RLNG with M/s GSPC for commissioning of the plant on 
reasonable endeavour basis (spot gas) till 31 st January 2013 at the rate of 
16.4 US$ per MMBtu (GCV) exclusive of VAT and transportation.  The plant is 
ready and all the pre -commissioning activities are completed.  The company 
has started commissioning of the plant on 20 th December 2012 in anticipation 
of granting approval of the above gas price. 
National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) 
Ammonia Plant Feedstock Changeover from Fuel Oil to Natural Gas at 
Panipat, Bathinda & Nangal were cleared by Cabinet Committee on Economic 
Affairs on 21.01.2010.  Based on the communication of approval from 
Department of Fertilizers, contract on Lump sum Turnkey Basis (LSTK) was 
placed on M/s Larsen & Toubro (L&T) India for feedstock changeover projects 
at Panipat & Bathinda and on Consortium of Technimont (TCM) Italy & 
Technimont ICB (TICB) India for Feedstock C hangeover Project at Nangal.  
Zero date of the projects was 29th January 2010.  
Gas Tie-up 
Domestic gas is yet to be allocated for changeover projects at Panipat, 
Bathinda and Nangal.  For pre -commissioning, commissioning & post -
commissioning upto 31 st May 2013, Master Spot Sale Agreement has been 

23 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
entered into with GAIL for supply of spot gas for Nangal and Bathinda units.  
Present delivered price of spot gas is USD 17.94 / mmBTU.  For supply of gas 
to Panipat unit, spot agreement had been entered into with IOC L upto 31 st 
January 2013. Present delivered price of spot gas is USD 17.04 / mmBTU.  
 So far as Naphtha based units in southern India are concerned, the 
Zuari Agro & Chemicals Limited is connected by gas pipeline and has started 
production on gas. The Madras Fertilizers Limited has not yet taken concrete 
steps for gas pipeline connectivity. Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited 
(MCFL) has signed the Gas Sale Agreement (GSA) with IOC and Gas 
Transmission Agreement (GTA) with GAIL on 16 th February, 2011. The SPIC 
has yet to sign the GSPA agreement. 
 With regard to capacity addition, it is reiterated that  based on NIP 
2012, this Department had received 15 proposals from various fertilizers 
companies. The matter  was discussed in the Department of Fertilizer s and a 
need was felt to move cautiously in giving approvals to the fresh proposals 
and in order to meet the immediate/projected demand of 2016 -17, the DoF 
can at the most consider four new proposals adding upto 5 0 LMT after taking 
into account the capacit y addition in PSUs (both revival and Brownfield 
expansion) as well as projects in the private sector which are already in 
progress and will be commissioned in 2013 -14. However, for transparency 
and equity, a need was felt to lay an objective criterion for selection of these 
proposals. A Group of Officers has been constituted to deliberate and decide 
on an objective criteria to select four projects and  import planning of urea in 
future. The first meeting of the Group of Officer has taken place on 14 th May, 
2013. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.19 The Committee had  noted that out of 8 Naptha/FO/LHS urea units,  5 
have been converted to gas based units.  The other three Naptha based units 
i.e. Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) , Southern Petro -chemical Industries 
Corporation Limited ( SPIC) and Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited 
(MCFL) are yet to be converted to gas.  Further, the  allocation of gas to four 
FO/LSHS based units – three units of NFL - Panipat, Bhatinda and Nanga l and  
one  unit of GNVFC - Bharauch,  is under consideration of the Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas.  Out of the four Naptha based units, only the Zuari 
Agro Limited has started production on gas since February, 2013 . In its Action 
Taken Reply, the Department has stated that   M/s GNVFC had entered into 

24 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
agreement for supply of RLNG with M/s GSPC. However, domestic gas is yet to 
be allocated for changeover projects at Panipat, Bathinda and Nangal.   MCFL 
has signed the Gas  Sale Agreement (GSA) with  IOCL and Gas Transmission 
Agreement (GTA) with GAIL on 16 th February, 2011. MFL has  yet to  take  
concrete steps for gas pipeline connectivity. Further, the   SPIC has yet to sign 
the GSPA agreement.  Thus, the Committee are not s atisfied with the  pace of  
progress in the conversion of Naphtha/FO/LHS based units to gas based units. 
The Committee strongly feel that the  Department,  being the nodal authority, 
should  pursue the matter vigorously with the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas and IOCL/GAIL and needs to  undertake periodic reviews at  the  
highest level in order to expedite conversion of all units into gas  based units 
in a time bound manner . The Committee would like to be apprised of  the 
progress made  in this regard. 
 With regard to investment proposals received under NIP -2012, the 
Committee have already given its comments at para 1.7 above. 
 
F. FERTILIZER MONITORING SYSTEM 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
1.20 Emphasizing the need to strengthen the existing Fertilizers Monitori ng 
System, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
 "The Committee are of the view that Department of Fertilizers has the primary 
responsibility to assess the requirement of fertilizers and also to ensure that 
there is a dequate and timely availability of fertilizers to the farmers. The 
Committee in this regard note that there is monitoring mechanism of 
Fertilizers Monitoring System which tracks availability of fertilizers upto district 
level and has now been extended thro ugh mobile Fertilizers Monitoring 
System (m -FMS) to the last point of sale i.e.; retailer. The Department of 
Fertilizers has also informed that all the stakeholders are required to register 
in m-FMS and perform the required reporting to increase transparen cy across 
the supply chain. The Committee, however, feel that there are still reports of 
black-marketing and illegal sale of fertilizers across the country. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation as mentioned in 
the demands for gra nts report 2012 -13 that Department of Fertilizers should 

25 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
strengthen the existing Fertilizer Monitoring System and make it more 
effective in bringing transparency in the sale of fertilize rs and to eradicate 
hoarding and black-marketing of fertilizers.  
 The Committee also note that as there is no reserves of potash in the 
country, the total requirement of the same is met through imports and the 
companies are free to import fertilizers depending upon the demand and 
market condition in the country. However, th e Committee regret to note that 
for the Kharif season of 2011 -12, potash could not be imported due to lack of 
adequate contracts with international suppliers and high international prices to 
meet the requirements of the farmers of the country. The Committe e, 
therefore, recommend that a mechanism may be put in place to monitor and 
to ensure timely procurement of potash as per the demand of the farmers. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Department in this regard." 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.21 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 
"The month -wise demand is assessed and projected by the Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) in consultation with the State Governments 
before the commencement of each cropping season. Accordingly, month -wise 
and state-wise supply plan is made. State Governments are responsible for 
monitoring the availability within their respective states. On the basis of 
month-wise & state -wise projection given by Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation, Department of Fertilizers allocates sufficient/adequate quantities 
of fertilizers to the States by issuing monthly supply plans and continuously 
monitors the availability of Fertil izers at the state level.  Further 
monitoring/distribution of fertilizers district/block wise is the responsibility of 
the respective states.  The state wise availability during April 2012 to March, 
2013 along with pre -positioning of fertilizers is at Appendix-II. As can be 
seen, the availability of all the fertilizers was adequate. 
  Department of Fertilizers (DOF) is responsible for distribution and 
movement of fertilizers in the country. DOF is also paying subsidy on all major 
fertilizers to ensure adequate and quality fertilizers to the farmers at affordable 
price. The Maximum Retai l Price (MRP) of urea is under the statutory price 

26 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
control of the Government of India, while the MRPs of Phosphatic and 
Potassic (P&K) fertilizers have been freed and the manufactures/importers 
are deciding the MRPs for these fertilizers. The manufactures/ importers and 
their wholesale and retail dealers are required to adhere to the provisions of 
the Fertilizers Control Order (FCO) regarding quality and MRP of fertilizers. 
As per the Allocation of Business Rules of the Government of India, 
administration of  FCO is the responsibility of the Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation. The equitable distribution of fertilize rs to the farmers within 
the State at MRPs is the responsibility of the concerned state government. 
State Government can conduct search, mak e seizures and take punitive 
action against any person/dealer violating the provisions of the FCO. 
However, as DOF is responsible for making available subsidized fertilizers as 
per the requirement of the states, the issues like black marketing, illegal 
diversion, smuggling, breach of MRP are the issues of concern for us. 
Therefore, states are constantly told about the urgent necessity of keeping 
strict vigil and prompt action by the states to check black marketing, diversion, 
smuggling, breach of MRP etc., by bringing these issues to the notice of the 
state government at various forums and through correspondences. Lately, 
said issues  were highlighted during the  Zonal Conference on Agriculture 
Inputs for Kharif 2013 season held from 6 th to 8 th February, 2013 and the 
National Conference on Agriculture for Kharif Campaign -2013 held from 6 th to 
7th March 2013, in which representatives from all the states were present. 
  All the fertilizer companies are also advised time and again to take 
strict action against the ir dealers found indulging in malpractices like black -
marketing, hoarding etc. 
 As regards Potash - there was tightness in the availability of MOP 
during 2011 -12. There is no viable source of Potash in the country as such 
the entire demand of MOP is met thr ough imports. During 2011-2012 year, up 
to the month of July, contracting for import of MOP could not materialize due 
to substantial increase of prices by cartelization by MOP producers in the 
International market. The contracting of MOP took place only in  the month of 
August. As a result, availability of MOP for direct application was comfortable 
in Rabi’2011-12." 
 
  

27 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
Comments of the Committee 
  
1.22 The Committee had recommended that the Department should 
strengthen the existing Fertilizer Monitoring System and make it more effective 
in bringing transparency in the sale of fertilizers and eradicate hoarding and 
black marketing of fertilizers. It was noted by the Committee that during  Kharif 
season of 2011 -12, potash could not be imported due to lack o f adequate 
contracts with international suppliers and high international prices to meet the 
requirements of the farmers of the country.   The Committee had , therefore,  
also recommended that a mechanism may be put in place to monitor and to 
ensure timely procurement of potash as per the demand of the farmers.  In its 
Action Taken Reply, the Department has claimed that the state-wise availability 
during April, 2012 to March, 2013 along wit h pre-positioning of fertilizers was 
adequate. Further, the equitable distribution of fertilizers to the farmers within 
the State at MRPs is the responsibility of the concerned state government.  
Thus, the Committee regret to note that the Department has pu t the entire 
responsibility on State Governments for monitoring/distribution of fertilizers in 
their State .  However, the Committee  are not entirely convinced with the 
explanation of the Department in the matter. The Committee strongly feel  that 
the entire onus in this regard could not be put  only on the State Governments.   
The Department , as being the nodal authority, can not  overlook its 
responsibility  for effective distribution and transparency in the sale of 
fertilizers. The Committee are of the view that it is for the  Department to 
shoulder the responsibility and take corrective measures in  coordination   
with  State Governments   and other stakeholders in the matter.  As  regards 
Potash,  the Department has stated  in its Action Taken Reply  that the entire 
demand of MOP is met through imports.  However, during 2011-2012, up to the 
month of July, contracting for import of MOP could not materialize due to 
substantial increase of prices by cartelisation by MOP producers in t he 
international market and the  contracting of MOP took place only in the month 
of August.  This again reflects the failure of the Department to  monitor  the 
demand of MOP before hand  and its  timely import. In view of the foregoing, 
the  Committee, theref ore, desire  that the entire issue concerning  the  
demand  of fertilizers and its distribution  to the farmers in the country  may be 
reviewed holistically   and an  effective mechanism  be put in place  in 
coordination with State Governments and other stak eholders to monitor  the  
distribution of  fertilizers to the farmers as per their requirement. The 

28 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department 
and the progress made in this regard. 
 
G. JOINT VENTURES ABROAD 
Recommendation No. 10 
1.23 Emphasizing the need to set up  joint ventures abroad , the Committee had 
recommended as under:-  
 
 "The Committee note that the Department have been encouraging joint 
ventures with the resource rich countries with the buy -back facilities. This is 
being done to fulfil the need of the Fertilizers industries which have near total 
dependence on the imported raw material, for P&K fertilizers. The Committee 
also note that the Department is also working with the goal of having access 
to / acquisition of fertilizer raw material abroad. The Committee, are however, 
disappointed to note that besides KRIBHCO, RCF is the only PSU which 
intends to set up urea projects at Ghana and Indonesia as JV companies with 
local partners along with long term off -take arrangement of urea. The 
Department, through diplomatic channels, is pursuing the case for RCF for the 
said projects. However, in order to ensure adequate supply of P&K fertilizers, 
the Committee recommend that the Department, being the nodal agency, 
should make vigorous efforts so that the JV projects are set up expeditiously. 
The Committee also expect that other PSUs should also be encouraged to 
enter into joint ventures abroad with the resource rich countries. The 
Department should also speed up the process of acquiring fertilizer raw 
materials abroad. The Committee hope that as a result of these efforts the 
requirement of the farmers for phosphatic fertilisers will be met."  
 
Reply of the Government 
1.24 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 
      "Department of Fertilizers have  been encouraging Joint Ventures with the 
resource rich countries with the buy -back facilities. This is being done to fulfill 
the need of the fertilizers industries which have near total dependence on the 
imported raw material, for P&K fertilizers. Departm ent is also working for 
acquisition of fertilizer raw material abroad. In addition to KRIBHCO and  RCF, 
other PSUs such as GNFC and IFFCO are also making efforts towards 

29 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
signing of MOU/agreements for Joint Ventures. In case of IFFCO, recently it 
has signed an agreement with JPMC for setting up of a Joint venture Project 
namely Jordan -IFFCO company (JIFCO), for production of Phosphoric acid 
and sulphuric acid. The project is likely to be completed by the year 2013.  
IFFCO has also entered into a Joint Venture with M/s.Grow max Agri Crop, 
Canada for potash exploitation in Peru.   IFFCO has also planned to establish 
a Urea plant in Canada.  However, out of the total estimated equity 
contribution of USD 500 Million for the said proposed project, the share of 
IFFCO is yet to be finalized.  So far as GNFC is concerned, it along with RCF 
is leading the discussions with Iran for setting up Urea-Ammonia plant in Iran.  
      So far as setting up of Gas based Ammonia -urea Fertilizer Plant in 
Ghana is concerned, there is n o delay on the part of RCF/Department of 
Fertilizers. But response from Ghanaian Govt. is still awaited  on the draft 
agreement which was submitted to them. Further the matter of notification of 
gas Price by the Ghanaian side, is also being lingered on by t hem for almost 
two years, despite repeated requests from Indian side. As regards Indonesia, 
there is also no delay on the part of RCF/Department of Fertilizers. A draft 
MOU was sent by RCF, with the approval of Department of Fertilizer, to M/s. 
Minerals, E nergy & Commodities (MEC) Pvt. Ltd., Singapore, a foreign 
Company nominated by Indonesia Investment Coordinating Board to 
collaborate with RCF for its Joint Venture projects but the response from M/s. 
MEC is awaited."  
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.25 The C ommittee had noted that the Department has  been encouraging 
joint ventures with the resource rich countrie s with a view to meet the 
requirement of farmers for P&K fertilizers. However, besides KRIBHCO, RCF is 
the only PSU which intends to set up  JV projects abroad at Ghana and 
Indonesia. In order to ensure adequate supply of P&K fertilizers, the 
Committee had, therefore,  recommended that the Department, being the nodal 
agency, should make vigorous efforts to set up JV  projects expeditiously. The 
Committee had also expected that other PSUs should also be encouraged to 
enter into joint ventures abroad with the resource rich countries.  In its Action 
Taken Reply, the Department has stated that in addition to KRIBHCO and R CF, 
other PSUs such as Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilizers (GNFC) and IFFCO are 
also  making effort s  for Joint Venture s abroad. But the Committee regret to 

30 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
note (Chapter-IX of 33 rd Report of the Committee) that none of them comes 
under the administrative control of the Depar tment of Fertilizers.  In its Action 
Taken Reply, the   Department has not elaborated the initiatives taken or being 
undertaken to  expedite the setting up of joint ventures abroad with the 
resource rich countries . Since the fertilizers u nits in the country  is almost  
dependent on the imported raw material for P&K fertilizers, it is  imperative  for 
the Department to make concerted and coord inated efforts to expedite the JV 
projects with buy -back facilities and  acquisition of fertilizer raw material 
abroad.  To keep this end in view, the Committee  reiterates its 
recommendation that the Department should encourage  all  PSUs under its 
administrative control to enter into joint v entures abroad with the resource 
rich countries.   The Committee  would like to be apprised of the initiatives 
taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
 

31 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation No. 2 
 
 The Committee note with concern that the funds allocated for the 12th Five 
Year Plan i.e. Rs.16920.70 crore is less than the funds which were allocated during 
the 11th Five Year Plan i.e. Rs.21213.90 crore. The Committee are further 
concerned to note that for the year 2013 -14, an amount of Rs.269.00 crore as GBS  
has been allocated as against Department of Fertilizers' proposal of Rs.372.56 crore 
The Committee are, therefore, apprehensive that the lesser amount of funds 
allocated by the Ministry of Finance may upset the schemes/programmes of the 
Department finalis ed by them in consultation with PSUs/Co -operatives and may 
derail the growth of the fertilizer industry in the country during the 12 th Five Year 
Plan. The Committee also feel that as a result of reduction in the GBS allocation for 
the 12 th Five Year Plan, the process of revival/rehabilitation of the three major loss 
making fertilizer units viz., BVFCL, FACT and MFL is also likely to be affected 
adversely. The Committee are of the view that the allocation made by the Ministry of 
Finance should be in commensu rate to the projections made by the Department so 
that the targeted growth of fertiliser sector and the revival/rehabilitation plan of loss 
making fertiliser units do not get hampered for want of resources during the 12 th plan 
period.  
 The Committee are a lso distressed to note that certain schemes of the 11 th 
Plan period which could not be taken up due to various commercial/functional 
reasons, have been carried over to 12 th Plan period. This goes to show that either 
those scheme were formulated with out ca reful and effective planning or there was a 
lack of concerted and co -ordinated efforts on the part of the Department to address 
those constraint which were impeding the implementation of the schemes. The 
Committee are of the view that once the annual plan has been made after careful 
consideration, the same needs to be implemented effectively. The Committee, 
therefore, expect and recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should 
effectively monitor the schemes planned for the duration of 12 th plan period including 
those carried over from the previous plan period and review the progress of the 
projects on regular basis for timely completion and full utilisation of funds allocated 
for the purpose which would in turn lead to  eventual growth of the fertilizer industry.  
Reply of the Government 

32 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
 Planning Commission has intimated that Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) 
allocation during 12 th Five Year Plan will be Rs.1484 crores as against GBS 
allocation of Rs.1492 crores during the 11 th Plan, marginally less in 12 th Plan than 
11th Five Year Plan.  However, it may be pointed out that during the 11 th Five Year 
Plan, Rs.885 crores were allocated for capital subsidy for conversion and Rs.607 
crores for revival of sick PSEs.  During 12 th Five Year Plan, the whole amount i.e. 
Rs.1484 crores is available for meeting the requirement of renewal and replacement 
of three loss making PSEs, namely BVFCL, FACT and MFL.  The observations of 
the Standing Committee is noted and during Annual Plan dis cussions, Planning 
Commission will be impressed upon to allocate adequate funds to meet the 
requirement of renewal and replacement of three PSEs so as to sustain production 
by these companies. 
 The companies have been asked in the past to prepare schemes t o be 
implemented under the Plan schemes with necessary care and due appreciation of 
all the factors affecting their investment proposal to obtain most beneficial outcomes 
from the investment.  Observations of the Committee is noted and once again 
companies will be asked to prepare future plans in an optimal fashion to generate 
necessary outcomes.  Schemes proposed by the companies will be 
reviewed/monitored by the Department of Fertilizers with a view to complete them in 
a timely manner and to utilize funds allocated. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2013-Fin.II (Vol.II)  dated 04.07.2013] 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that the actual non -plan expenditure 
during the year 2010 -11 was Rs.65859.08 crore (gross), for the year 2011 -12, 
Rs.74588.52 crore and for the year 2012 -13, Rs.63974.24 crore as on 31st January, 
2013. The Committee were informed that since budget allocations for the year 2012 -
13 were less than requirement, the s hortfall is likely to be carried over to the next 
financial year. The huge non -plan expenditure is primarily due to mounting fertilizer 
subsidy being granted under NBS policy. The subsidy on P&K fertilizer during the 
year 2010-11 and 2011-12 was Rs. 41500 crore and Rs.36107.94 crore respectively. 
The Committee were informed that all high cost Naptha /FO/LSHS based urea units 
have been directed for conversion to gas based units to reduce the indigenous cost 
of urea which in turn reduce the subsidy being gran ted under the NBS policy. The 
Committee expect that the Department would expedite the process of conversion of 

33 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
existing Naptha /FO/LSHS based urea units to gas so that the non -plan expenditure 
could be checked.  
 The Committee are also distressed to note that as the proposal to set up 
brown field plant could not be finalized by BVFCL, the demand for GBS was reduced 
from BE Rs. 94.61 crore to just Rs.2.00 crore during 2012 -13 for meeting the pre -
project activities. But even the pre -project activities could not be undertaken due to 
non-finalization of brown field projects. The Committee feel that being the only 
fertilizer company/ industry of North -East, it becomes crucial for BVFCL to set up its 
brown field project o n time which would in turn help in development and growth of 
North-Eastern region. The Committee expect the Department, being the 
administrative controller, to take effective steps to expedite the finalisation of 
proposed brown field plant of BVFCL with in  a fixed time frame. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.   
 The Committee note that there has been a steady increase of subsidy on 
imported fertilizers from Rs.13716.12 crore in 2011-12 (AE) to Rs.15,544.64 crore in 
the year 2013 -14 (BE). According to the Department of Fertilizers, the increase of 
subsidy on imported fertilizers for the year 2013 -14 is due to increase in the 
estimated requirement of imported urea during 2013 -14 vis -à-vis 2011 -12 and the 
higher Rupee/ US dollar exchange rate as compared to 2011-12. The Committee are 
of the view that the increasing subsidy on imported fertilisers could be reduced if the 
domestic production of fertiliser is adequately increased to meet the growing demand 
of our farmers. T he development of commercial process to extract potash from 
internal resources like Gluconite sand would also greatly help in not only meeting the 
demand of potash of our farmers but in turn would also help to reduce the mounting 
subsidy on imported fertil iser. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should make an action plan to augment the domestic production of 
fertiliser.  
Reply of the Government 
 The Department of Fertilizers has requested the Naphtha/FO/LSHS based 
P&K fertilizer manufa cturers namely M/s FACT, MFL and GNVFC to convert their 
feedstock to gas based unit. These companies have taken appropriate steps towards 
conversion of their plant to gas based unit. However, these units a re yet to receive 
the commitment from Government fo r adequate supply of gas to these units as per 
their requirements. 
 In respect of extraction of Potash, t he Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad has 
completed the study and submitted its report to M/s FAGMIL, a PSU under the 

34 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
Department of Fertilizers.  M/s FAGMIL is examining the viability of Gluconite mining 
to extract Potash.  The Department will take appropriate action as per findings of M/s 
FAGMIL in this regard.   
 The current status regarding conversion of existing Naptha/FO/LSHS based  
Urea Units is given as under :- 
Status of  Fuel Oil based  Ammonia Feedstock Changeover Projects at 
Panipat & Bathinda, NFL 
 
 Zero date for both the projects is 29th January 2010. 
 Mechanical completion achieved on 4 th November 2012 at Bathinda and 9 th 
November 2012 at Panipat against the contractual date of 33 months from zero date 
i.e. 28th October 2012. 
 Ammonia plants handed over after purging to L&T (LSTK Contractor) on 14 th 
November 2012 at Panipat and 28 th November 2012 at Bathinda for hook -up / tie-in 
& commissioning activities. 
 Ammonia production started on 9 th January 2013 at Bathinda and 11 th January 2013 
at Panipat. 
 Commissioning achieved on 16th January 2013 at Bathinda and 24 th January 2013 at 
Panipat against the scheduled date of 28 th January 2013 as per Government  
approval. 
 The hook -up / tie -in and commissioning activities were completed in Panipat and 
Bathinda within the contractual time period of 90 days from handing-over of Ammonia 
plant. 
 Presently, both Panipat and Bathinda plants have achieved 100% daily rated  
capacity of 900 MTPD of Ammonia and 1550 MTPD of Urea and optimization of 
energy consumption is being carried out by LSTK Contractor M/s L&T and the 
Licensor M/s HTAS. 
 Presently, plants are under Sustained Load and Guaranteed Test Run stage and the 
process of declaration of commercial production is being initiated.     
   
Status of Ammonia Feedstock Changeover Project at Nangal, NFL 
 
 Zero date for the feedstock changeover project is 29th January 2010. 
 On completion of mechanical erection and pre -commissioning activities required for 
Mechanical Completion, Plant shut-down for hook-up / tie-in and commissioning was 
taken on 15th February 2013.  Contractual date for achieving Mechanical Completion 
was 28th October 2012.  Project was to be commissioned by 28th December 2012. 
 Presently, Ammonia plant hook -up / tie -in job has been completed.  Revamped 
Ammonia plant is under start up and Ammonia production is expected to be achieved 
shortly. 
 
Status of Naphtha based Ammonia Feedstock Changeover Projects  
Kanpur Fertilizers  and Chemicals Limited (KFCL) 
 
Gas Sale Agreement signed with GAIL on 8 th November 2012 for supply of 
RLNG w.e.f. 1 st July 2013. The company started production from one stream 
in June 2013 while the production from other two streams will start very soon 
on gas. 
 
Zuari Agro Chemicals Limited 
 

35 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
On February 12, 2013, Company has signed unbundled Gas Supply 
Agreement with GAIL .  Due to delay in laying of cross country pipeline and 
also delays in pre -commissioning and commissioning activities at Gas 
Terminal of GAIL, the Gas  could be delivered to Fertilizer plant at Goa only 
effective from February 15, 2013. 
 
Southern Petro-chemical Industries Corporation Limited (SPIC) 
 
Basic Engineering work has been completed .  Urea plant would be ready to 
receive gas from November 2013.  SPIC has signed a MoU with GAIL and 
IOC to get RLNG either from Cochin or Chennai.  
 
Mangalore Chemicals  & Fertilizers Limited (MCFL) 
 
Gas pipeline connectivity from Petronet LNG terminal at Kochi to Mangalore is 
expected to be co mpleted in April, 2014.  The fertilizer plant will be ready to 
receive the gas when the pipeline connectivity is established.  Gas Sale 
Agreement (GSA) with IOC and Gas Transmission Agreement (GTA) with 
GAIL have been signed on 16th February, 2011.   
 
Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) 
 
The project is proposed to be implemented in January 2014 and trial 
production will commence from February 2014. After firming up the gas 
supplier, based on Techno-Commercial evaluation, MFL has to enter into Gas 
Transportation Agreement (GTA) and Gas Sales Agreement (GSA). 
 
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL) 
 
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL), a urea 
manufacturing loss making company under the administrative control of this 
Department has submitted a Techno -Economic Feasibility Report for 
installation of a new Brownfield Ammonia Urea plant (4 th unit) at Namrup in 
Dibrugarh district of Assam. Planning Commission accorded ‘in -principle’ 
approval in August 2012.  Cost of the pro ject has been projected to be 
Rs.3311.09 Crores with equity component of Rs.815.67 Crores.  The Plant 
would be of 8.4 lakh MT capacity with specific energy consumption of 5.2 
G.cal/MT of urea.  In a meeting held on 21 st March 2013 under the 
Chairmanship of  Secretary (Fertilizers), BVFCL was asked to get the 
valuation of its assets. After submission of valuation report of the assets, the 
transaction structure will be decided.  M/s Price Waterhouse Coopers Pvt. Ltd. 
has been appointed as Consultant for open a nalysis, feasibility analysis of the 
options and suggesting most suitable option.   BVFCL has appointed a 
Government approved valuer for assets valuation.  The report of the asset 
valuer is awaited. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2013-Fin.II (Vol.II)  dated 04.07.2013] 
 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 

36 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
 
(Please  see Para No.1.10 of Chapter-I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
 The Committee note that natural gas has been the preferred feed stock for 
manufacture of urea and at present natural gas based plants account for 80% of 
urea capacity, naptha is used for 9% urea and balance 11% capacity is based on 
fuel oil and LSHS as feed stock. Natural gas is not only clean and effective source of 
energy but the same is also considerably cheaper and more cost effective in term of 
manufacturing cost of urea. As per the policy announced in January, 2004, new urea 
projects, expansion of exi sting urea units and capacity through de -
bottlenecking/revamp/modernisation will be allowed/recognised if the urea  is 
manufactured by using natural gas/CNG as feedstock.  A policy for conversion of 
existing Naptha/FO/LHS based units to natural gas / LNG as  feed stock has also 
been formulated in January, 2004 which encourages early conversion of non - gas 
urea units to natural gas/CNG units. The Committee also note that pursuant to the 
said policy, out of 8 Naptha/FO/LHS urea units,  5 have been converted to gas 
based units.  
 The three units of NFL i.e. Panipat, Bhatinda and Nangal and Bharauch unit 
of GNVFC, which are FO/LSHS based, have been converted in to gas but the 
allocation of gas to these units is under consideration of the Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas. Out of the four Naptha based units, the Zuari Agro Limited has started 
production partly on gas since February, 2013 and the full production on gas will start 
from April, 2013. The other three Naptha based units i.e. MFL, SPIC and MCFL are 
yet t o be converted to gas. Thus, the Committee are anguished to note the slow 
progress in the conversion of Naphtha/FO/LHS units to gas based units as a result of 
which non -gas based units continue to produce high cost urea and consequently, 
there is no reduct ion in subsidy being granted by the Government. In view of the 
mounting burden of subsidy, the Committee reiterate its earlier recommendation of 
reducing the increase in subsidy and state that Department of Fertilizers should take 
adequate steps to expedit e process of conversion of the Naphtha/FO/LHS based 
units in to gas based units with in a fixed time frame. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
 The Committee further note that pricing and firm availability of natu ral gas for 
existing and new units of fertilizer companies are the pre -requisites for indigenous 
production of urea. The concern of the fertiliser units to protect them from any 

37 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
additional liability arising due to increase in the delivered price of gas has  been 
addressed in the NIP-2012.  The Committee would, therefore, desire the Department 
to play a proactive role in association with all stakeholders viz. Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas. GAIL and fertiliser units to meet the requirement of fertilise r sector 
on priority basis. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has informed that 
whenever, new gas is found in the country, the same will be allocated to fertiliser 
units on priority basis. The Committee were also informed that three units of NFL vi z. 
Nangal, Bhatinda and Panipat have been connected with gas pipeline. The MFL has 
not taken any step for gas pipeline connectivity. The Committee stress that the 
Department should vigorously pursue the issues regarding adequate allocation of 
natural gas and gas pipeline connectivity with Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. 
If felt necessary, the fertiliser units may be advised to use imported RLNG in case of 
non availability of domestic natural gas.  Further, the Committee reiterates its earlier 
views t hat with the assured allocation and pricing of natural gas to the fertilizer 
sector, the expansion and revamping process of existing and new fertilizer projects 
could be completed at the earliest which in turn would avoid cost and time overruns. 
The Commit tee would like to recommend that expeditious and effective measures 
may be taken by the Department for capacity addition programmes so as to achieve 
self-sufficiency in fertilizer sector. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (GNVFC):  
 
         M/s GN VFC is an enterprise of the State Government of Gujarat.  
Implementation work has been completed from quite some time and the plant is 
ready for starting commissioning activities since last week of September 2012.  The 
company has requested for allocation of Natural Gas and its source since long.  The 
entity has also sought permission to run the plant on RLNG and consider its cost as 
pass through cost for working out cost of production of Urea for subsidy purpose.  
Based on request and discussions carried out with DoF several times, the company 
had entered into agreement for supply of RLNG with M/s GSPC for commissioning of 
the plant on reasonab le endeavour basis (spot gas) till 31 st January 2013 at the rate 
of 16.4 US$ per MMBtu (GCV) exclusive of VAT and transportation.  The plant is 
ready and all the pre -commissioning activities are completed.  The company has 
started commissioning of the plant on 20th December 2012 in anticipation of granting 
approval of the above gas price. 

38 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) 
 Ammonia Plant Feedstock Changeover from Fuel Oil to Natural Gas at 
Panipat, Bathinda & Nangal were cleared by Cabinet Committee on Econ omic 
Affairs on 21.01.2010.  Based on the communication of approval from Department of 
Fertilizers, contract on Lump sum Turnkey Basis (LSTK) was placed on M/s Larsen  
& Toubro (L&T) India for feedstock changeover projects at Panipat & Bathinda and 
on Cons ortium of Technimont (TCM) Italy & Technimont ICB (TICB) India for 
Feedstock Changeover Project at Nangal.  Zero date of the projects was 29 th 
January 2010.   
Gas Tie-up 
 
Domestic gas is yet to be allocated for changeover projects at Panipat, 
Bathinda and Nangal.  For pre-commissioning, commissioning & post-commissioning 
upto 31 st May 2013, Master Spot Sale Agreement has been entered into with GAIL 
for supply of spot gas for Nangal and Bathinda units.  Present delivered price of spot 
gas is USD 17.94 / mmBT U.  For supply of gas to Panipat unit, spot agreement had 
been entered into with IOCL upto 31 st January 2013.  Present delivered price of spot 
gas is USD 17.04 / mmBTU.  
 So far as Naphtha based units in southern India are concerned, the Zuari 
Agro & Chemicals Limited is connected by gas pipeline and has started production on 
gas.  The Madras Fertilizers Limited has not yet taken concrete steps for gas pipeline 
connectivity. Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (MCFL) has signed the Gas 
Sale Agreement (GSA) with IOC and Gas Transmission Agreement (GTA) with GAIL 
on 16th February, 2011.  The SPIC has yet to sign the GSPA agreement. 
 With regard to capacity addition, it is reiterated that  based on NIP 2012, this 
Department had received 15 proposals from various fertilizers companies. The matter   
was discussed in the Department of Fertilizers and a need was felt to move cautiously 
in giving approvals to the fresh proposals and in order to meet the 
immediate/projected demand of 2016 -17, the DoF can at the most consider four new 
proposals adding upto 50 LMT after taking into account the capacity addition in PSUs 
(both revival and Brownfield expansion) as well as projects in the private sector which 
are already in progress and will be commissioned in 2013 -14.  However, for 
transparency and equity, a need was felt to lay an objective criterion for selection of 
these proposals. A Group of Officers has been constituted to deliberate and decide 
on an objective criteria  to select four projects and import planning o f urea in future. 
The first meeting of the Group of Officer has taken place on 14th May, 2013. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  

39 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2013-Fin.II (Vol.II)  dated 04.07.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please  see Para No.1.19 of Chapter-I  of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 8 
 The Committee note that out of 9 public sector fertilizer companies under 
administrative control of Department of Fertilizers, four are sick as per the provisions 
of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions)Act, 1985. These are FCIL, 
HFCL, MFL and BVFCL. Out of these four, the units of FCIL and HFCL are presently 
lying closed since 2002. MFL and BVFCL are operational but are sick companies 
under the administrative control of Depa rtment of Fertilizers. The Committee also 
note that financial performance of these units have been dismal except MFL which 
has showed positive growth in the year 2011 -12. With regards to steps being taken 
for revival of HPCL and FCIL, the Department of Fer tilizers informed that ECOS 
meeting was held in January, 2013 to discuss the various issues concerning revival 
of HPCL/ FCIL alongwith direction of BIFR which stated that Department of 
Fertilizers should explore the possibility of company's net worth becom ing positive 
and directed to work out way to repay the dues of creditors of the FCIL and HFCL to 
enable the company to move out of preview of BIFR.  Now, ECOS recommended 
that matter be placed before Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). 
 For the r evival of MFL, the Department has informed that comments of the 
concerned Ministries/ Departments have been received by Department of Fertilizers 
and the same is under examination in the Department.  Thereafter, the Operating 
Agency (SBI) will formulate a DRS and submit the same to BIFR. Further, with 
regard to revival of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Ltd. (BVFCL) the latest 
status as informed by Department of Fertilizers is that a draft note from Board for 
Restructuring of Public Sector Enterpr ise (BRPSE) regarding financial restructuring 
and rehabilitation has been circulated for Inter -Ministerial consultation. After Inter -
Ministerial consultation, the note will be sent to BRPSE for their consideration.  
 The Committee regret to note that the p rocess of revival of sick and closed 
fertilizer units have been very slow and nothing concrete have been achieved so far. 
The Committee also feel that the delay in the revival of closed and sick units leads to 
time and cost overruns.  The Committee, theref ore, recommend that the process of 
revival of closed PSUs may be done strictly in a time bound manner. The Committee 
also reiterate its earlier recommendation of expediting the process of revival of 
closed fertilizer units and expects that Department of Fe rtilizers would ensure the 

40 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
complete revival of closed and sick fertilizer units during the 12th Five Year Plan. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Revival of HFCL and FCIL:  
 
 With regard to revival of closed units of HFCL and FCIL it has already been 
indicated that a meeting of Empowered Committee of Secretaries (ECOS) 
was held on 23.1.2013 to discuss the various issues concerning revival of 
HFCL/FCIL along with recent direction of BIFR, w hich stated that Department 
of Fertilizers should explore the possibility of the companies’ net -worth 
becoming positive and directed to work out way to repay the dues of creditors 
of the FCIL and HFCL to enable the companies to move out of purview of 
BIFR. ECOS recommended that the matter be placed before the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). 
 Meanwhile, Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister took a meeting on 
28.1.2013 on revival of closed fertilizer urea units. During the meeting, it was 
inter-alia decided that the Department of Fertilizers will bring a note for CCEA 
in respect of FCIL seeking waiver of government dues and also seeking inter 
corporate loans to FCIL. 
 In respect of closed units of HFCL, he said that proposal /action plan on 
revival of HFCL be taken up once revival of FCIL is on track. 
 Based on the recommendations of the ECOS and directions of PMO, a 
proposal for revival of closed units of FCIL was placed before CCEA, which 
approved the same in its meeting held on 9.5.2013. CC EA, inter -alia, has 
approved the following: 
(i)  approved the recommendations of ECOS to make the net worth of FCIL 
positive, as suggested by BIFR, by means of the followings:  
a. Waiver of Government of India loan amounting to Rs. 2739.27 crores  as on 
31.3.2012.  
b. Waiver of interest on Government of India loan amounting to Rs. 7904.47 
crores as on 31.3.2012. 
c. Waiver of LIC guarantee fees amounting to Rs. 9.69 crores as on 31.03.2012. 
d. Waiver of consequent tax liabilities on account of making net worth positive. 
 
(ii) To direct the participating PSUs (SAIL, CIL & EIL) to pay a commitment fee of 
Rs. 25 crores to FCIL to enable FCIL to make its net worth positive.  
 
(iii) Inter-corporate loan of Rs. 171 crores to FCIL on mutually agreed terms and 
conditions from P SUs participating in the revival of 3 units of FCIL on 
nomination basis, for settlement of creditors by way of One Time Settlement 
(OTS) and settlement of post closure dues (return of security deposits, dues 

41 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
of the ex -employees etc. to be settled @ 100%) t o bring the net worth of the 
FCIL to positive for coming out of BIFR to expedite the revival process. 
(iv)   Government of India will give guarantee for inter -corporate loan of Rs. 171 
crores given by PSUs (SAIL, CIL, NFL, RCF & EIL) to FCIL. 
(v)   Authori zed ECOS to act, as and when necessary, in furtherance of revival 
process of units being revived by PSUs on nomination basis.  
(vi)  Authorized ECOS to take appropriate action, as deemed necessary, to rectify 
any anomaly/discrepancy in the course of implementation of these proposals.  
(vii)  Proposal/action plan on revival of HFCL units to be taken up once revival of 
FCIL units is on track. 
Financial Restructuring of Madras Fertilizer Limited (MFL) : 
 
 A draft note for BRPSE regarding financial restructuring of MFL was circulated 
for Inter -ministerial consultations. The comments of the 
Ministries/Departments have been received in the Department. Based on their 
comments, the Department of Fertilizers is i n process of preparing final 
rehabilitation proposal, to be placed before Board for Reconstruction of PSEs 
(BRPSE) for their recommendations.  
Financial Restructuring of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corp. Ltd. (BVFCL): 
 
 A draft note for Board for Reconst ruction of Public Sector Enterprises 
(BRPSE) regarding financial restructuring and rehabilitation in respect of 
BVFCL has been circulated for Inter -Ministerial consultation. After Inter -
Ministerial consultation, BRPSE note will be sent to BRPSE for their 
consideration.  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2013-Fin.II (Vol.II)  dated 04.07.2013] 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 The Committee note that there are nine Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) 
and one multi -state c ooperative society under the administrative control of the 
Department of Fertilizers. Out of this, Krishak Bharati Cooperative Limited 
(KRIBHCO), the multi -State cooperative society and three PSUs, viz. National 
Fertilizers Limited (NFL), Rashtriya  Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF) and 
Projects and Development (India) Limited (PDIL) are profit making units. Three 
PSUs, viz. Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT), Madras Fertilizers 
Limited (MFL) and Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer C orporation Limited (BVFCL) are 
loss making units. Besides, two PSUs, viz. Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd. (FCI) 

42 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
and Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Ltd. (HFCL) are lying closed after incurring 
losses continuously over a period of time.  
 
 The Committee observe that the profit making fertilizer PSUs have shown only 
marginal increase in the profits from the year 2010 -11 to 2011 -12 and in fact, for 
PSUs like NFL, the profits margin has come down to negative for year 2012 -13 
(provisional upto December 20 12) at Rs. ( -) 68.14 crore and for KRIBHCO, it has 
reduced to Rs.176.76 crore in the year 2011 -12 from Rs.200.55 crore in 2010 -
11.The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that Department 
and the PSUs in tandem should make extra effor ts to take effective measures to 
improve and streamline the functioning of these organisations in order to increase 
their profit margins. 
 
Reply of the Government 
1. NATIONAL FERTILIZERS LIMITED:   
  During 2010 -11 and 2011 -12, NFL earned a profit before tax of 
Rs.203.92 crore and Rs.184.20 crore respectively. However, during the 2012 -
13, loss for the year ended 31st March, 2013 is 230.62 Crore (provisional). 
  Major reasons for loss during 2012 -13 is lower urea production and 
higher energy consumption due to extended shutdown at Vijaipur -I and 
Vijaipur-II units for commissioning of Energy saving and Urea capacity 
enhancement projects. Company has also undertaken Ammonia Feedstock 
Changeover Projects (AFCP) to convert its three (Panipat, Bathinda and 
Nangal) oi l-based units to gas based. These units took longer shutdowns 
during 2012-13 for commissioning these projects. Moreover, fixed cost being 
considered in the concession rate of urea was fixed in 2002-03 and since then 
there is considerable increase in salary & wages due to wage revision, normal 
increments and increase in DA etc., increase in repairs and maintenance 
expenditure due to ageing of the plants and increase in other overheads. This 
has resulted in decrease in profitability of the Company on year -to year basis, 
as these elements of cost are not revised for reimbursement through 
concession rate by FICC, Department of Fertilizers. This problem is faced by 
all the urea making companies. The proposal to revise the fixed cost 
reimbursement is pending before the Government. 

43 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
  Company has successfully commissioned Energy saving and urea 
capacity enhancement Projects at Vijaipur -I & II Units during 2012 -13, which 
will result in higher production and profitability during 2013 -14 and onwards. 
AFCP Projects at Pa nipat and Bathinda units has been commissioned during 
January 2013 and Nangal unit is at advanced stage of commissioning. These 
projects are expected to result in substantial savings in the subsidy outgo of 
the Government.  
 
2. MADRAS FERTILIZERS LIMITED (MFL):  
 
  After incurring consistent loss during 2003 -04 to 2008-09, MFL started 
making profit during the last 4 years as detailed below:    
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Profit 
2009-10     6.88 
2010-11 169.86 
2011-12 111.99 
2012-13 24.44(provisional) 
  
  Above was possible because of reduction in energy consumption and 
improvement in capacity utilization resulting from implementation of 66 out of 
the 124 schemes suggested by PDIL in its report on “Rehabilitation Proposal 
of MFL”. These schemes were implemented with an expenditure of Rs.171.49 
Cr with plan fund from Government of India that was released during 2009 -10 
& 2010-11 to MFL. 
  As of now, energy consumption per MT of urea has come down from 
7.929 Gcal/MT in 2008-09 to 6.890 Gcal/MT in April 2013. 
  A Financial restructuring proposal for MFL to be submitted to BRPSE 
was also circulated for Inter -Ministerial consultation. Comments from various 
Departments have been received and are under examination in this 
Department. 
 
3. FCI ARAVALI GYPSUM AND MINERALS INDIA LTD. (FAGMIL) : 
  The details in respect of the Sales Turnover and Profit Before Tax 
(PBT) of the FAGMIL are as under: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Particular 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13(Prov.) 
Sales Turnover 45.61 61.48 66.53 73.84 
PBT 15.88 19.89 29.07 38.51 

44 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
 
 The company has achieved MOU ranking of 1.07 which is best among 
Fertilizer and Mining PSUs and entitles the company for Prime Minister’s 
Award. 
 
4. THE FERTILISERS AND CHEMICALS TRAVANCORE LIMITED: 
  During the year 2010 -11, FACT made a loss of Rs.49.33 crores. For 
the year 2011 -12, a profit of Rs.19.80 crore was made. The provisional 
working results for the year 2012 -13 show a cumulative loss of Rs. 344.30 
crore (provisional) making the net-worth of the Company negative.  
 The Company’s Financial performance during the year 2012 -13 was 
affected by a combination of factors like  stoppage  of  Caprolactam plant for 
nearly  six  months on account of poor economics affecting  Ammonium 
Sulphate  production also,  lower   fertilizer  production  on  account  of  
stoppage  of  plants  in  February, 2013  owing to  failure  of  monsoon  and  
constraints  in  working  capital.  This  along  with  raw material  shortage  has  
affected  the physical  and  financial  performance  during the  year. 
 Efforts are being made by the FACT to improve its profitability. The 
major schemes being implemented are as under: 
I. FACT is converting its production units for usage of LNG as feedstock and 
fuel. 
II. FACT has submitted following new projects to DoF which form part of the 
12th Plan proposals: 
 
a. Setting up a 2800 TPD Ammonia -3500 TPD Urea project at Cochin 
Division. 
b. Capacity enhancement of NP plant at Cochin Division. 
c. 1500TPD New Urea Plant at Udyogmandal. 
d. Setting up a new 2000 TPD Sulphuric acid Plant at Cochin Division. 
 
 FACT has submitted a financial restructuring proposal for revival. The same is 
under the consideration of DOF. The salient features of the revival proposal 
are as under: 
(Rs.in Crore) 
a) NON-FUND BASED – WAIVERS 
(i) Write off of GOI loan balance as on 31.3.2012   282.73 
(ii) Write off of interest payable as on 31.3.2013      
         160.66 
TOTAL   443.39 
b) FUND BASED – FRESH FUND INFUSION 
 Infusion of funds as interest free loan repayable             300.00 
 in 10 yearly equal installments with two year moratorium  
       TOTAL          300.00 

45 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
 
a. Government’s support for projects identified by the company as part of its 
expansion/diversification schemes. 
b. Compensation for costly LNG vis-a-vis cheap natural gas to provide a level 
playing field. 
c. Extension of Naphtha compensation with effect from 01.07.2013 till switch 
over to LNG. 
 
 
5. RASHTRIYA CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS LIMITED (RCF): 
 
 The Profit After Tax (PAT) of the RCF during last three financial years is as  
 
under:                                                                                (Rs. in crore) 
Year Profit After Tax 
2010-11 245.12 
2011-12 249.23 
2012-13 280.9 
            
  The above figures clearly indicate that RCF have been showing 
continuous improvements in the profitability.  
 Though profitability in fertilizer sector, being in the controlled scenario, 
is range bound, as can be seen from above, RCF has been showing 
continuous improvements in many parameters due to its sustained efforts in 
planning and execution. However, the profitability is dependent on fertilizer 
policy and prompt payment of subsidies by GoI. For example, fixed costs to 
be considered in Urea subsidy cal culations have not been revised since 
2002-03. Similarly, a legitimate cost of input like marketing margin paid on 
RIL gas is not recognized in subsidy. Delays in subsidy payments have 
resulted in increase in interest burden on the company. Revision in NPS -III at 
an early date and addressing the other issues as mentioned shall further 
improve the company’s profitability. RCF is in constant dialog with this 
Department to address the above referred issues. 
  RCF is actively perusing various capacity expansion  programmes 
which shall increase its turnover to Rs. 15000 crores by 2018 which shall 
further improve the profits of the company. An early approval to the 
company’s proposal for THAL-III shall be of great advantage.  
 
6. PROJECTS & DEVELOPMENT INDIA LIMITED: 

46 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
 PDIL is mainly involving in design engineering and consultancy service 
and also producing catalyst for the fertilizer industry and oil refineries. During 
the last three financial years, the net profit of the Company is as under: 
                                                                                                       (Rs. in Crore) 
Year  Profit after Tax 
2010-11 21.02  
2011-12 26.08 
2012-13 15.33 (provisional) 
 
  The profit of the company has decreased during the 2012 -13. The 
major reasons for the same are recession, global economic slowdown and 
major investments in the Fertilizer sector being stagnant or low for the past 
many years. 
 
7. BRAHMAPUTRA VALLEY FERTILIZER CORPORATION LIMITED 
(BVFCL): 
  There has been overall improvement in the performance of this 
company during the year 2012-13 as stated below: 
a) The highest ever Ammonia and Urea production (Since commissioning in 
1987) in Namrup-III with capacity unitization of 104% for the year. 
b) The average specific energy consumption of Nam rup-III plant has been 
brought down by 2.3 Gcal/MT of urea during this year. 
c) The highest urea production (after revamp in 2005) in Namrup -II Plant for 
the year. 
d) The operating cash profit (PBIT)of Rs.94 crores for the year.  
  All out efforts are being made  by the company for further improvement 
in plant performance. Further renovation jobs are being taken up in the year 
2013-14 to improve the on -stream days and bring down the specific energy 
consumption. 
  Further a financial restructuring proposal of BVFCL  for BRPSE has 
been circulated for the Inter -ministerial comments. BVFCL will become profit 
making on receiving financial restructuring with dispensations as proposed in 
the comprehensive proposal. 
 
8. HINDUSTAN FERTILIZER CORPORATION LIMITED (HFCL) and 
FERTILIZER CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED (FCIL): 
 
  With regard to revival of closed units of HFCL and FCIL it has already 
been indicated that a meeting of Empowered Committee of Secretaries 
(ECOS) was held on 23.1.2013 to discuss the various issues concerning 
revival of HFCL/FCIL along with recent directio n of BIFR, which stated that 

47 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
Department of Fertilizers should explore the possibility of the companies’ net -
worth becoming positive and directed to work out way to repay the dues of 
creditors of the FCIL and HFCL to enable the companies to move out of 
purview of BIFR. ECOS recommended that the matter be placed before the 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). 
2. Meanwhile, Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister took a meeting on 
28.1.2013 on revival of closed fertilizer urea units. During the meet ing, it was 
inter-alia decided that the Department of Fertilizers will bring a note for CCEA 
in respect of FCIL seeking waiver of government dues and also seeking inter 
corporate loans to FCIL. 
 3. In respect of closed units of HFCL, he said that proposal /action plan 
on revival of HFCL be taken up once revival of FCIL is on track. 
 
 4. Based on the recommendations of the ECOS and directions of PMO, a 
proposal for revival of closed units of FCIL was placed before CCEA, which 
approved the same in its meeting  held on 9.5.2013. CCEA, inter -alia, has 
approved the following: 
(i) approved the recommendations of ECOS to make the net worth of FCIL 
positive, as suggested by BIFR, by means of the followings:  
a.  Waiver of Government of India loan amounting to Rs. 2739.27 crores as 
on 31.3.2012.  
b.  Waiver of interest on Government of India loan amounting to Rs. 
7904.47 crores as on 31.3.2012. 
c.  Waiver of LIC guarantee fees amounting to Rs. 9.69 crores as on 
31.03.2012. 
d.  Waiver of consequent tax liabilities on account of making net worth 
positive. 
(ii)  To direct the participating PSUs (SAIL, CIL & EIL) to pay a commitment fee 
of Rs. 25 crores to FCIL to enable FCIL to make its net worth positive.  
(iii)  Inter-corporate loan of Rs. 171 crores to FCIL on mutually agreed terms and 
conditions from PSUs participating in the revival of 3 units of FCIL on 
nomination basis, for settlement of creditors by way of One Time Settlement 
(OTS) and settlement of post closure dues (return of security deposits, dues 
of the ex-employees etc. to be settled @ 100%) to bring the net worth of the 
FCIL to positive for coming out of BIFR to expedite the revival process. 
(iv)   Government of India will give guarantee for inter -corporate loan of Rs. 171 
crores given by PSUs (SAIL, CIL, NFL, RCF & EIL) to FCIL. 
(v)    Authorized ECOS to act, as and when necessary, in furtherance of revival 
process of units being revived by PSUs on nomination basis.  

48 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
(vi)  Authorized ECOS to take appro priate action, as deemed necessary, to 
rectify any anomaly/discrepancy in the course of implementation of these 
proposals.  
(vii)  Proposal/action plan on revival of HFCL units to be taken up once revival of 
FCIL units is on track. 
 
KRISHAK BHARATI COOPERATIVE LIMITED:  
 The profitability of the Society has reduced during the year 2011 -12 on 
account of:  
 
a) Revamp of its existing ammonia -urea units with a project cost of Rs.1300 
Crore whereby the plant was shut -down during the year 2011 -12 for 
commissioning of new ammonia -urea plants resulting in lower urea 
production of 14.33 Lakh MT as against 18.41 Lakh MT  achieved in the 
year 2010-11. 
b) Society is getting reimbursement of fixed costs @ Rs.1484 PMT as fixed 
by Government in 2002 -03. However, the actual fixed costs have 
increased considerably and now it is in the range of Rs.2700 PMT – 
Rs.2750 PMT resulting in loss from urea operations. Government of India 
has now proposed modified NPS -III policy, which has a provision to pay 
higher fixed costs. Once this policy is approved, the profitability of the 
Society will improve. It is worth observing that the Society w as able to 
earn a profit of Rs.176.76 Crore during the year 2011 -12 only due to the 
dividend received from its Joint Venture company namely OMIFCO." 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2013-Fin.II (Vol.II)  dated 04.07.2013] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
 The Committee note that the Department have been encouraging joint 
ventures with the resource rich countries with the buy -back facilities. This is being 
done to fulfil the need of the Fertilizers industries which have near total dependence 
on the imported raw material, for P&K fertilizers. The Committee also note that the 
Department is also working with the goal of having access to / acquisition of fertilizer 
raw material aborad. The Committee, are however, disappointed to note that besides 
KRIBHCO, RCF is the only PSU which intends to set up urea projects at Ghana and 
Indonesia as JV companies with local partners along with long term off -take 
arrangement of urea. The Department, through diplomatic  channels, is pursuing the 
case for RCF for the said projects. However, in order to ensure adequate supply of 
P&K fertilizers, the Committee recommend that the Department, being the nodal 
agency, should make vigorous efforts so that the JV projects are set  up 
expeditiously. The Committee also expect that other PSUs should also be 
encouraged to enter into joint ventures abroad with the resource rich countries. The 

49 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
Department should also speed up the process of acquiring fertilizer raw materials 
abroad. The Committee hope that as a result of these efforts the requirement of the 
farmers for phosphatic fertilisers will be met.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  Department of Fertilizers have been encouraging Joint Ventures with the 
resource rich countries with the buy -back facilities. This is being done to fulfill the need 
of the fertilizers industries which have near total dependence on the imported raw 
material, for P&K fertilizers. Department is also working for acquisition of fertilizer raw 
material abroad. In addi tion to KRIBHCO and  RCF, other PSUs such as GNFC and 
IFFCO are also making efforts towards signing of MOU/agreements for Joint Ventures. 
In case of IFFCO, recently it has signed an agreement with JPMC for setting up of a 
Joint venture Project namely Jorda n-IFFCO company (JIFCO), for production of 
Phosphoric acid and sulphuric acid. The project is likely to be completed by the year 
2013.  IFFCO has also entered into a Joint Venture with M/s.Grow max Agri Crop, 
Canada for potash exploitation in Peru.    IFFC O has also planned to establish a Urea 
plant in Canada.  However, out of the total estimated equity contribution of USD 500 
Million for the said proposed project, the share of IFFCO is yet to be finalized.   So far 
as  GNFC is concerned, it alongwith RCF is leading the discussions with Iran for setting 
up Urea-Ammonia plant in Iran.   
        So far as setting up of Gas based Ammonia -urea Fertilizer Plant in Ghana is 
concerned, there is no delay on the part of RCF/Department of Fertilizers.  But  
response from Ghanaian Govt. is still awaited  on the draft agreement  which  was 
submitted to them. Further the matter of notification of gas Price by the Ghanaian side, 
is also being lingered on by them for almost two years, despite repeated requests from 
Indian side. As regards Indonesia, there is also no delay on the part of 
RCF/Department of Fertilizers. A draft MOU was sent by RCF, with the approval of 
Department of Fertilizer, to M/s. Minerals, Energy & Commodities (MEC) Pvt. Ltd., 
Singapore, a foreign Company nominated by Indonesia Investment Coordinating Board 
to collaborate with RCF for its Joint Venture projects but the resp onse from M/s. MEC 
is awaited. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2013-Fin.II (Vol.II)  dated 04.07.2013] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please  see Para No.1.25 of Chapter-I  of the Report) 

50 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY  
 
-- NIL-- 
  

51 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
 The Committee note that the Department is following a phased approach for 
direct disbursement of fertiliser subsidy to the intended beneficiaries. The 
implementation of Phase -I has already been made operational and subsequent 
phases of project i.e.; Phase-II, Phase-III and Phase-IV will be implemented once the 
implementation of Phase -I is stabilized. The project mechanism to transfer the 
subsidy directly to intended beneficiaries will also be formulated and implemented 
once Phase -I is stabilized. In this re gard, the Committee were informed that 12 
districts across 11 states have been selected for the Phase -II pilot project based on 
Aadhaar penetration, fertilizer consumption, geographical variance, dealers network 
as well as implementation status on Phase-I. The Committee expect the Government 
to keep strict vigilance and monitoring on the implementation of this particular phase 
as it would pave the  way for wide implementation of direct subsidy to the farmers in 
the country. The Committee are, therefore, hope ful that the Phase-II pilot project will 
be successful and recommend that feedback from these 12 districts in respect of 
Phase-II of the scheme be analysed critically and on that basis , the scheme be 
implemented in the entire country. The Committee also r eiterate its earlier 
recommendation that all the phases of direct subsidy transfer should be implement in 
a time bound manner so that there is no undue delay in the transfer of the benefits of 
direct subsidy to the farmers, which would in turn check the co rruption, close the 
loopholes and profligacy in subsidies. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Department of Fertilizers is following a phased approach in direct 
disbursement of fertilizer subsidy to the intended beneficiaries.  Implementation of 
Phase-I has already been made operational and subsequent phases will be 
implemented once implementation of Phase -I is stabilized.  Technical Consultant of 
Department of Fertilizers, i.e. National In formatics Centre has completed the 
development of Phase-II mFMS application which is enabled to run on Point of Sale 
(PoS) devices, mobiles, personal computers as well as tablets.  Final User 

52 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
Acceptance Test (UAT) was conducted on 18.03.2013.  The testing of application is 
in progress and would be completed before deployment in the pilot districts. 
 In the DBT Executive Committee meeting held on 06.05.2013 taken by 
Principal Secretary to PM, it has been informed that National Committee on DBT has 
decided th at transferring food and fertilizer subsidy through DBT is not under 
consideration at present.  Therefore, Deptt. of Fertilizers could focus on other 
aspects of the system they are putting in place for the time being.  Therefore, DoF is 
planning to start pilot for Phase-II in select districts. 
 In a meeting with fertilizer companies, chaired by Secretary (Fert.) on 
30.04.2013, it has been decided to roll out 6 pilot districts of mFMS Phase -II out of 
12 pilot districts in June / July 2013.  The pilot is bein g conducted by LFS of  the six 
States.  The cost of the pilot would be met from the incentive money of Rs.50/mt for 
the retailer. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2013-Fin.II (Vol.II)  dated 04.07.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please  see Para No.1.13 of Chapter-I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
 The Committee are of the view that Department of Fertilizers has the primary 
responsibility to assess the requirement of fertilizers and also to ensure that there is 
adequate and timely availability of fertilizers to the farmers. The Committee in this 
regard note that ther e is monitoring mechanism of Fertilizers Monitoring System 
which tracks availability of fertilizers upto district level and has now been extended 
through mobile Fertilizers Monitoring System (m -FMS) to the last point of sale i.e.; 
retailer. The Department of Fertilizers has also informed that all the stakeholders 
are required to register in m -FMS and perform the required reporting to increase 
transparency across the supply chain. The Committee, however, feel that there are 
still reports of black -marketing and illegal sale of fertilizers across the country. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation as mentioned in the 
demands for grants report 2012 -13 that Department of Fertilizers should strengthen 
the existing Fertilizer Monitoring Sys tem and make it more effective in bringing 
transparency in the sale of fertilizes and to eradicate hoarding and black -marketing 
of fertilizers.  

53 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
 The Committee also note that as there is no reserves of potash in the country, 
the total requirement of the sa me is met through imports and the companies are 
free to import fertilizers depending upon the demand and market condition in the 
country. However, the Committee regret to note that for the Kharif season of 2011 -
12, potash could not be imported due to lack of adequate contracts with 
international suppliers and high international prices to meet the requirements of the 
farmers of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a mechanism 
may be put in place to monitor and to ensure timely procurement of  potash as per 
the demand of the farmers. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The month -wise demand is assessed and projected by the Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) in consultation with the State Governments before 
the commencement of each cropping season. Accordingly, month -wise and  state -
wise supply plan is made. State Governments are responsible for monitoring the 
availability within their respe ctive states. On the basis of month -wise & state -wise 
projection given by Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Department of 
Fertilizers allocates sufficient/adequate quantities of fertilizers to the States by 
issuing monthly supply plans and continu ously monitors the availability of Fertilizers 
at the state level.  Further monitoring/distribution of fertilizers district/block wise is 
the responsibility of the respective states.  The state wise availability during April 
2012 to March, 2013 along with pre-positioning of fertilizers is at Appendix-II.  As 
can be seen, the availability of all the fertilizers was adequate. 
 Department of Fertilizers (DOF) is responsible for distribution and 
movement of fertilizers in the country. DOF is also paying subsidy on all major 
fertilizers to ensure adequate and quality fertilizers to the farmers at affordable 
price. The Maximum Retai l Price (MRP) of urea is under the statutory price control 
of the Government of India, while the MRPs of Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) 
fertilizers have been freed and the manufactures/importers are deciding the MRPs 
for these fertilizers. The manufactures/ importers and their wholesale and retail 
dealers are required to adhere to the provisions of the Fertilizers Control Order 
(FCO) regarding quality and MRP of fertilizers. As per the Allocation of Business 
Rules of the Government of India, administration of  FCO is the responsibility of the 
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation. The equitable distribution of fertilize rs 
to the farmers within the State at MRPs is the responsibility of the concerned state 

54 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
government. State Government can conduct search, mak e seizures and take 
punitive action against any person/dealer violating the provisions of the FCO. 
However, as DOF is responsible for making available subsidized fertilizers as per 
the requirement of the states, the issues like black marketing, illegal div ersion, 
smuggling, breach of MRP are the issues of concern for us. Therefore, states are 
constantly told about the urgent necessity of keeping strict vigil and prompt action 
by the states to check black marketing, diversion, smuggling, breach of MRP etc., 
by bringing these issues to the notice of the state government at various forums and 
through correspondences. Lately, said issues  were highlighted during the  Zonal 
Conference on Agriculture Inputs for Kharif 2013 season held from 6 th to 8 th 
February, 201 3 and the National Conference on Agriculture for Kharif Campaign -
2013 held from 6 th to 7 th March 2013, in which representatives from all the states 
were present. 
 All the fertilizer companies are also advised time and again to take strict 
action against th eir dealers found indulging in malpractices like black -marketing, 
hoarding etc. 
 As regards Potash - there was tightness in the availability of MOP during 
2011-12.  There is no viable source of Potash in the country as such the entire 
demand of MOP is met through imports.  During 2011-2012 year, up to the month of 
July, contracting for import of MOP could not materialize due to substantial increase 
of prices by cartelization by MOP producers in the International market.  The 
contracting of MOP took place onl y in the month  of August.  As a result, availability 
of MOP for direct application was comfortable in Rabi’2011-12 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2013-Fin.II (Vol.II)  dated 04.07.2013] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please  see Para No.1.22 of Chapter-I  of the Report) 
  

55 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH  FINAL 
REPLIES  OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
 The Committee note that presently India is 3 rd largest fertiliser producer in the 
world and the substantive demand of urea is met through indigenous production 
which is 224.69 LMT during the year 2012 -13 (up to February  2013). However, the 
90% demand of phosphoric fertiliser is met through imports eit her in the form of 
finished fertilisers or raw material due to absence of viable phosphatic mines in the 
country but for potash, the country is fully dependent on imports. Over the years, 
there has been a sharp increase in consumption of fertilisers due to  various factors 
like good monsoon combined with increase irrigation facilities, increased area under 
cultivation, better awareness of usage of fertilisers amongst farmers and better 
purchasing power in rural areas. However, the Committee are distressed to  note that 
the indigenous production of fertilisers has not increased with the growing 
requirement of fertiliser in the country primarily due to non -availability or limited 
availability of raw material/inputs as well as lack of new investment in urea secto r, 
which is again owing to constraints in the availability of domestic natural gas. 
 The Committee also note that the Government has recently notified New 
Investment Policy (NIP) -2012 on 02.01.2013 to facilitate fresh investment in urea 
sector to achieve self sufficiency in the sector. The Committee hope that as a result 
of investment in the sector under the NIP - 2012, indigenous production of urea will 
increase. In fact under this policy, the Government has received 15 investment 
proposals from various fertilizer companies which are under consideration of the 
Department. The Committee expect and recommend that all these investment 
proposals may be examined actively and finalised by the Department expeditiously. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 The Committee also note that there is an urgent need for the development of 
suitable commercial process for extraction of potash domestically in order to reduce 
the dependence of fertiliser units on import of potash. The extensive deposits of 
Gluconite sand containing potash have been detected in various parts of the country 
and a study is being conducted by the Indian School of Mines regarding efficient 
process for optimum extraction of potash content from the Gluconite s and. In this 
regard, the Committee would like the Department to monitor the study and impress 

56 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
upon the Indian School of Mines to complete the study and give its findings with in a 
fixed time frame. The Committee desire that the progress made in this regard  may 
also be apprised to them.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Consequent upon the approval of the announcement of New Investment 
Policy 2012 which was notified by the Ministry in January, 2013  Department of 
Fertilizers (DoF) had received 15 investment proposal s from various fertilizer 
companies.   The policy stipulates that all those units, which come into production 
within 5 years from the date of notification would be covered under the policy.  The 
policy provides for guaranteed buy-back of Urea for a period of 8 years from the start 
of production for which subsidies/incentives will be given by the Government. 
 Presently there is annual demand and supply gap of around 6 0 to 7 0 LMT 
(likely to reach around 80 to 90 LMT by the end of 2016-17) in indigenous production 
after taking into account 2 0 LMT of Urea from OMIFCO, which is being met through 
imports.  If all the proposals materialize at one go within the stipulated period of 5 
years it would create a capacity far more excess than the requirement and with no 
option for the Government but to buy the product.  It would unnecessarily put heavy  
burden on the subsidy outflows. 
 As per para 13 of the New Investment Policy 2012, all the urea units who plan 
to set up urea unit in the country are required to mandator ily provide information at 
beginning and completion of each sta ge of the project as given at Annexure-2 of the 
said policy.  Accordingly, the Department of Fertilizers has requested 
aforementioned companies to submit the broad stages for setting up urea proje ct.  
This is also required to assess the demand and production gap in the country as well 
as the cost of gas expected to be used in production of urea from  new investments. 
 The matter regarding new capacity creation was discussed in the Department 
of Fertilizers and a need was felt to move cautiously in giving approvals to the fresh 
proposals and in order to meet the immediate/projected demand of 2016-17, the DoF 
can at the most consider four new proposals adding upto 5 0  LMT after taking into 
account the  capacity addition in PSUs (both revival and Brownfield expansion) as 
well as projects in the private sector which are already in progress and will be 
commissioned in 2013-14.  However, for transparency  and equity, a need was felt to 
lay an objective criterion for selection of these proposals and a Group of Officers has 
been constituted to deliberate and decide on an objective criteria to select four 

57 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
projects and  import planning of urea in future. The first meeting of the Group of 
Officer has taken place on 14th May, 2013.  
 
 In respect of extraction of Potash, t he Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad has 
completed the study and submitted its report to M/s FAGMIL, a PSU under the 
Department of Fertilizers.  M/s FAGMIL is examining the viability of gluconite  mining 
to extract Potash.  The Department will take appropriate action as per findings of M/s 
FAGMIL in this regard. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2013-Fin.II (Vol.II)  dated 04.07.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please  see Para No.1.7 of Chapter-I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 The Committee note that Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) on decontrolled 
phosphatic (P) & potassic  (K) fertilizers was put in to effect from 1st April, 2010. 
Under the NBS policy, a fixed amount of subsidy decided on annual basis is provided 
to each grade of subsidised P&K fertilisers depending on its nutrient content. Since 
the country is largely depe ndent on imports for P&K fertiliser in the form of finished 
fertiliser or its raw material and subsidy being fixed, any rise or fall in international 
prices of P&K fertilisers and its inputs have effect on MRP of these fertilisers in the 
country. Further, variation in exchange rate also affects the delivered prices of these 
fertilisers. The Committee further note that under the NBS policy, fertiliser companies 
have been allowed to fix MRP at reasonable level.  
 The Committee were informed that as at present , there is no mechanism 
under the policy to monitor and enforce reasonableness of MRP. However, in order 
to monitor the MRP of fertilizers fixed by the companies, the Department proposed to 
bring in a policy note that will address the issue of MRP. The Com mittee therefore, 
recommend that Department of Fertilizers should expedite the formulation of 
mechanism in a time bound manner to monitor and enforce the fertilizer companies 
to fix MRP of fertilisers produced by them at reasonable level.  
 The Committee also note that a study of NBS policy is also being undertaken 
through a consultancy firm. The study will cover all aspects of NBS policy including 
its evaluation viz -a-viz price rise and its effect on balance fertilization of soil. The 
Committee expect that the Department of Fertilizer would take steps to expedite the 

58 
 
C:\Documents And Settings\Administrator\Desktop\42nd  Report On ATR\42 Report For Internet.Docx 
study of NBS regime so that it would be improved implementation of NBS policy. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Department has issued policy/guidelines dated 3.5.2013 (copy enclosed  
as Appendix-I)  under which it will be mandatory for all fertilizers companies to 
furnish  the certified cost data in prescribed format for monitoring of MRPs of P&K 
fertilizers fixed by them . The Department is in the process to finalise a suitable 
mechanism to determine the reasonableness of MRP fixed by the fertilizer 
companies under the NBS Policy.  
 The Department is in the process of appointing a consultant to study the NBS 
policy. The st udy will also look into, among others, the causes of price rise of P&K 
fertilizers and make suggestions. The study will be of 3 month’s duration.   
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2013-Fin.II (Vol.II)  dated 04.07.2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please  see Para No.1.16 of Chapter-I  of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;             Gopinath Munde 
11 DECEMBER  2013      CHAIRMAN                
20 AGRAHAYANA, 1935 (SAKA)                STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
         CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
  

59 
 
 
Appendix-I
 


60 
 
 
 


61 
 
  


62 
 
 
 


63 
 
 
 


64 
 
 
 
  


65 
 
 
 
Appendix – II 
<Figures in 000'MTs> 
Requirement, Availability and Sales of Fertilizers  during the year 2012-13 (April'12 To  March'13 along with Stock Pre-Positioned)     
 UREA   DAP   MOP   NPK   
States Requirement  Availability Sales Requirement  Availability Sales Requirement  Availability Sales Requirement  Availability Sales 
Andhra Pradesh 3250.00 2952.23 2851.49 1230.00 886.44 648.20 660.00 415.21 313.82 2250.00 2159.07 1758.79 
Karnataka 1500.00 1473.53 1446.32 890.00 685.24 404.00 562.00 338.29 268.00 1440.00 1222.05 939.54 
Kerala 205.00 136.91 135.99 45.00 37.72 24.69 194.00 107.52 87.54 251.00 185.64 153.16 
Tamil Nadu 1150.00 937.54 928.24 455.00 255.36 232.00 555.00 240.96 216.85 682.00 692.87 570.81 
Gujarat 2375.00 1950.74 1924.25 880.00 541.02 395.19 200.00 88.76 79.43 555.00 662.69 458.42 
Madhya Pradesh 1850.00 2080.47 1891.27 1150.01 1576.92 1106.90 140.00 115.74 84.75 434.00 323.88 232.52 
Chhattisgarh 690.00 825.86 706.25 311.84 337.88 233.16 127.00 106.10 66.47 175.00 140.30 103.92 
Maharashtra 2800.00 2366.76 2291.65 1560.00 995.50 658.80 625.00 432.63 314.12 1900.00 1685.49 1280.38 
Rajasthan 1725.00 1915.34 1846.05 760.00 739.09 593.40 48.24 19.90 15.51 166.10 88.64 83.54 
Haryana 2000.00 2190.25 2034.24 720.00 939.50 687.00 75.00 24.04 21.45 97.50 32.68 26.47 
Punjab 2640.00 3125.78 2842.91 805.00 1044.59 870.70 106.00 52.97 35.18 147.50 50.56 42.19 
Himachal Pradesh 66.50 68.99 64.64 0.00 0.00 0.00 6.30 6.86 6.57 45.50 22.91 17.44 
Jammu & Kashmir 143.30 186.37 144.35 85.00 66.47 49.81 35.00 19.17 16.24 0.02 0.00 0.00 
Uttar Pradesh 6000.00 6761.18 6255.85 1815.00 2765.56 2085.30 350.00 158.20 131.02 1147.50 819.00 661.79 
Uttarakhand 245.00 261.79 244.76 34.50 39.90 27.19 8.00 5.32 3.82 57.00 40.08 32.10 
Bihar 2150.00 2136.97 2100.88 500.00 694.89 541.30 230.00 155.06 114.00 365.00 380.08 300.37 
Jharkhand 270.00 208.30 198.39 125.00 73.03 54.12 35.00 6.88 2.52 128.50 28.35 26.00 
Orissa 650.00 546.04 524.66 275.00 163.31 144.11 200.00 88.63 74.60 397.50 288.11 228.60 
West Bengal 1350.00 1547.51 1387.44 525.00 556.88 425.22 425.00 315.04 215.77 828.21 913.60 789.59 
Assam 315.00 264.45 261.84 65.00 41.19 32.68 150.00 80.59 57.56 23.32 7.29 6.00 
All India 31544.38 32015.23 30157.49 12358.72 12447.79 9221.80 4782.11 2787.68 2135.01 11150.74 9760.45 7727.75 
 
 

66 
 
 
Appendix - III 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 11 December, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 
1530 hrs. in Committee Room – B, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri A. A. Jinnah     - In the Chair 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
3. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
4. Shri SK. Nurul Islam 
5. Shri Tufani Saroj 
6. Shri Raju Shetti 
7. Shri D. Venugopal 
8. Shri Sai Prathap Annayyagari 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
10. Smt. Naznin Faruque 
 
Secretariat 
  
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Additional Director 
 
2. As the Chairman could not attend the sitting due to pre -occupation, the 
members chose Shri A.A Jinnah, MP and a member of the Committee, to act as the 
Chairman.  The Acting Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
 
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the 
following draft Reports : 
 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-third Report (15th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants (2013 -14) of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) and  

67 
 
 
 
(ii) Draft Report on Action  Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty -sixth Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) on the subject 'Production and Availability of Pesticides'  
pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
 
4. After some discussion, the above two draft Reports were adopted by the 
Committee without any amendment.  
 
5. The Committee also decided to take oral evidence of some of the 
representationists in January 2014 who have desired to appear before the 
Committee in connection of Jan Aushadhi Scheme for which the Committee 
had given advertisements in the newspapers and electronic media. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

68 
 
 
Appendix – IV 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
  
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY -THIRD REPORT (15 TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2012-13) 
ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013 -2014)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS).  
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 10 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 2,3, 6, 8,  9 and 10)   
6 
Percentage of Total 60 % 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 
(Vide Recommendation  No. Nil)  
 
0 
Percentage of Total 0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 4 and 7)  
2 
Percentage of Total 20 %  
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are still awaited:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1 and 5) 
 
2 
Percentage of Total 20 % 
 