  
 
44 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  
39TH  REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2013-14) ON 
‘PRICING OF FERTILIZERS' OF DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS.] 
 
 
FORTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
February, 2014/ 27 Magha 1935, (Saka) 
  


  
 
CC&F No. -44 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  
39TH  REPORT (15TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2013-14) ON ‘PRICING OF 
FERTILIZERS' OF DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS.] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 12 .02.2014 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.02.2014 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2014/27 Magha 1935, (Saka)  


  
 
(i) 
CONTENTS 
 
. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-14)  
INTRODUCTION 
Chapter I Report  
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply  of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
 ANNEXURES 
I. Statement showing State-wise Requirement, Availability and Sales of 
Fertilizers during 2012-13 (April 12 to March 13) 
II. Strengthening/upgrading of Fertilizers Quality Control Mechanism- 
regarding 
III List of New Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories (FQCLs) sanctioned 
under National Project of Management Soil Health & Fertility. 
IV. Number of Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories (FQCLs) sanctioned for 
strengthening during 11th Plan period under National Project on 
Management of Soil Health & Fertility  
 APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2013-14) held on 20.01.2014. 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Ninth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Pricing of Fertilizers of the 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 

  
 
(ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
Shri Gopinath Munde  -  Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri S. Alagiri  
3. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
4. Shri P.P. Chauhan  
5. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
6. Shri S.K. Nurul Islam 
7. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
8. Shri Paswan Kamlesh  
9. Shri  Amarnath Pradhan 
10. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat 
11. Shri Tufani Saroj 
12. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar 
13. Shri Raju Shetti 
14. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
15. Shri  D. Venugopal 
16. Shri Sai Prathap Annayyagari 
17. + Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19.  Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
24. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
25. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
26. Shri Dilipbhai Pandya 
27. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
28.  Shri Ishwar Singh 
29. & Shri Pramod Kumar 
30.  Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Smt Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Under Secretary 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
+ Shri K.D. Deshmukh has resigned his seat in Lok Sabha and his resignation has been accepted by the   Speaker w.e.f. 12-12-2013 
&    Nominated w.e.f. 20.12.2013 

  
 
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2013 -14) 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf present 
this Forty-Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (201 2-2013) on 'Pricing 
of Fertilizers' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
 
2. The T hirty-Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 29 August, 2013.   The Action 
Taken Replies of Government to all observations/recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 01 November, 2013.   The Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (201 3-14) considered the Action Taken Report and adopted the same at 
their sitting held on 20 January, 2014. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on th e 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 28 January, 2014                                                      GOPINATH MUNDE 
8  Magha, 1935 (Saka)                                           Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 
  

  
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Thirty -Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Pricing of 
Fertilizers’ of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) which 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 29.8.2013. The Report contained 12 Observations / 
Recommendations of the Committee. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were requested 
to furn ish replies to the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Thirty -Ninth 
Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e.,  
by 28.11 2013. The Action Taken Replies of th e Government in respect of all the 12 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report have been received  from the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) vide their O.M. No.H -
11021/19/2013-Parl., dated 01.11.2013. These have been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have be en accepted by the 
Government: 
 
      Sl.Nos. 2,3,7,8,9,10, and 12     (Total =7)   
                                                       Chapter II  
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
  Sl.No. Nil         (Total = Nil)  
           Chapter III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  Sl.Nos. 4,5,6,11        (Total =04)  
           Chapter IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
  Sl.No.1          (Total =1)  
           Chapter V  
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I, Chapter IV in respect  of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and Chapter V for 
which final replies  are still awaited, of this Report, should  be fu rnished 
expeditiously.  

  
 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations / Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A. Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
5. Stressing for conducting a comprehensive  study on the impact of Nutrient Based 
Policy on prices of fertilizers, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note that  Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) policy was introduced  
w.e.f. 01.04.2010 to  address the issues relating to agriculture productivity, 
balanced use of fertilizers and growth of indigenous fertilizer industry, 
competiveness amongst the fertilizer companies, etc. Under this policy, a fixed 
amount of subsidy decided on annual basis is  provided on each grades of 
subsidized fertilizers depending on its nutrient contents and fertilizer 
manufactures/marketeers are allowed to fix the MRP at reasonable rate.  
However, the Committee are distressed  to note that after the introduction of NBS 
policy, the prices of the P&K fertilizers have escalated  exponentially almost three 
or four times.  The Committee also regret to note that the Government has yet to 
conduct a formal study on the impact of NBS Policy on prices of fertilizers since its 
implementation. In the absence of such study, the Committee feel that the 
Department of Fertilizers would not be able to  take any appropriate and effective  
corrective measures to contain the escalating  prices of the fertilizers  in the 
country. Since NBS regime is f or the last more than three years, the Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the De partment of Fertilizers should initiate action  to 
conduct a comprehensive study in this regard without further delay. The study 
should be completed within a fixed  time frame and on the basis of outcome of the 
study, the Department should take corrective measures to render relief to the 
farmers through reduction in prices."  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
6. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee , the 
Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 
"The Department has in August 2013, engaged a consultancy firm namely M/s. 
Ernst & Young to carry out a study on the impact of NBS Policy.  The key focus 
areas of the Study are as under:- 
 
(i) Impact of NBS Policy on prices and availability of fertilizers in India. 
(ii) Impact of NBS Policy on balanced fertilization on soil and its impact on the 
agricultural productivity. 

  
 
(iii) Mechanism to ascertain ‘reasonability’ of MRPs. 
(iv) Identification of additional mechanism under NBS policy to make it more 
effective in achieving its objectives. 
(v) Monitoring and regulation of prices. 
(vi) Price Discovery and Fixation of Prices. 
 
The report from M/s. Ernst & Young is expected soon." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. The Committee were disappointed to note that after the introduction of NBS 
policy, the prices of P&K has escalated exponentially.  The Committee had , 
therefore, recommended that a comprehensive study should be conducted with in 
a fixed time frame on the impact of NBS policy on the prices of ferti lizers since its 
implementation and on the basis of outcome of the study, the Department should  
take corrective measures to render relief to the farmers through reduction in 
prices. In their action taken r eply, the Department of Fertilizers ha s stated that 
they have engaged in August 2013, a consultancy firm namely M/s Ernst & Young 
to carry out study on impact of NBS policy. However, the Committee are dismayed 
to note that no specific time limit has been  set by the Department  for submission 
of the report by M/s Ernst & Young . Since it is essential to evaluate the impact of 
NBS regime on price rise of fertili zers, the Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Department of Fertilizers should impress upon M/s Ernst & Young  to expedite 
the report in the matter  with in a fixed time frame  and on the basis of outcome of 
the said study, the Department should  take appropriate corrective measures to  
provide relief to the farmers.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the  
action taken by the Department and the progress made in this regard. 
B. Price Rise of Fertilizers 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
8. While expressing their concern over the increasing trend in rise in price  of 
fertilizers, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
  
 "The Committee are dismayed to note the increasing trend of price rise of the 
P&K fertilizers in the recent years.  The Department of Fertilizers has attributed 
various reasons for increase in the prices of fertilizers.  According to the 
Department of Fertilizers, rise in the prices of imported raw material along with the 
depreciation of rupee against the dollar have led to the increase in the price of  
fertilizers in recent years.  The increase in the price of the oil and natural gas has 
also led to increase  in the prices of fertilizers.  However, the Committee are not 

  
 
entirely convinced with the reasons given by the Department of Fertilizers for the 
sharp and abnormal rise in prices of fertilizers. Under the NBS policy, there is no 
mechanism to determine the reasonableness of MRP fixed by the fertilizer 
companies or any express provision for taking action against those unscrupulous 
manufacturers/ marketeers which  are raking up   undue profits  as a result of  
fixation of very high MRP. Needless to say, any increase in the prices of fertilizers 
adversely af fects the farmers particularly those belonging to the poor and 
marginal sections. The Committee, therefore, recommend that an effective 
mechanism should be put in place to examine/ scrutinize the reasonableness o f 
the MRP fixed by the fertilizer companies.  In this context, fertilizer companies 
should also be asked to submit the requisite information mandatorily about the 
cost of fertilizers on which subsidy is being claimed by them and   also justify the 
MRP of fer tilizers fixed by them. In this regard, cost audit of the fertil izers 
produced/manufactured by the companies should be compulsorily carried out. In 
case the MRP fixed by the companies is found unreasonable, then the 
Department should take stern action against them and the subsidy given to them 
should either be restricted or even recovered from them.  The prices at which the 
fertilizers are being sold to the farmers in the retail marke t should be strictly 
monitored by the Department in co -ordination with the State Governments and if 
anyone found selling the fertilizers above the printed MRP should b e strictly dealt 
with under the EC Act. An institutional mechanism to monitor the sale price of t he 
fertilizers at retail market to the farmers should be set up for the purpose."  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
9. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee , the 
Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 
 "In order to monitor the reasonableness of MRPs of P&K fertilizers fixed by the 
fertilizer companies, it has been made mandatory for all the fertilizer companies to 
submit, along with their claims of subsidy, certified cost data in the prescribed 
format and as per the requirement. This has become effective from 1.4.2013. 
 In cases, where, after scrutiny, unreasonableness of MRP is established or 
where there is no correlation between the cost of production or acquisition and the 
MRP printed on the bags, the subsidy may be restricted  or denied even if the 
product is otherwise eligibl e for subsidy under NBS scheme.  In proven case of 
abuse of subsidy mechanism, DOF, on the recommendation of IMC, may exclude 
any company from the NBS Scheme. 

  
 
 The Cost Data from some of the fertilizer companies has since been 
received. After analysis of the requisite data, the Department will take appropriate 
action under the NBS Policy." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10. The Committee were dismayed to note the increasing trend  of price rise of 
P&K fertilizers in the recent years.  The Committee had, therefore, recommended 
that an effective mechanism should be put in place to examine/ scrutinize the 
reasonableness of the MRP fixed by the fertilizer companies.  The Committee had 
also impressed upon that the cost audit of the fertilizers produced/manufact ured 
by the companies should be compulsorily carried out. In case the MRP fixed by 
the companies is found unreasonable, then the Department should take stern 
action against them and the subsidy given to them should either be restricted or 
even recovered fr om them. The Committee had also recommended that an 
institutional mechanism to monitor the sale price of the fertilizers at retail market 
to the farmers should be set up for the purpose.  In its action taken r eply, the 
Department has stated that it has been made mandatory for all the fertilizer 
companies to submit, along  with their claim  of subsidy certified cost data in the 
prescribed format and as per the requirement.  This has become effective from 
1.4.2013. The Department has also stated that in case s it is proven that there is 
unreasonableness of MRP and abuse of subsidy mechanism, Department on the 
recommendation of IMC, may exclude any company from the NBS scheme.  The 
cost data from some of the fertilizer com panies has since been received and after  
analysis of the requisite data, the Department will take appropriate action under 
the NBS policy.  However, the Committee regret to note that no timeline has been 
fixed to finalize the investment proposal received by the Department.  The 
Committee now expect from the Department to analyse the cost data as received 
from the fertilizer companies with in a fixed time frame and to find out the 
reasonableness of MRP of the fertilizers  fixed by the companies as well as the 
justification for  their claim for subsidy . Rest of the companies should also be 
impressed upon to furnish the cost date without any further delay.  If On the basis 
of outcome of the analysis,  the companies are found  raking up undue profits as a 
result of fixation of high MRP, then the Department should  take stern action 
against such companies. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in the matter and the progress made in this regard. 
 
 

  
 
C. New Pricing Scheme 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
11. Stressing the need to augment the domestic production of urea , the Committee 
had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note that New Pricing Scheme (NPS) for urea units came in to 
existence w.e.f. 01.04.2003 replacing the erstwhile Retention Price System. The 
Committee also note that there is an imperative need to set up new urea units and 
expansion of existing urea units for augmenting the domestic production capacity 
of urea to meet the growing demand of urea for enhancing the agricultural 
production in the country over the years.  The Committee a re, therefore, of the 
view that formulation of policy for existing urea unit beyond stage III of New 
Pricing Scheme (NPS) is essential to achieve self -sufficiency in domestic 
production of urea which is also one of the cherished goals which the Government 
plans to achieve by the end of Twelfth Plan period.  Hence, the Committee 
recommend that the formulation of the policy for existing urea units beyond Stage 
III of New Pricing Scheme may be expedited." 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 12.  In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee , the 
Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"The policy for stage III of New Pricing Scheme (NPS -III) was effective from 
01.10.2006 till  31.03.2010. The provisions of p olicy for Stage -III of N PS have 
been extended beyond the validity period of NPS -III i.e. 31.03.2010 till further 
orders. The matter of formulation of policy for the existing urea units beyond 
stage-III of New Pricing Scheme (NPS) is under consideration of Group of 
Ministers constituted to review the fertilizer policy, the meeting of which was held 
on 5th June, 2013 and during the meeting, it was decided that further deliberations 
on the issues are required before formulation of policy for existing urea units 
beyond New Pricing Scheme." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13. The Committee  noted that the policy for stage III of New Pricing Scheme  
(NPS) expired on 31.03.2010  but its  provisions have been extended beyond 
31.03.2010 till further orders.  Keeping in view the imperative need  to achieve self-
sufficiency in domestic production of urea , the  Committee had, therefore,  
recommended that the formulation of the policy for existing urea units beyond 
Stage-III of New Pricing Scheme should be expedited.  In their action taken reply , 

  
 
the Department has stated that the provisions of policy for Stage-III of New Pricing 
Scheme (NPS) is under consideration of Group of Ministers constituted to review 
the fertilizer policy. In its meeting held on 5th June 2013, it was decided that further 
deliberations on the issue s are required before formulation of policy for existing 
urea units beyond New Pricing Scheme. The Committee are not satisfied with the 
pace of  progress in the matter as even after a lapse of  more than three years, the  
new pricing scheme f or existing urea units beyond stage III of NPS is yet to be 
formulated by the Government.  The Department has also not fixed any time lines 
to formulate the policy in the matter.  This shows the lackadaisical approach of the 
Government on the issue. Since it  is essential to augment the domestic 
production of urea to meet the growing demand of agriculture  and any further 
delay may adversely affect the growth of urea units , t he Committee  expect the 
Department to expedite the deliberations on the issue  and formulate the policy for 
existing urea units beyond Sta ge-III of NPS with in a fixed time frame . The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the timeframe establish and progress 
made so far by the Department in this regard. 
D. Availability of Fertilizers  
Recommendation No. 4 
 
14. While s tressing direct interaction with the farmers at the Village or Panchayat 
levels, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee were informed  that the weekly video conference is conducted 
jointly by Department of Agriculture, Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of 
Railways and Ministry of Shipping with State Agriculture officials with regard to all 
issues related to agricultural production, prod uctivity and inputs such as 
availability of fertilizers. The video conference is held at official level only and 
farmers or Panchayats do not participate in such video conferences. The 
Committee were also informed that logistically it would not be possible  to hold 
video conferences at the district level as the State Government are supposed to 
take data from the districts. It also came to the notice of the Committee that the 
Department of Fertilizers does not have any direct interaction with the farmers as 
they do not have any field officers and the Department has to depend  entirely 
upon the officers of the State Government for getting  the required information. 
The Committee were further informed that the teams constituted by  the 
Department of Fertilizers conduct on field inspections to see whether the shops 
are available, weights of the fertilizer bags are correct or not and at what prices 
fertilizers are being sold etc. Nevertheless, the Committee are of the view that the 

  
 
ground reality with regard to availa bility of fertilizers and on related issues could 
be ascertained only by way of direct interaction with the farmers at the Village or 
Panchayat levels. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the farmers or their 
representatives from Panchayats  should invariably be involved and interacted in 
weekly or monthly video conferences organized by the Department of Fertilizers. 
Such conferences should be held at the District level and an Action Taken Report 
on the issues jointly reviewed by officials of the Government of India and the State 
Governments should be placed on the website of the Department. The Committee 
also recommend that Department  should also find out the feasibility to  establish 
an annual  programme for regular field visits of their own field offic ers for 
interaction directly with the farmers in order to get first hand information about the 
demand, availability and prices of fertilizers and on related issues. 
 
Reply of the Government 
15. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "Department of Agriculture & Cooperation organizes weekly video conferences 
with State Governments in which officials of State Government Agriculture 
department, responsible for availabili ty of fertilizers in their respective States , 
participate. Officials of Department of Fertilizers also attend these conferences. It 
is not possible to involve farmer s or their representatives in these conferences  or 
holding video conferences at District level because Department of Fertilizers does 
not have any Field Officers even at State level. 
  As regards regular field visits by the officer s of this Department are 
concerned, this Department formed  teams to visit the States allocated to them 
and review th e following items with the concerned State Government authorizes 
and submit report periodically:- 
i. Inspection of Mobile Based Fertilizer Monitoring System. 
ii. Fertilizer availability at state as well as District level. 
iii. Quantity verification at godowns of dealers/ companies. 
iv. Quality of fertilizer bags. 
v. Black marketing, Hoarding and smuggling of fertilizers. 
vi. Diversion of fertilizers for other than agriculture use like industrial  
  use. 
vii. Interactions with non-officials and farmers to take feedback. 
viii. Verification of printed MRP and MRP shown by the companies in  
  FMS. 
ix. Updation of data in Fertilizer Monitoring System. 
x. Shortage/ leakage in quantity due to poor handling. 
xi. Updation of dealer’s data in FMS/mFMS. 
xii. General awareness of rules by dealers. 
xiii. Quality of fertilizers/ sales of non-standard fertilizer." 
 

  
 
Comments of the Committee 
16. The Committee were of the view that the ground reality with regard to 
availability of fertilizers and on related issues could be ascertained only by way of 
direct interaction with the farmers at the Village or Panchayat levels. The 
Committee had, therefore, recommended that  the farmers or their representatives 
from Panchayats  should invariably be involved and interacted in weekly or 
monthly video conferences organized by the Department of Fertilizers.  The 
Committee had also recommended that the Department of Fertilizers shou ld find 
out the feasibility to establish an annual programme for regular field visits of their 
own field officers for interaction directly with the farmers in order to get first hand 
information about demand, availability and prices of fertilizers. However, the   
Committee are distressed to note from the action taken reply of the Government 
that it would not be possible for them to involve farmers or their representatives in 
these conferences or holding video conferences at district level as Department 
does not have any field officers even at state leve l. The Committee are not entirely 
convinced with the submission of the Department in the matter.  The Committee 
are of the view  that the Department, being the nodal agency,  can not absolve 
themselves of their re sponsibility to ensure availability of fertilizers at reasonable 
prices to the farmers in various States and therefore, it is imperative for them to 
work out modalities or mechanism in co-ordination with the Ministry of Agriculture 
and respective State Governments with a view to  get first hand  information from 
the farmers or from their representatives about the demand, availability 
distribution and prices of fertilizers  and on related issues. The Committee , 
therefore, reiterate its recommendation that fa rmers or their representatives  
should be involved in video conferences organized by the Department to get first 
hand information about demand, availability and prices of fertilizers  and for this 
purpose, it is imperative for them to work out an annual program me for regular 
field visits for direct interaction with the farmers or their representatives. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in 
this regard. 
 
  

  
 
E.  Streamlining movement and distribution  of Fertilizers 
 
Recommendation No. 5  
 
17. While noting that the overall supply (availability) of fertilizers is not as per the 
demand (requirement), the Committee had recommended as under:-  
  "The Committee were informed that there was no problem about the availability of 
fertilizers to the farmers in the last Kharif season and overall availability of 
fertilizer was comfortable. However, contrary to the claim of the Department of 
Fertilizers, it came to the notice of the  Committee that the farmers in some parts 
of the country like in Medak and Nizamabad in Andhra Pradesh have to stand in 
long queues outside the fertilizer shop just to get one bag of fertilizer which 
sometimes they fail to get.  In the action taken reply to the Recommendation No.9 
of the Twenty Eighth Report of the Committee on ‘Production, Demand and 
Availability of Fertilizers and its Distribution’, the Department had stated that the 
supply (availability) of fertilizers is adequate and comfortable. However, on careful 
analysis of demand and supply of fertilizers during the year 2012, as reflected in 
the statement (Annexure -VII), the Committee have noted that the overall supply 
(availability) of fertilizers is not as per the deman d (requirement), irrespective of 
sale of fertilizers. In fact, the availability of Urea, DAP, MOP and NPK in most of 
the States is less than the demand (requirement) which clearly indicates the 
shortage of fertilizers in the States. As for example, the dem and (requirement) of 
urea in Maharashtra is 2190.00 MT whereas only 1779.42 MT of Urea was 
available. Similarly, as against the demand of 1301.00 MT of DAP, 482.00 MT of 
MOP and 1522.00 MT of NPK only 743.49 MT of DAP, 314.99 MT of MOP and 
1325.73 of NPK w as available. Similar is the position of demand and supply in 
reality in Karnataka, Kerala, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, and other States as well. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should find out the 
reported shortage of fertilizer in vari ous parts of the country and simultaneously 
should take effective measures to streamline the movement and distribution 
system in coordination with the officials of the State Government concerned with 
a view to ensure timely and adequate supply of fertilize r to the farmers at 
affordable prices."  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
18. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 

  
 
"The Status of requirement, availability and sales of Urea, DAP, MOP and NPK 
during the year 2012 -13 is placed at Annexure-I. It may be seen from the table 
that availability of Urea, DAP, MOP and NPK during the year has been 
comfortable and more than the sa les. The demand for the fertilizer is projected by 
the States one or two months in advance of commencement of the next season. 
For the annual demand for fertilizers, the States is largely dependent upon the 
ideal condition. It is generally seen that fertil izers are consumed during 2 -3 
months window in each season. Therefore, though the States give projection for 
all the months but lift less than projected requirement during last months. 
 The Department of Fertilizers tries to ensure availability of fertiliz ers as per 
the assessed demand by the State Governments at the start of the season but the 
supply/ availability of fertilizers to a particular State not only depend upon its 
assessed demand but also lifting of fertilizers by the States by placing orders wi th 
the fertilizer companies through their marketing institutions and actual sales at 
dealer level in States. The availability is also a factor of sales.  Here, it is pertinent 
to mention that actual sales is reflective of actual demand during the season, 
whereas the initial projection at the start of season is mere an assessment. 
Assessed demand for fertilizers is largely dependent upon ide al conditions, 
whereas the sale are a reflection of actual conditions prevailing during the season 
which may change the actual demand of fertilizers by farmers on real time basis. 
Therefore, there is always a gap between the assessed demand, actual 
availability and sales of fertilizers. Hence, availability of fertilizers may appear to 
be low as compared to requirement but is quite comfortable vis-a vis sales." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
19. The Committee had recommended that the Department should find out the 
reported shortage of fertilizer in various parts of the country and simultaneously 
should take effective measures to  streamline the movement and distribution 
system in coordination with the officials of the State Government concerned with 
a view to ensure timely and adequate supply of fertilizer to the farmers at 
affordable prices.  In its action taken reply, the Departm ent has stated that the 
demand for the fertilizer is projected by the States one or two months in advance 
of commencement of the next season.  The Department tries to ensure availability 
of fertilizers as per the assessed demand by the State Governments at the start of 
the season but the supply/ availability of fertilizers to a particular State not only 
depend upon its assessed demand but also lifting of fertilizers by the States by 
placing orders with the fertilizer companies through their marketing institu tions 

  
 
and actual sales at dealer level in States. According to the Department,  actual 
sales is reflective of actual demand during the season, whereas the initial 
projection at the start of season is mere an assessment. Assessed demand for 
fertilizers is la rgely dependent upon ideal conditions, whereas the sale are a 
reflection of actual conditions prevailing during the season which may change the 
actual demand of fertilizers by farmers on real time basis. Therefore, there is 
always a gap between the assesse d demand, actual availability and sales of 
fertilizers. Hence, availability of fertilizers may appear to be low as compared to 
requirement but is quite comfortable vis -a vis sales.  The Committee are not 
convinced with the reply of the Department in the mat ter that the overall 
availability of fertilizers to the farmers is comfortable.  Contrary to the claim of the 
Department, there were reported shortage of  fertilizers to the farmers which  had 
come to the notice of the Committee as pointed out in their 39 th Report but the 
Department, it seems, has not made any efforts to find out the specific reasons in 
to those cases as reported to the Committee.  The Committee feel that it is very 
natural for the farmers to make  demand for  fertilisers as per the prevailing  
seasonal conditions. Therefore,  it is the responsibility of the Government to keep 
adequate stock of fertilizers of various grades ensuring  supply of adequate 
quantity of fertilisers as per their demand.  During its study tour to Srinagar, 
Jammu, Dalhousie, Chamba and Pathankot (from 17 to 23 June, 2013), it was 
reported to the Committee that in the State of Jammu and Kashmir there is only 
one transporter appointed by National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) and the  single 
transporter does not supply fertilizers to far flung areas, resulting in shortage of 
fertilizers. The Committee are of the view  that there should not be any objection if 
other transporters besides those appointed by NFL,  are allowed as secondary 
transporters to supply fertilizers in the State.  In view of the foregoing, t he 
Committee reiterate its recommendation that  an effective mechanism may be put 
in place to streamline the movement and distribution of fertilisers to the farmers 
as per the ir demand . T he Committee would like to be apprised of the initiat ives 
taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
F. Realistic assessment of requirement of fertilisers 
Recommendation No. 6  
 
20. While noticing that the requirement of fertilizers assessed by States is unrealistic 
and inflated, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee also observe that there is huge variation in the actual sales in 
comparison to availability (supply) of fertilizers. As for example, the availability of 

  
 
Urea in Haryana was 1542.77 MT, whereas, corresponding sales was 1461.06 
MT only. Similarly, as against the availability of 776.72 MT of DAP, 21.45 MT of 
MOP and 23.09 MT of NPK and only 473.82 MT of DAP, 18.36 MT of MOP and 
17.19 MT of NPK was sold .   The Committee, therefore, come to the conclusion 
that the requirement of fertilizers assessed by States is unrealistic and inflated if 
we go by the present way of assessment. The Committee, therefore, desire that a 
scientific mechanism need to be developed for working out a realistic assessment 
of requirement of fertilizers in the country. This is all the more essential in order to 
restrict import of fertilizers particularly P&K fertilizers so as to check outgo of 
precious foreign exchange.  Therefore, the Comm ittee recommend that the 
Department of Fertilizers should take initiative in cooperation with the Department 
of Agriculture and Cooperation to evolve a scientific process for realistic 
assessment of requirement of fertilizers. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the steps taken by the Department in this regard." 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
21. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee , the 
Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 
"Various measures taken by Ministry of Agriculture to ensure the process of 
assessment of requirement of fertilizers more rational, scientific and realistic are 
as follow: 
(i) The Ministry modified the process of assessment of requirement of 
fertilizers to make it more scientific by  introduction of new proformas and 
modification of few earlier proformas (used to assess requirement of fertilizers). 
These new and modified proformas have been sent to States for assessing the 
requirement of fertilizers for last three cropping seasons. 
The States have been requested to compile the information in these new & 
modified proformas related to gross cropped area, area under irrigation, area 
under crops at block level and information pertaining to deficiency in terms of 
nutrients, requirements in terms of NPK nutrients etc. at district level . These are 
the factors, which primarily govern the requirement of fertilizers. States have been 
compiling information in these new/modified proformas for last three cropping 
seasons. 
(ii) State Governments proj ect requirement of fertilizers more or less as per 
the requirement of NPK nutrients and availability of fertilizers in the states are 
made as per the projected requirement. But due to unprecedented increase in 
prices of P&K fertilizers as compared to the p rice of Urea (‘N’) has led to demand 

  
 
destruction in P&K fertilizers. Thus, sales of P&K fertilizers vis -à-vis their 
availability are low despite the se being required as per the actual status of soil 
health.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
22.  The Committee had observed that  the assessment of requirement of 
fertilizers by the States  is unrealistic and  inflated. The Committee had, therefore, 
recommended that Department of Fert ilizers should take initiative in cooperation 
with Department of Agriculture and Coop eration (DAC) to evolve a scientific 
process for realistic assessment of requirement of fertilizers. In its action taken 
reply, the Department has stated that DAC has taken various measures to ensure 
the process of assessment of requirement of fertilizers more ratio nal, scientific 
and realistic. The Committee are of the opinion that assessment of requirement of 
fertilizers of the farmers should be done in a scientific manner taking into account  
all relevant factors viz., weather forecast, market trend, local condition s, transport 
facility, previous history, etc.  As a result of scientific assessment of demand of 
fertilizers, the Committee hope that the outgo of precious foreign exchange due to 
inflated and irrational assessment of demand of fertilizers in the country would  be 
checked and at the same time,  there would be adequate quantity of fertilizers to 
meet the just demand of farmers from time to time.  
 
G. New Investment Policy- 2012 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
23. While noting that the initiative of the New Investment Policy is to facilitate fresh 
investment in urea sector, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
  "The Committee note that the New Investment Policy -2012 has since been 
notified by the Government on 2 nd January 2013. The initiative of the policy is to 
facilitate fresh investment in urea sector to reduce India’s import dependency in 
urea sector. The  policy not only supports gas based plants but it also supports 
revival of closed units  in the country. It encourages investment by Indian industry 
in Joint Venture abroad in resource rich countries. The Committee hope that the 
New Investment Policy would address comprehensively all the issues which are 
affecting the growth of fertilizer sector and reduce the gap between the 
indigenous production and import of urea in the country. The Committee, 
however, expect that the New Investment Policy would be implemented effectively 

  
 
and expeditiously. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan 
formulated by the Government in this regard."  
 
Reply of the Government 
      
24. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee , the 
Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
       "The Government has announced New Investment Policy-2012 on 02.01.2013 to 
attract investment and enhance domestic production of Urea. Under this policy, 
the Government has received 14 investment proposals from various fertilizer 
companies including PSUs/Cooperatives which are under conside ration. As per 
deliberation and discussion held in the meeting on 01.07.2013 under 
Chairmanship of PS to Hon’ble Prime Minister, it was decided to move an 
amendment in New Investment Policy, 2012 through CCEA for substituting the 
phrase “guaranteed buyback ” with expression that subsidies will be given only 
upon domestic sale as at present with proper safeguards.  The draft CCEA Note 
has been circulated on 21 st August, 2013 for Inter -Ministerial consultation before 
placing it for consideration of CCEA." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
25. In their report, the Committee had expected that the New Investment Policy-
2012 would be implemented effectively and expeditiously. In its action taken reply, 
the Department  has stated that New Investment Policy -2012 was announced on 
2.1.2013 to attract investment and enhance domestic production of urea . Under 
this policy, the Government ha s received 14 investment proposals from various 
fertilizer companies including PSUs/ Cooperatives which are currently under 
consideration. Further, in a meeting held on 1.7.2013 , it was decided to move an 
amendment in New Investment Policy, 2012 through CCEA for substituting the 
phrase 'guarantee buyback' with expression that subsidies will be given only upon 
domestic sale as at present w ith proper safeguards. Further, the draft CCEA Note 
has been circulated on 21st August, 2013 for Inter -Ministerial consultation before 
placing it for consideration of CCEA.  In view of the foregoing, the  Committee 
expect the Department to pursue the matter so that investment proposals received 
under the new policy may be considered and finalized  expeditiously within a fixed 
time frame with a view to  attract investment and augment domestic production of 
Urea. The Committee would like to be apprised of the  initiatives taken by the 
Department in this regard.  
 

  
 
 
H. Revival of Closed Fertilizer Units  
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
26. Stressing the need for early rev ival of closed fertilizer units, the Committee had  
recommended as under:- 
  "The Committee note  that there are five closed units of Fertilizer Corporation of 
India Ltd. (FCIL) at Sindri, Talcher, Ramagundam, Gorakhpur and Korba and 
three closed units of Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Ltd. (HFCL) at Durgapur, 
Barauni and Haldia. The Government of India d ecided to close these units in 
2002. In addition, one unit in the private sector namely Duncans Industries 
Limited (DIL) was closed down in 2002. All these units were closed down as these 
companies were consistently making losses due to a variety of reason s such as 
technological obsolescence,  lack of investment on up -gradation/modernization, 
power shortage etc. However, the Committee were informed that the efforts are 
being made to revive these closed units of FCIL/HFCL. The Committee were 
informed that aft er revival of all the units of FCIL and HFCL, the production of 
urea will increase approx. by 10.16 million tonnes.  Keeping in view the significant 
role which is expected to be  played by these units after their revival, in 
augmenting the production of urea  in the country,  the Committee regret to note 
the slow progress made  by the Government in  this regard and the units are still 
not revived even after a lapse of more than 12 years. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the process of revival of closed un its of fertilizers  be expedited 
with in a fixed time frame. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard.” 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
27. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee , the 
Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"Revival of the closed units of FCIL and HFCL: 
 In 2008, Cabinet approved to revive Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited 
(FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Limited (HFCL) units subject to non -
recourse to Government funding and to consider write off of GOI loan & interest to 
the extent required, subject to submission of fully tied up proposals for final 
decision on waiver. The revival of these closed units would be through nomination 
route by PSUs and through bidding route by private sector. Sindri, Talcher and 
Ramagundam Units of FCIL to be revived on nomination basis.  Gorakhpur & 

  
 
Korba units of FCIL and Durgapur, Haldia,  Barauni of HFCL to be revived through 
bidding route. 
 
2. The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs ( CCEA) had in August, 2011 
approved the Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) for revival of all the Units of 
FCIL and HFCL. DRS envisa ged revival of Talcher Unit by a  consortium of 
M/s.Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF), M/s Coal India Limited (CIL) 
and M/s Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL), revival of Ramagundam Unit by 
M/s. Engineers India Limited (EIL) and M/s. National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) and 
revival of Sindri unit by M/s Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL). 
3. CCEA in its meeting held on  9.5.2013, inter -alia, approved waiver of 
Government of India loan and interest to facilitate FCIL to arrive at positive net 
worth. This enabled FCIL to get de -registered from the purview of Board For 
Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR). Proposal/action plan on revival of 
HFCL units is to be taken up once revival of FCIL units comes on track. 
4. For Talcher unit, it is proposed to establish two joint venture (JV) 
companies viz. First company for upstream coal gasification section with GAIL 
and second company comprising RCF, CIL and FCIL for downstream section of 
Ammonia-urea, Nitric Acid, Ammonia Nitrate plants, off sites and utilities. The 
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) among consortium PSUs i.e. CIL, RCF, 
GAIL and FCIL, has been signed on 5.9.2013. 
5. For Ramagundam Project, EIL & NFL a re having discussions with the 
technology providers, whose bids have already been received.  EIL itself would 
take up the works of Engineering and Project Construction for the project. 
 
6. For Sindri  unit, it has been decided to entrust the assignment of R&R 
activities at Sindri Unit to M/s. Project & Development India Limited (PDIL) and 
PDIL have submitted their offer for the assignment to SAIL on 20.09.2013 for their 
examination and approval, before  Work Order is issued to PDIL for the R&R 
activities." 
Comments of the Committee 
 
28. In their report, the Committee  had recommended that the process of revival 
of closed units of fertilizers  may be expedited with in a fixed time frame.   In its 
action taken reply , the Department ha s  elaborated the various measures /steps 
taken or  being undertaken by the Government  to revive the closed units  of 
fertilizers. It has also been  informed that while Sindri, Talcher and Ramagundam 
Units of FCIL  are to be revived on nomination basis,  Gorakhpur & Korba units of 
FCIL and Durgapur, Haldia,  Barauni of HFCL are being  revived through bidding 

  
 
route. The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs ( CCEA) had in August, 2011 
approved the Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DR S) for revival of all the Units of FCIL 
and HFCL. CCEA  in its meeting held on 9.5.2013, inter -alia, approved waiver of 
Government of India loan and interest to facilitate FCIL to arrive at positive net 
worth. Proposal/action plan on revival of HFCL units is to be taken up once revival 
of FCIL units comes on track.  The Committee are of the view that it is the 
responsibility of the Department to pursue the matter  vigorously with all 
concerned at the highest level and to render all possible help with a view to  revive 
the closed units of fertilizers in a time bound manner and make them commercially 
viable. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard. 
 
I. Joint Ventures Abroad  
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
29. While expecting the Department to provide incentives to Public Sector Companies 
for effective and expeditious  development of assets and setting up of Joint Venture 
Fertilizer projects abroad, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
  "The Committee note that due to near total dependence on imports for 
Phosphatic fertilizer and its raw materials and full import dependence for MOP, 
the efforts are being made by the Government to encourage Government PSUs to 
establish joint ventures with t he countries which are rich in raw material   with the 
assurance to buy/ off take the fertilizers and fertilizer inputs regularly from them 
for using as fertilizer/ producing fertilizers indigenously. The Committee expect 
that the Department  would provide s uitable incentives to  the Public Sector 
companies and would actively  pursue the opportunities that  exist with resource 
rich countries like Ghana, Indonesia, Nigeria, Oman, Canada, Iran, Russia, 
Tunisia, South Africa etc. for effective and expeditious  development of assets and 
setting up of Joint Venture Fertilizer projects abroad. The Committee would 
further like the Department to take up the matter with a view to ensure that these 
joint ventures abroad are materialized expeditiously. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
30. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 

  
 
“The following is the current status of the JV initiatives being taken by DOF for 
setting up of JV abroad /development of assets abroad or to enter into long term 
agreement  with foreign entities for supply of fertilizer to India : 
 
(i) Co-operation with Ghana:  A Secretary (F) led delegation had visited 
Ghana on 24th – 26th June 2013 to discuss with Ghanian Authorities on draft Joint 
Venture Agreement. During the visit, the Ghanian side was reminded of the draft 
JV agreement sent by RCF to Ghanian  side long time back on which they are yet 
to respond. The main issue was related to availability of  gas and its price. The 
Ghanaian side was also reminded of sticking to the 15 th September, 2013 
deadline  for signing of the JV agreement.  
(ii) Co-operation with Togo: A Secretary(F) led delegation had visited Togo 
on 24th – 26th June 2013 to discuss with Togolese authorities participation  of the 
Indian Fertilizer entities in mining and production of Phosphate in Togo.   
Meanwhile, a letter from MOS(IC) for Chemic al and fertilizers has also gone to 
Minister of Transport, Mines and Energy, Govt. of Togo, intimating him that a 
questionnaire containing the details of information required by the  Indian side for 
formulation of specific proposals for development of Carbo nated Rock Phosphate 
deposits has already been sent to Govt. of Togo and also informing him a bout 
awaiting the visit of Togo lese delegation to India with the detailed information in 
order to discuss the matter further. In response to the questionnaire, Hig h 
Commission, Accra has sent a message from Minister for Mines and Energy of 
Republic of Togo w.r.t. the  details of Mines and  reserves of minerals  which is 
under process. 
(iii) Co-operation with Belarus : A Secretary(F) led delegation visited Belarus 
in January 2013 to discuss the following issues:-  
 
(a)  Sale of Shares of Belaruskali. 
(b) Long-term purchase agreement. 
(c) Indian investment in Grodno Azot Project.  
(d) Investment in New Potash Mines of Belarus especially Petrikov 
Mines.  
 
. But the Indian delegation was disappo inted as no concrete decision could 
be taken on any of the four issues mentioned above.  Recently, the Hon’ble 
speaker of Lok Sabha visited Belarus and a meeting was held with the President 
of Belarus on 20 th May 2013. During the meeting, the President of B elarus has 
once again  expressed interest in India’s  participation in the privatization of the 
potash industry in  Belarus. Further, Joint Secretary(Eurasia), MEA, vide D.O. 
letter dated  30.05.2013, has suggested to invite a delegation from Belarus to 

  
 
discuss these matters. The Department of Fertilizers has conveyed to Embassy of 
India at Minsk that Indian side is ready to receive a delegation from Belarus during 
the week starting on 10 th June 2013 to discuss issues related with Potash 
Fertilizers. Following a visit of officers of Belarus Potash Company (BPC) in 
August 2013, RCF and other companies are examining their proposal. 
(iv) Co-operation with Canada:  Price Waterhouse Coopers were appointed 
as financial advisors for negotiating a potash off -take agreem ent with M/s. 
Encanto. Discussions with M/s. Encanto were held in the 1 st week of April 2013 
and they submitted a revised proposal along with a revised Potash Off -take 
Agreement for review of the Indian side. The documents submitted by M/s 
ENCANTO are under examination. 
A delegation of M/s ENCANTO visited Department of Fertilizers on 11 th & 12 th 
June 2013 and met Secretary (F).  Meetings were also held with them under the 
Chairmanship of JS(SG) alongwith RCF led consortium.  As an outcome of these 
meetings, a  draft of Principle terms and purchase and sales agreement was 
initiated between RCF (on behalf of Indian consortium) and M/s ENCANTO to 
finalize the Draft Off -Take Agreement. An aggregate off -take of 1.8 million tonne 
of MOP per annum  has been mentioned i n the Draft Agreement.  A copy of the 
draft agreement has been sent by RCF to Indian consortium to members for their 
review and necessary action.  In this connection, a meeting held on 2 nd July 2013 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary(F) with the RCF led con sortium to discuss 
the draft  agreement initiated by RCF (on behalf of consortium) and  
M/s ENCANTO. The members of the consortium were requested to intimate the 
details of commitment of off -take quantity within a week subject to the approval of 
their respective Boards. M/s RCF led consortium had further discussions with  
M/s ENCANTO on the terms of agree ment and M/s RCF has suggested calling 
M/s ENCANTO delegation to India for final discussions and prior to that have 
suggested to call for  meeting to be taken by Secretary (F) for consulting 
consortium members on the issue. The issue is under process. 
(v) Cooperation with Russia:  A proposal was submitted by the ACRON 
Group of Russia in November 2011 for co -operation with the Govt. of India and 
the Indian entities for development of Potash and phosphate deposits in Russia.  
Thereafter, a series of meetings we re held with ACRON Group on  20.10.11, 
9.11.11 and 25.5.12 and a detailed questionnaire was framed and was sent to the 
President and CEO of the ACRON Group in August 2012.  The President and 
CEO of the ACRON Group was informed, vide e -mail dated 10.5.13 that  Indian 
companies namely M/s. Jubilant, KRIBHCO and GNFC have shown preliminary 
interest in the proposals of ACRON Group.  Vide letter dated 31.5.13 received 

  
 
through e -mail, the President of ACRON informed that information on the said 
questionnaire has already been sent to M/s. RCF and Jubilant. He also invited the 
representatives of the interested Indian companies for visiting their mining sites in 
Russia in the week beginning 17 th of June 2013.  Subsequently the visit was 
deferred. Recently an AS & FA led d elegation consisting of representatives from 
RCF, FACT, EIL, FAI, KRIBHCO and NMDC visited mining sites of M/s ACRON 
from September 9 -12, 2013. The meeting of Sub -Group on Fertilizers was  on 9th 
September, 2013 in Moscow and the IRWGTEC  held on 2 -3 October , 2013.  
Further action is being taken on various proposals. 
(vi) Cooperation with Ukraine:   A high level delegation led by Secretar y(F) 
visited Ukraine during 11 th – 14th January 2013 to take up the matter with 
Ukrainian Govt. regarding supply of Urea to India and also to get investment by 
them in fertilizer sector.  Department of Commerce had  informed Department of 
Fertilizers about the visit of Ukrainian delegation to India to attend 2 nd Session of 
the India-Ukraine Working Group on Trade & Economic Cooperation  (IUWGTEC) 
on 20-21st March 2013.  First Meeting of the Joint Working Group was held with 
Ukrainian delegation on 20th March, 2013.  Further discussions are going on. 
(vii) Cooperation with  Iran: A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of 
Hon’ble MOS(I/C) for C&F on 28 th May, 2013 with the Iranian delegation led by 
Iranian Petroleum Minister.  In the said meeting, the following issues were raised 
with the Iranian delegation:-  
(i)  Assurance of getting National treatment to the Indian joint venture as 
is given to the Iranian Companies.  
(ii) Assured supply of gas at a fixed rate of 0.84 USD per mmbtu to the 
Joint Venture Company for 10 years.  
(iii) Assured gas supply to the joint venture for entire project life i.e. 25 
years at rate at which it would be supplied to local Iranian companies. 
(iv) Long Term Urea purchase arrangement. 
  An apprehension was expressed by Indian side about the sanctions 
imposed on Iran by US and the difficulties that would arise due to these sanctions 
in the implementation of Ammonia Urea Plant Joint Vent ure Project.  The 
Department of Fertilizers has already commissioned a Pre -feasibility study 
through PDIL, an Indian Govt. consultancy company (PSU) and have also 
associated Indian companies M/s. GNFC and RCF with the proposed project. 
Iranian delegation as sured that Indo -Iran Joint Venture will be given national 
treatment and will be treated in the same way as the Iranian companies are being 
treated. Supply of Gas to the Joint Venture would be at price of 700 Rial/Scm. The 
Iranian delegation was requested t o reply on long -term rice stability of the gas 

  
 
which has been made available to the joint ventures project. Both sides agreed for 
joint venture project at Assaluye. Meanwhile M/s PDIL have been awarded the 
contract for conducting prefeasibility study for s etting up gas based Ammonia 
Urea plant in Iran at a total cost of Rs 80 lakh which would be equally shared by 
RCF and GNFC and M/s IGC would serve as local consultant for the study. A 
PDIL led delegation was to visit Iran in first week of September, 2013 b ut due to 
an advisory from MEA, the visit has been postponed.  
(viii) Tunisia and Jordan : On the invitation of Mr. Mehdi Jomaa, Tunisian 
Minister of Industry, a delegation led by  Hon’ble MOS (I/C) (C&F) alongwith  
Secretary (F) and technical team from Fertilizer companies namely M/s 
Coromandel and M/s GSFC visited Tunisia during 11 th -12th July, 2013 to jointly 
inaugurate the TIFERT plant which is the most important Tunisia -India Joint 
Venture Project and  to explore further cooperation and the potential of new joint 
venture projects in the field of  phosphatic of fertilizers.  Before visiting Tunisia, 
Hon’ble MOS(I/C) (C&F) alongwith Secy(F) and representative of fertilizer PSU 
M/s RCF, visited Jordan during 09 th-10th July, 2013 on the invitation received from 
the Chairman of the Board of Jordan  Phosphate Mining Company (JPMC), a 
Govt. of Jordan company to visit Jordan with the purpose to :- 
(i) review the market conditions in India and the ways to improve them 
for the benefit of both sides i.e. JPMC and the Govt. of India 
(ii) Explore the potential of new joint venture projects leading to 
establishment of new phosphatic fertilizer plant for export of 
fertilizers. 
(iii) Presenting the future activities of JPMC and the infrastructural 
projects that would be needed to have them materialize. 
 As an outcome to the India delegation visit to Jordan, a draft EOI has been 
submitted by RCF for the proposed Joint Venture with JPMC and JAFCO and the 
same is under process. 
 (ix) Cooperation with  IRAQ : On the request of Ministry of Petroleum and  
Natural Gas, AS &FA of Department of Fertilizers accompanied the delegation led 
by Minister (PNG) to attend the 17 th Indian-Iraq Joint Commission Meeting (JCM) 
held at Baghdad during 7 -8th July, 2013 to exp lore the possibilities of Joint 
Venture on Fertilizer in Iraq.  During the discussions the Indian side showed 
interest in (i)setting up of  a JV project in Al-Qaim/Al-Anbar area for establishing a 
Urea and Phosphate unit ; and (ii) import of sulphur from Iraq. Meanwhile an Inter-
Ministerial meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary (East), MEA to 
review the actions taken subsequent to the 17 th India-Iraq Joint Commission 

  
 
Meeting and in preparation for the forthcoming visit of Prime Minister of Ira q to 
India on 23 rd August, 2013.  In the meeting, DOF was asked to share Draft Letter 
of Interest (LOI) and Confidentiality Agreement to establish proposed Urea Plant 
and Phosphate Fertilizer Unit as JV project in Al -Qaim/Al-Anbar area of Iraq. The 
same was forwarded to MEA and Ambassador of India to Iraq on 31.7.2013. 
However, the Iraqi side sent us a LOI and NDA on 12.8.2013 which had the 
approval of their Cabinet and was also signed by 4 -5 Indian companies for our 
comments so that if the same was agreeab le, it could be signed during the visit of 
Prime Minister of Iraq. The LOI/NDA was forwarded to RCF  for their comments 
and with some modifications it was sent back to us, The same after obtaining the 
approval of MOS (I&C) C&F, has been sent to MEA for nece ssary action at their 
end. Meanwhile, we have received an Expression of Interest from KRIBHCO to 
explore the possibility of investment in JV project for rock phosphate mining/ 
Phosphatic fertilizer project in Alkaim/Alanbar of Iraq which has been forwarded  to 
MEA for necessary action.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
31. The Committee noted that due to near total dependence on imports for 
Phosphatic fertilizer and its raw materials and full import dependence for MOP, the 
efforts are being made by the Government to encourage Government PSUs to 
establish joint ventures with the countries which are rich in raw material. The 
Committee had , therefore, expected that the Department  would provide suitable 
incentives to  the Public Sector companies and would actively  pursue the 
opportunities that exist with resource rich  countries for effective and expeditious  
development of assets and setting up of Joint Vent ure Fertilizer projects abroad.  
The Committee had also desired  that the Department of Fertilizers would take up 
the matter with a view to ensure that the joint ventures abroad are materialized at 
the earliest .  In its action taken reply , the Department of Fertilizers ha s given 
status of various joint ventures initiatives under taken or being taken by the 
Department for setting up of joint ventures abroad / development of assets abroad 
or to enter into long term agreement with foreign entities or to explore the 
possibility of investment in JV projects with foreign entities for supply of fertilizers 
to India . The Committee hope that the Department would continue to make its 
efforts for expeditious development of assets and setting up of Joint Ven ture 
Fertilizer projects abroad with a view to meet the demand of the farmers for 
phosphatic fertilizers in the country. However, the Committee are unhappy to note 
that the Department of Fertilizers  is silent on the issue of providing incentives to 
PSUs to set up joint ventures abroad  as recommended by the Committee. The 

  
 
Committee, therefore, reiterate its recommendation  in the matter and hope that  
Department of Fertilizers , being the nodal authority,  would encourage  PSUs and 
provide them all possible help and i ncentives to form joint ventures abroad to 
augment supply of phosphatic fertilizers or its input/ raw materials for the country. 
The Committee would like to apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in 
this regard. 
 
J. Creation of ‘Sovereign Wealth Fund’ 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
32. On the proposal of the Department of Fertilizers  regarding creation of ‘Sovereign 
Wealth Fund’, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 "The Committee  also note that the Department of Fertilizers has prepared a 
proposal for creation of a dedicated 'Sovereign Wealth Fund' for acquiring fertilizer 
assets abroad to augment supplies of fertilizers and fertilizer input/raw materials 
for the Country.  Since the proposed creation of  Fund would help in acquiring 
fertilizer assets abroad which is very essential for the country, the Committee 
would like the Department of Fertilizers to pursue vigorously with all the 
stakeholders in the matter to get it finalised at the earliest.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
33. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee , the 
Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"In o rder to secure long term interests of fertilizers for the country, DOF had 
submitted a proposal to DEA in January, 2012 for setting up of Sovereign Fund on 
the Fertilizers for acquiring fertilizers resources /assets aboard with an initial 
corpus of about Rs 5000 Crore. The modality of creation and operation of the fund 
was to be decided by the Ministry of Finance. The proposal was not favored by 
DEA as it was specifically for fertilizers sector. Meanwhile, DEA has circulated a 
concept note for setting up of  India Overseas Investment Corporation Ltd (IOICL), 
a wholly owned entity of Government of India, to invest in the ownership of  
resources/ assets overseas to create long term resource security.  The paid up 
capital of IOICL would be fixed Rs 10 Crore and fu nds will be raised through long-
term rupee bonds which will be subscribed to by PSUs from their surplus funds 
and commercial banks/financial Institution.  The proposed investment from PSU s 
in assets overseas would be submitted to INOIL which after taking th e approval of 
EFCs would submit it to its Board and the Board /CCEA would have the power to 

  
 
approve the investment.  The proposal is at various levels of processing and no 
time frame could be given as to when it would become operative." 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
34. The Committee noted that  the Department of Fertilizer s had prepared a 
proposal for creation of a dedicated "Sovereign Wealth Fund" for acquiring assets 
to augment supplies of fertilizers and fertilizers input/ raw materials for the 
country. The Committee had, therefore, desired that  the Department of Fertilizers 
would pursue the matter vigorously with all the stakeholders to get it finalised at 
the earliest. In its action taken reply, the Department of Fertilizers ha s stated that 
the proposal was not favored by  the Department of Economic Affairs ( DEA) as it 
was specifically for fertilizers sector.  Instead, DEA has circulated a concept note 
for setting up of India Overseas Investment Corporation Ltd (IOICL), a wholly 
owned entity of Government of India, to invest in the ownership of  resources/ 
assets overseas to create long term resource security  and the same is at various  
levels of processing . However, no time frame could be given as  to when it would 
become operative. Nevertheless, the Committee hope that the proposed creation 
of IOICL would also help the Department of Fertilizers in acquiring fertilizer assets 
abroad. Since acquisition of these assets are  absolutely essential for country, the 
Committee, therefore, expect the Department to pursue the matter vigorously with 
all concerned with a view  to expedite the  establishment of IOICL. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard.  
 
K. Diversion of Fertilizers for Non-Agricultural Purposes 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
35. While noting alleged diversion and smuggling of urea and other  fertilizers for non-
agricultural purposes, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
  "The Committee note  that about 10 -15% of urea is diverted for the non -
agricultural purposes.  There are reports of alleged diversion and smuggling of 
urea and other fertilizers from India to Nepal, Bangladesh and other neighboring 
countries. In this regard, the Department of Fertilizers has informed the 
Committee that several steps/measures have been taken/ are being t aken to curb 
the diversion and smuggling of fertilizers to neighboring countries. State 
Governments have been advised by the Department of Fertilizers to keep a strict 
vigil to check such activities through land and sea routes. Similarly, Union Home 
Ministry has also alerted Border guarding forces viz. BSF, ITBP, SSB, Assam 
Rifles etc. to maintain strict vigilance on the borders to check smuggling of 

  
 
fertilizers.  The Committee were also informed that the Department had   also 
written to State Governments particularly to the States touching the international 
borders to direct the police to see that there are no instances of black marketing 
of fertilizers, especially  of urea in their States.  Also through the weekly video 
conferencing with the State Governments, the Department of Fertilizers has 
repeatedly been instructing the State Governments to ensure that there is no 
divergence.  However, the Committee note that th e Department of Fertilizers do 
not have any field formation to check the divergence of fertilizers themselves. The 
Committee, therefore, would like to recommend that the Department should find 
out the feasibility of establishing an institutional mechanism in cooperation with 
the State Governments to take notice of instances of smuggling and divergence 
of fertilizers for non -agricultural purposes and to ensure stringent punishment for 
those who are involved in such activities. The Committee may be apprised o f the 
action taken by the Department in this regard." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
36. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"At present, due to limited staff, Department of Fertilizers has no wherewithal for 
establishing an institutional mechanism. But the State Governments are 
adequately empowered under the provisions of Fertilizers Control Order for taking 
necessary steps, procedure and legal actions to check diversion and smuggling of 
fertilizers on their part. Department of Fertilizers will continue to advise the State 
Government, Border Security Forces to keep a strict vigil and take necessary 
steps to check diversion and smuggling of subsidized fertilizers." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
37. The Committee note d that the Department of Fertilizers do not have any 
field formation to check the divergence of fertilizers themselves . The Committee 
had, therefore, recommended that Department of Fertilizers should find feasibility 
of establishing an institutional mechanism in cooperation with the State 
Governments, to take notice of instances of smuggling and divergence of 
fertilizers. In its action taken reply, the Department of Fertilizers ha s stated that at 
present due to limited staff, the Department of Fertilizers has no wherewithal for 
establishing an institutional scheme. However, the Department of Fertilizers would 
continue to advise the State Government and BSF to keep a strict vigil and take 
necessary steps to check diversion and smuggling of subsidized fertilizers.  
Notwithstanding the position explained by the Department of Fertilizers, the 

  
 
Committee are of the view that  establishment of an institutional mechanism would 
be essential for checking instances of smuggling and divergence of fertilizers  
effectively and efficiently . The Committee, therefore,  urge the Department of 
Fertilizers to examine the issue  in right perspective and find out the feasibility to 
set up an institutional mechanism for the purpose. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard.  
 
 
 

  
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Price Rise of Fertilizers  
 
  The Committee are dismayed to note the increasing trend of price rise of the P&K 
fertilizers in the recent years.  The Department of Fertilizers has attributed various 
reasons for increase in the prices of  fertilizers. According to the Department of 
Fertilizers, rise in the prices of imported raw material along with the depreciation of rupee 
against the dollar have led to the increase in the price of  fertilizers in recent years.  The 
increase in the price of  the oil and natural gas has also led to increase in the prices of 
fertilizers. However, the Committee are not entirely convinced with the reasons given by 
the Department of Fertilizers for the sharp  and abnormal rise in prices of fertilizers. 
Under the NBS policy, there is no mechanism to determine the reasonableness of MRP 
fixed by the fertilizer companies or any express provision for taking action against those 
unscrupulous manufacturers/ marketeers which  are raking up  undue profits as a result 
of fixation of very high  MRP. Needless to say, any increase in the prices of fertilizers 
adversely affects the farmers particularly  those belonging to the poor and marginal 
sections. The Committee, therefore, recommend that an effective mechanism should be 
put in place to examine/ scrutinize the reasonableness of the MRP fixed by the fertilizer 
companies. In this context, fertilizer companies should also be asked to submit the 
requisite information mandatorily about the cost of fertilizers on which subsidy is being  
claimed by them and  also justify the MRP of fertilizers fixed by them. In this regard, cost 
audit of the fertilizers produced/ manufactured by the companies should be compulsorily 
carried out. In case the MRP fixed by the companies is found unreasonable,  then the 
Department should take stern action against them and the subsidy given to them should 
either be restricted or even recovered from them.  The prices at which the fertilizers are 
being sold to the farmers in the retail market should be strictly moni tored by the 
Department in co-ordination with the State Governments and if anyone found selling the 
fertilizers above the printed MRP should be strictly dealt with under the  EC Act. An 
institutional mechanism to monitor the sale price of the fertilizers at  retail market to the 
farmers should be set up for the purpose.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 In order to monitor the reasonableness of MRPs of P&K fertilizers fixed by the 
fertilizer companies, it has been made mandatory for all the fertilizer companies to 

  
 
submit, along with their claims of subsidy, certified cost data in the prescribed format and 
as per the requirement. This has become effective from 1.4.2013. 
In cases, where, after scrutiny, unreasonableness of MRP is established or where 
there is no correlation between the cost of production or acquisition and the MRP printed 
on the bags, the subsidy may be restricted or denied even if the product  is otherwise 
eligible for subsidy under NBS scheme.  In proven case of abuse of subsidy mechanism, 
DOF, on the recommendation of IMC, may exclude any company from the NBS Scheme. 
The Cost Data from some of the fertilizer companies has since been received.  
After analysis of the requisite data, the Department will take appropriate action under the 
NBS Policy. 
   [MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (Department of Fertilizers)  
  O.M. NO. H-11021/19/2013-PARL. dated: 01-11-2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
New Pricing Scheme  
 
 The Committee note  that New Pricing Scheme (NPS) for urea units came in to 
existence w.e.f. 01.04.2003 replacing the erstwhile Retention Price System. The 
Committee also note that there is an imperative need to set up new urea units and 
expansion of existing urea units for augmenting the domestic production capacity of urea 
to meet the growing demand of urea for enhancing the agricultural production in the 
country over the years.  The Committee are, therefore, of the view that formulation of 
policy for existing urea unit beyond stage III of New Pricing Scheme (NPS) is essential to 
achieve self-sufficiency in domestic production of urea which is also one of the cherished 
goals which the Government plans to achieve by the end of Twelfth Plan period.  Hence, 
the Committee recommend that the formulation of the policy for existing urea units 
beyond Stage III of New Pricing Scheme may be expedited. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
      The policy for stage III of New Pricing Scheme (NPS -III) was effective from 
01.10.2006 till 31.03. 2010. The provisions of Policy for Stage -III of NPS have been 
extended beyond the validity  period of NPS -III i.e. 31.03.2010 till further orders.  The 
matter of formulation of policy for the existing urea units beyond stage -III of New Pricing 
Scheme (NPS) i s under consideration of Group of Ministers constituted to review the 
fertilizer policy, the meeting of which was held on 5 th June, 2013 and during the meeting, 

  
 
it was decided that further deliberations on the issues are required before formulation of 
policy for existing urea units beyond New Pricing Scheme. 
 
   [MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (Department of Fertilizers)  
  O.M. NO. H-11021/19/2013-PARL. dated: 01-11-2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
 
New Investment Policy- 2012 
 
  The Committee note that the New Investment Policy -2012 has since been notified 
by the Government on 2 nd January 2013. The initiative of the policy is to facilitate fresh 
investment in urea sector to reduce India’s import dependency in urea sector. The  policy 
not only supports gas based plants but it also supports revival of closed units  in the 
country. It encourages investment by Indian industry in Joint Venture abroad in resource 
rich countries. The Committee hope that the New Investment Policy would address 
comprehensively all the issues which are affecting the growth of fertilizer sector and 
reduce the ga p between the indigenous production and import of urea in the country. 
The Committee, however, expect that the New Investment Policy would be implemented 
effectively and expeditiously. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan 
formulated by the Government in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
       The Government has announced New Investment Policy -2012 on 02.01.2013 to 
attract investment and enhance domestic production of Urea. Under this policy, the 
Government has received 14 investment proposals from various fertilizer companies 
including PSUs/Cooperatives which are under consideration.  As per deliberation and 
discussion held in the meeting on 01.07.2013 under Chairmanship of PS to Hon’ble 
Prime Minister, it was decided to mov e an amendment in New Investment Policy, 2012 
through CCEA for substituting the phrase “guaranteed buyback” with expression that 
subsidies will be given only upon domestic sale as at present with proper safeguards.  
The draft CCEA Note has been circulated o n 21 st August, 2013 for Inter -Ministerial 
consultation before placing it for consideration of CCEA. 
 
   [MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (Department of Fertilizers)  
  O.M. NO. H-11021/19/2013-PARL. dated: 01-11-2013] 
 

  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para 25 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
Revival of Closed Fertilizer Units  
 
  The Committee note  that there are five closed units of Fertilizer Corporation of 
India Ltd. (FCIL) at Sindri, Talcher, Ramagundam , Gorakhpur and Korba and three 
closed units of Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Ltd. (HFCL) at Durgapur, Barauni and 
Haldia. The Government of India decided to close these units in 2002. In addition, one 
unit in the private sector namely Duncans Industrie s Limited (DIL) was closed down in 
2002. All these units were closed down as these companies were consistently making 
losses due to a variety of reasons  such as technological obsolescence,  lack of 
investment on up-gradation/modernization, power shortage etc. However, the Committee 
were informed that the efforts are being made to revive these closed units of FCIL/HFCL. 
The Committee were informed that after revival of all the units of FCIL and HFCL, the 
production of urea will increase approx. by 10.16 milli on tonnes.  Keeping in view the 
significant role which is expected to be  played by these units after their revival, in 
augmenting the production of urea in the country,  the Committee regret to note the slow 
progress made by the Government in  this regard and the units are still not revived even 
after a lapse of more than 12 years. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
process of revival of closed units of fertilizers  be expedited with in a fixed time frame. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Revival of the closed units of FCIL and HFCL: 
 
In 2008, Cabinet approved to revive Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited (FCIL) 
and Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Limited (HFCL) units subject to non -recourse to 
Government funding and to consider write off of GOI loan & interest to the extent 
required, subject to submission of fully tied up proposals for final decision on waiver.  The 
revival of these closed units would be through nomination route by PSUs and through 
bidding route by private sector. Sindri, Talcher and Ramagundam Units of FCIL to be 
revived on nomination basis.  Gorakhpur & Korba units of FCIL and Durgapur, Haldia,  
Barauni of HFCL to be revived through bidding route. 
2. The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs ( CCEA) had in August, 2011 
approved the Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) for revival of all the Units of FCIL and 
HFCL. DRS envisaged revival of Talcher Unit  by a consortium of M/s.Rashtriya 

  
 
Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF), M/s Coal India Limited (CIL) and M/s Gas 
Authority of India Limited (GAIL), revival of Ramagundam Unit by M/s. Engineers India 
Limited (EIL) and M/s. National Fertilizers Limited (NFL ) and revival of Sindri unit by M/s 
Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL). 
3. CCEA in its meeting held on  9.5.2013, inter-alia, approved waiver of Government 
of India loan and interest to facilitate FCIL to arrive at positive net worth. This enabled 
FCIL to get de -registered from the purview of Board For Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction (BIFR). Proposal/action plan on revival of HFCL units is to be taken up 
once revival of FCIL units comes on track. 
4. For Talcher unit, it is proposed to establish two joint venture (JV) companies viz. 
First company for upstream coal gasification section with GAIL and second company 
comprising RCF, CIL and FCIL for downstream section of Ammonia -urea, Nitric Acid, 
Ammonia Nitrate plants, off sites and utilities. The M emorandum of Understanding 
(MOU) among consortium PSUs i.e. CIL, RCF, GAIL and FCIL, has been signed on 
5.9.2013. 
5. For Ramagundam Project, EIL & NFL are having discussions with the technology 
providers, whose bids have already been received.  EIL itself would take up the works of 
Engineering and Project Construction for the project. 
6. For Sindri unit, it has been decided to entrust the assignment of R&R activities at 
Sindri Unit to M/s. Project & Development India Limited (PDIL) and PDIL have submitted 
their offer for the assignment to SAIL on 20.09.2013 for their examination and approval, 
before Work Order is issued to PDIL for the R&R activities. 
 
   [MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (Department of Fertilizers)  
  O.M. NO. H-11021/19/2013-PARL. dated: 01-11-2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para 28 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Joint Ventures Abroad  
 
  The Committee note that due to near total dependence on imports for Phosphatic  
fertilizer and its raw materials and full import dependence for MOP, the efforts are being 
made by the Government to encourage Government PSUs to establish joint ventures 
with the countries which are rich in raw material   with the assurance to buy/ off ta ke the 
fertilizers and fertilizer inputs regularly from them for using as fertilizer/ producing 
fertilizers indigenously. The Committee expect that the Department  would provide 
suitable incentives to  the Public Sector companies and would actively  pursue th e 

  
 
opportunities that  exist with resource rich  countries like Ghana, Indonesia, Nigeria, 
Oman, Canada, Iran, Russia, Tunisia, South Africa etc. for effective and expeditious  
development of assets and setting up of Joint Venture Fertilizer projects abroad. T he 
Committee would further like the Department to take up the matter with a view to ensure 
that these joint ventures abroad are materalised expeditiously. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The following is the current status of the JV initiatives being taken by DOF for 
setting up of JV abroad /development of assets abroad or to enter into long term 
agreement with foreign entities for supply of fertilizer to India : 
(i) Co-operation with Ghana:  A Secretary (F) le d delegation had visited 
Ghana on 24th – 26th June 2013 to discuss with Ghanian Authorities on draft Joint 
Venture Agreement. During the visit, the Ghanian side was reminded of the draft 
JV agreement sent by RCF to Ghanian side long time back on which they are yet 
to respond. The main issue was related to availability of  gas and its price. The 
Ghanaian side was also reminded of sticking to the 15 th September, 2013 
deadline for signing of the JV agreement.  
(ii) Co-operation with Togo:  A Secretary(F) led delegation had visited Togo 
on 24th – 26th June 2013 to discuss with Togolese authorities participation  of the 
Indian Fertilizer entities in mining and production of Phosphate in Togo.   
Meanwhile, a letter from MO S(IC) for Chemical and fertilizers has also gone to 
Minister of Transport, Mines and Energy, Govt. of Togo, intimating him that a 
questionnaire containing the details of information required by the  Indian side for 
formulation of specific proposals for deve lopment of Carbonated Rock 
Phosphate deposits has already been sent to Govt. of Togo and also informing 
him about awaiting the visit of Togo lese delegation to India with the detailed 
information in order to discuss the matter further. In response to the 
questionnaire, High Commission, Accra has sent a message from Minister for 
Mines and Energy of Republic of Togo w.r.t. the  details of Mines and reserves of 
minerals which is under process. 
(iii) Co-operation with Belarus : A Secretary(F) led delegation visited Bel arus 
in January 2013 to discuss the following issues:-  
(a) Sale of Shares of Belaruskali. 
(b) Long-term purchase agreement. 
(c) Indian investment in Grodno Azot Project.  
(d) Investment in New Potash Mines of Belarus especially Petrikov Mines.  
 

  
 
But the Indian delegation  was disappointed as no concrete decision could be 
taken on any of the four issues mentioned above.  Recently, the Hon’ble speaker 
of Lok Sabha visited Belarus and a meeting  was held with the President of 
Belarus on 20th May 2013. During the meeting, the President of Belarus has once 
again expressed interest in India’s  participation in the privatization of the potash 
industry in Belarus.  urther, Joint Secretary(Eurasia), MEA, vide D.O. letter dated  
30.05.2013,  has suggested to invite a delegation from Belar us to discuss these 
matters. The Department of Fertilizers has conveyed to Embassy of India at Minsk 
that Indian side is ready to receive a delegation from Belarus during the week 
starting on 10 th June 2013 to discuss issues related with Potash Fertilizers . 
Following a visit of officers of Belarus Potash Company (BPC) in August 2013, 
RCF and other companies are examining their proposal. 
(iv) Co-operation with Canada:  Price Waterhouse Coopers were appointed 
as financial advisors for negotiating a potash off -take agreement with M/s. 
Encanto. Discussions with M/s. Encanto were held in the 1 st week of April 2013 
and they submitted a revised proposal along with a revised Po tash Off -take 
Agreement for review of the Indian side. The documents submitted by M/s 
ENCANTO are under examination. 
A delegation of M/s ENCANTO visited Department of Fertilizers on 11 th & 12 th 
June 2013 and met Secretary (F).  Meetings were also held with them under the 
Chairmanship of JS(SG) alongwith RCF led consortium.  As an outcome of these 
meetings, a draft of Principle terms and purchase and sales agreement was 
initiated between RCF (on behalf of Indian consortium) and M/s  ENCANTO to 
finalize the Draft Off -Take Agreement. An aggregate off -take of 1.8 million tonne 
of MOP per annum  has been mentioned in the Draft Agreement.  A copy of the 
draft agreement has been sent by RCF to Indian consortium to members for their 
review and necessary action. In this connection, a meeting held on 2 nd July 2013 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary(F) with the RCF led consortium to discuss 
the draft agreement initiated by RCF (on behalf of consortium) and M/s 
ENCANTO. The members of the consort ium were requested to intimate the 
details of commitment of off-take quantity within a week subject to the approval of 
their respective Boards. M/s RCF led consortium had further discussions with M/s 
ENCANTO on the terms of agreement  and M/s RCF has sugges ted calling M/s 
ENCANTO delegation to India  for final discussions and prior to that have 
suggested to call for  meeting to be taken by Secretary (F) for consulting 
consortium members on the issue. The issue is under process. 
(v) Cooperation with Russia:  A proposal was submitted by the ACRON 
Group of Russia in November 2011 for co -operation with the Govt. of India and 

  
 
the Indian entities for development of Potash and phosphate deposits in Russia.  
Thereafter, a series of meetings were held with ACRON Group on  20.10.11, 
9.11.11 and 25.5.12 and a detailed questionnaire was framed and was sent to the 
President and CEO of the ACRON Group in August 2012.  The President and 
CEO of the ACRON Group was informed, vide e -mail dated 10.5.13 that Indian 
companies namely M/ s. Jubilant, KRIBHCO and GNFC have shown preliminary 
interest in the proposals of ACRON Group.   Vide letter dated 31.5.13 received 
through e -mail, the President of ACRON informed that information on the said 
questionnaire has already been sent to M/s. RCF and Jubilant. He also invited the 
representatives of the interested Indian companies for visiting their mining sites in 
Russia in the week beginning 17 th of June 2013.  Subsequently the visit was 
deferred. Recently an AS & FA led delegation consisting of re presentatives from 
RCF, FACT, EIL, FAI, KRIBHCO and NMDC visited mining sites of M/s ACRON 
from September 9 -12, 2013. The meeting of Sub -Group on Fertilizers was 9 th 
September, 2013 in Moscow and the IRWGTEC  held on 2 -3 October, 2013.  
Further action is being taken on various proposals. 
(vi) Cooperation with Ukraine:   A high level delegation led by Secretary(F) 
visited Ukraine during 11th – 14th January 2013 to take up the matter with 
Ukrainian Govt. regarding supply of Urea to India and also to get investment by  
them in fertilizer sector.  Department of Commerce had  informed Department of 
Fertilizers about the visit of Ukrainian delegation to India to attend 2 nd Session of 
the India-Ukraine Working Group on Trade & Economic Cooperation (IUWGTEC) 
on 20-21st March 2013.  First Meeting of the Joint Working Group was held with 
Ukrainian delegation on 20th March, 2013.  Further discussions are going on. 
(vii) Cooperation with  Iran: A meeting was held under the Chairmanship of 
Hon’ble MOS(I/C) for C&F  on 28 th May, 2013 with th e Iranian delegation led by 
Iranian Petroleum Minister.  In the said meeting, the following issues were raised 
with the Iranian delegation:-  
(i) Assurance of getting National treatment to the Indian joint venture 
as is given to the Iranian Companies.  
(ii) Assured supply of gas at a fixed rate of 0.84 USD per mmbtu to the 
Joint Venture Company for 10 years.  
(iii) Assured gas supply to the joint venture for entire project life i.e. 25 
years at rate at which it would be supplied to local Iranian 
companies. 
(iv) Long Term Urea purchase arrangement. 
 
An apprehension was expressed by Indian side about the sanctions imposed on 
Iran by US and the difficulties that would arise due to these sanctions in the 
implementation of Ammonia Urea Plant Joint Venture Project.  The Department of 

  
 
Fertilizers has already commissioned a Pre -feasibility study through PDIL, an 
Indian Govt. consultancy company (PSU) and have also associated Indian 
companies M/s. GNFC and RCF with the proposed project. Iranian delegation 
assured that Indo -Iran Joint Venture will be given national treatment and will be 
treated in the same way as the Iranian companies are being treated.  Supply of 
Gas to the Joint Venture would  be at price of 700 Rial/Scm.  The Iranian 
delegation was requested to reply on long -term rice stability of the gas which has 
been made available to the joint ventures project.  Both sides agreed for joint 
venture project at Assaluye. Meanwhile M/s PDIL have been awarded the contract 
for conducting prefeasibility study for setting up gas based Ammonia Urea plant in 
Iran at a total cost of Rs 80 lakh which would be equally shared by RCF and 
GNFC and M/s IGC would serve as local consultant for the study. A PDIL led 
delegation was to visit Iran  in first week of September, 2013 but due to an 
advisory from MEA, the visit has been postponed.  
(viii) Tunisia and Jordan :- On the invitation of Mr. Mehdi Jomaa, Tunisian 
Minister of Industry, a delegation led by  Hon’ble MOS (I/C) (C&F) alongwith 
Secretary (F) and technical team from Fertilizer companies namely M/s  
Coromandel and M/s GSFC visited Tunisia during 11 th -12th July, 2013 to jointly 
inaugurate the TIFERT plant which is the most important Tunisia -India Joint 
Venture Project and  to explore further cooperation and the potential of new joint 
venture projects in the field of  phosphatic of fertilizers.  Before visiting Tunisia, 
Hon’ble MOS(I/C) (C&F) alongwith Secy(F) and representative of fertilizer PSU 
M/s RCF, visited Jordan during 09 th-10th July, 2013 on the invitation received from 
the Chairman of the Board of Jordan  Phosphate Mining Company (JPMC), a 
Govt. of Jordan company to visit Jordan with the purpose to :- 
(i) review the market conditions in India and the ways to improve them for the  
benefit of both sides i.e. JPMC and the Govt. of India 
(ii) Explore the potential of new joint venture projects leading to establishment 
of new phosphatic fertilizer plant for export of fertilizers. 
(iii) Presenting the future activities of JPMC and the infrastructural projects that 
 would be needed to have them materialize. 
 As an outcome to the India delegation visit to Jordan,  a draft EOI has been 
submitted by RCF for the  proposed Joint Venture with JPMC and JAFCO and the 
same is under process. 
 
 (ix) Cooperation with  IRAQ : On the request of Ministry of Petroleum and  
Natural Gas, AS &FA of Department of Fertilizers accompanied the delegation led 

  
 
by Minister (PNG) to attend the 17 th Indian-Iraq Joint Commission Meeting (JCM) 
held at Baghdad during 7 -8th July, 2013 to explore the possibilities of Joint 
Venture on Fertilizer in Iraq.  During the discussions the Indian side showed 
interest in (i)setting  up of  a JV project in Al-Qaim/Al-Anbar area for establishing a 
Urea and Phosphate unit ; and (ii) import of sulphur from Iraq. Meanwhile an Inter-
Ministerial meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary (East), MEA to 
review the actions taken subsequent to the 17 th India-Iraq Joint Commission 
Meeting and in preparation for the forthcoming visit of Prime Ministe r of Iraq to 
India on 23rd August, 2013.   In the meeting, DOF was asked to share Draft Letter 
of Interest (LOI) and Confidentiality Agreement to establish proposed Urea Plant 
and Phosphate Fertilizer Unit as JV project in Al -Qaim/Al-Anbar area of Iraq. Th e 
same was forwarded to MEA and Ambassador of India to Iraq on 31.7.2013. 
However, the Iraqi side sent us a LOI and NDA on 12.8.2013 which had the 
approval of their Cabinet and was also signed by 4 -5 Indian companies for our 
comments so that if the same wa s agreeable, it could be signed during the visit of 
Prime Minister of Iraq. The LOI/NDA was forwarded to RCF  for their comments 
and with some modifications it was sent back to us, The same after obtaining the 
approval of MOS (I&C) C&F, has been sent to ME A for necessary action at their 
end. Meanwhile, we have received an Expression of Interest from KRIBHCO to 
explore the possibility of investment in JV project for rock phosphate mining/ 
Phosphatic fertilizer project in Alkaim/Alanbar of Iraq which has been forwarded to 
MEA for necessary action. 
   [MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (Department of Fertilizers)  
  O.M. NO. H-11021/19/2013-PARL. dated: 01-11-2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para 31 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
 The Committee  also note that the Department of Fertilizers has prepared a 
proposal for creation of a dedicated 'Sovereign Wealth Fund' for acquiring fertilizer 
assets abroad to augment supplies of fertilizers and fertilizer input/raw materials for the 
Country. Since the proposed creation of Fund would help in acquiring fertilizer assets 
abroad which is very essential for the country, the Committee would like the Department 
of Fertilizers to pursue vigorously with all the stakeholders in the matter to get it finalised 
at the earliest.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the 
Department in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 

  
 
 In order to secure long term interests of fertilizers for the country, DOF had 
submitted a proposal to DEA in January, 2012 for setting up of Sovereign Fund on the 
Fertilizers for acquiring fertilizers resources /assets aboard with an initial corpus of about 
Rs 5000 Crore. The modality of creation and operation of the fund was to be decided by 
the Ministry of Finance. The proposal was not favored by DEA as it was specifically for 
fertilizers sector. Meanwhile, DEA has circulated a concept note for setting up of India 
Overseas Investment Corporation Ltd (IOICL), a wholly owned entity of Government of 
India, to invest in the ownership of  resources/ assets overseas to create long term 
resource security. The paid up capital of IOICL would be fixed Rs 10 Crore and funds will 
be raised through long-term rupee bonds which will be subscribed to by PSUs from their 
surplus funds and commercial banks/f inancial Institution. The proposed investment from 
PSUs in assets overseas would be submitted to INOIL which after taking the approval of 
EFCs would submit it to its Board and the Board /CCEA would have the power to 
approve the investment.  The proposal is at various levels of processing and no time 
frame could be given as to when it would become operative. 
 
   [MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (Department of Fertilizers)  
  O.M. NO. H-11021/19/2013-PARL. dated: 01-11-2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para 34 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
ADULTERATION OF FERTILIZERS 
 
 The Committee note that there have been various complaints from farmers 
regarding improper mixing in DAP fertilizer. In this regard, the Committee were  informed 
that the responsibility of getting the samples tested has been given to the State 
Governments under Fertilizer Control Order (FCO). There are 74 labs with various State 
Governments where they randomly get the sample tested. They are authorized to  take 
action against the defaulters under FCO. However, it has come to the notice of the 
Committee that these labs do not function quite often and the farmers are asked to visit 
from one lab to another to get the fertilizers tested.   At the time of cultiva tion of crops, 
farmers do not have much time to visit from one laboratory to another to get the 
fertilizers tested.  
 
 The Committee regret to note that there is no mandatory requirement or 
mechanism for checking the quality of fertilizers at the factory o r manufacturers’ level till 

  
 
it reaches to the farmers for usage. The superior quality of fertilizer is absolutely 
essential to maintain the fertility of soil for sustained growth of agricultural production.  
The Committee feel that Department of Fertilizers  should impress upon the State 
Governments to ensure that the labs under their control are well equipped and 
functioning properly all the time and especially during the time of cultivation of crops. 
The Committee, therefore,  recommend that the Government s hould work out a 
mechanism in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture and the State Governments to 
make testing of fertilizers mandatory at every possible level right from the factory level till 
it reach to the farmers. The Committee also recommend that the Department of 
Fertilizers should look into the possibility of getting opened  atleast one laboratory in all 
the districts of the country especially in those districts where consumption of fertilizers is 
comparatively more and provide all the   assistance to the State Governments for that 
purpose. The setting up of laboratories at  district level would facilitate farmers to get the 
fertilizers checked from the nearest laboratory. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the initiatives taken by the Government in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i)  Fertilizer Quality Control Laboratories are established by the State Government under 
clause 29 of the Fertilizer Control Order 1985, to analyse the fertilizer samples drawn by 
the fertilizer inspe ctors from the manufacturing units and their dealers.   In addition, four 
laboratories have also been established by the Central Government which mainly 
analyse the fertilizer samples drawn by the fertilizer inspectors from the ships/containers 
of imported fertilizers undergoing discharge at various ports in the country. Total 74 
laboratories with an annual analyzing capacity of 1.30 lakh samples are functioning in 
the country as on date.  
(ii) Ministry of Agriculture, from time to time, issues advisories/di rections to all the 
State Governments to ensure that laboratories under their control are well equipped and 
function properly. Recently also, an advisory in respect of strengthening/up -grading of 
fertilizer quality control mechanism has been issued to all the State Governments. 
Copies of the letters issued in this regard are enclosed as Annexure-II. 
(iii) A scheme ‘National Project for Management of Soil Health & Fertility’ has been 
under implementation by Ministry of Agriculture since 2008 -09. Under the scheme, there 
are provisions of Strengthening/up -grading existing state fertilizer quality control 
laboratories, setting up of new fertilizer quality control laboratories by state governments 
and setting up of fertilizer testing laboratories for advisory pur poses, under the 
private/cooperative sector. 

  
 
Under the scheme, during 11 th plan, total 14 new fertilizer quality control 
laboratories have been sanctioned in various states and funds for strengthening of 45 
existing laboratories have been sanctioned. Copie s of the details are enclosed as 
Annexure-III and Annexure-IV respectively. In addition, Madhya Pradesh Government 
is also establishing 6 new fertilizer quality control laboratories at each divisional level in 
Shahdol, Rewa, Sagar, Ujjain, Morena and Hoshangabad. 
This scheme is proposed to be implemented during 12 th plan as a part of  
Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) under National Mission for Sustainable 
Agriculture (NMSA). 
 
   [MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (Department of Fertilizers)  
  O.M. NO. H-11021/19/2013-PARL. dated: 01-11-2013] 
  

  
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY  
 
 
- NIL - 
  

  
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
Recommendation No. 4 
 
Availability of Fertilizers  
 
  The Committee were informed  that the weekly video conference is conducted 
jointly by Department of Agriculture, Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Railways and 
Ministry of Shipping with State Agriculture officials with regard to all issues related to 
agricultural production, productivity and inputs such as availability of fertilizers. The video 
conference is held at official level only and farmers or Panchayats do not participate in 
such video conferences. The Committee were also informed that logistically it would not 
be possible to hold video conferences at the district level as the State Government are 
supposed to take data from the districts. It also came to the notice of the Committee that 
the Department of Fertilizers does not have any direct interaction with the farmers as 
they do not have any field officers and the Department has to depend  entirely upon the 
officers of the State Government for getting the required information. The  Committee 
were further informed that the teams constituted by the Department of Fertilizers conduct 
on field inspections to see whether the shops are available,  weights of the fertilizer bags 
are correct or not and at what prices fertilizers are being sold etc. Nevertheless, the 
Committee are of the view that the ground reality with regard to availa bility of fertilizers 
and on related issues could be ascertained only by way of direct interaction with the 
farmers at the Village or Panchayat levels. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the farmers or their representatives from Panchayats  should invariably be involved and 
interacted in weekly or monthly video conferences organized by the Department of 
Fertilizers. Such conferences should be held at the District level and an Action Taken 
Report on the issues jointly reviewed by officials of the Govern ment of India and the 
State Governments should be placed on the website of the Department. The Committee  
also recommend that Department   should also find out the feasibility to  establish an 
annual programme for regular field visits of their own field offic ers for interaction directly 
with the farmers in order to get first hand information about the demand, availability and 
prices of fertilizers and on related issues.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Department of Agriculture &  Cooperation organizes weekly video conferences 
with State Governments in which officials of State Government Agriculture department, 
responsible for availability of fertilizers in their respective States, participate. Officials of 

  
 
Department of Fertilizer s also attend these conferences. It is not possible to involve 
farmers or their representatives in these conferences  or holding video conferences at 
District level because Department of Fertilizers does not have any Field Officers even at 
State level. 
 
 As regards regular field visits by the officers of this Department are concerned, 
this Department formed  teams to visit the States allocated to them and review the 
following items with the concerned State Government authorizes and submit report 
periodically:- 
i. Inspection of Mobile Based Fertilizer Monitoring System. 
ii. Fertilizer availability at state as well as District level. 
iii. Quantity verification at godowns of dealers/ companies. 
iv. Quality of fertilizer bags. 
v. Black marketing, Hoarding and smuggling of fertilizers. 
vi. Diversion of fertilizers for other than agriculture use like industrial use. 
vii. Interactions with non-officials and farmers to take feedback. 
viii. Verification of printed MRP and MRP shown by the companies in FMS. 
ix. Updation of data in Fertilizer Monitoring System. 
x. Shortage/ leakage in quantity due to poor handling. 
xi. Updation of dealer’s data in FMS/mFMS. 
xii. General awareness of rules by dealers. 
xiii. Quality of fertilizers/ sales of non-standard fertilizer. 
 
 
   [MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (Department of Fertilizers)  
  O.M. NO. H-11021/19/2013-PARL. dated: 01-11-2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
  The Committee were informed that there was no problem about the availability of 
fertilizers to the farmers in the last Kharif season and overall availability of fertilizer was 
comfortable. However, contrary to the claim of the Department of Fertilizers, it came to 
the notice of the  Committee that the farmers in some parts of the country like in Medak 
and Nizamabad in Andhra Pradesh have to stand in long queues outside the fertilizer 
shop just to get one bag of fertilizer which sometimes they fail to get.  In the action taken 
reply to the Recommen dation No.9 of the Twenty Eighth Report of the Committee on 
‘Production, Demand and Availability of Fertilizers and its Distribution’, the Department 

  
 
had stated that the supply (availability) of fertilizers is adequate and comfortable.  
However, on careful analysis of demand and supply of fertilizers during the year 2012, 
as reflected in the statement (Annexure -VII), the Committee have noted that the overall 
supply (availability) of fertilizers is not as per the demand (requirement), irrespective of 
sale of fertilizers. In fact, the availability of Urea, DAP, MOP and NPK in most of the 
States is less than the demand (requirement) which clearly indicates the shortage of 
fertilizers in the States. As for example, the demand (requirement) of urea in 
Maharashtra is 2190.00 MT whereas only 1779.42 MT of Urea was available. Similarly, 
as against the demand of 1301.00 MT of DAP, 482.00 MT of MOP and 1522.00 MT of 
NPK only 743.49 MT of DAP, 314.99 MT of MOP and 1325.73 of NPK was available. 
Similar is the position of demand and supply in reality in Karnataka, Kerala, 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, and other States as well. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department should find out the reported shortage of fertilizer in various parts of 
the country and simultaneous ly should take effective measures to streamline the 
movement and distribution system in coordination with the officials of the State 
Government concerned with a view to ensure timely and adequate supply of fertilizer to 
the farmers at affordable prices.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Status of requirement, availability and sales of Urea, DAP, MOP and NPK 
during the year 2012 -13 is placed at Annexure-I. It may be seen from the table that 
availability of Urea, DAP, MOP and NPK during the year has been comfortable and more 
than the sales. The demand for the fertilizer is projected by the States one or two months 
in advance of commencement of the next season. For the annual demand for fertilizers, 
the States is largely dependent upon the ideal condition. It is g enerally seen that 
fertilizers are consumed during 2 -3 months window in each season. Therefore, though 
the States give projection for all the months but lift less than projected requirement 
during last months. 
  
The Department of Fertilizers tries to ensur e availability of fertilizers as per the 
assessed demand by the State Governments at the start of the season but the supply/ 
availability of fertilizers to a particular State not only depend upon its assessed demand 
but also lifting of fertilizers by the S tates by placing orders with the fertilizer companies 
through their marketing institutions and actual sales at dealer level in States. The 
availability is also a factor of sales.  Here, it is pertinent to mention that actual sales is 
reflective of actual demand during the season, whereas the initial projection at the start 
of season is mere an assessment. Assessed demand for fertilizers is largely dependent 
upon ideal conditions, wh ereas the sale are a reflection of actual conditions prevailing 

  
 
during the season which may change the actual demand of fertilizers by farmers on real 
time basis. Therefore, there is always a gap between the assessed demand, actual 
availability and sales o f fertilizers. Hence, availability of fertilizers may appear to be low 
as compared to requirement but is quite comfortable vis-a vis sales. 
 
   [MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (Department of Fertilizers)  
  O.M. NO. H-11021/19/2013-PARL. dated: 01-11-2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para 19 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
 
 The Committee also observe that there is huge variation in the actual sales in 
comparison to availability (supply) of fertilizers. As for example, the availability of Urea in 
Haryana was 1542.77 MT, whereas, corresponding sales was 1461.06 MT only. 
Similarly, as against the availability of 776.72 MT of DAP, 21.45 MT of MOP and 23.09 
MT of NPK and only 473.82 MT of DAP, 18.36 MT of MOP and 17.19 MT of NPK was 
sold .   The Committee, therefore, come to the conclusion that the requirement of 
fertilizers assessed by States is unrealistic and inflated if we go by the present way of 
assessment. The Committee, therefore, desire that a scientific mechanism need to be 
developed for working out a realistic assessment of requirement of fertilizers in the 
country. This is all the more essential in order to restrict import of fertilizers particularly 
P&K fertilizers so as to check outgo of precious foreign exchange.  Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should take initiative in 
cooperation with the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation to evolve a scientific 
process for realistic assessment of requirement of fertilizers.  The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Various measures taken by Ministry of Agriculture to ensure the process of 
assessment of requirement of fertilizers more rational, scientific and realistic are as 
follow: 
(i)  The Ministry modified the process of assessment of requirement of fertilizers to 
make it more scientific by introduction of new proformas and modification of few earlier 
proformas (used to assess requirement of fertilizers). These new and modified 
proformas have been sent to States for assessing the requirement of fertilizers for last 
three cropping seasons. 

  
 
The States have been requested to compile the information in these new & modified 
proformas related to gross cropped area, area under irrigation, area  under crops at 
block level and information pertaining to deficiency in terms of nutrients, requirements in 
terms of NPK nutrients etc. at district level . These are the factors, which primarily 
govern the requirement of fertilizers. States have been compil ing information in these 
new/modified proformas for last three cropping seasons. 
(ii)   State Governments project requirement of fertilizers more or less as per the 
requirement of NPK nutrients and availability of fertilizers in the states are made as per 
the projected requirement. But due to unprecedented increase in prices of P&K fertilizers 
as compared to the price of Urea (‘N’) has led to demand destruction in P&K fertilizers. 
Thus, sales of P&K fertilizers vis -à-vis their availability are low despite t hese being 
required as per the actual status of soil health.  
 
   [MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (Department of Fertilizers)  
  O.M. NO. H-11021/19/2013-PARL. dated: 01-11-2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para 22 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
 
DIVERSION OF FERTILIZERS FOR NON-AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES 
  The Committee note that about 10-15% of urea is diverted for the non-agricultural 
purposes. There are reports of alleged diversion and smuggling  of urea and other 
fertilizers from India to Nepal, Bangladesh and other neighboring countries. In this 
regard, the Department of Fertilizers has informed the Committee that several 
steps/measures have been taken/ are being taken to curb the diversion and  smuggling 
of fertilizers to neighboring countries. State Governments have been advised by the 
Department of Fertilizers to keep a strict vigil to check such activities through land and 
sea routes. Similarly, Union Home Ministry has also alerted Border guar ding forces viz. 
BSF, ITBP, SSB, Assam Rifles etc. to maintain strict vigilance on the borders to check 
smuggling of fertilizers.   The Committee were also informed that the Department had   
also written to State Governments particularly to the States touchi ng the international 
borders to direct the police to see that there are no instances of black marketing of 
fertilizers, especially of urea in their States.  Also through the weekly video conferencing 
with the State Governments, the Department of Fertilizers  has repeatedly been 
instructing the State Governments to ensure that there is no divergence.   However, the 
Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers do not have any field formation to 
check the  divergence of fertilizers themselves. The Committee,  therefore, would like to 
recommend that the Department should find out the feasibility of establishing an 

  
 
institutional mechanism in cooperation with the State Governments to take notice of 
instances of smuggling and divergence of fertilizers for non -agricultural purposes and to 
ensure stringent punishment for those who are involved in such activities. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
At present, due to limited staff, Department o f Fertilizers has no wherewithal for 
establishing an institutional mechanism. But the State Governments are adequately 
empowered under the provisions of Fertilizers Control Order for taking necessary steps, 
procedure and legal actions to check diversion an d smuggling of fertilizers on their part. 
Department of Fertilizers will continue to advise the State Government, Border Security 
Forces to keep a strict vigil and take necessary steps to check diversion and smuggling 
of subsidized fertilizers. 
 
   [MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (Department of Fertilizers)  
  O.M. NO. H-11021/19/2013-PARL. dated: 01-11-2013] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para 37 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
  

  
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation No. 1 
Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) 
 The Committee note that  Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) policy was introduced  w.e.f. 
01.04.2010 to  address the issues relating to agriculture productivity, balanced use of 
fertilizers and growth of indigenous fertilizer industry, competiveness amongst the fertilizer 
companies, etc. Under this policy, a fixed amount of subsidy decided on annual basis is  
provided on each grades of subsidized fertilizers depending on its nutrient contents and 
fertilizer manufactures/marketeers are allowed to fix the MRP at reasonable rate.  However, 
the Committee are distressed  to note that after the introduction of NBS pol icy, the prices of 
the P&K fertilizers have escalated  exponentially almost three or four times.  The Committee 
also regret to note that the Government has yet to conduct a formal study on the impact of 
NBS Policy on prices of fertilizers since its implementation. In the absence of such study, the 
Committee feel that the Department of Fertilizers would  not be able to  take any appropriate 
and effective  corrective measures to contain the escalating  prices of the fertilizers  in the 
country. Since NBS regime is f or the last more than three years, the Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should  initiate action  to conduct a 
comprehensive study in this regard without further delay. The study should be completed 
within a fixed time frame and on the basis of  outcome of the study, the Department should  
take corrective measures to render relief to the farmers through reduction in prices.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Department has in August 2013, engaged a consultancy firm namely M/s. Ernst  
& Young to carry out a study on the impact of NBS Policy.  The key focus areas of the Study 
are as under:- 
(i) Impact of NBS Policy on prices and availability of fertilizers in India. 
(ii) Impact of NBS Policy on balanced fertilization on soil and its impart on the 
agricultural productivity. 
(iii) Mechanism to ascertain ‘reasonability’ of MRPs. 
(iv) Identification of additional mechanism under NBS policy to make it more 
effective in achieving its objectives. 
(v) Monitoring and regulation of prices. 
(vi) Price Discovery and Fixation of Prices. 
The report from M/s. Ernst & Young is expected soon. 
 
   [MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (Department of Fertilizers)  
  O.M. NO. H-11021/19/2013-PARL. dated: 01-11-2013] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
New Delhi; 
 28 February, 2014                                                   GOPINATH MUNDE 
 8 Magha, 1935 (Saka)                                           Chairman, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 

  
 
Annexure-I 
 
  

  
 
Annexure-II 
 
  

  
 


  
 
  

  
 
 


  
 
 
 
  

  
 
 
 
  

  
 
 


  
 
 
  

  
 
 
Annexure-III  
 
  

  
 
Annexure-IV 
 
 
 
  

  
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 20 January, 2014 from 1530 hrs. to 
1630 hrs. in Committee Room – D, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri  Gopinath Munde    -    Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prabhatsinh P. Chauhan  
3. Shri SK. Nurul Islam 
4. Shri Shakti Mohan Malik 
5. Shri Raju Shetti 
6. Shri G.M. Siddeshwara 
RAJYA SABHA 
7. Shri Brijlal Khabri 
8. Smt. Dilipbhai Pandya 
9. Shri Raghunandan Sharma 
10. Shri Ishwar Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary  
2. Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Additional Director 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. 
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up draft Action Taken Report on the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty -ninth Report (15 th 
Lok Sabha) on the subject 'Pricing of Fertilizers'  pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)  for Consideration and adoption .  After some 
deliberations, the draft Action Taken Report was adopted by the Committee subject to 
corrections/ amendments as indicated at Annexure.    
 
4. Thereafter, the Committee considered the representations of   individuals/ 
organisations/ experts etc. who have expressed their willingness, for giving evidence 
before the Committee on the subject 'Jan Aushadhi Scheme' of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Pha rmaceuticals).  After some deliberation, the 
Committee authorized Hon'ble Chairman to select the representationists who may be 
called for their personal appearance before the Committee.  The Committee also 
decided to recirculate the advertisement in local vernacular newspapers in Punjab and 
Haryana only for seeking public opinion on the subject 'Jan Aushadhi Scheme'.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

  
 
 
 
Annexure 
[Please see para 3 of the minutes] 
Para 
No. 
Page 
No. Line Amendments/ modifications 
10 5 5 from 
below 
Insert the following Sentence;  
For, 'In view of the forgoing, the Committee' substitute 
as under : 
 "However, the Committee regret to note that no 
time line has been fixed to finalize the investment 
proposals received by the Department.  The" 
10 5 4 from 
below 
Before 'if' Insert the following sentence;  
 "Rest of the companies should also be impressed 
upon to furnish the cost data without any further 
delay." 
16 9 8 from 
below 
After 'availability', Insert ',distribution'  
25 15 3 from 
below 
After expeditiously', Insert the following sentence; 
"within a fixed time frame" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

  
 
 
Appendix-II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
  
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION T AKEN BY THE GOVERNME NT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED I N THE THIRTY -NINTH 
REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA ) OF THE COMMITTEE O N PRICING OF 
FERTILIZERS OF THE M INISTRY OF CHEMICALS  & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 12 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 2,3,7,8,9,10, and 12)  
07 
Percentage of Total 58.33 % 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil)  
 
0 
Percentage of Total 0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 4,5,6 and 11)  
 
04 
Percentage of Total 33.33%  
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are still awaited:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation No. 1) 
 
01 
Percentage of Total  8.34% 
 