   
  
54 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2018-19) 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
    
  
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
"PRICING OF DRUGS WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO DRUGS 
(PRICES CONTROL) ORDER, 2013” 
 
 
 
FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  February, 2019/   Magha, 1940 (Saka) 
 


 
CC&F.No.54 
 
 
 
FIFTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2018-19) 
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
"PRICING OF DRUGS WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO DRUGS 
(PRICES CONTROL) ORDER, 2013” 
 
 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13 February 2019 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13 February  2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
   February, 2019/   Magha, 1940 (Saka) 
 
  

 
  
CONTENTS 
Sl. No. Chapter / Subject description / Heading / Title 
 
Page  No. 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2018-19) (iii) 
2. INTRODUCTION (v) 
REPORT 
 Part-I - Narration Portion  
3. Chapter-I Introductory 1-12 
4. Chapter-II Role of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) 
13-17 
5. Chapter-III The other Related Matters 18-29 
7. Part-II - Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 30-35 
 Appendices  
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizer held on 24 May, 2018 
36-38 
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizer held on 22 October, 2018 
39-41 
III. Minutes of the Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizer held on 11 February, 2019 
42 

 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
  (2018-19) 
 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Sarfaraz Alam 
3.  George Baker 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
7. Dr. (Smt.) Ratna De (Nag) 
8. Smt. Veena Devi 
9. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
10. Shri Innocent 
11. Shri K. Ashok Kumar   
12. Dr. (Prof.)  Azmeera Seetaram Naik  
13. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
14. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
15. Sushree Sadhvi Savitri Bai Phoole  
16. Shri S. Rajendran  
17. Dr. Kulamani Samal  
18. Dr. Uma Saren  
19. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh  
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
21.  Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad 
25. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev  
26. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
27. Elamaram Kareem 
28. Dr. Sanjay Singh  
29.  Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
30.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri V.K. Tripathi  -                 Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri  C. Kalyanasundaram -     Additional Director               
3.              Ms. Sonia Sankhla                  -                Executive Assistant 
 
 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2018- 19) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present 
the Fifty-fourth Report (16 th Lok Sabha)   on the subject ‘Pricing of Drugs with special 
reference to drugs (Prices Control) Order , 2013’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
 The subject ‘Pricing of Drugs with special reference to drugs (Prices Control) 
Order, 2013’ has been selected by the Standing Committee on Chemicals  and 
Fertilizers (2018-19) for examination and report.   The Committee were briefed on the 
subject by the representatives of the Department of Pharmaceuticals on 24.05.2018 
and their oral evidence was taken on the subject in the sitting held on 22.10.2018 
 The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 11-02-2019. 
 The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) for furnishing necessary 
written replies, views and other material / information to the Committee for the 
examination of  the subject. 
 The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to t he 
Committee. 
 For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi.                                Chairperson 
                                                        Standing Committee on   
 11 February, 2019                    Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 22 Magha,  1940  (Saka)  
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 The expenditure on medicines forms a major chunk of medical expend iture 
both in rural and urban areas of the country.   As per the Publication titled "Health in 
India" - NSS 71st Round (January-June, 2014) brought out by the National Sam ple 
Survey Organization (NSSO), in 2014 at all India level as well as the s tate level the 
highest percentage of total expenditure is made towards medicines.  At all  India 
level, around 72% in rural sector and 68% in urban sector of the total medical 
expenditure was done for purchasing medicines.  Hence, the affordability of 
medicines is a crucial element in availing medical treatment by all sections of the  
people particularly poor people in the country.  Poor people including those b elow 
the poverty line may face immense difficulties to cope with the expe nditure on 
medicines while treating a disease/ailment.  The Committee, therefore, selecte d the 
subject "Pricing of drugs with special reference to Drug (Price Control) Order, 2013 
for examination and report on priority basis.  Succeeding parts of this Report deal 
with the various aspects of this subject. 
 ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF PRICE CONTROL REGIME IN INDIA 
1.2 Price control over drugs was first introduced in the country with the 
promulgation of the Drugs (Display of Prices) Order, 1962 and the Drugs (Control of 
Prices) Order, 1963. These were promulgated under the Defense of India Act, a nd 
had the effect of freezing the prices of drugs as on 1st April 1963.  The Price Control 
Order of 1963 was revisited in 1966, in the backdrop of the criticism that the prices of 
relevant raw materials were not similarly frozen. Selective increase in prices was 
allowed in 1966 with prior approval of the Government. In 1968, the new drugs and 
the drugs having pharmacopoeia name (generic name) were exempted f rom prior 
price approval.  
 
1.3  Subsequently, the Drugs (Prices Control) Order 1970 was promulgated which 
had provision of mark-up applicable to essential and other formulatio ns with overall 
profitability not exceeding 15 per cent on sales turnover.  The Drugs (Pri ces Control) 
Order of 1966 and the Drugs (Prices Control) Order of 1970 were issued under the  
"Essential Commodities Act" 1955[ “EC Act ”] by declaring drugs to be essential 
commodities.  
 
1.4  Cost based pricing came into effect with the notification of Drugs (Prices 
Control) Order of 1979. This was the underlying principle of the Drugs (Price s 
Control) Order, 1987 and the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995 [DPCO, 1995]. The 
DPCO, 1995 implemented the Drug Policy of 1994. The Drug Policy o f 1994 was 
introduced in the context of the liberalization of economy and finan cial reforms of 
1991. The principle for price control broadly adopted in this policy represented a 
radical departure from the earlier policies. As per the criteria of 1994 policy, a list of 

2 
 
74 bulk drugs was identified. These drugs, as well as formulations based  on these 
drugs, were brought under the price control regime. 
 
1.5  The National List of Essential Medicines 2003 [ “NLEM-2003”] was finalized 
by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. A Task Force set up under the 
Chairmanship of Principal Advisor, Planning Commission, Dr. Pronab Sen submitte d 
its recommendations in 2005 on various aspects of drug pricing and othe r aspects 
related to the pharmaceutical sector.  
 
1.6  Meanwhile, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare notified th e National 
List of Essential Medicines, 2011 [ “NLEM-2011”].  NLEM,2011 consisted of 377 
medicines and 948 formulations.  The National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy  
[“NPPP-2012”] was thereafter notified on 07.12.2012.  
  
1. 7  The objective of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy (NPPP)-201 2 is to put 
in place a regulatory framework for pricing of drugs so as to ensure availability of 
required medicines i.e. essential medicines at reasonable prices even while 
providing sufficient opportunity for innovation and competition to support the g rowth 
of industry, thereby meeting the goals of employment and shared ec onomic well 
being for all. Subsequently the Government notified the Drugs (Prices Control) 
Order, 2013 [ “DPCO, 2013”] on 15.05.2013. The NLEM-2011 has been adopted as 
the First Schedule of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order 2013.  
 
1.8 In pursuance of the Policy, the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 2013 (DPCO, 
2013) has been implemented. The essential medicines included in She dule-1 of 
DPCO are subject to price ceilings and thus available at reasonable prices.  The 
medicines which are not included in Schedule -1 are not subject to price ceil ings and 
through this measure sufficient opportunity has been provided to Pharma industry for 
innovation and competition. The preferred objectives of NPPP 2012 have  been 
achieved to a considerable extent.  
NATIONAL PHARMACEUTICAL PRICING POLICY (NPPP), 2012 
1.9  As per the information furnished by the Ministry, the three key principles o f 
the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy(NPPP)-2012 are as below:  
(i) Essentiality of Drugs: The regulation of prices of drugs is on the basis of 
essentiality of drugs as per the medicines under NLEM-2011. The NLEM 
2011  has been as the First Schedule of DPCO 2013. Formulations listed in 
the National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM) are under price control.   
 
(ii) Control of Formulations prices only: The prices of formulations only are to 
be regulated and not the prices of the Bulk Drugs and the resulting 
formulations as adopted in the Drug Policy 1994.  
 
iii) Market Based Pricing:  The ceiling prices of medicines is fixed on Market 
Based Pricing (MBP) methodology. In this regard the Committee were 
informed further during evidence that the ceiling price is calculated based on  

3 
 
‘market based data ’ wherein 'Average Price to Retailer ’ is considered for 
pricing. MRP is arrived at by adding Local Taxes to Ceiling Price. Brands  
selling above Ceiling Price have to bring down to Ceiling Price and th e brands 
selling below Ceiling Price having to retain the same price. 
 
IMPORTANT FEATURES OF NPPP-2012 
 
1.10 As per the information provided by the Department, the follow ing are the 
features of NPPP, 2012:- 
(i) Methodology of Price Fixation: The ceiling prices of scheduled medicine s, 
is worked out, adopting the Simple Average Price of all the brands having 
market share (on the basis of Moving Annual Turnover) more than and eq ual 
to 1% of the total market turnover of that medicine, and then by ad ding a 
notional 16 % retailer's margin to the average arrived at, for working out the 
ceiling price. 
 
 ii) Span of Control: The Span of Price Control is as per the dosages and 
 strengths of  formulations as listed in Schedule I of DPCO 2013.  
 
iii) Revision of Prices: The ceiling prices of scheduled medicines will be 
allowed an annual increase as per the Wholesale Price Index [ “WPI”] as 
notified by the Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion.  
 
iv) Non-scheduled formulations: In order to keep a check on overall drug 
prices, of prices of all the drugs, even the non-scheduled will be don e on 
regular basis. Non-scheduled medicines are allowed a price increase of 10% 
per annum.  
 
(v) Availability of NLEM-2011 and to prevent shifting the manufact urers out of 
Price  Control: If a manufacturer of a scheduled formulation with dosages an d 
strengths as  specified in the First Schedule launches a new drug by 
combining the scheduled formulation with either a scheduled or a non-
scheduled formulation or by changing the strength and dosages of the 
scheduled formulation, such manufacturers are required to seek prior price 
approval from the Government before launching the new drug.  
 
 (vi) No separate price for Imported Drugs: The Ceiling Prices determined for 
 scheduled formulations shall be applicable to those which are domestically 
 produced and imported. Under DPCO, 1995, the prices of imported scheduled 
 medicines were being fixed on the basis of landed cost declared by the  
 importer.  
 
(vii) Exemptions: To promote innovation and R&D, exemption from price 
control is given to formulations developed through indigenous R&D etc.  
 
 

4 
 
DRUGS (PRICES CONTROL) ORDER (DPCO) -2013 
 
1.11  The Drugs Price Control Order, 2013 was notified on 15.05.2013 under the  
Essential Commodities Act and is based on the broad guidelines of the Nation al 
Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy-2012. However, in addition to price fixation, 
provisions have been made in DPCO, 2013 to ensure that there is reduction in the 
ceiling price with respect to the price of highest priced brand (of the essentia l 
medicine) having at least one percent market share, proper and effective control an d 
regulation in price movement of scheduled as well as non-scheduled med icines and 
availability of the essential medicines. Some of such provisions are as below:  
 
 (i)  To ensure reduction in ceiling price in cases where there is absence o f 
 competition, the percentage reduction of the highest priced formulation of 
 other strengths and dosages of  the same formulation, or another schedule d 
 formulation in the same sub-therapeutic  group or the another scheduled 
 formulation of the same therapeutic group are taken into account (Parag raph 
 6(1) of DPCO, 2013).  
(ii)  Continuation of price control if a scheduled formulation is re-launched  
by another manufacturer (Paragraph 12(2) of DPCO, 2013).  
(iii)  The manufacturers selling scheduled formulations below the ceiling 
price are to maintain the sub-ceiling price (Paragraph 13(2) of DPCO, 2013).  
(iv)  The manufacturers proposing to produce a combination/new strength/ 
new dosage form of the medicines included in the First Schedule, need to 
take price approval before selling it (Paragraph 15 of DPCO 2013).  
(v)  Further, the manufacturers have to take permission of the Government  
before discontinuing the manufacture of essential medicines (Paragraph 21 of 
DPCO, 2013).  
 (vi)  The ceiling price of an essential medicine would be reviewed in ca se of 
 change in market structure of the medicine (Paragraph 18(ii) and 18(iii) of 
 DPCO, 2013). 
 (viii)  The Government can fix the ceiling price of any medicine even the no n-
 scheduled one in case of certain extra ordinary situations or in public interest 
 (Paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013).  
 (ix)  The ceiling price, so notified by the Government has to be implemented 
 within 45 days of the notification for all the medicines available in  the market 
 (Paragraph 13(1) of DPCO, 2013).  
 (x)  Schedule I of the DPCO, 2013 consists of NLEM-2011 and it covers 27 
 therapeutic categories and includes the medicines for HIV, cancer, diabe tes, 
 Heart Diseases amongst  others. There were 628 formulations covering 348 
 medicines.  
(xi)  Schedule I of the DPCO 2013 was revised on 10.3.2016 based on 
National List of Essential Medicines 2015, and it covers 30 therapeutic 
categories and includes the medicines for HIV, cancer, diabetes, Heart 
Diseases, ENT amongst  others. There were  948 formulations covering 376 
medicines. Coronary Stents were added later on 22.12.2016 making total o f 
medicines to 377 and number of therapeutic categories to 31.    

5 
 
                                                 
MARKET BASED PRIZING MECHANISM 
 
1.12 In regard to market based pricing, the Committee pointed out during oral 
evidence of the representatives of Department of Pharmaceuticals that cost of 
medicines should be fixed as done in the case of other commodities beca use 
medicines are essential needs of common man and that there is lot of difference in 
the prices of big and small drug manufacturing companies.  In this regard, th e 
Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals made the following submission:- 
 
 "Sir, for those things, somebody will need to study what is the right profit 
margin.  We  did not have any drug innovation for the last 20 years be cause 
we are not investing enough.  One innovation will cost, at least, a billio n dollar 
of investment.  There are 99 failures and then you got one success .  Now, if I 
do not add the cost of the failures on the drug, then it will become diff icult for 
me to do innovation.  Nobody will experiment.  If I put the dru g price only at 
the cost-based or because I am not taking the cost of the failures in th e 
experiments, it will be difficult for me to put the price of the drugs on  the cost-
based basis.  Cost base presume that I am only calculating the cost of inputs 
which have gone into production of that drug but what about the failure  in the 
production of the drug where I had put the money?  There are complica tions 
in that and, I assure, that we will work out.  We will try and see its feasibility.  If 
it is feasible, we will do it.  But, as of now, the Government of India, in its 
wisdom, in 2013, decided that we should move away from cost-base d to the 
market-base.  Sir, for those things, somebody will need to study what is the 
right profit margin.  We did not have any drug innovation for the last 20 years 
because we are not investing enough.  One innovation will cost, at least, a 
billion dollar of investment.  There are 99 failures and then you got one 
success.  Now, if I do not add the cost of the failures on the drug, th en it will 
become difficult for me to do innovation.  Nobody will experiment.  If I put the 
drug price only at the cost-based or because I am not taking the cost o f the 
failures in the experiments, it will be difficult for me to put the p rice of the 
drugs on the cost-based basis.  Cost base presume that I am only calculatin g 
the cost of inputs which have gone into production of that drug bu t what about 
the failure in the production of the drug where I had put the money?  There 
are  complications in that and, I assure, that we will work out.  We will try 
and see its  feasibility.  If it is feasible, we will do it.  But, as of now, the 
Government of India, in its  wisdom, in 2013, decided that we should move 
away from cost-based to the market-base."  
 
1.13 During the course of the evidence, the Secretary further clarified regarding 
Government's decision to go for market based price fixation as under:- 
 "it is now market-based.  It was cost-based under DPCO, 1995 till 201 3.  Our 
experience  in the cost-based calculation of price of the medicines was n ot 
very conducive to continue with it.  One of the reasons was as follows. It  is 
because the same drug may be manufactured by 200 compan ies.  We take 

6 
 
the cost of each company differently.  A company which is an exporting 
company consisting of scientists, having its own lab, and a big establishment 
will have a different cost whereas a small scale industry which is  producing 
the same drug will have a different cost.  The second reason was, we  cannot 
audit the cost as such.  Whatever the company gives that this is its cost, we  
have to accept it. That was leading to an inspectorial raj that I enter into their  
premise, start looking into their audit books and say that they imported this 
drug at this cost and not at that cost and this is only the conversion  rate, etc.  
This was giving rise to a lot of problems in actual cost-based price f ixing and 
that too was not very (representative) because not every company will  divulge 
the cost.  
 As he had explained, these were not transparent costs, not known to  the 
public that this is the right cost. In the market-based data, there is, at least, 
transparency. What we do is, we  take every such formulation which is in the 
market, having more than one per cent market  share, take their prices to the 
retail, which is a known price and average it out. There are  plus and minus 
on both sides. The cost-based system may be ideal and that is something 
which is giving a true reflection. But it is very difficult to arrive at a cost-ba sed 
pricing. So, the Government, in its wisdom at that point of time, decided that 
we would go for more transparency and less intrusive inspector raj and, 
therefore, we will go by the market data available instead of going to ea ch 
factor and asking as to what their cost-based pricing is. That is the 
clarification." 
1.14  The Committee also brought to the attention of the representative s of the 
Department that there is wide difference between the prices of Jan Aushadi a nd the 
branded medicines.  The Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals clarified as 
below:- 
 
 "Jan Aushadhi is related to generic medicine.  Drug is the same.  Wh en a 
brand name is given to paracetamol, it becomes (Crocin) Then, there is a 
whole lot of medical representatives by the company which is manufacturing 
crocin.  So, crocin ’s rate will become a little higher because overhead cost of 
all the medical representatives is there.   When crocin is sold as paracetamol, 
it is not promoted by anything.  In fact, we should call it as promoted drug a nd 
unpromoted drug.  These unpromoted drugs have therefore a lower cost 
because there is no promotional cost in that.  There is no branding of that.  
There is no medical representative.  There is nobody going to the doctor an d 
saying that you please recommend crocin." 
1.15 During the course of  examination of the subject, the Committee asked  about 
the factors that determine essentiality of drugs and inclusion of drug 
formulations/medicines  under National List of Essential Medicines. The Dep artment 
in their written replies stated as under:- 
 
 "As per Report of the Co re-Committee for Revision of National List of 
Essential Medicines 2015, the criteria for inclusion of a medicine in NLEM  are as 
follows:  

7 
 
 The medicine should be approved/licensed in India. 
 The  medicine  should  be  useful  in  disease  which  is  a  p ublic  health 
problem in India. 
 The medicine should have proven efficacy and safety profile ba sed on valid 
scientific evidence. 
 The medicine should be cost effective. 
 The medicine should  be  aligned  with  the  current  treatment  gu idelines for 
the disease. 
 The medicine should be stable under the storage conditions in India. 
 When more than one medicine are available from the same therapeu tic class, 
preferably one prototype/ medically best suited medicine of that class to b e 
included after due deliberation and careful evaluation of their relative safe ty, 
efficacy, cost-effectiveness. 
 Price  of  total  treatment  to  be  considered  and  not  the  u nit  price  of  a 
medicine. 
 Fixed Dose Combinations (FDCs) are generally not included unless the 
combination  has  unequivocally  proven  advantage  over  individual  
ingredients  administered  separately,  in  terms  of  increasing  efficacy, 
reducing adverse effects and/or improving compliance. 
 The  listing  of  medicine  in  NLEM  is  based  according  to  the  leve l  of 
health care, i.e. Primary (P), Secondary (S) and Tertiary (T) because the 
treatment  facilities,  training,  experience  and  availability  of  health   care 
personnel differ at these levels. 
 The criteria for deletion of a medicine from NLEM is as follows: 
 The medicine has been banned in India. 
 There are reports of concerns on the safety profile of a medicine. 
 A  medicine with better efficacy or favorable safety profiles and bett er cost-
effectiveness is now available. 
 The  disease  burden  for  which  a  medicine  is  indicated  is  no  longer  a 
national health concern in India. 
 In  case  of  antimicrobials,  if  the  resistance  pattern  has  rendered   a 
medicine ineffective in Indian context. 
 
 As per Report of the Core-Committee for Revision of National List of Essential 
Medicines 2015, “Every  medicine  may  be  necessary  or  even  critical  for  specific  
disease conditions  for  which  it  is  indicated.  But  in  the  context  of  NLEM,  a 
medicine  may be essential  considering  the population  at large.  Hence, a medicine 
which is critical for a specific condition may not be listed in the list of essential  
medicines if the disease condition for which it is indicated has low prevalence or is 
rare. This does not mean that if a particular medicine is not included in the list of 
essential medicines, it is not necessary.  In  no  way,  exclusion  of  su ch medicines  
from  the  list  undermines  their  importance  in  therapeutics  and ne ed of their 
availability at an affordable cost."  It has further been stated by  the Ministry that the 
NLEM 2015 has been prepared adhering to the basic principles of Efficacy, Safety, 
Cost-Effectiveness; consideration of diseases as public health problems in India. The 
list could be called as a Best-Fit List. 
 
1.16 Regarding the composition of the Core Committee for Revision of National 
List of Essential Medicines constituted by the Ministry of Health and Family W elfare ( 
MOHFW) and status of representation of Department of Pharmaceuticals/NPPA in 
this Core Committee to enhance coordination, the Department in their written reply 

8 
 
stated  that as per the Office Order no. X.11035/923/2017-DRS, dated 03 .07.2018, 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has constituted a Standing National  
Committee on Medicines (SNCM) to review and revise the National List of Essential 
Medicines (NLEM) by way of addition and deletion in the existing NLEM in th e 
context of contemporary knowledge of use of therapeutic products in health & 
hygiene of general public. The Composition of the committee is as follows: 
 
1. Secretary, DHR and DG, ICMR Chairman  
2. Prof. Y.K. Gupta, Former Prof & Head Department of 
Pharmacology, AIIMS, New Delhi 
Vice-Chairman 
3. A representative of director General of Health Services 
(DGHS), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
Member 
4. A representative of Department of Pharmaceuticals, 
Ministry of Chemical & Fertilizers 
Member 
5. A representative of National Vector Borne Diseases 
Control Programme, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
Member  
6. Director, National Institute of Biologicals (NIB) NOIDA 
(U.P), Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
Member 
7. Secretary-cum-Scientific Director, Indian Pharmacopoeia 
Commission, Ministry of  Health & Family Welfare 
Ghaziabad 
Member 
8. Additional Director General (Stores, Directorate General 
Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
Member 
9. Director, National Institute of Malaria Research, Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare 
Member 
10. Director, National Institute of Pharmaceuticals Education 
and Research (NIPER), Guwahati 
Member 
11. Director-General, Employees State Insurance Corporation, 
Ministry of Labour or his nominee 
Member 
12. Representative from Ministry of AYUSH Member 
13. Director, Central Government Health Scheme  (CGHS), 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
Member 
14. Representative of Department of Consumer Affairs Member 
15. Five Experts as nominated by the Chair Member 
16. Drugs Controller General (India), Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare, or his representative 
Member 
17. Principal Secretary, Health,  Tamil Nadu Member 
18. Principal Secretary, Health,  Uttar Pradesh Member 
 
The representative of Department of Pharmaceuticals is a member of the Core 
Committee. A representative from NPPA will be special invitee." 
 
1.17  To a query of the Committee, whether the National Pharmaceutical P ricing 
Policy has taken into account the income levels and purchasing powe r of people 
belonging to BPL families in preparing NLEM, the Department in their writt en reply 
stated as under:- 

9 
 
 
 "The NLEM is prepared by the Core Committee for Revision of National List of 
Essential Medicines constituted by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfa re. 
The  income levels and purchasing power of people belonging to BPL 
families is not a relevant factor in preparing NLEM as diseases make no 
distinction between BPL & non BPL families." 
        
1.18 In response to the Committee query during oral evidence of the Depa rtment 
held on 22.10.2018, regarding non-usage of BPL as a relevant factor in  preparing 
NLEM the Secretary Department of Pharmaceuticals stated as under: 
 
"…the National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM), is prepared by a 
technical committee which is looking into only the technical aspects of the 
medicine. Affordability is not their issue. When they prepare the National List 
of Essential Medicines, they only prepare the essentiality from the point o f 
view of the disease burden of the region. Therefore, the sentence reads, 
which I agree, should have been framed better that the poverty or th e 
income level is not considered while finalising the NLEM…." 
 
1.19 The Committee also asked the Department to comment on the p aradox, that 
on one hand the mandate of NPPP 2012 is to put in place a regulatory framework for 
pricing of drugs so as to ensure availability of required medicines i.e.  essential 
medicines at reasonable prices, on the other hand the income levels of B PL families 
is not a relevant factor in preparing NLEM by MOHFW as well as current pricing 
method under DPCO, 2013 by NPPA, the Department in their written note sta ted as 
under: 
 
"As per National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM), essential medicines are 
those that satisfy the priority health care needs of the population. The list is 
made with consideration to disease prevalence, efficacy, safety and 
comparative cost-effectiveness of the medicines.   Such medicines are 
intended to be available in adequate amounts, in appropriate dosag e forms 
and strengths with assured quality. They should be available in such a w ay 
that an individual or community can afford." 
 
1.20  Further, during the oral evidence of the representatives of the Department  by 
the Committee on 24.05.2018, the Chairperson of the Committee made the following 
observation on the essentiality of medicines:- 
 
 "My objection is on the word ‘essentiality’.  Each and every medicine is 
essential.  It may be a small tablet or anything else.  It is because I a m having 
pain, I am purchasing a pain killer or tablet.  It is essential for me.  If I am a 
cancer patient, then I have to buy these costly medicines. That is wh y, each 
and every medicine is essential.  There should not be any bifurcation between 
essential and non-essential.  You cannot say that it is non-essential.  All these 
medicines should be put under the definition of essential." 
1.21 In response, the Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals gave the following 
reply during the course of oral evidence:- 

10 
 
 "Sir, I absolutely agree with what you said about essentiality.  If I am  
suffering from something, that drug is essential for me.  But this essentiality 
does not mean individual patient-wise.  The Health Department studies the 
disease burden of a country like kala-azar is a disease burden in India.  
Polio was a disease burden in India.  Malaria is a disease burden in India.  
There is an expert committee which studies what is the normal disease 
burden of this country.  Based on that, they decide that these medicines, n ot 
from individual point of view it is essential, no, but from the country ’s point of 
view it is essential.  It is because these are major ailments which a country 
goes through, therefore, we must have these medicines and from t hat point 
of view essentiality was defined by the Health Ministry.  They made th at list.  
As I said, most of the ailments are covered by this but there would be s ome 
ailments for which there would be some orphan drugs in the sense that 
there is a very specific psychological disease with which everybody does not 
suffer but for him that medicine will be very essential but that medicine is not 
listed here because may be only some few thousand people suffer fro m that 
disease.  So, the Health Department brings that  list of essentialities.  While 
I agree with you that every medicine is essential and that is why in th e 
DPCO, we put a clause 19, that based on the individual condition, 
emergency and the requirement, we can bring any medicine into  a price 
control order.  The 106 medicines which we showed were brought in the 
price control like that.  Those 106 medicines were not in the list of essenti al 
medicines.  But in 2014, there was a price cap on those 106 me dicines.  So, 
we are trying to handle your concerns which is our concern also through 
para 19 of DPCO."  
1. 22 The Committee also asked about the next revision of NLEM propo sed to be 
undertaken and new drugs/medicines that are proposed to be added in the list, the 
Department in their written note stated as under: 
 "Department of Health and Family Welfare has constituted a Standing 
National Committee on Medicines (SNCM) for the revision of National list o f 
Essential Medicines (NLEM) vide Order No X.11035/923/2017-DRS dated 3rd 
July 2018.  The number of drugs/medicines to be included in the NLEM will be 
decided by the Committee only." 
1.23  The Committee thereafter asked, whether the current Market Based  Pricing 
methodology adopted for fixing of prices of NLEM drugs/medicines ha s been able to 
ensure fair price with quality drugs/medicines to consumers, the Depart ment in their 
written note stated in affirmative that the current Market base policy has been 
successful in ensuring fair price with quality drugs/medicines to the consum er. The 
reduction in the prices under DPCO 2013 as follows:- 
 
Statement showing reduction in ceiling prices of scheduled formulations with resp ect 
to maximum price  
% reduction with respect to Maximum 
Price 
No. of scheduled 
formulations 
(NLEM 2011) 
No. of scheduled 
formulations 
(NLEM 2015) 
0<= 5% 80 234 
5<=10% 50 134 
10<=15% 57 98 

11 
 
15<=20% 43 98 
20<=25% 65 93 
25<=30% 49 65 
30<=35% 26 46 
35<=40% 34 24 
Above 40% 126 59 
Total formulations  530 851 
 
1.24  In view of the above data , as per current market based pricing methodology, 
number of scheduled formulations which witnessed 35-40 percentage and ab ove 40 
percentage reduction with respect to maximum price have reduced from 34 to 24 
percentage and 126 to 59 respectively under NLEM 2011 and 2015. Thus the 
Committee asked about the reasons for decrease in number of scheduled 
formulations under these two categories and the steps that are proposed thereon.  In 
this regard,  the Department in their written reply stated as under: 
 
"National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) fixed the ceiling price of 
851 scheduled formulations under National List of Essential Medicines 
(NLEM), 2015, out of which majority of formulations are common formulation s 
under NLEM, 2011 and NLEM 2015, where the price was already fixe d under 
NLEM, 2011. Therefore, while re-fixing the ceiling price of these common 
formulations the reduction in these cases are limited which has affected 
overall reduction under NLEM 2015." 
 
1.25 The Committee  were informed that NITI Aayog has proposed a new drug  
pricing index for pharmaceuticals. In this regard, when the Committee sought its 
difference from the current pricing mechanism under DPCO, 2013, the Departme nt 
in their written note stated as under: 
 
 "NITI Aayog in their report on NLEM and DPCO has recommended that the 
average price to first point of sale (where first point of sale could be 
Stockist/Wholesaler/ Distributor/ Hospital) should be considered for 
calculating ceiling prices of the drugs/  devices, instead of the presently 
followed system based on average price to the retailer. Niti Aayog sug gested 
that overall WPI may be replaced with the WPI for Pharmaceutical Products. 
The same was not accepted by the Department. In this regard, 
representations were received from Pharma Industry to keep the prices in 
pharma industry aligned with overall price movements in the economy.  
Overall WPI is higher than WPI for Pharmaceutical Products. Overall WPI 
includes multiple factors of the market which are not taken into consideration 
while calculating WPI pharma. Accordingly, the Department has propose d to 
retain the overall WPI." 
 
1.26 In view of the above written note by the Department, the Commi ttee further 
asked the Department the reasons for non acceptance of the WPI for 
Pharmaceutical Products as the basis for calculating ceiling prices for drugs/devices 

12 
 
and also regarding the proposals to reconsider this matter so as to lower the prices  
of drug/medicines. The Department in their written note stated as under: 
"The department has not accepted the WPI for pharmaceutical products as  
the basis for circulating annual revisions in ceiling prices for drugs because 
overall WPI is a more relevant for this annual exercise. Movements in prices 
of inputs such as labour cost, transportation cost etc. are not captured by  WPI 
for pharmaceutical products." 
 
1.27 Regarding the criteria and standard procedure for regulating the non- 
scheduled medicines prices which is fixed in view of extra ordinary situations or  
public interest, the Department in their written note stated as under: 
 "As per provision of the para 19 of the DPCO 2013, the Government m ay, in 
case of extra-ordinary circumstances, if it considers necessary so to do in 
public interest, fix the ceiling price or retail price of any Drug (scheduled a s 
well as non-scheduled drugs) for such period, as it may deem fit a nd where 
the ceiling price or retail price of the drug is already fixed and n otified, the 
Government may allow an increase or decrease in the ceiling price or the 
retail price, as the case may be, irrespective of annual wholesale price index 
for that year. There is no specific criteria defined for the invoking para 1 9 of 
the DPCO 2013 and the government decision under this provision is 
considered on the basis of the merit of the case." 
 
1.28 Further on the issue of the margins which are allowed to a wholesaler and 
distributers for drugs and medicines under DPCO 2013, the Department in 
their written note stated that the Ceiling price or retail price of medicin es is 
fixed by adding sixteen percent margin to retailer on the average price to 
retailer. There are no margins, other than this prescribed in the DPCO.     
1.29 The Committee also asked about the details regarding notification of ann ual 
increase in ceiling prices of scheduled medicine allowed/notified under DPCO,20 13, 
the Department in their written note stated as under: 
 "As per para 16(1) of the DPCO 2013, The Government shall revise the 
ceiling prices of scheduled formulations as per the annual wholesale p rice 
index (WPI) for preceding calendar year on or before 1st April of every y ear 
and notify the same on the 1st day of April every year.  
 As per para 16 (2) of the DPCO 2013, The manufacturers may increase the 
maximum retail price (MRP) of scheduled formulations once in a year, in the 
month of April, on the basis of the wholesale price index with respect to 
previous calendar year and no prior approval of the Government in this regard 
shall be required."           
  
  

13 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
  ROLE OF NATIONAL PHARMACEUTICAL PRICING AUTHORITY (NPPA) 
 
2.1 The National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA), an independe nt body 
of experts in the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers was formed by the Gov t. of 
India vide Resolution published in the Gazette of India No. 159 dated 29.08 .97. The 
functions of NPPA, inter-alia include fixation and revision of prices of sch eduled 
formulations under the Drugs (Prices Control) Order (DPCO), as well as monitoring 
and enforcement of prices. NPPA also provides inputs to Government on 
pharmaceutical policy and issues related to affordability, availability and accessibility 
of medicines. 
 
2.2  In view of the above, the Committee asked about the manda te and the role of 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) in regulating prices of scheduled 
and non-scheduled drugs/medicines, the Department in their written not e gave the 
following as mandate of the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA): 
 
 "(1) To implement and enforce the provisions of the Drugs (Prices 
Control) Order in accordance with the powers delegated to it.  
 (2) To deal with all legal matters arising out of the decisions of the 
Authority.  
 (3) To monitor the availability of drugs, identify shortages, if any, and to  
take remedial steps;  
 (4) To collect/maintain data on production, exports and imports, market 
share of individual companies, profitability of companies etc. for bulk 
drugs and formulations;  
 (5) To undertake and/or sponsor relevant studies in respect of pricing 
of drugs/pharmaceuticals;  
 (6) To recruit/appoint the officers and other staff members of the 
Authority, as per rules and procedures laid down by the Government;  
 (7) To render advice to the Central Government on changes/revisions 
in the drug policy;  
 (8) To render assistance to the Central Government in the 
parliamentary matters relating to the drug pricing." 
2.3 On being asked about the coordination mechanism between Indian  
Pharmacopoeia Commission and Drugs Controller General of India which fall under  
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare with the Department of Pharmace uticals / 
NPPA in the decision making / monitoring process relating to maintenance of q uality 
standards, safety and rational use of medicines in the country, the Departme nt in 
their written note stated as under:- 
  
"Department of Pharmaceuticals is a member of Governing Body and the 
General Body of Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission. Department o f 
Pharmaceuticals is represented by a Joint Secretary to this Body.   The 
regulatory control over the import, manufacture, distribution and sale of drugs, 
cosmetics and notified medical devices in the country, is under the provisions 
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 & Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 
and Medical Devices Rules, 2017. 

14 
 
The manufacture, sale and distribution of drugs in the country is primarily 
regulated by the State Drug Control Authorities appointed by the State 
Governments while control over drugs imported into the country and those 
introduced for the first time is exercised by the Central Government through 
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) headed by the DCGI. 
Under Chapter II and Section 5 of Drugs & Cosmetics Act 1940, Drugs 
Technical Advisory Board (DTAB) advises the Central Government and the 
State Governments on technical matters arising out of the administration of 
this Act and carries out the other functions assigned to it by this Act. 
Under Chapter II and Section 7 of Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940, Drugs 
Consultative Committee (DCC) advises the Central Government, the State 
Governments and the Drugs Technical Advisory Board on any other matter 
tending to secure uniformity throughout India in the administration of this Act. 
The drugs imported or manufactured for sale, distribution etc. are required to 
comply with the standards specified in the Second Schedule to the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act. According to it, drugs included in the Indian Pharmacopoeia 
(IP), [a book of standards for drugs published by Indian Pharmacopeia 
Commission (IPC)], should comply with the standards specified therein. Drugs 
not included in IP but which are included in official pharmacopoeia of any  
other country, should comply with the standards specified in such 
Pharmacopoeia. In case of proprietary medicines (not included in any o fficial 
Pharmacopoeia), the standards should be asper the formula displaye d in the 
prescribed manner on the label of the container and such other stand ards as 
may be prescribed. There is interaction/coordination taking place between 
MoH&FW/CDSCO/IPC and DOP/NPPA on various polices initiatives relating 
to quality/ availability/affordability rational use of drugs etc." 
 
2.4  Further the Committee asked to illustrate with an example, the comp lete 
cycle of price variation starting from manufacturer, wholesalers, retailer till consumer 
in the price fixation mechanism devised by NPPA under DPCO, 2013, the 
Department in their written reply stated  that NPPA fixes the ceiling prices w hich are 
applicable throughout the country. However, individual companies can fix the M RP 
less than the ceiling price. All the companies may not be present through out the 
country and on the basis of regional presence of the companies, the prices m ay 
vary. For example, in case of Metformin 500mg tablet, the ceiling price h as been 
fixed as Rs. 14.10 per 10 tablets. Company A, which is operating in a particular  
region, may have MRP of Rs. 11 for 10 tablets whereas Company B may be having 
MRP of Rs. 14 for 10 tablets in another region. 
 
2.5  While furnishing details regarding profit-margin in terms of percentage 
available for producers of scheduled medicines at prices fixed by NPPA on the basis 
of input/ output cost analysis along with comments regarding desirability of 
stipulating maximum profit margin to be allowed to a manufacturer on particular 
scheduled medicine, the Department in their written note stated as under: 
 
 "NPPA fixed the ceiling price based on average ‘Price to retailer’ plus sixteen 
percent,  though there is no restriction in the trade margin. On the analysis of 
the data provided by  the AIOCD AWACS, it is noticed that in most of the 
cases, the trade margin of distributor and retailer is 28% of the MRP." 
 

15 
 
2.6 The Committee also asked about the details of periodic survey con ducted by 
NPPA of prices of drugs sold in the country with particular reference to percentage of 
NLEM covered drugs/medicines in the market, the Department in their written n ote 
stated that NPPA is collecting market price data from the agency named All  India 
Organization of Chemists & Druggists & Advanced Working, Action and Correction 
System (AIOCD AWACS). The Annual Turnover for the last five years base d on the 
figures reported in the AIOCD’s AWACS is as follows:  
 
Year 
ending 
31.3.2014 
Year 
ending 
31.3.2015 
Year ending 
31.3.2016 
Year ending 
31.3.2017 
Year ending 
31.3.2018 
Scheduled  16,507   18,068   20,320   19,864   19,767  
Non-
Scheduled 
 63,477   72,501   82,294   93,064   99,618  
 
TOTAL  
 79,983   90,570   1,02,614   1,12,929   1,19,386  
      Percentage 
     Scheduled 21% 20% 20% 18% 17% 
Non-
Scheduled 
79% 80% 80% 82% 83% 
 
Source: AICOS AWACS Pharmatrac Report of March 2018. 
*the classification of Scheduled /Non – Scheduled medicines is as per present 
status. 
 
2.7 In view of the above, the Committee asked the Department to furnish  reasons 
for not conducting periodic survey on prices of drugs by NPPA, the Departmen t in 
their written note stated as under: 
 
"NPPA has made agreement with the All India Organization of Chemists & 
Druggists  &  Advanced Working, Action and Correction System (AIOCD 
AWACS) who makes the  collection of the data of the prices of the 
medicines, who collect the information from the majority of the distributors 
across the country. The information is provided on monthly basis.   On the 
basis of analysis of the information submitted by the AIOCS AWACS, NPPA is 
monitoring the prices of the medicines and issue notices for violation of the 
prices of medicines and therefore objective of the survey is being fulfilled." 
 
Growth of Pharma Industry during last 5 years has been as under: 
Year Annual Turnover (In Rs. 
Crores) 
Percentage Increase 
2013-14 128044 - 
2014-15 165202 29.01% 
2015-16 185388 12.21% 
2016-17 219755 18.53% 
2017-18 226423 3.03% 

16 
 
2.8 When the Committee asked about the reasons for reduction in percentag e 
growth of the pharmaceuticals industry from 29% in 2014-15 to only  3% in 2017- 18 
and steps that are being taken to reverse this trend, the Department in their  written 
note stated as under: 
 
 "From the above table, it may be noted that the annual turnove r of the pharma 
industry has increased continuously. However, the growth rate of annual 
turnover has reduced in  the current year but there is no definite patte rn of 
decline in the percentage increase of  Annual Turnover of pharma sector as 
such. Annual turnover of an industry depends on multiple factors such as  
exports, production etc. 
2.9 With regard to steps taken by the  Ministry , for the growth of Pharmaceutical 
industry, the Committee were informed that National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 
2012 (NPPP-2012) was notified with the objective to put in place a reg ulatory 
framework for pricing of drugs so as to ensure availability of required m edicines – 
“essential medicines” at reasonable prices even while providing sufficient opportunity 
for innovation and competition to support the growth of pharma industry the reby 
meeting the goals of employment and shared economic well-being for a ll. Also, the 
policies formulated by Government from time to time are made to give fillip t o 
indigenous manufacturing. In this direction, the Government vide its notification  
dated 28th January, 2016 has withdrawn exemption of customs duty of certain 
categories of Bulk Drugs/APIs. Further, the Department of Pharmaceuticals has 
prepared an umbrella scheme namely ‘Scheme for Development of Pharmaceutical 
Industry’ with the objective to increase the efficiency and competitiveness of 
domestic pharmaceutical industry so as to enable them to play a lead role in the 
global market and to ensure accessibility, availability and affordability of qu ality 
pharmaceuticals of mass consumption. The umbrella scheme has the foll owing sub-
schemes:- 
 
 (i)        Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common Facility Centre; 
(ii)       Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility Centre; 
(iii)      Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS); 
(iv)      Assistance for Cluster Development; and 
(v)       Pharmaceutical Promotion Development Scheme (PPDS)" 
 
2.10 The Committee also asked about the mechanism for monitoring of prices of  all 
the non schedule drug formulations under DPCO 2013 and comment upon the 
effectiveness of the system, the Department in their written note stated as under: 
 "NPPA is effectively monitoring the prices of scheduled as well as n on-
scheduled medicines under DPCO, 2013 so that these formulations are 
available to public at the ceiling prices notified and any increase in  price is 
limited to the provisions of DPCO 2013. It takes action against companies 
found overcharging the consumers based on the references received from the 
State Drugs Controllers / individuals, samples purchased from the open 
market and reports from market based data and complaints received throug h 
the grievance redressal websites: ‘Pharma Jan Samadhan ’  and ‘Centralized 
Public Grievance Redressal and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) ’. The 
monitoring of increase in the price of formulations beyond the permissible li mit 
is also done on the basis of market data submitted by AIOCD (Pharmatrac 
Data) and individual complaints." 

17 
 
2.11  The Committee were further informed that NPPA issue notices for 
overcharging as and when price violation cases come to notice based on t he reports 
received from State Drug Controllers or based on samples purchased from market or 
complaints received from NGOs / individuals or based on PharmaTrac data. Action 
for recovery of the overcharged amount is taken as per the provisions of DPCO , 
1995 and DPCO, 2013. The cases are also referred to District Collector for reco very 
of the overcharged amount as arrears of land revenue under Sectio n-3 of Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955. 
2.12 When the Department was about the agencies/authorities at natio nal level, 
state level and district level that are responsible for enforcement of DPCO, 201 3 and 
state-wise details of complaints received from consumers and complaints for 
violation of DPCO, 2013 for last Five years as well as  complaints that have been 
resolved/settled, the Department in their written  reply stated that NPPA is 
empowered for the implementation of DPCO 2013. However, NPPA is taking 
assistance of the State Drug Controllers at state level who provide information 
regarding price violation and also assist in recovery of the overcharged amoun t. 
State Drug Controller has Drug Controller officer at District level.  
2.13 Further regarding the punishment for violating the DPCO, 2013 and steps 
taken by the government/NPPA on issue of overcharging by a manufacturer/ret ailer, 
the Department informed the Committee that the manufacturer violating the provision 
of DPCO 2013 is liable to deposit overcharged amount along with the Interest . In 
respect of new drug launched without the price approval, the penalty, is im posed as 
per guidelines. In case overcharging is not deposited the cases are referred  to the 
District Collector concerned for recovery.  
2.14  In regard to strengthening of NPPA the Secretary, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals made the following submission to the Committee during  the oral 
evidence on 24.05.2018: 
" We will need your support because we do want to strengthen NPP A.  NPPA 
has one full-time Member which is half-time now.  But, in regular course, there 
is one full-time Member and one full time Member Secretary.  This is no t good 
enough.  So, I want at least three-four full-time Members.  Drug Controller is a 
Member there, but he is a part-time Member.  Economic Advisor from DEA is 
a Member, but he is a part-time Member.  I am not casting anything, but a 
part-time Member cannot do justice to this work in the manner which a full -
time Member can do. So, I want the establishment to be strengthened w ith 
more full-time experts and Members.  As administrators, we do not know the 
full play of the pharmaceutical industry." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
 THE OTHER RELATED MATTERS 
 
3.1 On the issue of pharmaceutical companies going to court of law in the past  
and the action taken by the NPPA o n violation of DPCO,2013 order, the Committee 
asked the Department regarding the remedial measures taken in this regard so as to  
contain the problem of litigation as well as need for amendment in the existing rule to 
do away the problem of litigation, the Department in their written note stated as 
under: 
 " Yes, since the inception of the price control, the pharmaceutical companies  
have been  approaching the courts of law in relation to the issues mainly of 
overcharging and pricing  etc. arising out of difference of interpretation of 
DPCO by the company and the  government.  There is a provision of review 
of order of NPPA by the government in the DPCO, 2013. The scope of 
litigation remains as there is always a possibility for a  different interpretation 
suiting the company.  An amendment is made when it is felt that making it w ill 
reduce the unnecessary litigation." 
 
3.2 Regarding the steps that are being taken to reduce the number of litigations in 
this regard, the Department in their written note stated as under: 
 
 "Before moving to the Court, the companies are free to come into the review 
under para  31 of DPCO, 2013 against the price notification of NPPA. 
Department provides review hearing to the companies and decide the ma tter 
as per provisions of DPCO, 2013. Further, in order to reduce the numbe r of 
litigations, NPPA also provide an opportunity to the pharmaceutical 
companies for personal hearing and pass reasoned speaking orders." 
 
3.3 Further, on details regarding cases of violation of DPCO, 2013 reported/ 
noticed by NPPA during the last Five years and the actions that have  been taken on 
such cases, the Department in their written  reply stated that total 964  Demand 
Notices were issued  during  last  5  years  (till  September  2018)  to  the  errant 
pharmaceutical companies. Summary showing year wise number of Demand  
Notices issued, amount involved and recovery made are tabulated in the table giv en  
below. 
 
DETAILS OF DEMAND NOTICES ISSUED 
PARTICULARS YEAR 
2013-14 
YEAR 
2014-15 
YEAR 
2015-16 
YEAR 
2016-17 
YEAR 
2017-18 
YEAR 
2018-19 
(Till Sept., 
2018) 
Total 
No. of Demand Notices issued for 
overcharging (including suo-moto 
deposits) 
90 128 263 137 221 125 964 
Amount of Demand Notices issued 
(Rs. Crore) 
406.83 581.10 931.63 333.97 704.12 194.81 3152.46 
Amount recovered from 
Pharmaceutical companies (in  Crore) 
40.08 90.17 12.32 302.08 148.42 17.43 610.50 
 
3.4  When the Committee asked the Department to comment on the effectiveness 
of the present penalties and punishments related to violations of DPCO, 2013 and 

19 
 
steps that are being taken/ proposed to be taken to strengthen the syste m, the  
Ministry in their written reply had stated that action for recovery of the overcharged 
amount is taken by NPPA as per the provisions of Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 
1995 (DPCO, 1995) and DPCO, 2013. Whenever companies are found overcharging 
the consumers in respect of price of medicines, demand notices are issued for 
recovery of overcharged amount along with 15% interest thereon for violation un der 
various provisions of DPCO, 1995 and DPCO, 2013 read with Section 7A of 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955. If the manufacturers do not deposit the d emanded 
amount within the prescribed time limit after one time- bound remi nder, the matters 
are referred to concerned District Collector to initiate recovery proceedings against 
pharmaceutical companies. 
3.5 In cases where the defaulting pharma companies do not submit the requ ired 
sales data and Pharma Trac data is not available, the cases are referred to SDCs 
with a copy to the Principal Secretary/Secretary (Health) in the State where the  
manufacturers’ headquarter is situated with a request for pressing upon them to 
furnish required information within a further period of 30 days and also to verify their 
credentials through inspection of their offices and factory premises if need b e. The 
system of NPPA is robust where overcharging cases are identified and taken up as 
per the provisions of DPCO. 
3.6 However, in some cases, the demands raised for overcharging have been 
challenged in courts due to overcharging in formulations manufactured befo re the 
date of notification and found selling at pre revised prices after date o f notification 
and formulation claimed to be having innovative drugs delivery system. NP PA is 
actively pursuing these court cases. Where the demand raised by NPPA has not  
been challenged in the court and the concerned company does  not deposit the 
amount of demand, the matter is referred to the respective Collector for recovery  of 
the overcharged amount as arrears of land revenue under Essential Commodities  
Act, 1955. The cases referred to collectors are also followed up on regu lar basis by 
issuing D.O. reminders. 
 
3.7 Further the Committee asked the Department to comment on online-sale o f 
drugs/medicines at present and proposed guidelines for introduction and regulation 
e-pharmacies and the role envisaged for NPPA with regard to price regulation and 
monitoring of online-sale of drugs, the Department in their written no te stated as 
under: 
 "The ceiling prices fixed under DPCO 2013 are equally applicable to the 
online-sale of drugs/medicines. The online sales of drugs are being regulated 
by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare through Drug controller General 
of India. At present, there in separate wing/division for online sale of 
medicines. However, the prices are being monitored through the Report of the 
All India Organization of Chemists & Druggists  & Advanced Working, Action 
and Correction System (AIOCD AWACS)which provide data of the prices."         
3.8 Regarding the  mechanism that is in place to deal with drugs/medicines 
approved by Drug Controller General of India but subsequently found to have 
harmful side effects on consumers and also banned abroad but available in In dia at 
high prices, the Department in their written note stated that the C entral Government, 

20 
 
has the power to regulate, restrict or prohibit manufacture and sale of d rugs 
considered harmful or irrational in the country, under Sec. 26- A of the Dr ugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940 which is reproduced below- 
“26A. Power of Central Government to regulate, restrict or prohibit 
manufacture, etc., of drug and cosmetic in public interest . Without prejudice to 
any other provision contained in this Chapter, if the Central Government is 
satisfied, that the use of any drug or cosmetic is likely to involve any  risk to 
human beings or animals or that any drug does not have the therapeutic value 
claimed or purported to be claimed for it or contains ingredients and in such  
quantity for which there is no therapeutic justification and that in the public 
interest it is necessary or expedient so to do, then, that Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, regulate, restrict or prohibit the 
manufacture, sale or distribution of such drug or cosmetic.” 
Drugs, for which harmful effects are reported in the published literature or in t he 
media or in other country or if therapeutic justification is considered inadequate in the 
context of current medical evidence, are examined by Expert Committees/Drug s 
Technical Advisory Board (DTAB) to review the status of the drug formulation. The 
use of the drug is assessed on the basis of available technical information  benefit -
risk ratio, local needs and availability of the safer alternatives etc. Considering the 
recommendation of Expert Committee/ DTAB, if the Central Government is satisf ied, 
that the use of any drug is likely to involve any risk to human bein gs or animals or 
that any drug does not have therapeutic justification, the manufacture, sale a nd 
distribution of such drug is regulated/ restricted/ prohibited under Section 26A of the 
Said Act.  Banning of any drug in a country is based on a risk assessment process  
undertaken by the respective country. There could be number of reasons a s to why 
some of the drugs continued to be used in one country though ban ned in other 
country. Certain drugs banned in other country (ies), have been allowed for  
continued marketing in the country with certain conditions/restrictions under Section 
26A of the said Act based on examination of their benefit-Risk profile th rough Expert 
Committee/Drug Technical Advisory Board. Such drugs includes Nimsulide, Analgin, 
Dextropropoxyphene, Pioglitazone etc. 
SPURIOUS DRUGS ISSUE 
3.9 In regard to spurious drugs, the Committee were informed that the 
manufacture and sale of spurious drugs is a clandestine activity generally indulged in 
by anti-social elements and carried out by unlicensed or sometimes by the licensed 
manufacturers to exploit the confidence enjoyed by certain fast selling branded drugs 
by making their imitations.  Use of spurious drugs may results in harmful side effects 
or allergies and sometimes leads to death. If contaminated with pathogens (bacteria, 
virus) or other toxic elements can cause further illness or poisoning.  As a 
consequence of such damaging effects of spurious drugs, confidence of public may 
go down in health care systems, health care professionals, the suppliers a nd sellers 
of genuine drugs, the pharmaceutical industry etc.  Reports of availability of  spurious 
drugs in the country shake the confidence of indigenous as well as foreign buyers 

21 
 
and prestige of the country ’s pharmaceutical trade interests with negative impact on 
export of drugs from India. 
3. 10  The Committee enquired about the spurious medicines/drugs in the ma rket 
and its effect on pharmaceuticals industry and prices of drugs/medicines.   In this 
regard, the Department in its written reply had stated that drugs are regu lated under 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules made there under. The regulatory control 
over the drugs imported is exercised by the Central Government through the Central  
Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO). The manufacture, sale and 
distribution of drugs are regulated by the State Drugs Control Authorities appo inted 
by the State Governments through a system of licensing and inspection. The 
inspector is authorized to institute prosecution in respect of breaches of the A ct and 
Rules there under. Schedule M to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules provides 
requirements for Good Manufacturing Practices and requirements of plant and 
equipment for manufacture of drugs. The manufacturer is required to comply with the 
requirements of plant and equipments, facilities as per Schedule M.   As per the 
section 9B  of Drugs and cosmetics Act, 1940 a drug shall be deemed to be 
spurious:- 
 (a) if it is imported under a name which belongs to another drug; or  
 (b) if it is an imitation of, or a substitute for, another drug or resembles 
another drug  in a manner likely to deceive or bears upon it or upon its label or 
container the name of another drug unless it is plainly and conspicuously 
marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such 
other drug; or  
 (c) if the label or the container bears the name of an individual or com pany 
 purporting to be the manufacturer of the drug, which individual or company is 
 fictitious or does not exist; or  
(d) if it has been substituted wholly or in part by another drug or 
substance; or  
(e) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not truly  
a product. 
 As per the section 17B  of Drugs and cosmetics Act, 1940 a drug shall be 
 deemed to be  spurious:- 
 (a) if it is manufactured under a name which belongs to another drug; or  
 (b) if it is an imitation of, or is a substitute for, another drug or resembles  
another drug in a manner likely to deceive or bears upon it or upo n its label or 
container the name  of another drug unless it is plainly and conspicuously 
marked so as to reveal its true character and its lack of identity with such 
other drug; or  
 (c) if the label or container bears the name of an individual or com pany 
 purporting to  be the manufacturer of the drug , which individual or company is 
 fictitious or does not  exist; or  
(d) if it has been substituted wholly or in part by another drug or 
substance; or  
(e) if it purports to be the product of a manufacturer of whom it is not trul y 
a product. 
  

22 
 
 The Committee were further informed that the drugs inspectors are authorized 
under section 22 of the provisions of Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940, to tak e 
samples of any drugs/vaccines and send to Central Drugs Laboratories for 
test and analysis. In case any sample is declared as sub-standard quality, 
spurious/adulterated/Misbranded drugs, action is required to be taken against 
the earring firms as per the provisions of said Act and Rules. 
           
3. 11 A Statement Showing No. of Samples tested, No. of Samples declared Not  of 
Standard Quality/Spurious/ Adulterated drugs, No. of Prosecution Launched, an d 
No. of cases decided and No. of persons arrested States / UTs wise during last three 
years i.e. 2015-16 to 2017-18, as per the information made availa ble by the States is 
given in the table below: 
Number of samples tested and enforcement actions taken by State Drugs 
Controller during last three years 
 
 
3.12 Details of no. of samples tested declared Not of Standard Quality/Spuriou s/ 
Adulterated drugs and Percentage of Not of Standard Quality/Spurious/Adu lterated 
drugs in the country since 2015-16 to 2017-18, as per the information  made 
available by the various Zonal/Sub-Zonal offices of CDSCO is given in the  table 
below: 
 
 The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Govt. of India had conduct ed a 
country wide survey in the year 2014-2016 to determine the extent of spurious /Not 
of Standard Quality (NSQ) drugs in the country. Total 47012 drug samples were 
tested/ analyzed, out of which 1850 samples were declared as NSQ and 13 samples 
were declared as spurious by the Govt. analyst. Percentage of NSQ drugs repo rted 
is 3.16 %, while a spurious drug is 0.0245 %. 
 
3.13  During the oral evidence before the Committee on 22.10.2018, Drug 
Controller General of India made the following submission regarding spurious drugs:- 
"As you know, this comes under the concurrent list of the Constitution. Both , 
the Central Government and the State Governments are involved in 
S. 
No 
Year 
 
No. of 
drugs 
samples 
tested 
No. of 
samples 
declared not 
of standard 
quality 
No. of 
samples 
declared 
spurious / 
adulterated 
No. of prosecutions 
launched for 
manufacture, sale 
and distribution of 
spurious / 
adulterated drugs 
No. of case 
(as 
mentioned in 
the earlier 
column) 
decided 
No. of 
persons 
arrested  
1. 2015-16 74586 3703 234 289 2 59 
2. 2016-17 76721 2780 123 186 17 106 
3. 2017-18 82599 2783 236 131 16 163 
S. 
No. 
Year No. of drugs 
samples tested 
No. of samples 
declared not of 
standard quality 
% of drugs 
samples declared 
not of standard 
quality 
No. of drugs 
samples 
declared 
spurious/ 
adulterated 
% of drugs samples 
declared spurious/  
adulterated 
1. 2015-16 2897 115 3.96 5 0.17 
2. 2016-17 5207 146 2.80 Nil 0.0 
3. 2017-18 7088 381 5.37 2 0.028 

23 
 
monitoring the quality of the products. As a part to ensure quality of the 
drugs moving in India, we draw samples from all parts of India by the Drug 
Inspectors of the State Government as well as the Central Government. So, 
I have three years of data regarding the number of samples drawn across 
India and how many samples failed/ not of standard quality and h ow many 
spurious drugs we have found. In the year 2017-18, 82,599 sa mples have 
been drawn, out of which the number of samples declared as spurious is  
236. In the year 2016-17, we have drawn 76,721 samples, out o f which 123 
samples were found to be spurious. In the year 2015-16, 17,58 6 samples 
have been drawn, out of which 234 samples have been declared as 
spurious. In addition to this, in the year 2016-17, the Government of India 
conducted a special national drug survey for which the samples have bee n 
drawn all across India. Samples were not drawn by the Drug Inspectors 
alone. Samples were drawn by the third party, that is, Consumer 
Associations to prevent bias and 47,000 samples have been drawn and the  
spurious drugs are found to be of 0.3 per cent. This is the survey cond ucted 
by the Government of India with the help of the NGOs and the samples are 
tested in the Government Drug Testing Laboratories." 
 
MEASURES TAKEN FOR ENSURING QUALITY OF DRUGS 
 
3.14 Details  of various measures that have been taken by the Department to 
ensure the quality of drugs are as under:- 
(i) AMENDMENTS IN DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT 
 
 The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 was amended under Drugs & Cosmetics 
(Amendment) Act 2008 and had come in force since 10 th Aug, 2009. The 
salient features of the amended Act are as under: 
 
 (a) Under this Act, any drug deemed to be adulterated or spurious wh en 
used by any person for or in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, or prevention 
of any disease or disorder is likely to cause his death or is likely to cause such 
harm on his body as would amount to grievous shall be punishable w ith 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but w hich may 
extend to imprisonment for life   and shall also be liable to f ine which shall not 
be less than ten Lakh rupees or three times value of the drugs confiscated,  
whichever is more. 
 (b) The fines realized will be paid to the relative of the decease d or the 
aggrieved person. 
 (c) Offence for sale and manufacture of spurious and adulterated dr ugs 
have been made cognizable and non-bailable. 
 (d) A provision of compounding of minor offences has been introduced t o 
dispose of them expeditiously. 
 (e) Designating special courts for trial of offences relating to Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act. So far, 22 States and UT’s have set up the courts.  
 

24 
 
List of States having Designated Special Courts 
 
1. Karnataka 
2. Madhya Pradesh 
3. Delhi 
4. Tripura 
5. Lakshadweep 
6. Arunachal Pradesh 
7. Goa 
8. Meghalaya 
9. Bihar 
10. Mizoram 
11. J&K 
12. Daman & Diu 
13. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
14. Tamil Nadu 
15. Uttarakhand 
16. Uttar Pradesh 
17. Rajasthan 
18. Puducherry 
19. Punjab 
20. Kerala 
21. Andhra Pradesh  
22. Haryana 
 
The details of enhancement of penalties through amendment in th e Act in 2008 are 
mentioned below: 
 
Offence Penalties before 
Amendment in 2008 
Enhanced Penalties after 
Amendment  2008 
27(a) any drug deemed to 
be adulterated or spurious 
is likely to cause his death 
or is likely to cause such 
harm as would amount to 
grievous hurt 
imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than five 
years but which may extend to 
a term of life  and with fine 
which shall not be less than 
ten thousand rupees; 
imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than ten 
years but which may extend to a 
term of life  and with fine which 
shall not be less than ten lakh 
rupees; or three times values 
of the drugs confiscated, 
whichever is more 
The fine realized shall be paid to 
the victims/relatives. 

25 
 
27(b) any drug adulterated 
but not being a drug 
referred to in clause (a), or 
without a valid license  
 
 
imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than one 
year but which may extend to 
three years  and with fine 
which shall not be less than 
five thousand rupees 
imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than three 
year but which may extend to 
five  years  and with fine which 
shall not be less than one lakh  
rupees: or three times of value 
of drug confiscated, 
whichever is more. 
27(c) any drug deemed to 
be spurious under section 
17B, but not being a drug 
referred to in clause (a) 
imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than  
three years  but which may 
extend to five years and with 
fine which shall not be less 
than five thousand rupees: 
imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than 7 years  
but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life  and with 
fine which shall not be less 
than three lakh rupees or 
three times the value of the 
drug confiscated, whichever 
is more 
27(d) any drug, other than 
a drug referred to in clause 
(a) or clause ( b) or clause 
(c), in contravention of any 
other provision of this 
Chapter or any rule made 
there under, 
Imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than 
one year  but which may 
extend to two years and with 
fine. 
Imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than one year 
but which may extend to two 
years and with fine which shall 
not be less than 20 thousand 
rupees. 
 
(ii) WHISTLE BLOWER SCHEME 
 
 Whistle Blower Scheme was announced by Government of India in Au gust, 
2009 to encourage vigilant public participation in the detection of movement of 
spurious drugs in the country. Under this scheme the informers would be 
suitably rewarded for providing concrete information in respect of movement 
of spurious drugs to the regulatory authorities. The salient features of  the 
aforesaid reward scheme are as under: 
  The reward scheme shall be applicable for whistleblowers in the area of 
drugs, cosmetics and medical devices.  
 Reward is to be given to the whistleblowers i.e. the informers / officials only  
when there is a confirmation of the seizure of spurious, adulterated and  
misbranded drugs, cosmetics and medical devices by the designated officers 
of the CDSCO.  
 The reward of maximum of upto 20% of the total cost of consignme nts seized 
will be payable to the informer /officials which should not in any case exce ed 
Rs 25 Lakh in each case.  
 In respect of an officer of the Government / CDSCO, the reward should not i n 
any case exceed Rs 5 Lakh for one case and a maximum of Rs 30 Lakh in his 
/ her entire service.  
 With a view to ensure that the informers are not made to wait till the  final 
disposal of the matter, 25% of the amount will be given at the time of filing of 
the charge sheet in the court of Law.  

26 
 
 Further, with a view to ensure that the informers do not turn hostile during t he 
trial of the case and continue to assist the court in deciding the matter in favour 
of the Government, 25% of the amount will be given to them at the time of 
disposal of the case in favour of the Government in the first court of law.  
 The remaining 50% amount will be paid only when the case has be en finally 
disposed off and no appeal with respect to the matter is pending in any o ther 
Court of Law in the country.  
 However, so far the complaints were found to be fictitious and no person has  
been rewarded under this Scheme till date as per the information  furnished by 
the Department. 
 
 (iii) INTRODUCTION OF GOOD LABORATORY PRACTICES 
 The Department informed the Committee that Schedule L-1 specifying the  
rules relating to Good Laboratory Practices & Requirements of Premises & 
Equipment for testing laboratories have become operative since 1st day of 
November, 2010.These rules provide for Good housekeeping and safety prov isions 
for the maintenance of the laboratory. The manufacturers having in-house 
laboratories are required to conform to the provisions of the said Schedule. 
 
(iv) SUBMISSION OF BIOEQUIVALENCE STUDY RESULT 
  The Committee were also informed that in order to ensure efficacy of drug s, 
the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 have been amended w.e.f. 3.4.2017 providing 
that applicant shall submit the result of bioequivalence study along with the 
application for grant of manufacturin g license of oral dosage form of drugs falling 
under the Category II and Category IV of the Biopharmaceutical Classificat ion 
System. 
 
(v) JOINT INSPECTION OF MANUFACTURING FACILITIES BEFOR GRANT 
OF LICENSE 
 On 27.10.2017, the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 have been amend ed 
by the Department vide Gazette notification no. G.S.R. 1337 (E) making it mandatory 
that before the grant of manufacturing license, the manufacturing establish ment is to 
be inspected jointly by the Drugs Inspectors of Central Government and State 
Government. The licensed manufacturing premises shall be inspected jointly by the 
Drugs Inspectors of Central Government and State Government to verify the 
compliance with the conditions of license and the provisions of the Drug s & 
Cosmetics Act and Rules for not less than once in three years or as needed as per 
risk based approach. 
 
(vi) SUBIMISSION OF EVIDENCE OF STABILITY, SAFETY OF EXCIPIENTS 
ETC OF ALL DRUGS 
 The Committee were further informed that on 10.04.2018, the Dru gs and 
Cosmetics Rules, 1945 have been amended vide Gazette notification no. G.S.R. 360 
(E), making it mandatory for all drugs, that the applicants shall submit evidence  of 
stability, safety of excipients etc. to the State Licensing Authority before grant of 
product manufacturing license by the Authority.    

27 
 
  
3.15 With regard to the list of 349 Fixed Dose Combinations, which were  banned 
by the Government, the Chairman NPPA informed the Committee as under d uring 
oral evidence  held on 22.10.2018:- 
 
"Against that banning of those drugs by the Government, many persons,  
pharmaceutical people went to different High Courts of the country. The  
Government, against that, approached the Supreme Court and requested 
the Supreme Court to hear all the cases together. Luckily, the Government ’s 
request was allowed by the Supreme Court and in last December, 2017, the 
Supreme Court passed an order that drugs can be banned with due proces s 
of law. The due process of law, as the Supreme Court recommended, is all 
these pharmaceutical companies will be given hearing by Drug Technical 
Advisory Board, which is constituted as per the Drugs and Cosmetic Rules. 
Duly hearing was given to them. An expert in the field of clinical 
pharmacology was Chair of that s ub-Committee which heard all the 
companies. After hearing all the companies, 343 drugs were banned a nd 6 
drugs were considered rational and they were allowed. Saridon was one o f 
those 343 drugs. But as soon as this list was out on 7th of Septemb er, the 
companies again approached the Supreme Court saying that these dru gs 
were available and they were permitted before 1988. Since, they were there  
for the last 30 years, they should be allowed. The Supreme Court then 
ordered that these 15 combinations which included saridon should be 
looked afresh because they were available in the country and they were 
approved 30 years ago. That can be looked separately and the Gove rnment 
can go ahead with others. So, 328 drugs were banned. But even after 
banning, pharmaceutical companies again approached different High Courts 
of the country and there are approximately 80 cases lodged by different  
pharmaceutical companies in different High Courts. On request of the 
Government, the Supreme Court itself, in one of the cases directed that th is 
situation cannot go on. In one of the company ’s request, the Supreme Court 
itself ordered that all these cases will be combined and the Government has  
requested Attorney General of India to present the Central Government in 
this case. The Supreme Court itself has fixed the date of 23rd Octob er for 
next hearing of this case." 
 
 CONSUMER ISSUES 
3.16 The Government has helped the consumers since May, 2014 by 
implementing the provisions of DPCO, 2013 made the following savings:- 
Particulars Saving to Consumers 
in Rs. Crores 
NLEM-2011  
Under NLEM-2011 upto May 2014 2221.23 
Under NLEM-2011 from May-2014 to Feb-2016 201.01 
NLEM-2015  
Under NLEM-2015 from Mar-2016 till 21.9.2017 2643.00 
Coronary Stents in Feb-2017 4547.00 
Under Para 19 (extraordinary circumstances) in July, 2014 350.00 
Knee Implants in Aug-2017 1500.00 
TOTAL 11462.24 

28 
 
  
3.17  In view of the above data provided by the Department, the Comm ittee asked 
about the satisfaction of the Department with the present rate of sa ving or there is 
still potential to enhance such savings on this account keeping in view the increasing 
number of diseases, the Department in their written reply stated that the sa vings 
accrued to consumers is dependent on the number of medicines that a re included in 
the NLEM. 
 
3.18 Concerned about low consumer awareness the Committee asked  the 
Department regarding the rules and regulations that govern the packaging, labeling  
and sale of drugs/medicines including price-labeling on drugs/medicines packets in  
the country, the Department in their written reply stated that the rules and regulations 
for the packaging, labeling and sale of drugs/medicines are governed by  the Drugs 
and Cosmetics Act 1955. The price labeling is governed by the Drug (Pri ces Control) 
Order 2013.  As per para 24(2) of DPCO 2013, every manufacturer of a schedule 
formulation intended for sale shall display in indelible print mark, on the lab el of 
container of the formulation and the minimum pack thereof offered for retail sale, the 
maximum retail price of that formulation based on the ceiling price noti fied in the 
Official Gazette or ordered by the Government in this behalf with the words  
"Maximum Retail Price" preceding it and the words 'inclusive of all taxes' succe eding 
it. 
3.19 Further the Committee also asked about consumers demanding for price list  
of scheduled and non-scheduled medicines being sold by a chemist/retaile r and is it 
mandatory for a chemist/retailer to have such list, the Department in the ir written 
reply stated  -"Yes, as per para 24(4) of the DPCO 2013, every retailer a nd dealer 
shall display the price list and the supplementary price list, if any, as f urnished by the 
manufacturer, on a conspicuous part of the premises where he carries on busine ss 
in a manner so as to be easily accessible to any person wishing to consult the 
same." 
 
3. 20  Regarding steps that are being taken to conduct awareness campaign 
through print and electronic media to spread awareness among the public in this 
regard, the Department in their written reply stated that NPPA is running a Cen tral 
Sector Scheme i.e. Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring vide which 
creation of general awareness about the availability of medicines, ce iling prices of 
medicines fixed by the Government, precautions to be taken while p urchasing 
medicines and about the functioning of NPPA.This will be done through  issue of 
advertisements in the print media and through radio jingles and tele-films.   Further, 
for dissemination of information on ceiling price, NPPA is promoting the Mobile Ap p 
“Pharma Sahi Daam ” whereby the consumer can verify the ceiling prices of the 
medicine instantly.Pharma Sahi Daam is a Mobile App was developed by NPPA and 
launched officially by Hon’ble Minister (Chemicals & Fertilizers/Parliamentary Affairs) 
on 29 th August, 2016 on the occasion of NPPA Foundation Day. This app provides 
information to consumers on prices of scheduled medicines which are under price 
regulation as well as prices of non-scheduled medicines. This app helps consumers 
to check the ceiling prices of medicines and to verify whether medicines are being 

29 
 
sold within the approved price range and also to detect any case of overpricing by 
pharmaceutical company/ chemist. In case of overpricing the consumer can lod ge a 
complaint through Pharma Jan Samadhan website 
(
http://nppaindia.nic.in/redressal.html). 
 
 
 
  

30 
 
Recommendations/Observations 
4.1 The Committee note that about 70% of medical expenditure in our 
country is incumbent on medicines and as such affordability of medicines is a 
crucial element in availing medical treatment by all sections of the people in 
the country particularly poor people.  The Committee, therefore, selected and 
examined the subject ‘Pricing of drugs with special reference to Drug (Price 
control) order, 2013 on priority basis.  DPCO, 2013 was notified on 15.05.2013 
under the essential commodities Act and is based on the broad guidelines of 
the National pharmaceuticals pricing policy, 2012 which aimed at bringing a 
regulatory framework for pricing of drugs so as to ensure availability of 
required medicines at reasonable prices even while providing sufficient 
opportunity for innovation and competition to support the growth of industry, 
thereby meeting the  goals and shared economic well being for all.  The 
Government has dawn a National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM), 2015 as  
first schedule of DPCO, 2013 which was notified on 10 March,2016.  As per 
NLEM, the essential medicines are those that satisfy the priority health car e 
needs of the population.   The list is made with consideration to disease 
prevalence, efficacy, safety and comparative cost- effectiveness of the 
medicines. All efforts should be made by the Union Government in 
coordination with State Governments to provide medicines to poor people at a 
price affordable to them. 
4.2 The Committee are not in agreement with the nomenclature of “National 
List of Essential Medicines ”.  Every medicine/drug is essential to treat a 
particular disease/ailment. When a person is affected by any disease/ailment,  
particular medicine becomes essential to treat that disease/ailment and as 
such every medicine is essential from the context of treating the disease for 

31 
 
which it is formulated. The Committee, therefore, feel that the present 
nomenclature of NLEM is not appropriate and recommend that the same may 
be reviewed and the present nomenclature may suitably be modified.  
4.3 The Committee note that the Department has adopted market based 
pricing system for drugs in the country even though it has accepted that cost-
based system may be ideal and that may give a true reflection of drug prices.  
However, the Government has adopted market based system as it is very 
difficult to arrive at a cost-based pricing due to non-divulgence of actual cost 
by every company.  The government decided to go for market based pricing to 
bring in more transparency, less intrusive inspector raj and to encourage 
innovation and research in the field.  In this regard, the Committee are of the 
firm view that it is the responsibility of the Government to protect the interests 
of common man through actual and affordable prices for drugs in the country.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that an expert Committee should be 
constituted to study the impact of market based and cost based pricing 
systems on drug prices in the country and to take appropriate steps on the 
basis of the recommendations of that Committee.  
4.4 The Committee are concerned to note the lot of difference between the 
prices of Jan Aushadhi and branded medicines.  In this regard, the Committee 
note that the cost of branded medicines are more due to inclusion of 
promotional cost in them. Number of Jan Aushadhi stores is less in the 
country.  Moreover, awareness among people about Jan Aushadhi medicines 
is also not quite high.  Most of the doctors prescribe branded medicines and 
the people incur lot of expenditure on buying them and most of the times such 
expenditure is beyond their buying capacity.  In this regard, the Committee 
recommend the following steps:- 

32 
 
(a) The government should take necessary steps to ensure that branded 
medicines are not heavily priced and their pricing should not be more than 
certain ceiling to be fixed by NPPA viz-a-viz Jan Aushadhi medicines.  
(b) More number of Jan Aaushadhi stores should be opened in all districts 
in country particularly near railway stations, bus terminals, Government 
hospitals, etc.  
(c) Awareness among people about PMBJP scheme, cheaper prices of Jan 
Aushadhi medicines and their proven quality should be created. 
(d) Doctors should be advised to prescribe Jan aushadhi/generic medicines 
which are cheaper than branded medicines. 
4.5 The Committee note that the Ministry of Health and Family welfare has 
constituted a Standing National committee on Medicines to review and revise 
the National List of essential Medicines (NLEM).  There are 23 Members in the 
Committee representing various Health and family welfare sectors.  One 
representative is from the Department of Pharmaceuticals but there is no 
representation for NPPA in the committee.  Even though a representative from 
NPPA will be a special invitee for the meetings of the Committee, permanent 
representation has not been given to NPPA.  NPPA is entrusted with the 
responsibility of fixation and revision of prices of scheduled formulations 
under drugs (Prices control) order and also responsible for monitoring and 
enforcing drug prices in the country.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that permanent representation should be given to NPPA in the Core 
Committee.   
4.6 The Committee are satisfied to note that the total number of scheduled 
formulations have increased from 530 under NLEM 2011 to 851 under NLEM 

33 
 
2015.  It is also heartening to note that ceiling prices of 370 scheduled 
formulations under NLEM 2011 which witnessed 0 to 30% decrease with 
respect to maximum price has increased to 670 formulations under NLEM 
2015.  However, the number of scheduled formulations which witnessed 35- 40 
percentage and above 40 percentage reduction with respect to maximum price 
have reduced from 34 to 24 and 126 to 59 under NLEMs 2011 and 2015, 
respectively.  The clarification   provided by the Department in this regard that 
the reduction in these cases are limited while refixing the  ceiling price of the 
common formulations under NLEMs 2011 and 2015 is not satisfactory. Th e 
Committee recommend that the Government should take all necessary steps 
to bring more number of formulations under these two categories so that 
overall prices of drugs in the country are affordable to people particularly to 
poor people.  
4.7   The Committee note that on the issue of violation of Drug Price Control 
Order (DPCO),2013 with respect to overcharging, the National Pharmaceuticals 
Pricing Authority issued Demand Notices but the actual amount recovered in 
2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16, 2017-18 and 2018-19 is Rs 4 0.08 crores, Rs.90.17 
crores, Rs. 12.32 crores, Rs. 148.42 crores and Rs. 17.43 crores respec tively 
which is too meager in comparison to the amount due to be recovered which 
was Rs. 406.83 crores, Rs. 581.10 crores, Rs.931.63 crores, Rs.704.12 crores  
and Rs. 194.81 crores respectively during the period except in 2016-17 wh en 
out of Rs. 333.97 crores, Rs. 302.08 crores were recovered. The Committee 
firmly feels that unless DPCO rules are made stringent and effectively 
implemented, the unfair market practices by pharma companies may continue 
to hamper the availability of affordable medicines to the people. Since 
overcharging of drugs/medicines is a violation of consumers right to basic 

34 
 
healthcare, the Committee strongly recommend that if the manufacturer do not 
deposit the demanded amount within the prescribed time limit given by NPPA, 
cancellation of licenses of such companies to  manufacture that medicine/drug 
may be considered. Similar action may also be taken on retailers who indulge 
in overcharging of drugs/medical devices. 
4.8 The Committee are concerned to note the sale of spurious and non-
standard quality drugs/medicines in the country. Drug samples are annually 
tested by the State Drugs Controller in States as well as Zonal and Sub-Zonal 
Offices of Central Drug Standards Control Organization. However, the 
Committee are discomfit to note that the number of samples tested is very 
less, such that 74586, 76721 and 82599 samples were tested by State Dru g 
Controller during 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 respectively.  During the same 
period 2897, 5207 and 7088 samples were tested by Central Drug Standards 
Control Organization.  Considering the size of the country and the huge 
quantum of medicines being distributed and sold in the country, this sample 
size is not adequate to measure the actual problem of spurious and non-
standard quality drugs in the country. The Committee also note that the 
punishment for the spurious drugs under the amendments made in Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act 1940 which came into force since 10th August, 2009 are 
stringent and 22 States have set up designated Special Courts for the purpose.  
However, the Committee is dismayed to note that the decision is pending in 
most of cases such that in the year 2015-16 out of 289 prosecutions launched 
against manufacture, sale and distribution of spurious/adulterated drugs only 
2 cases have been decided. Similarly in 2016-17 out of 186 cases of 
prosecutions against manufacture, sale and distribution of 
spurious/adulterated drugs only 17 cases were decided and in 2017-18 out of 

35 
 
131 prosecution cases only 16 cases were decided.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Government should take adequate measures to 
considerably increase the number of samples of drugs to be tested so as to 
instill fear in those who indulges in sale/distribution of spurious/non-standard 
quality drugs. There is also urgent need for time bound decision on the 
prosecutions launched against manufacture, sale and distribution of 
spurious/non-standard quality. The Committee in this regard recommend that 
more  Special Designated Courts may be opened in all the States/UTs and 
those courts may also impressed upon the need for timely disposal of cases. 
4.9 The Committee are constrained to note that presently National 
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) has only a part-time member apart 
from the chairperson.  NPPA is entrusted with the responsibility of enforcing 
the Drugs (Prices control) order and to monitor availability of drugs in the 
country, identify shortages and to take remedial steps thereon.  In the absence 
of even a full time member and a strong management team, the Committee are 
skeptical that the authority will be able to carry out its functions effectively.  
The Committee are of the view that the current composition of the authority 
needs to be expanded to include more full time expert members so that the 
administrative efficiency of the organization is enhanced to fulfill the mandate 
of NPPA. Thus, the Committee strongly recommend that the Composition of 
NPPA may be reviewed and more full time members may be appointed. 
 
 
New Delhi;                                  ANANDRAO ADSUL 
11  February,  2019                           Chairperson 
22 Magha 1940 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on 
                          Chemicals and Fertilizers 

36 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2017-18) 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 24th May, 2018 from 1100 hrs.  
to 1230 hrs. in Committee Room 'E' , Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
4. Shri S. Rajendran 
5. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
6. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
7. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
8. Smt. Veena Devi 
 RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
  10. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judeo 
  11. B. K. Hariprasad 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri U. C. Bharadwaj          -    Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri N. Amarthiagan            -     Committee Officer 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
1. Shri Jai Priye Prakash Secretary 
    2. Shri Navdeep Rinwa Joint Secretary 
 

37 
 
II. REPRESENTATIVES OF NATIONAL PHARMACEUTICALS  PRICING AUTHORITY  (NPPA) 
1. Shri Rakesh Kumar Vats Chairman, National Pharmaceuticals Pricing 
Authority (NPPA)  
2. Ms Rittu Dhillon Member Secretary, National Pharmaceuticals 
Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
4. Sh. Kalyan Nag Adviser, National Pharmaceuticals Pricing 
Authority (NPPA) 
 
2. At the outset, Hon ’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) and other officials to the sitting.  
 Their attention was invited to the provisions contained in Direction 55(1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of the Committee's proceedings.  
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the official from Department of 
Pharmaceuticals made power point presentation on the subject "Pricing of drugs with 
special reference to Drug Price Control Order 2013" covering inter-alia the following 
Points:- 
 (i) Setting up of NPPA and its composition; 
(ii) Salient features of DPCO, 2013; 
(iii) National List of Essential Medicines  
(iv) Price fixation for medicines in NLEM 
(v) E-initiative -Pharma Janm Samadhjan 
(vi) E-initiaive Pharma Data Bank(IPDMS) 
(vii) Pharma Sahi Dham  
4. During the discussion, the Hon'ble Chairperson and Members of the Committee 
inter-alia raised following issues/points namely-: 
(i) Reasons for replacing the cost based pricing to market based pricing; 
(ii) Mechanism for deciding essentiality of a medicine; 
(iii) Measures taken to control prices of non scheduled    
  drugs/medicines/formulation; 
(iv) Issue related to availability of drugs in indian markets which are  
   banned in foreign countries;  
(v) Price difference of medicines being manufactured by big and small  
  pharma companies; 

38 
 
 (vi) Fair profit margin and difference in cost of promoted and non-  
  promoted drugs; and 
(vii)  Incentives for small pharma companies to undertake research   
  projects  
(viii) Need for more full time members  in NPPA  to strengthen its effective  
  functioning. 
 
4. The Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals replied to the above 
issues/points. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before 
the Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information to the Committee.  They 
were also asked to provide required information which was not readily available with 
them to the Committee at the earliest.   
5. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  

39 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2018-19) 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 22 nd October, 2018 from 1100 hrs.  
to 1230 hrs. in Committee Room 2,  Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
4. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
5. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
6. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
7. Dr. (Smt.) Ratna De (Nag) 
8. Shri Sarfaraz Alam 
 RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
10. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
11. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
12. Shri B. K. Hariprasad 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   -    Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Srivastava          -                Director 
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram            -     Deputy Secretary 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
I.  MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
1.  Shri Jai Priye Prakash Secretary 
2.  Shri Navdeep Rinwa Joint Secretary 

40 
 
II.   REPRESENTATIVES OF NATIONAL PHARMACEUTICALS  PRICING AUTHORITY (NPPA) 
1. Shri Rakesh Kumar Vats Chairman, National Pharmaceuticals Pricing 
Authority (NPPA)  
2. Ms Rittu Dhillon Member Secretary, National Pharmaceuticals 
Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
3. Sh. Kalyan Nag Adviser, National Pharmaceuticals Pricing 
Authority (NPPA) 
 4. Shri APS Sawhney Director , National Pharmaceuticals Pricing 
Authority (NPPA) 
 
 
III. DRUG CONTROLLER GENERAL OF INDIA  
1. Dr. S. Eswara Reddy,  DCGI 
2. Sh. A. K. Pradhan DDC, DCGI 
 
2. At the outset, Hon ’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) and other officials to the sitting.  
 Their attention was invited to the provisions contained in Direction 55(1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of the Committee's proceedings.  
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the representative of Department of 
Pharmaceuticals made a power point presentation to the Committee on the subject 
"Pricing of drugs with special reference to Drug Price Control Order 2013" covering 
inter-alia the following Points:- 
 (i) Setting up of NPPA and its composition; 
(ii) Salient features of DPCO, 2013; 
(iii) National List of Essential Medicines  
(iv) Price fixation for medicines in NLEM 
(v) E-initiative -Pharma Janm Samadhjan 
(vi) E-initiaive Pharma Data Bank(IPDMS) 
(vii) Pharma Sahi Daam  
4. The power point presentation was followed by discussion on various 
issues/points relating to subject. During the discussion, the Hon'ble Chairperson and 
Members of the Committee raised questions which were replied by the representatives 
of the Ministry. Some of the vital points that came up for discussion are :- 
(i) Mechanism for deciding essentiality of a medicine; 

41 
 
(ii) Pricing mechanism for scheduled and non- scheduled medicines; 
(iii) Income level and purchasing power of people belonging to below poverty 
line viz-a-viz preparation of  National List of Essential Medicines; 
(iv) Violation of DPCO by manufacturers and retailers and action taken  
  thereon; 
(v) New Drug Policy and reasons for delays in approval of new drugs  
(vi) Supply of free medicines and prices of PMBJP medicines;  
(vii) Reasons for slow progress in development of pharma industry clusters 
and incentives for growth of micro, small and medium pharma industries; 
(viii) The status of Foreign Direct Investment in Greenfield and Brownfield 
projects in the pharmaceutical sector;  
 (ix) Functioning of mechanism to monitor quality of drugs and to check 
spurious drugs in the market; 
 (x) Issues   related to availability of drugs in Indian market which are             
banned in foreign countries; and 
 (xi) Prospects of revival of Public Sector Pharma PSUs including IDPL. 
 
5. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee as well as for furnishing valuable information to the Committee.  They were 
also asked to furnish these information which were not readily available with them to 
the Secretariat at the earliest.   
6. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

42 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FIFTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2018-19) 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 11 February, 2019 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1545  in Room No.139, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
SHRI ANANDRAO ADSUL  -    CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Veena Devi 
4. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
5. Shri K. Ashok Kumar   
6. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
7. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
8. Shri S. Rajendran 
9. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Elamaram Kareem 
11. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
SECRETARIAT  
1.  Shri V.K. Tripathi  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri  C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
3. Shri  N. Amarathiagan  -  Under Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  of the Committee. 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the draft 
Report  on the subject  'Pricing of Drugs with special reference to Drugs (Prices Control) 
Order, 2013' and draft Action Taken Report on 46th Report of the Committee on the 
subject ‘Promotion and Co-ordination of Basic Applied and other Research in areas 
related to Pharmaceutical Sector’  both pertaining to Department of Pharmaceuticals.   
4. After deliberations, the Draft Reports were adopted by the Committee 
unanimously without any changes/amendments.  The Committee authorised the 
Chairperson to finalize and present the Reports to the Parliament. 
 
  xxxxx   xxxxx               xxxxx   xxxxx 
   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 