1 
 
9 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2014-2015) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-2015) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
22 July, 2015 / 31  Ashadha 1935, (Saka) 
 


2 
 
CC&F No. - 9 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2014-15) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2014-2015) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Second Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-2015) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.07.2015 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.07.2015 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
22 July, 2015 / 31  Ashadha 1935, (Saka) 


3 
 
 
(i) 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-15) ………………………………...  
Introduction. …………………………………………………..…………………………  
Chapter I Report ……………….…………………………………………………..  
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of  Seventeenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2014-15) held on  16 June 2015 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2014 -15) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2014 -15)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals).  
 
 
  

4 
 
(ii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(2013-14) 
 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Idris Ali 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N Chandrappa 
5. ShriSankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
9. Shri K Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi 
11. ShriChhediPaswan 
12. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle 
13. Shri Rajendran S 
14. Shri ChanduLal Sahu 
15. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
16. Dr. Uma Saren 
17. Dr. Krishan Pratap Singh 
18. Shri Taslimuddin 
19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20.* Shri Innocent 
21.* ShriKotha Prabhakar Reddy 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Dr. MS Gill 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Narayan LalPanchariya 
26. Shri K Parasaran 
27. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao 
28. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
29.* Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
30.% Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
31.$ Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Smt Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Nishant Mehra   - Under Secretary 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Changed the nomination of ShriMurliDeora, Member of RajyaSabha from the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers to the Committee on External 
Affairs w.e.f. 25-09-2014. 
* ShriPalvaiGovardhan Reddy, Member of RajyaSabha nominated w.e.f. 08-10-2014 
Shri Mohanbhai KalyanjibhaiKundariya Nominated as Minister of State w.e.f. 09.11.2014 
The term of ShriBrijlalKhabri, MP (RS) has expire w.e.f. 25.11.2014 
Changed the nomination of Adv. Joice George, Member of LokSabha from the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers to the Personnel, Public  Grievances, 
Law and  Justice w.e.f. 24-12-2014. 
*Shri Innocent, and ShriKothaPrabhakar Reddy, Member of LokSabhanominated w.e.f. 22-12-2014 
% ShriMansukh L. Mandaviya, Member of RajyaSabha nominated w.e.f. 31-12-2014 
% Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav, Member of RajyaSabha nominated w.e.f. 29.01.2015 
$Changed the nomination of Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav, Member of Rajya Sabha from the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers to the Committee on 
Industry w.e.f. 07.05.2015 

5 
 
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014 -15) having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Ninth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (2014-2015) on Demands for Grants (2014 -2015) of the Ministry of Chemicals and  
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
 
2. The Second Report  (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabh a on  10.12.2014  .   The Action Taken replies of Government 
to all observations/recommendations contained in the Report were received on 30.4.2015 .   The 
Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers(2014-2015) considered and adopted this Report 
at their sitting held on 16.6.2015. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and conveni ence, the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have  been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi; 
14 January, 2014   .      ANANDRAO ADSUL 
23  ASHADHA,1937 (Saka)           Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 

6 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contai ned in the Second Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Commi ttee on  Demands for Grants (2014 -15) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) which was pres ented to Lok Sabha on 
10.12.2014 In all, the Committee made 7 Observations / Recommendations in the Report. 
 
2.  Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) were requested to 
furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations  contained in the Second  Report within 
three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e., by 10.3.2015  The Action Taken 
Replies of the Gov ernment in respect of all the 7  Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) vide their O.M. No.23003/2/2014 -Fin.II dated 30.4.2015 . These  Replies have 
been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government :- 
 Sl.Nos. 1,2, 3, 4, 5 and 6              (Total =6 )     
     Chapter II  
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do no t desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply :- 
 Sl.No.Nil                 (Total =Nil)  
  Chapter III  
(iii) Recommendations / Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
 Sl.No. Nil              (Total = Nil )  
Chapter IV  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are of interim nature :- 
 Sl.Nos. 7                  (Total =1)  
    Chapter V  
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Tak en Notes on  the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and the Final Replies in respect of 

7 
 
Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter V for which final replies are still 
awaited should be furnished expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committ ee will now deal with action taken by t he Government on some  of their 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A. Need to allocate funds commensurate to the outlays proposed by the Department. 
 
Recommendation No.1 
 
5. While stressing  that the allocations made by the  Planning Commission should 
commensurate to the outlays proposed by the Department, the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
 
 “The Committee note that the Planning Commission had approved  an outlay of Rs. 2968 
crore for the 12th Plan period. However, the actual budget allocation by the  Planning 
Commission during the first three years was only 583 crore ( Rs. 188 crore, Rs. 188 crore 
and Rs. 207 crore respectively) and the balance outlay of Rs.2386 crore  (Rs.1193 + 
Rs.1193) has been redistributed for the remaining two years of the 12 th Five Year Plan 
period.  For Annual Plan 2010 -11, against a BE of Rs.165 crore (RE was restricted to Rs. 
119 core), actual expenditure incurred amounted to Rs.69.66 crore. Furth er, against a BE 
of Rs.175 crore for Annual Plan 2011 -12 (RE was Rs.77.78 crore), actual expenditure 
incurred was Rs.40.33 crore only .  For Annual Plan 2012 -13, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals proposed an outlay of Rs.1127.45 crore against which outlay appro ved 
by Planning Commission was Rs. 188 crore, RE was Rs.85 crore and  actual expenditure 
incurred was Rs.51.78 crore which is 60.92% of RE outlay. For Annual Plan 2013 -14, the 
Department proposed an outlay of Rs. 567.60 crore.   However, Planning Commission 
allocated only Rs. 188.00 crore,  RE was Rs.75 crore and actual expenditure incurred was 
Rs.74.07 crore which is 98.76 % of the RE.  For the year 2014 -15, the Department 
proposed an outlay of Rs. 871.81 crore to Planning Commission against which Planning 
Commission approved only Rs. 207 crore,  which works out to just 10 percent more than 
last year’s allocation of Rs. 188 crore. According to the Department, actual expenditure 
incurred in previous years would have been one of the criteria for allocation of fund s in 
subsequent years. As  a result  of lesser allocations  than the proposed outlays,   the 
Department was compelled to spread thinner allocations amongst its  various schemes 
during the year 2014 -15. As for illustration,  a provision of Rs. 20 crore for NIPER,  Mohali 
has been made against proposed  amount of Rs.88.40 crore. Similarly, a provision of  Rs.88 
crore has been made for New NIPERs as against the proposed  amount of Rs. 193 crore. Rs. 
6 c rore was allocated for upgradation of MEs to WHO -GMP Standards etc. as against 
proposed amount of Rs.200.50 crore. For New Scheme, only Rs.15 crore was allocated 
against proposed amount of Rs.60 crore. The Committee therefore, strongly feel  that the 
allocations made by the Planning Commission  should commensurate to the out lays 
proposed by the Department.  However, the Committee are  anguished to  note that the 
Department even failed to utilize fully, the outlay provided at RE stage during the year 
2012-13 and 2013 -14. Since various schemes of the Department are of paramount 
importance, any  reduction in the allocation will have an adverse impact on the 
implementation of the schemes undertaken by  the Department. It is therefore imperative 
for the Department to take proactive role in this regard and  ensure optimum utilisation of 

8 
 
its resources to avoid substantial reduction of outlay at RE stage. The Committee  
recommend that the Planning Commission should provided adequate budgetary allocation 
to the Department at RE stage under various Head  for effective implementation of its 
various schemes. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives under taken  
by the Department in this regard”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
6. In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“The details of the recommendation have been brought to the notice of Industries Division, 
Planning Commission with reference to allocation of Plan funds for the remaining years of 
Twelfth Five Year Plan. 
Regarding requesting Planning Commission to alloca te adequate funds for the 
remaining period of Twelfth five Year Plan, this Department has raised this aspect with the 
Planning Commission during the Mid -Year Review Meeting. The reason for higher 
requirement of funds under different schemes was also submit ted to Planning Commission. 
Regarding improving the utilization of funds by the Administrative Divisions regular 
Meeting are convened at the level of Secretary  (Pharma) for monitoring Plan expenditure 
and identifying bottlenecks in timely utilization of Plan funds”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7.  The Committee had noted that an allocation of Rs. 2968 crore was approved  by the 
Planning Commission for the 12th Plan period. However, the actual budget allocation by the 
Planning Commission during the first thre e years was only Rs.583 crore ( Rs. 188 crore  for 
2012-13, Rs. 188 crore  for 2013-14 and Rs. 207 crore for 2014-15). For the year 2014 -15, 
the Department proposed an outlay of Rs. 871.81 crore to Planning Commission against 
which only Rs. 207 crore  was approved by them , which works out to just 10 percent more 
than last year’s allocation of Rs. 188 crore. As  a result  of lesser allocations  than the 
proposed outlays,  the Department was compelled to spread thinner allocations amongst its 
various schemes during  the year 2014 -15. The Committee strongly felt that the allocations 
made by the Planning Commission should commensurate to the outlays proposed by the 
Department. The Committee  had, therefore, recommended that the Planning Commission 
should provide adequate budgetary allocation to the Department at RE stage under various 
Heads for effective implementation of its various schemes.  However, the Committee were 
also distress to note   that the outlay provided at RE stage during the year 2012 -13 and 
2013-14 was no t even fully utilized by the Department.  The Committee  had, therefore, 
recommended that the Department should take proactive role in this regard and ensure 
optimum utilisation of its resources to avoid substantial reducti on in outlay at RE stage. In 
its Action Taken Reply,  the Department has stated that the details of recommendations  of 
the Committee have been brought to the notice of Planning Commission with reference to 

9 
 
allocation of Plan funds for the remaining years of Twelfth Five Year Plan . The reasons for 
higher requirement of funds under different schemes was a lso submitted to Planning 
Commission. Regarding improving the utilization of funds by the Administrative Divisions , 
regular meetings are convened at the level of Secretary  (Pharma) for  monitoring Plan  
expenditure and identifying bottlenecks in timely utilization of Plan  funds. In view of the 
foregoing, the Committee hope and trust that  Planning Commission  (Now National 
Institution for Transforming India (NITI)  Aayog) /Ministry of Finance will al locate 
adequate funds  to the Department  for effective implementation of its various schemes.   
However, it is now for the Department to take proactive action to utilize the plan funds 
judiciously, optimally and timely.  For this purpose,   it would be imperative for the  
Department that all the bottlenecks which impede the effective implementation of its 
various scheme  and timely utilization of plan funds  are identified and  removed. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should spell out its ac tion plan and 
remove all bottlenecks in order to implement all its  scheme effectively and efficiently. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan formulated  by the Department for 
optimum and timely utilization of funds allocated to them. 
 
B. Need to expedite the establishment of New NIPERs in their own campuses. 
 
Recommendation No.3 
 
8. While expressing concern over the slow progress in construction of new NIPER campuses, 
the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee note that National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education Research (NIPER) 
was declared as an “Institute of National Importance” under the Act of Parliament on 26th 
June 1998. One of the main purpose for starting these institutes is to establish the linkage 
with indust ry as well as academics.  In addition to NIPER, SAS Nagar, Mohali, the 
Government has set up six new NIPERs at Hajipur  (Bihar) , Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh) , 
Gandhinagar (Gujarat) , Rae Bareli (Uttar Pradesh), Guwahati( Assam) and Kolkata (West 
Bengal). The se new NIPERs will cater to the growing demand of the pharmaceutical 
industry for highly trained man power for continuous growth of the  pharmaceutical sector 
with increased focus on R&D, particularly after the amendment of Indian Patent Act.  At 
present, th ese six new NIPERs are functioning with the assistance of Mentor Institutes.  
While the process for construction of new campus for NIPER, Guwahati and NIPER, 
Gandhinagar has already started, the land for NIPER, Hyderabad and NIPER, Rae Bareli has 
been allotted by the respective State Governments and the process of selection of Project 
Management Consultants (PMC) has been initiated.  NIPER, Hajipur and NIPER, Kolkata are 
yet to be allocated land for which the matter has been taken up with the respective State  
Governments. The Committee are extremely unhappy with the slow pace of progress in the 
acquisition of land and construction of new  campus for new NIPERs.  As a result , new 
NIPERs are still continuing  to function with the assistance of their mentor Institu tes In the 
absence of requisite infrastructure facilities, the Committee feel that it would be difficult for 
NIPERs to achieve its optimum level of efficiency imparting education and to focus on R&D.  

10 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make concerted and 
coordinated efforts to expedite the establishment of  new NIPERs in their own campuses in 
a time bound manner so that  they could achieve their avowed objectives to establish its 
links with  pharmaceutical industry and nurture and pr omote quality and excellence in 
pharmaceutical education and research. They should pursue with respective State 
Governments at the highest level. Further, the process of  selection of  PMC for NIPER, 
Hyderabad and NIPER, Rae -Bareli for which land has already  been acquired should also be 
expedited and be completed with in a fixed time frame. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
9. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommenda tion of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
 “The Department has since awarded the work of construction of NIPER campus from 
concept to completion at Guwahati to Engineering Project India Ltd. (EPIL) and 
Gandhinagar to H industan Steelworks Constructions Ltd. (HSCL). Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) to be signed by NIPER, Hyderabad with the National Project 
Construction Corporation (NPCC) Ltd.  After signing the MoU, funds would be released to 
NIPER for making available to  the concerned PSU so as to enable them to commence work 
relating to construction of NIPER campus at Gandhinagar and Hyderabad. 
 
 Construction activity to start at: 
1. NIPER, Guwahati MoU Signed with EPIL. 
2. NIPER, Ahmedabad MoU signed with HSCL. 
3. NIPER, Hyderabad MoU is likely to be signed. 
 
 However, construction could not be taken up as sufficient fund has not been 
provided. Land with respect to NIPERs of  1. Hajipur 2. Kolkata 3. Rae Bareli are yet to be 
resolved.  
 The construction of NIPERs Guwahati, Ahmedab ad and Hyderabad will start during 
the current year. Department is planning for supplementary demands/budget proposal for 
additional funds to undertake construction properly.  
 
Latest developments w.r.t. NIPER, Kolkata and Hajipur are given below:- 
 
Status of land allocation at NIPER, Kolkata (West Bangal) 
A).  National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research (NIPER), Kolkata was set 
up to nurture and promote quality and excellence in Pharmaceutical education and 
research at Masters and Ph. D level  after the State Government committed to provide 100 
acre of land free of cost. Subsequently, State Government allotted 35 acres land free of cost 
at Baruipur. However, out of 35 acres, NIPER was required to spare 10 acres for common 
facilities, which leav es a very small piece of land for setting up of an Institute of national 
importance. In addition, State Government wanted Government of India to pay for the 
External Development Charges (EDC). Since, Union Cabinet approved setting up of NIPERs 
in other par ts of country, including Kolkata, on the premise that 100 acres of land would 
be provided free of cost by the State Governments. Therefore, it is not possible to pay for 
EDC. Accordingly, earlier also the State Government was requested to confirm the 
following: 
(i)  Possession of 100 Acres of land near Kolkata free of cost free from all 
encumbrances.  

11 
 
B). The matter has been followed up vigorously with the State Government. However, 
response from the State Government is yet to be received.  
(c) A letter has also been written on 29.12.2014 by Hon’ble Minister (C&F) to the  Chief 
Minister of West Bengal. 
Status of land allocation at NIPER, Hajipur (Bihar) 
 
I. Based on the firm assurances given in writing by the State Government of Bihar for 
allotment of 100 acre land free of cost, vide letter No. dated 29/5/2006 and 28/8/2006 by 
the Industrial Development Commissioner Govt. of Bihar this Department set up NIPER at 
Hajipur in 2007 under the mentorship of Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical 
Sciences (RMRIMS), Patna. Since, 2007, NIPER is functioning in the EPIP Campus, BIADA 
Industrial Area, Hajipur. State Govt. has, however, not yet allotted the land for setting up 
full-fledged NIPER Campus at Hajipur, in spite of the matter being followed up with the 
State Govt. at Chief Minister and Chief Secretary level.  
II. The matter has been brought to the notice that in the 10 th State level coordination 
Committee meeting held at Hajipur on 21.3.2013. The Principal Secretary, Industries, 
Bihar has advised  that 50 acres of land  was not readily available for allotment to NIPER, 
the institution may proceed with vertical construction worked on the 12.43 acres of land 
already in possession of NIPER Hajipur, along with 3 buildings. At the same time the 
institute has bee n advised to pursue with the District Magistrate Vaishali for alternative 
land for acquisition for the NIPER.   
  In the Eastern Zonal Council meeting held on 16.01.2015 chaired by Union Home 
Minister, the matter was taken up and State Government reiterate d their view that 50 acre 
of land around Patna is not available and that the NIPER campus at the present site may be 
constructed vertically. 
III. Matter has not been settled as yet. Recently, the matter has been taken up at the 
level of Secretary and Minis ter. However, the quantum and location of land is yet to be 
settled satisfactorily.  
IV. Establishment of NIPER may be a great addition to the educational infrastructure of 
any State. However, since 2007 NIPER, Kolkata and Hajipur are functioning from the 
premises of their mentor institutes, and facing acute shortage of accommodation and they 
are unable to plan construction of full -fledged campus for providing inter -alia all essential 
infrastructure facilities essential for quality education at Post Graduat e level and Ph.D in 
Pharmaceutical Sciences.  
V.  A letter has also been written on 30.12.2014 by Hon’ble Minister (C&F) to the Chief 
Minister of Bihar.  
NIPER, Raebareli 
  As regards NIPER, Raebareli, t he Steering Committee constituted for all the NIPERs 
in its 20 th meeting held on 18.11.2014 observed that the issues related to adequacy and 
clear title of the land be assured and the related issues should be resolved before 
proceeding further in the matter of the appointment of the PMC for NIPER, Rae Bareli . 
Accordingly, the issue is being taken up with S tate Government to sort out the 
impediments so that PMC could be selected." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10. Expressing its deep concern over delay in construction of NIPER Campuses, the 
Committee had noted t hat six new NIPERs are functioning with the assistance of Mentor 
Institutes. The Committee had , therefore, recommended that the Department should make 
concerted and coordinated efforts to expedite the establishment of  new NIPERs  in their 

12 
 
own campuses in a time bound manner so that  they could achieve their avowed objectives 
to establish its links with  pharmaceutical industry and nurture and promote quality and 
excellence in pharmaceuti cal education and research. However, the Committee regret to 
note from the Action Taken Reply of the Department that in the absence of sufficient funds, 
the construction of NIPERs of Guwahati, Ahmedabad and Hyderabad  could not be taken up. 
However, the Department has  assured that   the construction of these NIPERs  will start 
during the current financial year and  the Department is planning for supplementary 
demands/budget proposal for additional funds to undertake construction properly . The 
Committee also note that  the issue s relating to allocation of  land in respect of NIPERSs  
Kolkata, Hajipur and Raebareli  is yet to be resolved.  In the context of NIPER, Kolkata, the 
Department has stated that  the matter has been followed up vigorously with the State 
Government of West Bengal but the response from them is yet to be received.  A letter has 
also been written on 29.12.2014 by Hon’ble Minister (C&F) to the Chief Minister of West 
Bengal. Similarly, the State Government of Bihar has not yet allotted the land for settin g up 
full-fledged NIPER Campus at Hajipur in spite of matter being follo wed up with the State 
Government at Chief Minister and Chief Secretary level.  As regards NIPER, Raebareli, the 
issues related to adequacy and clear title of the land  are yet to  be assured and  resolved 
before proceeding further in the matter of the appointm ent of the PMC for NIPER, Rae 
Bareli. The issue is being taken up with S tate Government to sort out the impediments so 
that PMC could be selected.  In view of the foregoing, the Committee are extremely distress 
to note that  the construction of NIPERs of Guw ahati, Ahmedabad and Hyderabad  could not 
be taken up simply for the reason that  adequate funds are not available. However, the 
Department has planned for supplementary demands/budget proposal for additional funds 
to NIPERs,  The Committee, therefore, hope and trust that the Department would pursue the 
matter vigorously  with the Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission  (Now National 
Institution for Transforming India (NITI)  Aayog) and urge them to provide adequate funds 
so that the construction of NIPERs at Guwahati, Ahmedabad and Hyderabad could be taken 
up with out further delay. As regards the construction of NIPERs Kol kata, Hajipur and 
Raebareli is concerned, the Committee expect the Department to pursue the matter 
rigorously and consistently with the respective State Governments impressing upon them 
to allocate  the requisite land for the purpose. The Committee, therefore, reiterate its 
recommendation that the Department should make concerted and coordinated efforts to 
expedite the establishment of  new NIPERs in their own campuses in a time bound manner.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department  in this 
regard. 

13 
 
 
C. Price Control of all Essential Drugs by  National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) 
 
Recommendation No.4 
 
11. While observing that  Government/NPPA to urgently bring down the prices of all essential 
drugs , the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that the  functions of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) inter-alia include fixation and revision of prices of scheduled drugs under the Drug 
(Price Control) Order, 1995 (DPCO’95)/DPCO, 2013, as well as monitoring and 
enforcement of prices. NPPA also provides inputs to Government for policy formulation 
and on other specific iss ues concerning affordable medicines to the consumers. The 
Government has notified New DPCO, 2013 on 15th May, 2013 in supersession of DPCO, 
1995. Out of the 628 NLEM medicines specified in the Schedule -I of DPCO, 2013, NPPA has 
fixed / notified the ceiling  prices in respect of 489 medicines upto 15 th September, 2014 
under provisions of the said order. In order to fix the ceiling prices in respect of the 
remaining NLEM medicines, NPPA has made sincere efforts to obtain / collect the data from 
all available s ources like IMS -Health, PharmaTrac, Pharma Industry Associations, 
Marketing Companies etc. In addition, NPPA took up the matter with Department of Health, 
Drugs Controller General (India), State Health Secretaries and State Drugs Controllers for 
providing the information / data so as to enable NPPA to fix prices of remaining NLEM 
medicines under provisions of DPCO, 2013. The  DPCO, 2013 also provides for monitoring 
of the production and availability of scheduled formulations and the active pharmaceuticals 
ingredients contained in the scheduled formulations. In this regard, the manufacturers/ 
importers/ marketing companies of the scheduled formulations and Active Pharmaceutical 
Ingredients are required to furnish information as stated in Form - III of the said order 
quarterly. NPPA regularly monitors the availability of essential medicines in the country 
through Drugs Control Administration of State Governments. Whenever shortage is 
reported by the State Drug Controllers or comes to its notice otherwise, NPPA ta kes 
remedial steps for ensuring availability of drugs by impressing upon manufacturers to rush 
the stocks to the places of shortage.  In this regard, the Committee were informed that 
recently the scarcity of certain essential medicines, namely, Anti -Snake V enom, Rabies 
vaccine, Rabies Immunoglobulin, Albumin Injection and Anti -malarial combination of 
Sulfadoxine + Pyrimethamine Tablets was  reported to the NPPA. According to the 
Department, the concerned manufacturers of these drugs were  not maintaining norma l 
supply of the medicines in domestic market and / or Institutions.  So, NPPA vide its 
notification S.O. No. 2292 (E) dated 09.09.2014  directed all the concerned manufacturers / 
importers to comply with the requirements contained in para 21(1) and furnish the month-
wise production and sale figures for the last 12 months. In view of the  foregoing, the 
Committee of the strong view that  the prices of all essential  drugs need to be regulated. In 
this regard, the role of the  Government in procuring drugs and prov iding it at affordable 
price to the public can not be undermined.  It is imperative for the Government/NPPA  to 
urgently bring down the prices of all essential drugs  so that the same are available to the  
common man, poor or the needy at affordable price. To keep this end in view,  the 
Committee strongly feel that the scope of price control needs to be enlarged taking into 
consideration cost effectiveness, safety and efficacy and more and more therapeutic 
segments  should be brought under price control. At the same time,  NPPA/Government 
should be vigilant enough to ensure that all essential  drugs are accessible to the public and 
a stock-out situation like the one as referred above should never arise.  NPPA should also 
expedite the process of notifying the ceiling price of the remaining NLEM medicines i.e. 139 
out of 628 NLEM medicines. The Committee would like the Department to act accordingly 

14 
 
and  be apprised of the initiatives taken by Department to fix/notify the prices of remaining 
NLEM medicines”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
12. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation  of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 “Out of the 628 NLEM medicines specified in the Schedule- I of DPCO,2013, NPPA has fixed/ 
notified the ceiling pric e in respect of 509 medicines upto 05 th February, 2015 under 
provisions of the said order. In order to fix the ceiling prices in respect of the remaining 
NLEM medicines, NPPA has made sincere efforts to obtain/ collect the price data from all 
available sources like IMS - Health, Pharma Trac, Pharma Industry Associations, Marketing 
Companies etc. In addition, NPPA took up the matter with Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare, Drugs Controller General (India), State Health Secretaries and State Drugs 
Controllers for providing the information/ data so as to enable NPPA to fix prices of 
remaining NLEM medicines under provisions of DPCO, 2013. An office memorandum was 
also placed on NPPA’s website on 27.01.2015 requesting all companies / pharma 
associations to provide data in respect of pending 102 formulations.  
  There are 680 medicines specified in the first schedule of DPCO, 2013 covering 27 
therapeutic groups as defined in the NLEM, 2011 that are currently under price control 
regime. Out of 680 medicines, 52 med icines are commonly appearing at more than one 
therapeutic group, therefore, there are 628 scheduled formulations. 
  As on 10.2.2015, the ceiling price of 509 medicines has been notified and the same 
are available in the public domain at the official website of NPPA at www.nppaindia.nic.in.  
The status in respect of all 680 cases of price fixation of scheduled formulations is as 
follows: 
Pricing Status as on 10.02.2015 
Sl. No. Particulars     
1 Total number of NLEM  medicines (after separating tablets and 
capsules) 
  680 
 Common medicines under different sections of DPCO, 2013   52 
 Net medicines for which prices are to be fixed  628 
2 Break up of number of items dealt under different category     
  A Notification issued upto 18 th meeting of the 
Authority under DPCO, 2013  
509   
  B Common items under DPCO, 1995 and DPCO, 2013 
for which price notifications are to be issued in 
2014, but are pending for want of information/data 
from IMS-Health  
15   
 C Common items under DPCO, 1995 and DPCO, 2013 
for which price notifications will be issued in 2015 
onwards  
17  
  d (a to c) Total Cases Processed / To be processed 541   
  E Total cases Pending for non-availability of data 
Referred to SDC’s/uploaded on NPPA’s websi tes. 
Industry, Trade and State Governments have been 
requested to provide available data, if any.  
87   
  Sub total (d + e)  628 

15 
 
3 Number of items under examination for data collection/pricing (1 
– 2 ) 
  Nil 
 
  Out of the remaining 119 formulations, 17 formulations are not yet due for price 
revision. The price of remaining 102 formulations could not be fixed mainly due to non -
availability of price data in respect of these formulations.  All possible efforts are being 
made to collect the same including wri ting to industry associations, trade associations, 
State Drug Controllers, State Health Secretaries, and Chief Secretaries.  Hon’ble Minister, 
Chemicals and Fertilizers has also written to the Health Minister. But progress is minimal. 
 Impact of Price Fixation 
 
  The details of reduction in prices scheduled formulations effected under DPCO, 2013 
as compared to the highest price prevailed prior to the announcement of DPCO, 2013 are 
given as under: 
 
% reduction with respect to Maximum Price No. of drugs 
0<= 5% 52 
5<=10% 45 
10<=15% 56 
15<=20% 44 
20<=25% 66 
25<=30% 55 
30<=35% 30 
35<=40% 34 
Above 40% 127 
  509 
 
  Regarding shortage of drugs, it is stated that the availability of essential medicines is 
regularly monitored by the NPPA mainly through Drugs  Control Administration of State 
Governments. Whenever shortage is reported by the State Drug Controllers or comes to its 
notice otherwise, NPPA takes remedial steps for ensuring availability of drugs by 
impressing upon manufacturers to rush the stocks to the places of shortage. 
 
  In the recent past, short supply of certain essential medicines namely, Anti -Snake 
Venom, Rabies Vaccine, Rabies Immunoglobulin, Albumin Injection and Anti -malarial 
combination in Sulfadoxine + Pyrimethamine Tablets was reported to NPPA. In order to 
maintain normal supply of these medicines in the domestic market and / or institutions, 
NPPA issued notification S.O. No. 2292 (E) dated 09.09.2014 wherein all the concerned 
manufacturer / importers were directed to ensure a smooth sup ply and to furnish 
compliance report in this regard. In connection with recent shortages of Human Albumin 
Injection reported by major hospitals throughout the country, NPPA has held a meeting 
with the major manufacturers/importers of Albumin Injection. Dur ing the course of 
discussion, it was observed that the shortage of Human Plasma is one of the main 
constraints in expending the production capacity of Human Albumin in the Country. In this 
regard, Chairman, NPPA has written a D.O. letter on 04.02.2015 to t he Additional Secretary, 
Department of Health regarding supply of Human Plasma to manufacturer of Human 
Albumin by NACO. There has been a reference from the Drugs Controller General (India) 
regarding non -availability of Injection Anti -Diptheria Serum in Po st Graduate Institute of 
Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh. In order to make the drug available, in and 
around Chandigarh, all the concerned manufacturers have been advised for necessary 
action in the matter. In this regard, M/s Haffkine Bio -Pharmaceuticals Corporation Limited, 

16 
 
a Govt. of Maharashtra undertaking has offered a quotation for supply of the said drug to 
Govt. Medical College and Hospital, Chandigarh while another manufacturer namely M/s 
Serum Institute of India Ltd., has informed that there is a shortage of plasma, however, they 
would expedite the process of getting the plasma in order to make the Diphtheria Antitoxin 
available.  
 
  Regarding enlarging the span of price control, it is informed that NPPA in its 20 th 
Authority meeting held on 05.02.2015 approved recommendations for enlarging NLEM -
2011 based on a comprehensive study conducted by NPPA for the consideration of the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals and onward recommendation to the Core Committee on 
Revision of NLEM set up by the M/o  Health & Family Welfare.  The study was conducted in 
pursuance with directions received from the Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers vide their letter no. 31026/24/2010 -PI.I dated 07.08.2014. 
Summary of recommendation sent to Department of Pharmaceuticals for further necessary 
action, are as follows: 
(i) Correction / modifications in respect of anomalies / discrepancies in specification / 
descriptions in the NLEM. 
(ii) Recommendation for addition of 43 medicines / drugs with specifie d dosage / 
strength in the NLEM. 
(iii) Two separate studies in respect of anti-cancer drugs and medical devices for making 
recommendations for inclusion in the NLEM / Schedule-I of DPCO, 2013. 
(iv) Final report by NPPA on the study done by the NHSRC on current pricin g practice 
followed with regard to cardiac stents and reasonable pricing of Bare Metal Stents 
and Drug Eluting Stent.  
(v) Differential pricing of NLEM drugs based on product distinctiveness i.e. source of 
origin, process differentiation, drug delivery system,  site specific delivery, 
therapeutic benefit in terms of increased efficiency of the drug etc. 
(vi)  Price fixation of injectable dosage form specified in the NLEM as per standard 
dosage unit. 
(vii)  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may be requested to work on t he list of Life 
Saving Drugs”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13. The Committee had noted that  the functions of National Pharmaceutical Pricing 
Authority (NPPA) inter-alia include fixation and revision of prices of scheduled drugs under 
the Drug (Price Contro l) Order, 1995 (DPCO’95)/DPCO, 2013, as well as monitoring and 
enforcement of prices. NPPA also provides inputs to Government for policy formulation and 
on other specific issues concerning affordable medicines to the consumers.  Whenever a 
shortage is repor ted by the State Drug Controllers or comes to its notice otherwise, NPPA 
takes remedial steps for ensuring availability of drugs by impressing upon manufacturers 
to rush the stocks to the places of shortage.  The Committee were of the strong view that the 
prices of all essential drugs need to be regulated and strongly felt that the scope of price 
control be enlarged taking in to consideration cost effective ness, safety and efficacy and 
that more and more therapeutic segments be brought  under price control. NPPA should 
also expedite the process of notifying the ceiling price of the remaining   NLEM medicines. In 
its Action Taken Reply , the Department has stated that out of the remaining 119 

17 
 
formulations, the price of 102 formulations have not  yet been fixed due to non-availability 
of price data in respect of these formulations.  In spite of all  possible efforts being made to 
collect the same but the progress in this respect is  minimal. The Committee are extremely 
distressed to note the slow pace of progress in t he fixation of prices of the remaining  
formulations. The Committee reiterate its view that prices of all essential drugs are brought 
down so that the  same are available to the  poor and common man at affordable price s and 
therefore, the Committee strongly r ecommend that the concerted and coordinated efforts 
be made by the Department to collect the requisite data  in respect of aforesaid 102 
formulations so that their prices could be fixed with out further delay.  As regards shortage 
of essential drugs , the Dep artment has stated that  NPPA takes remedial steps for ensuring 
availability of drugs by impressing upon manufacturers to rush the stocks to the places of 
shortages. The  Committee hope and trust that NPPA would be  vigilant enough and take  
proactive action to ensure that there is no shortage of essential drugs especially in far flung, 
remote and hilly areas  of the country. Regarding enlarging t he scope of price control , the 
Committee have  been informed that NPPA in its meeting held on 05.02.2015 approved 
recommendations for enlarging NLEM -2011 based on a comprehensive study conducted by 
NPPA for the consideration of the Department of Pharmaceuticals and onward 
recommendation to the Core Committee on Revision of NLEM set up by the M/o Health & 
Family Welfare. In view of this, the Committee expect the Department to expedite the follow 
up action on the recommendations approved by NPPA in a time bound manner. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by them in this regard.  
 
D. Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector. 
 
Recommendation No.7 
 
14. With the objective to create/upgrade the common facilities in the area where there is 
cluster of Pharma manufacturers, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note  that th e Department has come up with a scheme,  Cluster 
Development Programme for Pharma Sector with the objective to create/upgrade the 
common facilities in the area where there is a cluster of Pharma Manufacturers.  The total 
outlay of the scheme is Rs.125 crore for 12th Plan period. Through this scheme, the cluster 
of small  and medium  enterprises can avail financial assistance  for common facilities  like 
Common Testing Facilities, Training Centres, Effluent Treatment Plant, Common Logistics 
Centres. The Committee also note that the Department has already created a large number 
of Pharma clusters in the country  at places like Hyderabad, Chennai, Maharashtra and 
Gujarat, Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh and many Pharma clusters will come up over a 
period of time. The se Pharma clusters lack certain common facilities, like quality testing 
facility, library facility, training facility, effluent treatment plant etc. An initial allotment of   
Rs.6 crore would be used to start the process and  from next year onwards for the n ext two 
years, the Department  will spend substantial amount of  money and create common 

18 
 
facilities in these Pharma clusters. The Committee expect the Department to  implement the 
programme expeditiously  in a systematic, professional and transparent manner. T he 
Committee are of the view that these  Pharma Cluster may also be associated with regional 
centres of NIPER and  universities/colleges for their technical support and testing facilities.  
As a result thereof, the Committee hope that good quality  medicines a t affordable prices 
would be available to the common people. The Committee would like to be apprised of the  
progress made in the matter”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
15. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation  of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 “The Scheme with an overall allocation of Rs.125 Crores has now been approved by the 
Competent Authority. Department has invited bids from eligible companies for selection of 
the Project Management Consultant for implement ing the scheme. The technical bids were 
evaluated by a Committee which found that only 1 bidder out of 3 bidders had qualified.  
The file was submitted to IFD who had opined that since qualification of only 1 bidder out 
of the 3 tendering firm at the stage of technical evaluation would not render sufficient 
comparison nor enable the Department to ascertain L1. They advised the Department to 
call for tenders afresh. 
 
  After the failure of EOI which was called for selection of Project Management 
Consultant (P MC), the Department has decided in principle to appoint Project and 
Development India Ltd(PDIL), a Government of India undertaking for taking over the role 
of PMC on a nomination basis as per Rule 176 of the GFR.”  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
16. The Committee had noted that the Department has come up with a scheme,  Cluster 
Development Programme for Pharma Sector with the objective to create/upgrade the 
common facilities in the area where there is a cluster of Pharma Manufacturers.  The total 
outlay of the s cheme is Rs.125 crore for 12 th Plan period. The Committee had also noted 
that the Department has already created a large number of Pharma clusters in the country  
at places like Hyderabad, Chennai, Maharashtra and Gujarat, Uttarakhand and Himachal 
Pradesh a nd many Pharma clusters will come up over a period of time.   However, t hese 
Pharma clusters lack certain common facilities, like quality testing facility, library facility, 
training facility, effluent treatment plant etc.   The Committee had, therefore, expected the 
Department to implement the programme expeditiously  in a systematic, professional and 
transparent manner. The Committee were  also of the view that these  Pharma Cluster may 
also be associated with regional centres of NIPER and  universities/colleges for their 
technical support and testing facilities. In its Action Taken Reply ,  the Department has 
stated that the Scheme with an overall allocation of Rs.125 Crores has now been approved 
by the Competent Authority. The Committee also note that in the te chnical bids only 1 
bidder out of 3 bidder was found to be qualified and IFD had opined that qualification of 1 

19 
 
bidder out of the 3 tendering firm at the stage of technical evaluation would not render 
sufficient comparison nor enable the Department to asce rtain L1.   Therefore, the  
Department has been advised to call tenders afresh.  However, after the failure of EOI  
(Expression of Interest)  which was called for selection of Project Management Consultant 
(PMC),  the Department has decided in principle to app oint Project and Development India 
Ltd (PDIL), a Government of India undertaking for taking over the role of PMC on a 
nomination basis as per Rule 176 of the GFR .  In view of the foregoing, t he Committee 
expect the Department to urge PMC to  expedite the im plementation of the Cluster 
Development Programme so that the objectives of scheme could be achieved with in the 
remaining period of 12 th plan. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives 
undertaken and the road map formed   by the Department  for speedy  progress in the 
implementation of the Cluster Development Programme.  
 
 
 

20 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
 Recommendation No.1 
 
 The Committee note that the Planning Commission had approv ed an outlay of Rs. 2968 
crore for the 12th Plan period. However, the actual budget allocation by the  Planning Commission 
during the first three years was only 583 crore ( Rs. 188 crore, Rs. 188 crore and Rs. 207 crore 
respectively) and the balance outlay of Rs.2386 crore (Rs.1193 + Rs.1193) has been redistributed 
for the remaining two years of the 12 th Five Year Plan period.   For Annual Plan 2010-11, against a 
BE of Rs.165 crore (RE was restricted to Rs. 119 core), actual expenditure incurred amounted to 
Rs.69.66 crore. Further, against a BE of Rs.175 crore for Annual Plan 2011 -12 (RE was Rs.77.78 
crore), actual expenditure incurred was Rs.40.33 crore only For Annual Plan 2012-13, Department 
of Pharmaceuticals proposed an outlay of Rs.1127.45 crore against which outlay approved by 
Planning Commission was Rs. 188 crore, RE was Rs.85 crore and  actual expenditure incurred was 
Rs.51.78 crore which is 60.92% of RE outlay. For Annual Plan 2013 -14, the Department proposed 
an outlay of Rs. 567.60 crore.   However, Planning Commission allocated only Rs. 188.00 crore,  RE 
was Rs.75 crore and actual expenditure incurred was Rs.74.07 crore which is 98.76 % of the RE.  
For the year 2014 -15, the Department proposed an outlay of Rs. 871.81 crore to Planning 
Commission against which Planning Commission approved only Rs. 207 crore,  which works out to 
just 10 percent more than last year’s allocation of Rs. 188 crore. According to the Department, 
actual expenditure incurred in previous years would have been one of the criteria for allocation of 
funds in subsequent years. As  a result  of lesser allocations  than the proposed outlays,   the 
Department was compelled to spread thinner allocations amongst its  various schemes during the 
year 2014 -15. As for illustration,  a provision of Rs. 2 0 crore for NIPER, Mohali  has been made 
against proposed amount of Rs.88.40 crore. Similarly, a provision of Rs.88 crore has been made for 
New NIPERs as against the proposed  amount of Rs. 193 crore. Rs. 6 core was allocated for 
upgradation of MEs to WHO -GMP Standards etc. as against proposed  amount of Rs.200.50 crore. 
For New Scheme, only Rs.15 crore was allocated against proposed amount of Rs.60 crore. The 
Committee therefore, strongly feel  that the allocations made by the Planning Commission  should 
commensurate to the outlays proposed by the Department.  However, the Committee are  
anguished to note that the Department even failed to utilize fully, the outlay provided at RE stage 
during the year 2012-13 and 2013-14. Since various schemes of the Department ar e of paramount 
importance, any reduction in the allocation will have an adverse impact on the implementation  of 
the schemes undertaken by the Department. It is therefore imperative for the Department to take 
proactive role in this regard and  ensure optimum utilisation of its resources to avoid substantial 

21 
 
reduction of outlay at RE stage. The Committee  recommend that the Planning Commission should 
provided adequate budgetary allocation to the Department at RE stage under various Head  for 
effective implementation of its various schemes.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
initiatives under taken by the Department in this regard”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The details of the recommendation have been brought to the notice of Industries Division, 
Planning Commission with reference to allocation of Plan funds for the remaining years of Twelfth 
Five Year Plan. 
 Regarding requesting Planning Commission to allocate adequate funds for the remaining 
period of Twelfth five Year Plan, this Department has raised  this aspect with the Planning 
Commission during the Mid -Year Review Meeting. The reason for higher requirement of funds 
under different schemes was also submitted to Planning Commission. Regarding improving the 
utilization of funds by the Administrative D ivisions regular Meeting are convened at the level of 
Secretary(Pharma) for  monitoring Plan expenditure and identifying bottlenecks in timely 
utilization of Plan funds” 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No.7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.2 
 The Committee note  that under the Head Plan Capital Loan for Phama Industries,  BE 
allocation for the year 2014 -15 under the scheme Support for PSUs  is  Rs.16.79 crore  for HAL, for 
BCPL the allocation is Rs. 7 crore, for IDPL it is Rs.5 crore  and for RDPL the allocation is  Rs.1.21 
crore. Further, under Critical Assistance Scheme  (Grant for WHO -GMP compliance). for BE 2014 -
15 an amount of Rs.6.84 crore has been allocated to RDPL and Rs.3.16  crore (Rs.2 crore + Rs.1.16 
crore) has been allocated to IDPL  under the Head New Scheme for Pharma.  The Committee  are 
distressed to note from the status of release of funds that no proposal has been received from 
RDPL in respect of loans to PSUs.   Similarly RDPL has not requested for release of second 
installment in respect of Grant for WHO GMP Compliance as the funds received for the project had 
been utilized for some other purpose.  A Committee has been set up to reassess the project and its 
report is being processed.   The Committee ,therefore, would  like to to know the reasons for non -
receipt of any proposal from  RDPL for their  Project Based Support (Loans to PSUs) as well as for 
Grant for WHO GMP Compliance.   The Committee also stress  that funds allocated to the 
Department for the year 2014-15 should be fully and prudently utilized to enable them to take the 

22 
 
load of allocation of funds of last two years of 12 th Five Year Plan. The Committee, would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 An amount of Rs. 1.21 crores w as kept for the project ‘Capacity Enhancement’ in RDPl.  
However, properly framed proposal was not received in the requisite EFC format.  As such, the 
proposal received from RDPL was examined and RDPL was advised to submit the proposal in 
proper format and i n light of observations of the DoP.   In the meantime, drastic cut in the budget 
was imposed by Ministry of Finance in RE stage.  Hence, in the re -allocation of meager funds to 
various schemes, this scheme allocation was reduced to nil. Hence, no expenditure was incurred.  
 
 As regards, release of Rs. 6.84 crores to RDPL under Critical Assistance Scheme for 
WHO(GMP) Compliance project, funds were not released because there was not much physical 
progress of the scheme due to majority of funds having being dive rted by the then MD, RDPL 
(since deceased) for paying salaries and re-payment of loan to Banks). A Committee was formed to 
reassess the project and also find out the actual requirement of the funds for this project.   The 
Committee assessed the total requir ement of the funds for the project at Rs. 7.58 crores which 
included certain non -urgent items also.  It recommended release of Rs. 6.84 crores to RDPL with 
adequate safeguards to prevent future diversion.  The Committee was of the view that if funds are 
not sanctioned the earlier expenditure incurred in phase I of the project would go waste.   In 
addition to this, the Chief Vigilance Officer, RDPL was asked to investigate the matter.  The CVO in 
his report has stated that since MD, RDPL who authorized diversion  has died, no action can be 
taken in the matter.  CVO also advised that MD, RDPL should not be allowed to incur expenditure 
on his own.  One of the Directors on the Board of RDPL should also authorize release of funds 
jointly with MD, RDPL.  The entire amount  of Rs. 6.84  crore released on 31 st March, 2015.  MD, 
RDPL has been issued necessary instructions.   The Department has also requested the Internal 
Audit Department to conduct concurrent audit of the project.  A Preliminary Audit Report has 
already been conducted. The Committee would be pleased to note that out of Rs. 30.00 crores for 
the scheme ‘Support to PSUs’ Rs. 26.49 crores that was made available in RE has been fully 
released. As regards the Critical Assistance Scheme Rs. 6.84 crores available at RE stage has been 
released fully.  
Recommendation No.3 
 
 The Committee note that  National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education Research (NIPER) 
was declared as an “Institute of National Importance” under the Act of Parliament on 26th June 
1998. One of the main purpose for starting these institutes is to establish the linkage with industry 

23 
 
as well as academics.  In addition to NIPER, SAS Nagar, Mohali, the Government  has set up six new 
NIPERs at Hajipur  (Bihar) , Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh) , Gandhinagar (Gujarat) , Rae Bareli 
(Uttar Pradesh), Guwahati( Assam) and Kolkata (West Bengal). These new NIPERs will cater to the 
growing demand of the pharmaceutical industry  for highly  trained man power for continuous 
growth of the  pharmaceutical sector  with increased focus on R&D, particularly after the 
amendment of Indian Patent Act.  At present, these six new NIPERs are functioning with the 
assistance of Mentor Institutes.  While the process for construction of new campus for NIPER, 
Guwahati and NIPER, Gandhinagar has already started, the land for NIPER, Hyderabad and NIPER, 
Rae Bareli has been allotted by the respective State Governments and the process of selection of 
Project Management Consultants (PMC) has been initiated.  NIPER, Hajipur and NIPER, Kolkata are 
yet to be al located land for which the matter has been taken up with the respective State 
Governments. The Committee are extremely unhappy with the slow pace of progress in the 
acquisition of land and construction of new  campus for new NIPERs.  As a result , new NIPERs  are 
still continuing  to function with the assistance of their mentor Institutes  In the absence of 
requisite infrastructure facilities, the Committee feel that it would  be difficult for NIPERs to 
achieve its optimum level of efficiency imparting education and to focus on R&D.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should make concerted and coordinated efforts to 
expedite the establishment of  new NIPERs in their own campuses in a time bound manner so that  
they could achieve their avowed obje ctives to establish its links with  pharmaceutical industry and 
nurture and promote quality and excellence in pharmaceutical education and research. They 
should pursue with respective State Governments at the highest level. Further, the process of  
selection of PMC for NIPER, Hyderabad and NIPER, Rae -Bareli for which land has already  been 
acquired should also be expedited and be completed with in a fixed time frame. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Department has since awarded the work of construction of NIPER campus from 
concept to completion at Guwahati to Engineering Project India Ltd. (EPIL) and Gandhinagar to 
Hindustan Steelworks Constructions Ltd. (HSCL). Memo randum of Understanding (MoU) to be 
signed by NIPER, Hyderabad with the National Project Construction Corporation (NPCC) Ltd.  After 
signing the MoU, funds would be released to NIPER for making available to the concerned PSU so 
as to enable them to commence  work relating to construction of NIPER campus at Gandhinagar 
and Hyderabad. 
 Construction activity to start at: 
 1.NIPER, Guwahati MoU Signed with EPIL 
2..NIPER, Ahmedabad MoU signed with HSCL. 
3. NIPER, Hyderabad MoU is likely to be signed. 

24 
 
 
However, construction could not be taken up as sufficient fund has not been provided. Land 
with respect to NIPERs of 1. Hajipur 2. Kolkata 3. Rae Bareli are yet to be resolved.  
 
The construction of NIPERs Guwahati, Ahmedabad and Hyderabad will start during the 
current year. Department is planning for supplementary demands/budget proposal for additional 
funds to undertake construction properly.  
 
Latest developments w.r.t. NIPER, Kolkata and Hajipur are given below:- 
 
Status of land allocation at NIPER, Kolkata (West Bangal) 
 
A).  National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research (NIPER), Kolkata was set 
up to nurture and promote quality and excellence in Pharmaceutical education and 
research at Masters and Ph. D level after the State Government committed to pro vide 100 
acre of land free of cost. Subsequently, State Government allotted 35 acres land free of cost 
at Baruipur. However, out of 35 acres, NIPER was required to spare 10 acres for common 
facilities, which leaves a very small piece of land for setting up  of an Institute of national 
importance. In addition, State Government wanted Government of India to pay for the 
External Development Charges (EDC). Since, Union Cabinet approved setting up of NIPERs 
in other parts of country, including Kolkata, on the pre mise that 100 acres of land would 
be provided free of cost by the State Governments. Therefore, it is not possible to pay for 
EDC. Accordingly, earlier also the State Government was requested to confirm the 
following: 
 
(i)  Possession of 100 Acres of land near Kolkata free of cost free from all 
encumbrances.  
B). The matter has been followed up vigorously with the State Government. However, 
response from the State Government is yet to be received.  
(c) A letter has also been written on 29.12.2014 by Hon’ble  Minister (C&F) to the Chief 
Minister of West Bengal.  
 
Status of land allocation at NIPER, Hajipur (Bihar) 
 
I. Based on the firm assurances given in writing by the State Government of Bihar for 
allotment of 100 acre land free of cost, vide letter No. date d 29/5/2006 and 28/8/2006 by 
the Industrial Development Commissioner Govt. of Bihar this Department set up NIPER at 
Hajipur in 2007 under the mentorship of Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical 
Sciences (RMRIMS), Patna. Since, 2007, NIPER is func tioning in the EPIP Campus, BIADA 

25 
 
Industrial Area, Hajipur. State Govt. has, however, not yet allotted the land for setting up 
full-fledged NIPER Campus at Hajipur, in spite of the matter being followed up with the 
State Govt. at Chief Minister and Chief Secretary level.  
 
II. The matter has been brought to the notice that in the 10 th State level coordination 
Committee meeting held at Hajipur on 21.3.2013. The Principal Secretary, Industries, 
Bihar has advised  that 50 acres of land  was not readily available  for allotment to NIPER, 
the institution may proceed with vertical construction worked on the 12.43 acres of land 
already in possession of NIPER Hajipur, along with 3 buildings. At the same time the 
institute has been advised to pursue with the District Ma gistrate Vaishali for alternative 
land for acquisition for the NIPER.   
  In the Eastern Zonal Council meeting held on 16.01.2015 chaired by Union Home 
Minister, the matter was taken up and State Government reiterated their view that 50 acre 
of land around Patna is not available and that the NIPER campus at the present site may be 
constructed vertically. 
 
III. Matter has not been settled as yet. Recently, the matter has been taken up at the 
level of Secretary and Minister. However, the quantum and location of land is yet to be 
settled satisfactorily.  
 
IV. Establishment of NIPER may be a great addition to the educational infrastructure of 
any State. However, since 2007 NIPER, Kolkata and Hajipur are functioning from the 
premises of their mentor institutes, a nd facing acute shortage of accommodation and they 
are unable to plan construction of full -fledged campus for providing inter -alia all essential 
infrastructure facilities essential for quality education at Post Graduate level and Ph.D in 
Pharmaceutical Sciences.  
 
V.  A letter has also been written on 30.12.2014 by Hon’ble Minister (C&F) to the Chief 
Minister of Bihar.  
 
NIPER, Raebareli 
 
As regards NIPER, Raebareli, t he Steering Committee constituted for all the NIPERs in its 
20th meeting held on 18.11.201 4 observed that the issues related to adequacy and clear 
title of the land be assured and the related issues should be resolved before proceeding 
further in the matter of the appointment of the PMC for NIPER, Rae Bareli. Accordingly, the 

26 
 
issue is being tak en up with S tate Government to sort out the impediments so that PMC 
could be selected.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No.10 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.4 
 
 The Committee note that the  functions of National Pharmaceutical  Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) inter-alia include fixation and revision of prices of scheduled drugs under the Drug (Price 
Control) Order, 1995 (DPCO’95)/DPCO, 2013, as well as monitoring and enforcement of prices. 
NPPA also provides inputs to Government for po licy formulation and on other specific issues 
concerning affordable medicines to the consumers. The Government has notified New DPCO, 2013 
on 15th May, 2013 in supersession of DPCO, 1995 . Out of the 628 NLEM medicines specified in the 
Schedule-I of DPCO, 2 013, NPPA has fixed / notified the ceiling prices in respect of 489 medicines 
upto 15th September, 2014 under provisions of the said order. In order to fix the ceiling prices in 
respect of the remaining NLEM medicines, NPPA has made sincere efforts to obta in / collect the 
data from all available sources like IMS -Health, PharmaTrac, Pharma Industry Associations, 
Marketing Companies etc. In addition, NPPA took up the matter with Department of Health, Drugs 
Controller General (India), State Health Secretaries and State Drugs Controllers for providing the 
information / data so as to enable NPPA to fix prices of remaining NLEM medicines under 
provisions of DPCO, 2013. The  DPCO, 2013 also provides for monitoring of the production and 
availability of scheduled formulations and the active pharmaceuticals ingredients contained in the 
scheduled formulations. In this regard, the manufacturers/ importers/ marketing companies of 
the scheduled formulations and Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients are required to furnish 
information as stated in Form - III of the said order quarterly . NPPA regularly monitors the 
availability of essential medicines in the country through Drugs Control Administration of State 
Governments. Whenever shortage is reported by the State Drug Controllers  or comes to its notice 
otherwise, NPPA takes remedial steps for ensuring availability of drugs by impressing upon 
manufacturers to rush the stocks to the places of shortage.  In this regard, the Committee were 
informed that recently the scarcity of certain  essential medicines, namely, Anti -Snake Venom, 
Rabies vaccine, Rabies Immunoglobulin, Albumin Injection and Anti -malarial combination of 
Sulfadoxine + Pyrimethamine Tablets was reported to the NPPA. According to the Department, the 
concerned manufacturers of these drugs were  not maintaining normal supply of the medicines in 
domestic market and / or Institutions.  So, NPPA vide its notification S.O. No. 2292 (E) dated 
09.09.2014 directed all the concerned manufacturers / importers to comply with the 

27 
 
requirements contained in para 21(1) and furnish the month -wise production and sale figures for 
the last 12 months. In view of the  foregoing, the Committee of the strong view that  the prices of all 
essential drugs need to be regulated. In this regard, the role of the Government in procuring drugs 
and providing it at affordable price to the public can not be undermined.  It is imperative for the 
Government/NPPA to urgently bring down the prices of all essential drugs  so that the same are 
available to the common man, poor or the needy at affordable price. To keep this end in view,  the 
Committee strongly feel that the scope of price control needs to be enlarged taking into 
consideration cost effectiveness, safety and efficacy and more and more therapeutic segments   
should be brought under price control. At the same time,  NPPA/Government should be vigilant 
enough to ensure that all essential  drugs are accessible to the public and a stock -out situation like 
the one as referred above should never arise.  NPPA should also exp edite the process of notifying 
the ceiling price of the remaining NLEM medicines i.e. 139  out of 628 NLEM medicines. The 
Committee would like the Department to act accordingly and   be apprised of the initiatives  taken 
by Department to fix/notify the prices of remaining NLEM medicines. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Out of the 628 NLEM medicines specified in the Schedule - I of DPCO,2013, NPPA has fixed/ 
notified the ceiling price in respect of 509 medicines upto 05 th February, 2015 under provisions of 
the said order. In order to fix the ceiling prices in respect of the remaining NLEM medicines, NPPA 
has made sincere efforts to obtain/ collect the price data from all available sources like IMS - 
Health, Pharma Trac, Pharma Industry Associations, Marketing Companies  etc. In addition, NPPA 
took up the matter with Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Drugs Controller General (India), 
State Health Secretaries and State Drugs Controllers for providing the information/ data so as to 
enable NPPA to fix prices of remaining NLEM medicines under provisions of DPCO, 2013. An office 
memorandum was also placed on NPPA’s website on 27.01.2015 requesting all companies / 
pharma associations to provide data in respect of pending 102 formulations.  
 
 There are 680 medicines specified in the first schedule of DPCO, 2013 covering 27 
therapeutic groups as defined in the NLEM, 2011 that are currently under price control regime. 
Out of 680 medicines, 52 medicines are commonly appearing at more than one therapeutic group, 
therefore, there are 628 scheduled formulations. 
 As on 10.2.2015, the ceiling price of 509 medicines has been notified and the same are 
available in the public domain at the official website of NPPA at www.nppaindia.nic.in.  
 The st atus in respect of all 680 cases of price fixation of scheduled formulations is as 
follows: 
 

28 
 
Pricing Status as on 10.02.2015 
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars     
1 Total number of NLEM medicines (after separating tablets and 
capsules) 
  680 
 Common medicines under different sections of DPCO, 2013   52 
 Net medicines for which prices are to be fixed   628 
2 Break up of number of items dealt under different category     
  A Notification issued upto 18 th meeting of the 
Authority under DPCO, 2013  
509   
  B Common items under DPCO, 1995 and DPCO, 2013 
for which price notifications are to be issued in 
2014, but are pending for want of information/data 
from IMS-Health  
15   
 C Common items under DPCO, 1995 and DPCO, 2013 
for which price notifications will be issued in 2 015 
onwards  
17  
  d (a to c) Total Cases Processed / To be processed 541   
  E Total cases Pending for non -availability of data  
Referred to SDC’s/uploaded on NPPA’s websites. 
Industry, Trade and State Governments have been 
requested to provide available data, if any.  
87   
  Sub total (d + e)  628 
3 Number of items under examination for data collection/pricing 
(1 – 2 )  
  Nil 
 
 Out of the remaining 119 formulations, 17 formula tions are not yet due for price revision. 
The price of remaining 102 formulat ions could not be fixed mainly due to non -availability of price 
data in respect of these formulations.  All possible efforts are being made to collect the same 
including writing to industry associations, trade associations, State Drug Controllers, State Hea lth 
Secretaries, and Chief Secretaries.  Hon’ble Minister, Chemicals and Fertilizers has also written to 
the Health Minister. But progress is minimal. 
 
Impact of Price Fixation 
 
 The details of reduction in prices scheduled formulations effected under DPCO,  2013 as 
compared to the highest price prevailed prior to the announcement of DPCO, 2013 are given as 
under: 
% reduction with respect to Maximum Price No. of drugs 
0<= 5% 52 
5<=10% 45 
10<=15% 56 
15<=20% 44 
20<=25% 66 
25<=30% 55 

29 
 
30<=35% 30 
35<=40% 34 
Above 40% 127 
  509 
 
 Regarding shortage of drugs, it is stated that the availability of essential medicines is 
regularly monitored by the NPPA mainly through Drugs Control Administration of State 
Governments. Whenever shortage is reported by the Stat e Drug Controllers or comes to its notice 
otherwise, NPPA takes remedial steps for ensuring availability of drugs by impressing upon 
manufacturers to rush the stocks to the places of shortage. 
 
 In the recent past, short supply of certain essential medicin es namely, Anti -Snake Venom, 
Rabies Vaccine, Rabies Immunoglobulin, Albumin Injection and Anti -malarial combination in 
Sulfadoxine + Pyrimethamine Tablets was reported to NPPA. In order to maintain normal supply 
of these medicines in the domestic market an d / or institutions, NPPA issued notification S.O. No. 
2292 (E) dated 09.09.2014 wherein all the concerned manufacturer / importers were directed to 
ensure a smooth supply and to furnish compliance report in this regard. In connection with recent 
shortages of Human Albumin Injection reported by major hospitals throughout the country, NPPA 
has held a meeting with the major manufacturers/importers of Albumin Injection. During the 
course of discussion, it was observed that the shortage of Human Plasma is one o f the main 
constraints in expending the production capacity of Human Albumin in the Country. In this regard, 
Chairman, NPPA has written a D.O. letter on 04.02.2015 to the Additional Secretary, Department of 
Health regarding supply of Human Plasma to manufa cturer of Human Albumin by NACO. There 
has been a reference from the Drugs Controller General (India) regarding non -availability of 
Injection Anti -Diptheria Serum in Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, 
Chandigarh. In order to make the drug available, in and around Chandigarh, all the concerned 
manufacturers have been advised for necessary action in the matter. In this regard, M/s Haffkine 
Bio-Pharmaceuticals Corporation Limited, a Govt. of Maharashtra undertaking has offered a 
quotation for supply of the said drug to Govt. Medical College and Hospital, Chandigarh while 
another manufacturer namely M/s Serum Institute of India Ltd., has informed that there is a 
shortage of plasma, however, they would expedite the process of getting the pla sma in order to 
make the Diphtheria Antitoxin available.  
 
 Regarding enlarging the span of price control, it is informed that NPPA in its 20 th Authority 
meeting held on 05.02.2015 approved recommendations for enlarging NLEM -2011 based on a 
comprehensive s tudy conducted by NPPA for the consideration of the Department of 

30 
 
Pharmaceuticals and onward recommendation to the Core Committee on Revision of NLEM set up 
by the M/o Health & Family Welfare.  The study was conducted in pursuance with directions 
received from the Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers vide their 
letter no. 31026/24/2010 -PI.I dated 07.08.2014. Summary of recommendation sent to 
Department of Pharmaceuticals for further necessary action, are as follows: 
 
(i) Correction / modifications in respect of anomalies / discrepancies in   specification 
/ descriptions in the NLEM. 
(ii)  Recommendation for addition of 43 medicines / drugs with specified dosage   / 
strength in the NLEM. 
(iii)   Two separate studies in respect of anti-cancer drugs and medical devices for making 
recommendations for inclusion in the NLEM / Schedule-I of DPCO, 2013. 
(iv)  Final report by NPPA on the study done by the NHSRC on current pricing practice 
followed with regard to cardiac stents and reason able pricing of Bare Metal Stents 
and Drug Eluting Stent.  
(v)   Differential pricing of NLEM drugs based on product distinctiveness i.e. source of 
origin, process differentiation, drug delivery system, site specific delivery, 
therapeutic benefit in terms of increased efficiency of the drug etc. 
(vi)   Price fixation of injectable dosage form specified in the NLEM as per   standard 
dosage unit. 
(vii)  Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may be requested to work on the list  of Life 
Saving Drugs”.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No.13 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.5 
 
 The Committee note that the Department has 5 running PSUs under its administrative 
control viz. Karnataka Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL), Rajasth an Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL), Bengal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL), Hindustan 
Antibiotics Limited (HAL) and Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL). Out of these KAPL 
and RDPL are profit making and BCPL, HAL & IDPL are BIFR referred Companies. However, RDPL 
during the year 2013 -14, has registered losses for the first time though it is not a very sick unit in 
that way.   
 As the HAL is still incurring losses,   a Modified Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (MDRS)  based 
on the report s ubmitted by IFCI limited, a professional Consultant, involving the cash infusion of 
Rs.497.45 crores was submitted by IDBI, the Monitoring Agency to BIFR  on 17 February 2014. 
MDRS was subsequently revised by HAL  with the assumption that the entire fund req uirement for 
the revival of HAL would be made available by the Government of India from budgetary support.  

31 
 
The Statutory Auditors are in the process of completing the audit of the statutory   dues and other 
current liabilities of the company and the same wi ll be submitted to IDBI by the company shortly. 
IDBI will then circulate the revised proposal to the Banks and Government/ Statutory 
Departments seeking their views/opinions on the same and then a joint meeting of the stake 
holders of the company will be convened by IDBI for finalizing MDRS before submitting to BIFR.  
In the context of  IDPL, the Committee were informed that the process of revival of IDPL as 
per the Laws, Rules & Procedures laid down by the Government of India is underway. No time 
frame can be indicated because other agencies of the Government are also involved. However, the 
process is at an advanced stage and all efforts are being made to bring the process to conclusion at 
the earliest. At present, the MDRS is being modified by IDBI, as per the cut off date approved by the 
BIFR in its last hearing held in September, 2014. During the course of evidence, the Committee 
were also informed that   the rehabilitation programme  of IDPL is  under active consideration and 
very shortly the matter will go to the Cabinet for a decision.   In this context, the Committee were 
also informed that 80% of the bulk drugs are coming from outside India and that has resulted in 
closing down of drug units in India.   Therefore, the Department intends to create capacity for bulk 
drugs in India itself for which  a policy will be brought out very shortly in a month’s time or so. 
Once that policy is brought out, the Department hopes  to revive  IDPL and HAL to produce bulk 
drugs in a very big way which will help the country to attain self-reliance in bulk drugs.  
As regards the BCPL,  the Committee were informed that acute shortage of working capital 
and expiry of Purchase Procurement Policy in the year 2011 were the main reasons for gradual 
decrease in the production and sales tu rnover of the company. The said policy has since been 
renewed for another 5 years from December 2013. They are producing a lot of good quality drugs 
and have improved their performance to a great extent. Earlier they were producing quality drugs 
for Rs.10 crore which has since increased to Rs.30 to 40 crore.   
In view of the foregoing, the Committee are extremely unhappy  to note that no significant  
progress has been made over the years to revive the loss making/sick units  particularly IDPL and 
HAL. During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the Department pointed out  that a lot of time 
is lost  in the Government decision making  process as many agencies are involved  therein. The 
Committee are, however,  not satisfied with the explanation given by the Depar tment as it is their 
responsibility to speed up its functioning/working and to act effectively and efficiently. The 
Committee are also of the view that over -dependence on outside countries for bulk drugs/critical 
raw material is very risky as any  deterioration in relationship with them  can potentially result in 
severe shortages in the supply of essential drugs to the country. There will also be a risk of 
increase in prices of the drugs where there is virtual monopoly. It is, therefore,  essential that a 
well thought policy may be brought out with out further delay to create capacity of bulk drugs in 

32 
 
the country itself and  to attain self -reliance in bulk drugs for which revival of  sick units would be 
extremely essential. The Committee, therefore, recommend  that the Department should   make 
vigorous efforts in coordination with all concerned to revive these sick  units within a fixed  time 
line. The Committee are of the strong view that the revival of these units is  absolutely essential for 
the country  to ensure av ailability and adequate quantity of drugs at an affordable price to the 
public. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan of the Department in this 
regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 The Modified Draft Rehabilitation Scheme for Hindustan An tibiotics Ltd. has been 
submitted by IDBI in Febuary 2015, after taking into account the various observations of BIFR on 
the earlier DRS. The IDBI has advised that the approval of Board of Directors of HAL, BRPSE, Govt. 
of India may be obtained with approv al of the Cabinet to the MDRS as well as permission for sale 
of land to fund the MDRS.  Thereafter, the matter may be taken up to BIFR for final approval of the 
Second Rehabilitation Scheme.  The Board of Directors, HAL has approved the MDRS.   The BRPSE 
has been requested to agree to the MDRS.  A Cabinet Note is being prepared for circulation among 
concerned Ministries after approval of Minister (C&F).  
 
As regards, revival of IDPL, the MDRS has been submitted by IDBI in February, 2015. Action 
is being taken by IDPL to convey the approval of Board of Directors of IDPL to the MDRS.  Approval 
of BRPSE would be sought. Thereafter, Cabinet Note would be prepared as in the case of HAL.  
 
Recommendation No.6 
 
 The Committee note that access to quality medicines at af fordable prices is a key challenge 
for the Government. The prices of branded medicines are generally higher than generic medicines 
due to various reasons including limited regulation through Drug Prices Control Order, 1995 etc.  
For fulfilling this goal, ‘J an Aushadhi Campaign’ has been launched. The purpose of this campaign 
is to make available medicines at affordable prices for all, especially the poor and the 
disadvantaged. Under this campaign, less priced quality generic medicines will be made available 
through Jan Aushadhi Stores (JAS) which are of same quality , efficacy and safety as compared to 
branded generic medicines. The Bureau of Pharma Public Sector Undertakings of India (BPPI)  was 
set up on 1st December 2008 with the major objective to have a fo cused and empowered structure 
to implement the Jan Audhadhi Campaign initiated by the Department. BPPI mon itors the 
functioning of Jan Aushadhi Stores and is also involved in promotion of the unbranded generic 
drugs. The first  Jan Aushadhi Generic Drug Sto re was opened in Civil Hospital, Amritsar on 25 

33 
 
November 2008. So far, 199 Jan Aushadhi Generic Drug Stores in various States have been opened 
and out of that only 99 are running as in many place these stores have been closed as the free 
drugs are being supplied to all the patients in hospitals by the State Governments. 
 
 The Committee also note that on the recommendation of this Committee in its 32 nd Report 
(Recommendation No.9) regarding opening of  more JAS on a mission mode,  a revised Business 
Plan has b een worked out by the Department which aims to open more than 3000 stores during 
12th Plan period. However, the Committee regret to note that JAS is not being accepted either by 
the public or the drugs under the scheme are not being prescribed by the docto rs to the patients. 
Even after six years, no efforts have been made by the Government to educate the peoples and to 
reach out the doctors’ community in this regard.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a 
vigorous campaign should be launched by the Depa rtment to create awareness among the people 
about the generic drugs and Jan Aushadhi Stores and its quality, efficacy and safety comparable 
with branded medicines and  to reach out to the doctors’ community  by way of conferences to 
impress upon them to pres cribe generic drugs to the patients.   The Committee desire that special 
emphasis be given by the Department for improving the  functioning of the Jan Aushadhi Stores. 
The Committee also note that almost double amount has been earmarked for Jan Aushadhi 
Scheme in BE 2014 -15 i.e Rs.30 crore as compared to Rs.15.20 crore in RE 2013 -14.  The 
Committee, therefore recommend that the increased amount should be utilized judiciously for 
opening more Jan Aushadhi stores in the remote areas where Jan Aushadhi stores ar e not in 
existence and for vigorous publicity campaign to create awareness amongst the people about 
generic drugs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department 
in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 
a. Details of campaign made by BPPI to create awareness among the people about the generic 
drugs and Jan Aushadhi stores and its quality, efficacy and safety comparable with branded 
medicines.  
 
Availability and timely supply of medicines to Jan Aushadhi Stores is a pre -requisite before 
any publicity on awareness is launched, a concrete action plan is under finalization.  The 
availability of medicines and supply position substantially improved after BPPI took 
complete control over procurement and supply chain management by cre ating its own 
Central Warehouse for storage of medicines as per the new business plan approved in 
August, 2013.  With the improvement in situation towards the middle of 2014 -15, the 

34 
 
following publicity campaign has been carried out in some of the states whe re the Jan 
Aushadhi Scheme is working well: 
 
(i) Disease specific Publicity was given through print media in the states of Punjab, 
Chandigarh, Himachal Pradesh and Odisha in the month of November, 2014  making 
public aware about the availability of quality gen eric medicines at affordable prices 
at Jan Aushadhi stores  by giving illustrative price difference between average 
market branded prices and Jan Aushadhi medicines. Copies of this advertisement 
are enclosed.  
 
(ii) Publicity was carried out in different distric ts of Odisha in the months of December - 
January, 2015 by participating in exhibitions during Dhanushyatra, Lok Mahotsav, 
Beach festivals and making public aware about the Jan Aushadhi generic medicines 
and their advantages.  
 
(iii) Awareness campaign was also ca rried out by participating in the Arogya Mela 
organized by the Ministry of Ayush at Bhubaneswar in February, 2015.  
 
(iv) In addition to above, advertisement for Expression of Interest for opening of Jan 
Aushadhi stores highlighting the price difference between  branded medicines and 
generic Jan Aushadhi medicines were issued.  
 
An amount of about Rs. 20 lakh has been spent on these awareness campaigns.  
 
For the year 2015 -16, an action plan consisting of multi -media for creating 
awareness about Jan Aushadhi and its efficiency etc. is being prepared. According to 
the plan, the first phase of the publicity campaign consisting of display and 
distribution of pamphlets, posters and hoarding at Medical College Hospitals and 
prominent places in different places is propo sed. There will also be radio & sms 
campaign. 
b. Steps taken by BPPI to reach out to the doctor’s community.  Whether any conference has 
been held. 
 
To encourage doctors to prescribe generic medicines, a brochure containing list of 
medicines is proposed to be printed. Workshops/seminars with doctors to disseminate and 
sensitize them on promotion of low priced generic medicines are proposed to be organized 
during 2015. Engagement with Indian Medical Association has been undertaken for 
promoting generic drugs prescription.  
 
c. What special emphasis has been given for improving the functioning of the Jan Aushadhi 
stores?  
 
i. The management team of BPPI has been strengthened.  
 
ii. To improve the functioning of Jan Aushadhi Stores by making them financial  viable, 
the basket  of medicines is being augmented . It is planned to increase the basket 
from the existing 361 at present to 504.  In addition, certain surgical items are also 

35 
 
proposed to be supplied from Jan Aushadhi stores. This would improve the viability 
of Jan Aushadhi Stores and stoppage of undispensed prescriptions.  
 
iii. The supply chain management is being improved. 
 
iv. In respect of Jan Aushadhi stores located in Govt. Hospitals with the help of State 
Government, a onetime assistance of Rs. 2.50 lakh as establishment cost  and start-
up coast is given to the operating agency 
 
v. Jan Aushadhi stores opened by NGO/Society/Pharmacist etc., financial assistance as 
incentive linked to sale of medicines @ of 10% of the monthly sales amount subject 
to a ceiling of Rs. 10,000/ - per month for a period of first 12 months is provided. In 
case of stores opened in North Eastern states and other difficult areas, the rate of 
incentive is 15% of monthly sale amount subject to a ceiling of Rs. 15,000/ - per 
month. 
 
d. Rs. 30 crore was earmarked in B E 2014 -15 but BPPI could not utilize same.  The reason 
thereof may be furnished.  
 
Due to lack of progress in opening of New Jan Aushadhi Stores, resulting in poor utilization of 
funds provided to BPPI in 2013 -14, the budget of Rs. 30.00 crores could not be  released to 
BPPI.  

36 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
  
 
-NIL- 
 

38 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE 
 
 Recommendation No.7 
 
 The Committee note that the Department has come up with a scheme, Cluster Development 
Programme for Pharma Sector with the objective to create/upgrade the common facilities  in the 
area where there is a cluster of Pharma Manufacturers.  The total outlay of the scheme is Rs.125 
crore for 1 2th Plan period. Through this scheme, the cluster of small  and medium enterprises can 
avail financial assistance  for common facilities  like Common Testing Facilities, Training Centres, 
Effluent Treatment Plant, Common Logistics Centres. The Committee also note that the 
Department has already created a large number of Pharma clusters in the country  at places like 
Hyderabad, Chennai, Maharashtra and Gujarat, Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh and  many 
Pharma clusters will come up over a period of time. These Ph arma clusters lack certain common 
facilities, like quality testing facility, library facility, training facility, effluent treatment plant etc. 
An initial allotment of   Rs.6 crore would be used to start the process and  from next year onwards 
for the next t wo years, the Department  will spend substantial amount of  money and create 
common facilities in these Pharma clusters. The Committee expect the Department to  implement 
the programme expeditiously  in a systematic, professional and transparent manner. The 
Committee are of the view that these  Pharma Cluster may also be associated with regional centres 
of NIPER and  universities/colleges for their technical support and testing facilities.  As a result 
thereof, the Committee hope that good quality medicines at affordable prices would be available to 
the common people. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Scheme with an overall allocation of Rs.125 Crores has now been approved by the 
Competent Aut hority. Department has invited bids from eligible companies for selection of the 
Project Management Consultant for implementing the scheme. The technical bids were evaluated 
by a Committee which found that only 1 bidder out of 3 bidders had qualified.  The file was 
submitted to IFD who had opined that since qualification of only 1 bidder out of the 3 tendering 
firm at the stage of technical evaluation would not render sufficient comparison nor enable the 
Department to ascertain L1. They advised the Department to call for tenders afresh. 
 
 After the failure of EOI which was called for selection of Project Management Consultant 
(PMC), the Department has decided in principle to appoint Project and Development India 

39 
 
Ltd(PDIL), a Government of India undertaking fo r taking over the role of PMC on a nomination 
basis as per Rule 176 of the GFR. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No.16 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 NEW DELHI;             ANANDRAO ADSUL 
14 JULY, 2015                        Chairperson 
23 Ashadha, 1937 (Saka)        Standing Committee on  
          Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
Appendix – I 
MINUTES 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2014-15) 
 
 The Committee sat o n Tuesday, the 16 June, 2015 from 1 500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Room 
No. 139, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Shri Anandrao Adsul  -    Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Idris Ali 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Shankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
9. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
10. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
11. Dr. Krishan Pratap Singh 
12. Smt. Rekha Arim Verma 
13. Shri Innocent 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
15. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
Secretariat 
  
1.  Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary  
2.  Shri U.B.S. Negi  - Director 
3.  Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee.  
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
 
a) ******   ******   ******   ****** 
 
b) ******   ******   ******   ****** 
 
c) Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants (201 4-15) of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceutical) 
 

41 
 
4. The draft Reports relating to the Department of Fertilizers, Department of Pharmaceuticals 
and Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals were adopted by t he Committee without any 
amendment.   
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes, if any, arising out 
of the factual verification of the Reports by the Department of Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals and Department of Pharmaceuticals of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
6. The Committee then decided to hold its next meeting on 25th June, 2015 for briefing on the 
subject " Functioning of National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER)" by 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
________________________________________________ 
***** Matters not related to this Report. 

42 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION T AKEN BY THE GOVERNME NT ON THE RECOMMENDA TIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SEC OND REPORT (SIXTEENT H LOK SABHA) OF THE ST ANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CH EMICALS AND FERTILIZ ERS (2014 -15) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2014-15)’ O F THE MINISTRY OF CH EMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF 
PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 7 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4 , 5 and 6 )  
 
6 
Percentage of Total 85.72 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
00 
Percentage of Total 00 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:-  
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
00 
Percentage of Total 00 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
(Vide Recommendation No. 7) 
 
1 
Percentage of Total 14.28 
 