   
 
1 | P a g e  
 
29 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS  
& FERTILIZERS (2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained  
in the Twenty Third Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Sixteenth 
Lok Sabha) on "Demands for Grants 2016-17" of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
 
 
 
 TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2016 /AGRAHAYANA, 1938 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
  


   
 
2 | P a g e  
CC&F.No.29 
 
 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained  
in the Twenty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on "Demands for Grants 2016-17" of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09 December  2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09 December 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2016 /AGRAHAYANA, 1938 (SAKA) 
  

   
 
3 | P a g e  
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) 
 
iii 
INTRODUCTION 
 
v 
Chapter I Report  
 
1 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
17-24 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
 
25 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the committee  
 
26 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
27-28 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of Fifth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2016-17) held on 06.12.2016. 
 
29 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report  
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2016 -17) of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
 
30 
  

   
 
4 | P a g e  
(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Innocent 
9. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
11. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle 
12. Shri Rajendran S. 
13. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
14. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
15. Dr. Uma Saren 
16. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
17. Shri Taslimuddin 
18.  Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
21. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27. Shri K Parasaran 
28. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
29. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
30. Shri Abdul Wahab 
31. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
  Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
  Shri A.K.Srivastava  - Director 
  Shri H. RamPrakash  - Additional Director 
  Shri S. Vijayaraghavan - Senior Committee Assistant  

   
 
5 | P a g e  
(v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2016-2017) having been authorised  by the Committee to present the Report on their 
behalf, present this Twenty Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Twenty Third 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standin g Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers on 
"Demands for Grants 2016 -17" of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of Pharmaceuticals).  
2. The Twenty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 28.04.2016. The Action Taken 
replies of Government to all observations/ recommendations contained in the Report 
were received on 13.10.2016.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(2016-2017) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 6.12.2016. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4.  For facilit y of reference and convenience the Comments of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                      ANANDRAO ADSUL 
08 December, 2016                                                                                                             Chairperson 
17   Agrahayana 1938 (Saka)                                        Standing Committee on 
                                                                                                          Chemicals and Fertilizers 
  

   
 
1 | P a g e  
REPORT 
CHAPTER  I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the  
Twenty-Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the Demands for Grants 
2016-17 of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 28.4.2016.  In all, the Committee made  9 
Observations / Recommendations in the Report. 
2.  Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department o f Pharmaceuticals) were 
requested to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained in the  
Twenty-Third Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, 
i.e., by  28.7.2016. The Action Taken Replies of the Governmen t in respect of all the 9 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) vide their O.M. No. 
23003/1/2016-Fin.II dated 13.10.2016. These Replies  have been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations  that have been accepted by the 
Government :- 
 Sl.Nos.  1,2,3,4,5,6,7 and  8                                        (Total =8 )                                                     
 This may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply :- 
 Sl.No. Nil                                     (Total = Nil) 
 This may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report. 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
 Sl.No.   Nil                                 (Total = Nil )  
 This may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 
 Sl.No. 9                               (Total =1)  
These may be included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and V  of this Report should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 

   
 
2 | P a g e  
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations which  still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 A. Need for Promotion of manufacturing of bulk drugs 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.1 
5. While stressing that overdependence on imports for its bulk drugs needs is not a 
healthy sign for the Indian Pharmaceut ical Industry the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
“The Committee note that the country is almost self -sufficient in case of 
formulations. However, for making these formulations, the basic chemical comes 
from China. Since the pharmaceutical industry is  dominated by the private sector, 
they are free to import as per Foreign Trade Policy under which import of certain 
drugs and drugs intermediates is restricted.  
The Committee also note that Indian Pharmaceutical Industry which was at one 
point of time lea ding producer in bulk drugs is now becoming increasingly 
dependent on China for its bulk drug needs. The Committee, further observe that 
in order to promote domestic production of bulk drugs, a Committee headed by Dr. 
V. M. Katoch was constituted which has  submitted its recommendations. The 
Government is examining the recommendations of the Katoch Committee in 
consultation with the stakeholders. Besides this, three task forces have also been 
set up. All the three task forces have also submitted their report s, which are being 
examined.  
The Committee are of the strong view that overdependence on imports for its bulk 
drugs needs is not a healthy sign for the Indian Pharmaceutical Industry. The 
Committee observe that the recommendations of Katoch  Committee and the three 
task forces are essential to boost the growth of Pharmaceutical Sector and 
reducing the overdependence on imports. The Committee would, therefore, like 
the Department to examine the recommendation of the Task Forces expeditiously 
and implement its recommendations in a time bound manner for the promotion of 
manufacturing of bulk drugs in the country. The Committee would like to be 
informed of the action taken in this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
6. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:-  
 “In the meeting held in PMO 5.3.2016, the following two decisions were taken:- 
(i) D/o Pharmaceuticals may proceed with the proposal for providing 
assistance for commo n facilities for 03 Greenfield Bulk Drugs/API Parks to 
the extent of Rs.200 crore each after seeking due approval. 
(ii) Proposal for providing support for distressed Brownfield Units should be 
re-examined by Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals in consultat ion 
with CEO, NITI Aayog.  

   
 
3 | P a g e  
 As regards (i) above, Department had circulated a draft Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) note to Department ofIndustrial Policy and Promotion, NITI 
Aayog and Department of  Expenditure for their comments. Based on the 
comments received, the Department has drafted a revised scheme to provide 
financial assistance up to Rs.150 crore  or 50% of the cost of machinery and 
equipment for setting up common facilities in 3 Bulk Drug Parks.  
 In the meantime, Department of Expenditure vide their OM No. 24(35)/PF-II/2012 
dated 5th August, 2016 issued revised guidelines for making EFC/SFC notes. As per 
these new guidelines, the proposal has been revised and an ‘in -principle’ approval 
has been sought from the Department of Expenditure on 2 4.08.2016 in accordance 
with new guidelines.  
 As regards the proposal for support to distressed brownfield units,after 
consultation with NITI Aayog, Industry Associations have been requested to share 
their views on the type of intervention required from g overnment for reviving 
production of the API. Reply is still a awaited”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
7. The Committee  noted in their Report that Indian Pharmaceutical Industry 
which was at one point of time leading producer in bulk drugs is now becoming 
increasingly dependent on China for its bulk drug needs.  The Committee, 
therefore earlier recommended th at the recommendation of the Task Force of 
Katoch Committee may be examined and implemented expeditiously.   In its Action 
Taken Reply,  the Department has stated that  in the meeting held in PMO on 
5.3.2016,  two decisions were taken  (i) D/o Pharmaceuticals may proceed with the 
proposal for providing assistance for common facilities for 03 Greenfield Bulk 
Drugs/API Parks to the extent of Rs.200 crore each after seeking due approval. (ii) 
Proposal for providing support for distressed Brownfield Units shoul d be re -
examined by Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals in consultation with CEO, 
NITI Aayog.  The Department has also drafted a revised scheme to provide 
financial assistance up to Rs.150 crore  or 50% of the cost of machinery and 
equipment for setti ng up common facilities in 3 Bulk Drug Parks.   While 
appreciating the initiatives taken by the Department of Pharmaceuticals, the 
Committee are of the view that the Department should expedite all the process es 
requisite for providing the common facilities  and financial assistance to 3 Green 
Field Bulk Drugs/API Parks and make the scheme functional at the earliest.  This 
will not only make the country self reliant but also cut the production cost of 
medicines.  The Committee  would like to know the initiati ves taken to make the 
scheme functional  and the progress made in the matter so far.  
B. Need for Promotion of Indigenous Medical Devices Industry  

   
 
4 | P a g e  
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.2 
8. While expressing  the view that the development of indigenous medical devices 
industry is of paramount importance and fits in realizing the Make in India goal of the 
Government, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that medical devices industry is a multi -product industry, 
producing wide range of products. Th e industry can be broadly classified as 
consisting of medical disposables and consumables; medical electronics, hospital 
equipments, surgical instruments; Implants; and Diagnostic Reagents. Globally this 
industry is growing quite steadily and have shown do uble digit growth. However, 
medical devices industry in India mostly depends on imports which is over 65% of 
the total market. The Indian medical devices industry is fragmented into small and 
medium enterprise category and is primarily manufacturing produc ts such as 
disposables/medical supplies.   Most of the requirement for high end medical 
equipments are met by multinational companies.  
The Committee also note that Department wants to establish Medical Devices 
Manufacturing Parks in the country and the De partment of Health has initiated 
action to establish one park in Tamil Nadu. The Department of Pharmaceuticals 
want to create four or five private and Government sponsored Medical Devices 
Parks. The Committee, also observe that One such park is to be estab lished in IDPL 
land in Hyderabad and similarly, the Government of Andhra Pradesh is going to lay 
foundation stone for a separate medical devices manufacturing park. The 
Department has also got proposals to create parks in the State of Gujarat.  
The Committ ee are of the view that the development of indigenous medical 
devices industry is of paramount importance and fits in realizing the Make in India 
goal of the Government. It will not only be instrumental in providing quality health 
care to its citizens but also would be helpful in creating new job opportunities for 
the skilled workers of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should take proactive measures toward developing indigenous 
medical devices industry so as to reduce our  dependence on imports. The 
Committee would also like the Department to expedite the process of 
establishment of those Medical Devices Manufacturing Industry Parks for which 
the proposals have already been received from various States. The Committee 
would like to know the initiatives taken to expedite the scheme and the progress 
made in the matter so far”.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
9. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 “The government had constituted a Task Force on Medical Device Sector in India -
2015. The Task Force has since submitted its recommendation. These 
recommendations have been examined and sent to the concerned 
Ministries/Departments for their implementation. The  Department is following up 

   
 
5 | P a g e  
with the concerned Ministries/ Department for early implementation of the 
recommendations.  
The Department had circulated a draft Standing Finance Committee (SFC) note for 
implementation of Scheme for financing Common Facility Centers (CFCs) in 
Medical Device Park to Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, NITI Aayog 
and Department of Expend iture for their comments. Based on the comments 
received, the Department has drafted a revised scheme to provide financial 
assistance, to the tune of Rs.25 Crore per CFC or 70% of the cost of machinery and 
equipment whichever is less, for setting up these facilities. 
In the meantime, Department of Expenditure vide their OM No. 24(35)/PF-II/2012 
dated 5 th August, 2016 issued revised guidelines for formulation EFC/SFC notes. 
As per the new guidelines, the proposal has been revised and an ‘in -principle’ 
approval is being sought from the Department of Expenditure in accordance with 
new guidelines”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
10. The Committee noted that most of the requirement for high end medical 
equipments are met by multinational companies .  The Committee also noted that 
the Department wants to establish Medical Devices Manufacturing Parks in the 
country and the Department of Health has initiated action to establish one park in 
Tamil Nadu. The Department of Pharmaceuticals wants to create four  or five 
private and Government sponsored Medical Devices Parks.  Keeping in view the 
Committee earlier recommended that the process to establish Medical Devices 
Manufacturing Industry Parks may be expedited.   In their Action Taken Reply,  the 
Department  had stated that  the Government had constituted a Task Force on 
Medical Device Sector in India -2015 and it has since submitted its 
recommendations. These recommendations have been examined and sent to the 
concerned Ministries/Departments and are being fol lowed up with them for early 
implementation of the recommendations.  The Department has drafted a revised 
scheme to provide financial assistance, to the tune of Rs.25 Crore per Common 
Facility Centre (CFC) or 70% of the cost of machinery and equipment whic hever is 
less, for setting up these facilities. While lauding the measures taken  by the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals, the Committee feel that the development of 
indigenous medical devices industry will not only realize the dream of  Make In 
India but also reduce the burden of imports.  As such  it is expedient  to implement 
the scheme after getting the modalities of scheme approved from all  the 
stakeholders without any delay.  The Committee, therefore recommend that the 
recommendations of the Task Force may be implemented without any further delay 
by the concerned  Ministries/Departments and the financial assistance as proposed 

   
 
6 | P a g e  
in the revised scheme should be implemented with alacrity.   The Committee, would 
like to be informed of the steps taken in this regard. 
C. Need to Allocate funds commensurate to the outlays proposed by the 
Department. 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.3 
11. While expressing that the Department should take up the issue of severe cut in the 
outlay for its projects vigorously with the Ministry of Finance and impress upon them to 
allocate adequate funds as per the demand of the Department for implementation of 
various important scheme, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that for Annual Plan 2016 -17, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals proposed an outlay of Rs.2891.473 crore to the D/o Expenditure, 
M/o Finance but only Rs.160 crore was approved for BE 2016 -17. The Committee 
is dismayed to note that this allocation falls far short of the urgent funds 
requirements projected by the Department for carrying out its laid down mandate 
and its Vision for development of Indian Pharmaceuticals Industry under “Make in 
India” initiative, to make India a largest global provider of quality medicines. The 
Committee observes that budget allocation for the Department is substantially less 
during the current year because of poor spending capacity in the past. The 
Committee feels that a severe cut in outlay would have an adverse impact on the 
implementation of the Plan Schemes being undertaken by t he Department and the 
targets set for the 12th Five Year Plan. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Department should take up the issue vigorously with the Ministry of Finance 
and impress upon them to allocate adequate funds as per the demand of th e 
Department for implementation of various important schemes. The Committee 
would like to be informed of the action taken by the Department in this regard”. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
12. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 “The following schemes faced heavy cut in allocation due to less allocation of funds 
by the Ministry of Finance.  
Sl. 
No 
Name of Scheme which faced much less 
allocation as compared to outlay 
sought. 
Amount sought 
(Rs in crore) 
Amount allocated 
(Rs in crore) 
1.  NIPERs 1500.98 100.00 
2.  Cluster Development Scheme 60.00 10.00 
3.  Setting up Pharma Promotion Council 5.00 0.01 
4.  Setting up Medical Devices Promotion 
Council 
5.00 0.01 
5.  PTUAs  500.00 0.01 
6.  Venture Capital Fund 500.00 0.01 
7.  Jan Aushadhi 155.00 35.00 
8.  IDPL 24.20 0.01 
9.  HAL 111.50 0.01 

   
 
7 | P a g e  
 The issue of enhanced allocation was taken up the level of Hon’ble Minister 
(Chemicals and Fertilizers) and followed up at the level of Secretary 
(Pharmaceuticals).  
 
D. Need for sanction of Additional Funds for various important Plan Schemes. 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.4 
13. While expressing  concern over inadequate allocation of funds for various schemes 
of the Department, by the Finance Ministry,  the Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that BE under Plan expenditure was Rs.210 crore for 2015 -
16 and RE was Rs.150.38 crore against which the actual expenditure made by the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals was Rs.147.20 crore and for Non -Plan BE for 
2015-16 was Rs.48.02 crore and RE was Rs.69.01 crore against which Actual 
expenditure was Rs.70.09 crore. The Committee observe that Department has 
been able to utilize 95% of the funds allocated under RE 2015 -16. The Committee 
further note that the BE Plan e xpenditure for 2016 -17 has been provided as 
Rs.160 crore and Non -Plan allocation is Rs.51.40 crore. The Committee also 
observe that Department need more funds for meeting its expenditure on various 
Plan Schemes like NIPER, JAS, Setting up of National Centr e for R&D in Bulk Drugs, 
and Cluster Development Programme. These programmes are important for the 
development of Pharmaceutical Industries in the country and also for capacity 
building through NIPERS, and for expansion of Jan Aushadhi Scheme to make 
available generic drugs at affordable cost to common man.  
The Committee, therefore recommend that the Department should strongly take 
up the matter with Ministry of Finance and convey the recommendations of the 
Committee for sanction of additional funds, for v arious important Plan schemes. 
The Committee would also like the Department to utilize the entire allocated 
budget and implement the Plan Schemes effectively”. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
14. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the  
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 “As already explained, the matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance 
for allocation of more funds for schemes where the funds are required urgently. 
 The progress of expenditure allocated in  the Budget for the Department is being 
monitored regularly by Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals to ensure 
speedy implementation of Plan Schemes”.  
E. National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research. 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.7 
15. While observing that the Department should impress upon the Ministry of Finance 
to grant the required amount of funds for the expeditious construction of new NIPERs 

   
 
8 | P a g e  
where land has already been allocated and construction activities have been initiated in 
full swing, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that the foundation stone for NIPER Ahmedabad  has been 
laid on 16.12.2015 and for the construction work BOQ has already been approved 
and without the approval of funds, tender cannot be released and construction 
work could not be started. The Department proposed an amount of Rs.197.29 
crore. However, only an amount of Rs.21.96 crore has been allocated for the above 
stated purpose during 2016 -17 With regard to NIPER, Guwahati, the construction 
work has already been started. The Department proposed an amount of Rs.174.70 
crore for the purpose. However, only an amount of Rs.19.50 crore has been 
allocated for the above stated purpose during 2016-17 which is not sufficient. With 
regard to NIPER Hyderabad, the Committee observe that Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) has been signed between NIPER, Hyderabad a nd National 
Project Construction Corporation (NPCC) Ltd. on 09.12.2015 for construction of 
NIPER campus as well as National Centre for Research and Development in Bulk 
Drugs(NCRDBD). The Department has sought Rs.193.02 crore for NIPER, 
Hyderabad and Rs.36. 75 crore for NCRDBD. However, only an amount of Rs.35 
crore for NIPER, Hyderabad and Rs.0.01 crore for NCRDBD has been allocated 
during 2016 -17. The fund allocated is proposed to be utilized in meeting 
Establishment expenditure and for construction activit ies of new campus for 
NIPER, Hyderabad. With regard to NIPER, Rae Bareli possession of land has been 
taken. The funds required for meeting expenses for establishment related and 
essential expenditure to run the Institute and for construction activities of new 
campus for NIPER, Rae Bareli. In the proposed BE 2016 -17, the Department has 
sought Rs.176.59 crore. However, an amount of Rs.07.00 crore has been allocated 
during 2016-17. With regard to NIPER Madurai For setting up of NIPER in Tamil 
Nadu, Government of Tamil Nadu has allocated land at Madurai. In the proposed 
BE 2016-17, the Department has sought Rs.174.10 crore. However, an amount of 
Rs.1.00 crore has been allocated during 2016 -17 for the above said purpose. The 
Committee are of the view that due to lesser allocation of funds the construction of 
new NIPERs is going to be affected adversely. The Committee, therefore 
recommend that the Department should impress upon the Ministry of Finance to 
grant the required amount of funds for the expeditious constr uction of new 
NIPERs where land has already been allocated and construction activities have 
been initiated in full swing, as this will address the demand of pharmaceutical 
industry to meet the requirement of highly skilled manpower and also boost 
research and development in the sector”.  
  

   
 
9 | P a g e  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
16. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“NIPER Division proposed Rs.1500.98 crore for allocation for 2016 -17, so that 
construction of NIPER Campuses would be completed timely. However, against 
this, only Rs.100 crore has been allocated under NIPER Scheme. The Department 
has taken up the matter with the Ministry of Finance for allocation of additional 
funds”. 
 COMMENTS OF THE COMM ITTEE ON ACTION TAKEN REPL Y ON 
RECOMMENDATIONS NOS. 3, 4 AND 7 
17. The Committee had observed in their Report that budget allocation for the 
Department is substantially less during the year 2016 -17 because of poor spending 
capacity in t he past. The Committee felt that a severe cut in outlay would have an 
adverse impact on the implementation of the Plan Schemes being undertaken by 
the Department and the targets set for the 12th Five Year Plan.   The Committee 
also observed that the  Department need more funds for meeting its expenditure on 
various Plan Schemes like NIPER, JAS, Setting up of National Centre for R&D in Bulk 
Drugs, and Cluster Development Programme. These programmes are important for 
the development of Pharmaceutical Industri es in the country and also for capacity 
building through NIPERS, and for expansion of Jan Aushadhi Scheme to make 
available generic drugs at affordable cost to common man.  The Committee,  
therefore earlier recommended that the Department should strongly t ake up the 
matter with Ministry of Finance for sanction of required funds. 
 In their Action Taken replies of the recommendation No.3,  4 and 7 the Department 
has stated that  the matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance for 
allocation of more f unds for schemes where the funds are required urgently.  The 
progress of expenditure allocated in the Budget for the Department is being 
monitored regularly by the Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals to ensure 
speedy implementation of Plan Schemes.  The Department has also stated that 
NIPER Division proposed Rs.1500.98 crore for allocation for 2016 -17, so that 
construction of NIPER Campuses would be completed in time. However, against 
this, only Rs.100 crore has been allocated under NIPER Scheme. The Department 
has taken up the matter with the Ministry of Finance for allocation of additional 
funds.   The Department  has further stated that the schemes of the Department 
which faced serious cut are NIPERs, Cluster Development Scheme,  Setting up 

   
 
10 | P a g e  
Pharma Promotion Council, PTUAs, Venture Capital Fund, Jan Aushadhi,  IDPL, HAL 
and the issue of enhanced allocation was taken up at the level of Hon’ble Minister 
(Chemicals and Fertilizers) and followed up at the level of Secretary 
(Pharmaceuticals).   
The Commit tee feel that the plan schemes such as NIPER, Jan Aushadhi Scheme, 
Setting up of National Centre for R&D in Bulk Drugs, and Cluster Development 
Programme  are vital for the development and growth of  pharmaceuticals sector in 
the country  to give benefit to common man and to achieve the objective of  ‘Make In 
India’.    Therefore, the schemes should not suffer for want of money and reiterate 
their earlier recommendation that earnest efforts should be made at the highest 
level to get the requisite funds for the schemes for smooth functioning of plan 
schemes.  
F.  National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.5  
18 While expressing the need for quick recovery of overcharged amount the approval 
by the Ministry of Finance for need  for One Time Settlement (OTS),  the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA), 
is an independent body of experts in the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. Its 
functions inter -alia in cludes fixation and revision of prices of scheduled 
formulations under the Drugs (Prices Control) Order (DPCO), as well as 
monitoring and enforcement of prices. NPPA also provides inputs to Government 
on pharmaceutical policy and issues related to affordab ility, availability and 
accessibility of medicines. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that 
Since inception of NPPA, there are 1389 cases as on 29.02.2016 (1250 cases under 
DPCO 1995 & 139 cases under DPCO 2013) where demand notices have been 
issued by NPPA to Pharmaceutical companies for recovery of overcharged amount. 
The Committee also observes that NPPA has prepared a draft for One Time 
Settlement (OTS) with an aim of quick recovery of overcharged amount and sent to 
Department of Pharmaceutical s for its formal approval. The earlier proposal sent 
two years back to Ministry of Finance was not accorded approval by it. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that the Department should take up the matter 
with Ministry of Finance again by strongly putting its case for One Time Settlement 
Scheme with full justification. The Committee desire to be apprised of the detailed 
action in this regard”.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
19. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 

   
 
11 | P a g e  
 “A proposal on ‘One Time Settlement Scheme’ in respect of cases pertaining to 
recoveries of overcharged amount under DPCO 1979, DPCO 1995 and DPCO 2013 
is under active consideration of the Department in consultation with NPPA”.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
20. The Committee  were informed  earlier that  since inception of NPPA, there 
are 1389 cases as on 29.02.2016 (1250 cases under DPCO 1995 & 139 cases under 
DPCO 2013) where demand notices have been issued by NPPA to Pharmaceutical 
companies for recovery of overcharged amount.  It was also informed to the 
Committee earlier that  NPPA has prepared a draft for One Time Settlement (OTS) 
with an aim of quick recovery of overcharged amount and the draft was sent to 
Department of Pharmaceuticals for its formal approval . The earlier proposal sent 
two years back to Ministry of Finance was not accorded approval by them.  The 
Committee, therefore earlier recommended that the Department may take up the 
proposed OTS with Ministry of Finance for early finalisation.    In their Action Taken 
Reply, the Department has stated that the proposal of OTS in respect of cases 
pertaining to recoveries of overcharged amount under DPCO 1979, DPCO 1995 and 
DPCO 2013 is under active consideration o f the Department in consultation with 
NPPA.    
The Committee did not appreciate such a casual Action Taken Reply from the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals.  The Committee observed that the earlier  
proposal of the Department was not approved by  Ministry of Finance and still the 
Department has not finalis ed the proposal submitted by NPPA.   The Committee 
therefore, express its displeasure over the pace of such an important decision and 
reiterate its earlier recommendation for expeditious finalisation of One Time 
Settlement so that the  cases with regard to  recovery  of overcharged  amount from 
Pharma Companies  can be solved with  its implementation.  
G. Need for Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector. 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 6 
21. While expressing that  the scheme be expeditiously implemented in a systematic, 
professional and transparent manner and ensure that the Steering Committee reviews the 
responses received in the EOIs at the earliest,  the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
 “The Committee observe that Cluster Development Programme for Phar ma Sector 
is a Central Sector Scheme which was approved in February 2014. . The total size 
of the scheme CDPPS is proposed as Rs.125 Crore for 12th Five Year Plan. The 
Committee also note that the Scheme would be implemented on a Public Private 

   
 
12 | P a g e  
Partnership (PPP) format through one time grant –in – aid to be released in 
various phases for creation of identified infrastructure and common facilities in 
the form of Common Facility Centers(CFC) to Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) set 
up for the purpose. Assistance under the Scheme will be Rs.20.00 Crore per cluster 
or 70% of the cost of the project, whichever is less for creation of common 
facilities for Common Testing Facilities, Training Centre, Effluent Treatment Plant, 
R&D Centre, Common Logistics Centre.  
Projects and Development India Limited (PDIL) has been chosen as the Project 
Management Consulting (PMC) for implementing the scheme. PDIL have called for 
EOI/SPV for the 1st Phase, out of the six EOIs, one was found suitable by the 
Scheme Selection Committee  (SSC) to be located in Tamilnadu. SSC has requested 
PDIL to call fresh EOI which they have done and the last date of receipt of the EOIs 
was 31/12/2015. After that PDIL has extended the date till 31.01.2016. The 
meeting of SSC was held on 23/02/2016 to re view the response to EOIs and 
implementation of the Scheme.  
The Committee recommends the Department to implement the scheme 
expeditiously in a systematic, professional and transparent manner and ensure 
that the Steering Committee reviews the responses rec eived in the EOIs at the 
earliest so that there is concrete progress in this regard. The Committee would like 
to be apprised about the progress made in the matter”. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
22. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee , the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“After Launch of the Programme, Project Monitoring Consultant 
(PMC)/Department of Pharmaceuticals invited Expression of Interest (EOI) on 
07.07.2015 from SPVs for participation in the programme. In response, EOIs were 
received from six SPVs, out of which 1 SPV, i.e. M/s Chennai Pharma Industrial & 
Infra Structure Upgradation Complex, Alathur was found suitable in the 3 rd SSC 
meeting held on 13.10.2015. The SPV was asked to submit their Proposal & DPR  
but the same are still awaited from the party. In order to make the scheme more 
attractive, on the request of the Pharma Industry,the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals in the 6 th SSC meeting on 29/6/2016 decided that Ayurvedics, 
Unani and Cosmetics firms shal l also be considered as Pharma Firms for 
participation under the scheme. Following the decision PMC has invited fresh EOI 
by 16.9.2016”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
23. The Committee noted that the Projects and Development India Limited 
(PDIL) has been chosen as the Project Management Consultant for implementing 
the Cluster Development Programme. PDIL has called for Expression of Interest 
/SPV for  the 1st Phase, where out of six EOIs, one was found suitable .  Scheme 
Selection Committee (SSC) had requeste d to call for fresh EOI where last date for 
submission was fixed as 31.1.2016.   The Committee, further noted that the 4 th  

   
 
13 | P a g e  
meeting of SSC was held on 23/02/2016 to review the response to EOIs and 
implementation of the Scheme.   The Committee therefore ear lier recommended 
the Department to implement the scheme expeditiously. 
In their Action Taken Reply , the Department has  stated that out of six SPVs one 
SPV, i.e. M/s Chennai Pharma Industrial & Infra Structure Upgradation Complex, 
Alathur was only found suitable in the 3rd SSC meeting held on 13.10.2015. The SPV 
was asked to submit their Proposal & DPR but the same are still awaited from the 
party. In order to make the scheme more attractive, on the request of the Pharma 
Industry, the Department of Pharmace uticals in the 6 th SSC meeting held on 
29/6/2016 decided that Ayurvedic, Unani and Cosmetics firms shall also be 
considered as Pharma Firms for participation under the scheme. Following the 
decision PMC has invited fresh EOI by 16.9.2016. 
Considering the A ction Taken Replies, the Committee expect the Department to 
assist the M/s Chennai Pharma Industrial & Infra Structure Upgradation Complex, 
Alathur to finalize the proposal and DPR. The Committee, also, recommend that the 
Department should speed up EOI pro cess for  early implementation of Cluster 
Development Programme.   The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard. 
H. Public Sector Undertakings 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.9 
24. While expressing concern over the slow progress in the revival of sick Pharma 
PSUs, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
“The Committee note that out of the five Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) 
under the administrative control of Department of Pharmaceuticals, three viz. 
Indian Drug & Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), Hindustan Antibiotic Limited 
(HAL) & Bengal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) are sick and are 
referred to Board for Industrial & Financial Reconstruction (BIFR). The Raj asthan 
Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL) reported losses for the first time during 
the year 2013 -14. The Karnataka Antibiotic & Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL) is 
the only profit making CPSE. 
 Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceuticals Ltd  
The Committee also  notes that the performance of Bengal Chemical and 
Pharmaceuticals Limited is improving. The Government sanctioned a 
rehabilitation package which has been implemented now it is on its way to 
progress. Turnover of the Company was Rs.50 crore in 2013 -14. Last year, it was 
Rs.23 crore. This year, it is going to touch Rs.100 crore and it is likely to make up a 
gross profit of Rs.8 to Rs.10 crore. BCPL have two pending projects, one at Kanpur 

   
 
14 | P a g e  
and the other is a more prestigious anti -snake venom project. It requi res Rs.27 
crore investments and if it is sanctioned for anti -snake venom project, it can be 
supplied to entire country and can also be exported.  
 Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. 
The Committee note with regard to HAL, Salary for 17 months is pending. The 
Committee also notes that each time whenever salary is to be given, the 
Department has to go to the Finance Ministry. The Department has worked out a 
rehabilitation package for Hindustan Antibiotics Limited. It is sending the proposal 
for simplified rehabilitation package to the Cabinet, for both IDPL and HAL. The 
action for revival of the HAL would be initiated once the approval of Cabinet is 
accorded. The Committee also feels that if the Cabinet note is approved, the official 
process will take nine months to get the first installment of payment after selling of 
the land. Till that time, it will be difficult for the employees of HAL to meet their 
ends meet. In this context, the Comm ittee strongly feel that Department should 
strive to provide some interim relief to the employees of HAL so as to improve 
morale of the employees.  
 Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 
The Committee further notes that Cabinet note for revival of sick PSUs namely 
Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd (IDPL) is being finalized. The Committee also 
feels that the Government has to take a call on whether they want to revive IDPL 
or close it down because regular man power has virtually vanished. The 
Committee furthe r observes that the situation in IDPL has made a turn around 
with an operating cash profit of Rs.4.38 crore made last year. This year, the 
turnover is touching Rs.85 crore and will perhaps be the highest in -house 
production ever achieved in the last 20 yea rs. The Committee further note that 
IDPL is managing its own cash flow through its deposits, and is using it for working 
capital needs. The IDPL unit of Hyderabad will be inaugurated and It will be Good 
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) plant. The Committee, fe el that Government 
support is needed for revival of IDPL.  
The Committee is of the view that steps to rehabilitate all the sick PSUs should be 
quickened. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Department should 
make vigorous efforts in coordination wi th all concerned authorities to 
rehabilitate the Pharma PSU’s and meet their immediate requirement 
expeditiously.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
25. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“Notes for approval of Cabinet for the revival of Hindustan Antibiotics Limited 
(HAL) & Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), were submitted in April 
2016. As per the decision of Cabinet, the matter relating to revival of HAL has been 
referred to a Committee of  Ministers (i.e. Minister of Finance, Minister of Road 
Transport & Highways and Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers) to review the 
Pharma PSUs and suggest further course of action. Department of Pharmaceuticals 

   
 
15 | P a g e  
has been directed by t he Committee of Ministers to appoint a Consultant to 
develop a concept note and prepare a report/document on the issue of revival of 
these Pharmaceuticals Units. The process of appointment of Consultant has 
already been initiated by HAL”.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
26. The Committee had observed earlier that out of 05 Central Public Sector 
Enterprises (CPSEs) under the administrative control of Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, Karnataka Antibiotic Private Limited (KAPL) is the only profit 
making CPSE while    Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), Hindustan 
Antibiotic Limited (HAL) and Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited 
(BCPL) are sick and were referred to Board for Industrial & Financial 
Reconstruction.   Rajasthan Drug and Pharmaceuticals  Limited reported losses for 
the first time during the year 2013 -14.  In this regard it was observed  that  the 
turnover  of BCPL was Rs. 50 Crore in 2013 -14,  Rs. 23 Crore during the year 2014 -
15 and   going to touch Rs. 100 Crore this year thus  likely to make   a gross profit 
Rs. 8 to 10 Crore this year.  In respect of IDPL the Committee also observed that 
IDPL has made a turnaround with an operating cash profit of  Rs. 4.38 Crore during 
the last year and it is expected that this year the turnover would touch Rs. 85  Crore 
and will perhaps the highest in house production for  the last 20 years.  As regard 
the HAL, salary of its employees is pending for the last many months and each time 
whenever salary is given the Department has gone to Finance Ministry.  The 
Committee were further informed that Cabinet Note for revival of IDPL and HAL 
was being finalized.  The Department was in the process of sending the proposal for 
simplified  rehabilitation package to the Cabinet for both IDPL and HAL.  The action 
for revival would be initiated once  the approval of Cabinet is accorded. Further in 
case the Cabinet Note is approved it would take nine months to get first installment 
of payment of HAL employees after selling of the land.  Till that time it would be 
difficult for the employees to meet their ends.   In this context the committee had 
recommended that the Department should try to provide some interim relief to the 
employees of HAL so as to improve their morale.  The Committee also 
recommended that the steps to rehabilitate the sick PSUs should be quickened. 
In their Action Taken Reply the Department has stated that  Notes for approval of 
Cabinet for the revival of Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) and Indian Drugs 
and Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), were submitted in April 2016.  As per the 
decision of Cabinet, the matter relating to revival of HAL has been referre d to a 
Committee of Ministers to view the Pharma PSUs and suggest further course of 
action.  Department of Pharmaceuticals has been directed by the Committee of 

   
 
16 | P a g e  
Ministers to appoint a consultant to develop a concept note and prepare a 
report/document on th e issue of revival of these Pharmaceuticals Units.  The 
process of appointment of Consultant has already been initiated by HAL.   However, 
the Department has not commented anything about the latest position of  Cabinet 
decision regarding revival of IDPL. 
For the revival of IDPL, the Committee observe though IDPL has made a turnaround 
this year but still a revisit on the functioning of IDPL is expedient. For HAL t he 
Committee  recommend that the Department of Pharmaceuticals should coordinate 
with all concer ned including consultant to prepare the concept paper to expedite 
the revival of the HAL in a time bound manner.  As regards the salary to HAL 
employees the Committee are dismayed to note that the Department has not 
commented on the recommendation of the C ommittee to provide some interim 
relief to the employees of the HAL. The Committee , therefore reiterate its earlier 
recommendation and hope that the decision for salary of HAL employees shall be 
taken at the earliest as it will be morale booster and succor  to loyal staff.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this 
regard.   
 
 
  

   
 
17 | P a g e  
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.1 
The Committee note that the country is almost self -sufficient in case of formulations. 
However, for making these formulations, the basic chemical comes from China. Since the 
pharmaceutical industry is dominated by the private sector, they are free to impor t as per 
Foreign Trade Policy under which import of certain drugs and drugs intermediates is 
restricted.  
The Committee also note that Indian Pharmaceutical Industry which was at one point of 
time leading producer in bulk drugs is now becoming increasingly dependent on China for 
its bulk drug needs. The Committee, further observe that in order to promote domestic 
production of bulk drugs, a Committee headed by Dr. V. M. Katoch was constituted which 
has submitted its recommendations. The Government is examin ing the recommendations 
of the Katoch Committee in consultation with the stakeholders. Besides this, three task 
forces have also been set up. All the three task forces have also submitted their reports, 
which are being examined.  
The Committee are of the strong view that overdependence on imports for its bulk drugs 
needs is not a healthy sign for the Indian Pharmaceutical Industry. The Committee 
observe that the recommendations of Katoch Committee and the three task forces are 
essential to boost the growth of Pharmaceutical Sector and reducing the overdependence 
on imports. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to examine the 
recommendation of the Task Forces expeditiously and implement its recommendations in 
a time bo und manner for the promotion of manufacturing of bulk drugs in the country. 
The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 In the meeting held in PMO 5.3.2016, the following two decisions were taken:- 
(i) D/o Pharmaceuticals may proceed with the proposal for providing assistance for 
common facilities for 03 Greenfield Bulk Drugs/API Parks to the extent of Rs.200 
crore each after seeking due approval. 
(ii) Proposal for providing support for distressed Brownfield  Units should be re -
examined by Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals in consultation with CEO, 
NITI Aayog.  
As regards (i) above, Department had circulated a draft Expenditure Finance Committee 
(EFC) note to Department of  Industrial Policy and Promotio n, NITI Aayog and 
Department of  Expenditure for their comments. Based on the comments received, the 
Department has drafted a revised scheme to provide financial assistance up to Rs.150 
crore  or 50% of the cost of machinery and equipment for setting up co mmon facilities in 
3 Bulk Drug Parks.  
In the meantime, Department of Expenditure vide their OM No. 24(35)/PF -II/2012 dated 
5th August, 2016 issued revised guidelines for making EFC/SFC notes. As per these new 

   
 
18 | P a g e  
guidelines, the proposal has been revised and an ‘in-principle’ approval has been sought 
from the Department of Expenditure on 24.08.2016 in accordance with new guidelines.  
As regards the proposal for support to distressed brownfield units,  after consultation 
with NITI Aayog, Industry Associations ha ve been requested to share their views on the 
type of intervention required from government for reviving production of the API. Reply 
is still a awaited. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No.7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.2 
The Committee note that medical devices industry is a multi -product industry, producing 
wide range of products. The industry can be broadly classified as consisting of medical 
disposables and consumables; medical electronics, hospital equipments, surgical 
instruments; Implants; and Diagnostic Reagents. Globally this industry is growing quite 
steadily and have shown double digit growth. However, medical devices industry in India 
mostly depends on imports which is over 65% of the total market. The Indian medi cal 
devices industry is fragmented into small and medium enterprise category and is 
primarily manufacturing products such as disposables/medical supplies.   Most of the 
requirement for high end medical equipments are met by multinational companies.  
The Co mmittee also note that Department wants to establish Medical Devices 
Manufacturing Parks in the country and the Department of Health has initiated action to 
establish one park in Tamil Nadu. The Department of Pharmaceuticals want to create four 
or five pri vate and Government sponsored Medical Devices Parks. The Committee, also 
observe that One such park is to be established in IDPL land in Hyderabad and similarly, 
the Government of Andhra Pradesh is going to lay foundation stone for a separate medical 
devices manufacturing park. The Department has also got proposals to create parks in the 
State of Gujarat.  
The Committee are of the view that the development of indigenous medical devices 
industry is of paramount importance and fits in realizing the Make in In dia goal of the 
Government. It will not only be instrumental in providing quality health care to its 
citizens but also would be helpful in creating new job opportunities for the skilled 
workers of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the D epartment 
should take proactive measures toward developing indigenous medical devices industry 
so as to reduce our dependence on imports. The Committee would also like the 
Department to expedite the process of establishment of those Medical Devices 
Manufacturing Industry Parks for which the proposals have already been received from 
various States. The Committee would like to know the initiatives taken to expedite the 
scheme and the progress made in the matter so far”.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The government had constituted a Task Force on Medical Device Sector in India -2015. 
The Task Force has since submitted its recommendation. These recommendations have 
been examined and sent to the concerned Ministries/Departments for their 
implementation. T he Department is following up with the concerned Ministries/ 
Department for early implementation of the recommendations.  

   
 
19 | P a g e  
The Department had circulated a draft Standing Finance Committee (SFC) note for 
implementation of Scheme for financing Common Facility  Centers (CFCs) in Medical 
Device Park to Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion, NITI Aayog and Department 
of Expenditure for their comments. Based on the comments received, the Department has 
drafted a revised scheme to provide financial assistance,  to the tune of Rs.25 Crore per 
CFC or 70% of the cost of machinery and equipment whichever is less, for setting up these 
facilities. 
In the meantime, Department of Expenditure vide their OM No. 24(35)/PF -II/2012 dated 
5th August, 2016 issued revised guidelines for formulation EFC/SFC notes. As per the new 
guidelines, the proposal has been revised and an ‘in -principle’ approval is being sought 
from the Department of Expenditure in accordance with new guidelines”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (Please see Para No.10  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.3 
The Committee note that for Annual Plan 2016 -17, the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
proposed an outlay of Rs.2891.473 crore to the D/o Expenditure, M/o Finance but only 
Rs.160 crore was approved for BE 2016 -17. The Committee is dismayed to note that this 
allocation falls far short of the urgent funds requirements projected by the Department 
for carrying out its laid down mandate and its Vision for development of Indian 
Pharmaceuticals Industry und er “Make in India” initiative, to make India a largest global 
provider of quality medicines. The Committee observes that budget allocation for the 
Department is substantially less during the current year because of poor spending 
capacity in the past. The C ommittee feels that a severe cut in outlay would have an 
adverse impact on the implementation of the Plan Schemes being undertaken by the 
Department and the targets set for the 12th Five Year Plan. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department sh ould take up the issue vigorously with the Ministry of 
Finance and impress upon them to allocate adequate funds as per the demand of the 
Department for implementation of various important schemes. The Committee would like 
to be informed of the action taken by the Department in this regard”. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The following schemes faced heavy cut in allocation due to less allocation of funds by the 
Ministry of Finance.   
Sl. No Name of Scheme which faced much less 
allocation as compared to outlay 
sought. 
Amount sought 
(Rs in crore) 
Amount allocated 
(Rs in crore) 
1.  NIPERs 1500.98 100.00 
2.  Cluster Development Scheme 60.00 10.00 
3.  Setting up Pharma Promotion Council 5.00 0.01 
4.  Setting up Medical Devices Promotion 
Council 
5.00 0.01 
5.  PTUAs  500.00 0.01 
6.  Venture Capital Fund 500.00 0.01 
7.  Jan Aushadhi 155.00 35.00 
8.  IDPL 24.20 0.01 
9.  HAL 111.50 0.01 

   
 
20 | P a g e  
 The issue of enhanced allocation was taken up the level of Hon’ble  Minister 
(Chemicals and Fertilizers) and followed up at the level of Secretary 
(Pharmaceuticals).  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No.17  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. NO.4  
The Committee note that BE under Plan expenditure was Rs.210 crore for 2015 -16 and 
RE was Rs.150.38 crore against which the actual expenditure made by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals was Rs.147.20 crore and for Non -Plan BE for 2015 -16 was Rs.48.02 
crore and RE was Rs.69.01 crore against which Actual expenditure was Rs.70.09 crore. 
The Committee observe that Department has been able to utilize 95% of the funds 
allocated under RE 2015-16. The Committee further note that the BE Plan expenditure for 
2016-17 has been provided as Rs.160 crore and Non-Plan allocation is Rs.51.40 crore. The 
Committee also observe that Department need more funds for meeting its expenditure on 
various Plan Schemes like NIPER, JAS, Setting up of National Centre for R&D in Bulk 
Drugs, and Cluster Development Programme. These programmes are important for the 
development of Pharmaceutical Industries in the country and also for capacity building 
through NIPERS, and for expansion of Jan Aushadhi Scheme to make available generic 
drugs at affordable cost to common man.  
The Committee, therefore recommend that the Department should strongly take up the 
matter with Ministry of Finance and convey the recommendations of the Committee for 
sanction of additional funds, for various important Plan sc hemes. The Committee would 
also like the Department to utilize the entire allocated budget and implement the Plan 
Schemes effectively. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
As already explained, the matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance for 
allocation of more funds for schemes where the funds are required urgently. 
The progress of expenditure allocated in the Budget for the Department is being 
monitored regularly by Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals to ensure speedy 
implementation of Plan Schemes.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No.17  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.5  
The Committee notes that the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA), is an 
independent body of experts in the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. Its functions 
inter-alia includes fixation and revision of prices of scheduled formulations under  the 
Drugs (Prices Control) Order (DPCO), as well as monitoring and enforcement of prices. 
NPPA also provides inputs to Government on pharmaceutical policy and issues related to 
affordability, availability and accessibility of medicines. However, the Commi ttee are 
dismayed to note that Since inception of NPPA, there are 1389 cases as on 29.02.2016 
(1250 cases under DPCO 1995 & 139 cases under DPCO 2013) where demand notices 

   
 
21 | P a g e  
have been issued by NPPA to Pharmaceutical companies for recovery of overcharged 
amount. 
The Committee also observes that NPPA has prepared a draft for One Time Settlement 
(OTS) with an aim of quick recovery of overcharged amount and sent to Department of 
Pharmaceuticals for its formal approval. The earlier proposal sent two years back to  
Ministry of Finance was not accorded approval by it. The Committee, therefore 
recommend that the Department should take up the matter with Ministry of Finance 
again by strongly putting its case for One Time Settlement Scheme with full justification. 
The Committee desire to be apprised of the detailed action in this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
A proposal on ‘One Time Settlement Scheme’ in respect of cases pertaining to recoveries 
of overcharged amount under DPCO 1979, DPCO 1995 and DPCO 2013 is under a ctive 
consideration of the Department in consultation with NPPA.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.6 
The Committee observes that Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector is a 
Central Sector Scheme which was approved in February 2014. . The total size of the 
scheme CDPPS is proposed as Rs.125 Crore for 12th Five Year Plan. The Committee also 
note that the Scheme would be implemented on a Public Private Partnership (PPP) format 
through one time grant –in – aid to be released in various phases for creation of identified 
infrastructure and common facilities in the form of Common Facility Centers(CFC) to 
Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) set up for the purpose. Assistance under the Scheme w ill 
be Rs.20.00 Crore per cluster or 70% of the cost of the project, whichever is less for 
creation of common facilities for Common Testing Facilities, Training Centre, Effluent 
Treatment Plant, R&D Centre, Common Logistics Centre.  
Projects and Development India Limited (PDIL) has been chosen as the Project 
Management Consulting (PMC) for implementing the scheme. PDIL have called for 
EOI/SPV for the 1st Phase, out of the six EOIs, one was found suitable by the Scheme 
Selection Commit tee (SSC) to be located in Tamilnadu. SSC has requested PDIL to call 
fresh EOI which they have done and the last date of receipt of the EOIs was 31/12/2015. 
After that PDIL has extended the date till 31.01.2016. The meeting of SSC was held on 
23/02/2016 to review the response to EOIs and implementation of the Scheme.  
The Committee recommends the Department to implement the scheme expeditiously in a 
systematic, professional and transparent manner and ensure that the Steering Committee 
reviews the responses received in the EOIs at the earliest so that there is concrete 
progress in this regard. The Committee would like to be apprised about the progress 
made in the matter.  
  

   
 
22 | P a g e  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
After Launch of the Programme, Project Monitoring Consultant (PMC)/Department of 
Pharmaceuticalsinvited Expression of Interest (EOI) on 07.07.2015 from SPVs for 
participation in the programme. In response, EOIs were received from six SPVs, out of 
which 1 S PV, i.e. M/s Chennai Pharma Industrial & Infra Structure Upgradation Complex, 
Alathur was found suitable in the 3 rd SSC meeting held on 13.10.2015. The SPV was asked 
to submit their Proposal & DPR but the same are still awaited from the party. Inorder to 
make the scheme more attractive, on the request of the Pharma Industry,the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals in the 6 th SSC meeting on 29/6/2016 decided that Ayurvedics, Unani 
and Cosmetics firms shall also be considered as Pharma Firms for participation under the 
scheme. Following the decision PMC has invited fresh EOI by 16.9.2016. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.7 
The Committee note that the foundation stone for NIPER Ahmedabad  has been laid on 
16.12.2015 and for the construction work BOQ has already been approved and without 
the approval of funds, tender cannot be released and construction work could not be 
started. The Department proposed an amount of Rs.197.29 crore. However,  only an 
amount of Rs.21.96 crore has been allocated for the above stated purpose during 2016 -17 
With regard to NIPER, Guwahati, the construction work has already been started. The 
Department proposed an amount of Rs.174.70 crore for the purpose. However, only an 
amount of Rs.19.50 crore has been allocated for the above stated purpose during 2016 -17 
which is not sufficient. With regard to NIPER Hyderabad, the Committee observe that 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been signed between NIPER, Hyderabad a nd 
National Project Construction Corporation (NPCC) Ltd. on 09.12.2015 for construction of 
NIPER campus as well as National Centre for Research and Development in Bulk 
Drugs(NCRDBD). The Department has sought Rs.193.02 crore for NIPER, Hyderabad and 
Rs.36.75 crore for NCRDBD. However, only an amount of Rs.35 crore for NIPER, 
Hyderabad and Rs.0.01 crore for NCRDBD has been allocated during 2016 -17. The fund 
allocated is proposed to be utilized in meeting Establishment expenditure and for 
construction activities of new campus for NIPER, Hyderabad. With regard to NIPER, Rae 
Bareli possession of land has been taken. The funds required for meeting expenses for 
establishment related and essential expenditure to run the Institute and for construction 
activities of new campus for NIPER, Rae Bareli. In the proposed BE 2016 -17, the 
Department has sought Rs.176.59 crore. However, an amount of Rs.07.00 crore has been 
allocated during 2016-17. With regard to NIPER Madurai For setting up of NIPER in Tamil 
Nadu, Government of Tamil Nadu has allocated land at Madurai. In the proposed BE 2016-
17, the Department has sought Rs.174.10 crore. However, an amount of Rs.1.00 crore has 
been allocated during 2016-17 for the above said purpose. The Committee are of the view 
that due to lesser allocation of funds the construction of new NIPERs is going to be 
affected adversely. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Department should 
impress upon the Ministry of Finance to grant the required amount of funds for the 
expeditious constr uction of new NIPERs where land has already been allocated and 
construction activities have been initiated in full swing, as this will address the demand of 
pharmaceutical industry to meet the requirement of highly skilled manpower and also 
boost research and development in the sector.  

   
 
23 | P a g e  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
NIPER Division proposed Rs.1500.98 crore for allocation for 2016 -17, so that 
construction of NIPER Campuses would be completed timely. However, against this, only 
Rs.100 crore has been allocated under NIPER Scheme.The Department has taken up the 
matter with the Ministry of Finance for allocation of additional funds. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No.17 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.8 
The Committee note that making quality medicines available at affordable prices remains 
a k ey challenge to the Government. To provide relief to common man and to ensure 
availability of generic medicines at affordable prices to all, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals launched a Jan Aushadhi Campaign in November 2008 in collaboration 
with State Gov ernments. The Committee notes that Jan Aushadhi Scheme is being 
implemented by the Department of Pharmaceuticals through Bureau of Pharma PSUs of 
India. The Committee note that as on 10 March 2016, 263 stores spread over 21 
States/UTs are functional in the country.  
The Committee also note that during the Budget Speech, 2016 -17 the Finance Minister 
announced that the Government will reinvigorate the supply of generic drugs and open 
3000 stores under Prime Minister’s Jan AushadhiYojana  towards this objective. The 
Committee observe that BE for 2015-16 for Jan Aushadhi Scheme was Rs.35 crore and the 
RE 2015-16 was Rs.16.92 crore and the Actual Expenditure during 2015 -16 was Rs.16.91 
crore which shows full utilization. During 2016 -17, the BE for Jan Aushadhi Scheme has 
been fixed at Rs.35 crore similar to previous year. The Committee is to point out that in 
order to achieve the 3000 stores objectives during the year the allocations may not be 
sufficient and more funds would be required duri ng the course of the year. The 
Committee desire that Jan Aushadhi Stores should be opened in a well distributed manner 
in the country and the Department should ensure that all States, regions and difficult 
areas are also covered so that the scheme would se rve its intended purpose. The 
Committee would also suggest that the Department should also commission more mobile 
vans to supply medicines to distant areas, far flung areas, difficult terrains so that the 
population at large can benefit from the scheme. Th e Committee observe that the State 
Governments have their own free drugs scheme and are hesitant and non -cooperative in 
certain places which makes this scheme difficult to take off. The doctors may also be 
sensitized and encouraged to prescribe such generi c drugs that are available with Jan 
Aushadhi Stores. The Committee, therefore recommend that Department may utilize the 
allocated funds completely and promote the Scheme more effectively so that the objective 
of providing affordable medicines to all citizens is met.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Jan Aushadhi Scheme has been revamped with the approval of Hon’ble Minister 
(Chemicals & Fertilizers) on 30.9.2015. A target of 3000 Jan Aushadhi Stores has been 
proposed tobe opened by the end of 2016 -17. As on 30.0 9.2016, a total of 448 Jan 
Aushadhi Stores have been opened. To achieve the target of opening of 3000 Stores by the 

   
 
24 | P a g e  
end of March 2017, Rs.35 Crore have been allocated for 2016 -17 against the demand of 
Rs.115.89 Crore. Out of Rs.35 Crore, Rs.22.78 Crore hav e been released to Bureau of 
Pharma PSUs of India (BPPI). It is expected that the allocation under the scheme for 2016-
17 will be fully utilized. Supply chain and public awareness is being improved. Basket of 
medicines has been increased and the scheme is picking up. 
 
  

   
 
25 | P a g e  
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
  

   
 
26 | P a g e  
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
  
 
-NIL- 
 
 
  

   
 
27 | P a g e  
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE  STILL AWAITED 
RECOMMENDATION NO.9  
The Committee note that out of the five Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) under 
the administrative control of Department of Pharmaceuticals, three viz. Indian Drug & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), Hindustan Antibiotic Limited (HAL) & Bengal Chemicals 
& Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) are sick and are r eferred to Board for Industrial & 
Financial Reconstruction (BIFR). The Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL) 
reported losses for the first time during the year 2013 -14. The Karnataka Antibiotic & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL) is the only profit making CPSE. 
Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceuticals Ltd   
The Committee also notes that the performance of Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceuticals 
Limited is improving. The Government sanctioned a rehabilitation package which has 
been implemented now it is on it s way to progress. Turnover of the Company was Rs.50 
crore in 2013-14. Last year, it was Rs.23 crore. This year, it is going to touch Rs.100 crore 
and it is likely to make up a gross profit of Rs.8 to Rs.10 crore. BCPL have two pending 
projects, one at Kan pur and the other is a more prestigious anti -snake venom project. It 
requires Rs.27 crore investments and if it is sanctioned for anti -snake venom project, it 
can be supplied to entire country and can also be exported.  
Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. 
The Committee note with regard to HAL, Salary for 17 months is pending. The Committee 
also notes that each time whenever salary is to be given, the Department has to go to the 
Finance Ministry. The Department has worked out a rehabilitation package for Hindustan 
Antibiotics Limited. It is sending the proposal for simplified rehabilitation package to the 
Cabinet, for both IDPL and HAL. The action for revival of the HAL would be initiated once 
the approval of Cabinet is accorded. The Committee also feels that if the C abinet note is 
approved, the official process will take nine months to get the first installment of payment 
after selling of the land. Till that time, it will be difficult for the employees of HAL to meet 
their ends meet. In this context, the Committee str ongly feel that Department should 
strive to provide some interim relief to the employees of HAL so as to improve morale of 
the employees.  
Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd. 
The Committee further notes that Cabinet note for revival of sick PSUs namely Ind ian 
Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd (IDPL) is being finalized. The Committee also feels that the 
Government has to take a call on whether they want to revive IDPL or close it down 
because regular man power has virtually vanished. The Committee further observes  that 
the situation in IDPL has made a turn around with an operating cash profit of Rs.4.38 
crore made last year. This year, the turnover is touching Rs.85 crore and will perhaps be 
the highest in-house production ever achieved in the last 20 years. The Committee further 
note that IDPL is managing its own cash flow through its deposits, and is using it for 
working capital needs. The IDPL unit of Hyderabad will be inaugurated and It will be 

   
 
28 | P a g e  
Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) plant. The Committee, feel that Go vernment support 
is needed for revival of IDPL.  
The Committee is of the view that steps to rehabilitate all the sick PSUs should be 
quickened. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Department should make 
vigorous efforts in coordination with all con cerned authorities to rehabilitate the Pharma 
PSU’s and meet their immediate requirement expeditiously.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Notes for approval of Cabinet for the revival of Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) & 
Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), were submitted in April 2016. As per the 
decision of Cabinet, the matter relating to revival of HAL has been referred to a 
Committee of  Ministers (i.e. Minister of Finance, Minister of Road Transport & Highways 
and Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers) to review the Pharma PSUs and suggest further 
course of action. Department of Pharmaceuticals has been directed by the Committee of 
Ministers to appoint a Consultant to develop a concept note and prepare a 
report/document on t he issue of revival of these Pharmaceuticals Units. The process of 
appointment of Consultant has already been initiated by HAL.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No.26  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                  ANANDRAO ADSUL 
08 December,  2016                                       Chairperson 
17Agrahayana 1938 (Saka)                                     Standing Committee on 
                              Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

   
 
29 | P a g e  
APPENDIX – I 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 07 December, 2016 from 1615 hrs. to 
1700 hrs. in Committee Room 'B ', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B. N. Chandrappa 
5. Smt. Veena Devi 
6. Shri  R. Dhruvanarayana 
7. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
8. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
9. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
10. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
12. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
13. Shri K. Parasaran 
14. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
15. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
SECRETARIAT 
             1. Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
 3. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director  
 4. Shri Nishant Mehra  -  Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee.   
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the Draft Action Taken 
Reports on 'Demands for Grants 2016 -17' and on the subject 'Cluster Development 
Programme for Pharma Sector' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of Pharmaceutica ls). After some deliberations  the Draft Action Taken Reports were 
adopted by the Committee without any changes. 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to make consequential changes, if any, 
arising out of the factual verification of the Action Taken R eports by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
5. It was also decided in the meeting that presentation of 02 Action Taken Reports 
shall take place in both the Houses on 9.12.2016.  
6. The Committee thereafter deci ded to hold its next meeting on  
6th January, 2017.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

   
 
30 | P a g e  
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION T AKEN BY THE GOVERNME NT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONT AINED IN THE TWENTY -THIRD REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDI NG COMMITTEE ON CHEM ICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (2015 -16) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016 -17)’ OF THE 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICAL S AND FERTILIZERS  ( DEPARTMENT OF 
PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 
 
9 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos.1, 2,3,4 5, 6, 7 and  8 )   
 
8 
 
Percentage of Total 89% 
 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
00 
Percentage of Total    00 
 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:-   
NIL  
 
 
00 
Percentage of Total 00 
 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
 
(Vide Recommendation No 9) 
 
1 
 
Percentage of Total 11% 
 
 
 