 Page 1 
 
 
    
17 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA  
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
 
PETROLEUM CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
INVESTMENT REGIONS (PCPIR) 
 
 
 
REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
FEBRUARY, 2016/  PHALGUNA , 1937 (SAKA) 


 Page 2 
 
CC&F No.17 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
PETROLEUM CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS INVESTMENT 
REGIONS (PCPIR) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.02.2016 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 25.02.2016 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2016/  PHALGUNA, 1937 (SAKA)  


 Page 3 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-16) …………..………………………... 4 
Introduction ………………………………………………………………..………………………… 5 
 Part I  
Chapter I Introductory 6-8 
Chapter II Budgetary Allocation and Investment 9-16 
Chapter III Monitoring of PCPIRs 13-16 
Chapter IV Master Plan, Environmental Clearances and Disaster 
Management 
17-23 
Chapter V Implementation of PCPIRs 24-33 
Chapter VI Employment and Welfare Measures 34-41 
Chapter VII Other Important  Issues 42-43 
 Part II 
Observations/Recommendations 
 
44-53 
 
APPENDICES 
i. Minutes of Sixth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2012-13) held on  30 January, 2013  
54-55 
ii. Minutes of Fourth  Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2015-16) held on  29 October, 2015  
56-57 
iii. Minutes of Fifth  Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2015-16) held on  17 November, 2015 
58-59 
iv Minutes of Sixth  Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2015-16) held on  12 January, 2016 
60 
 
  

 Page 4 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Idris Ali 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Innocent 
9. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi 
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle 
13. Shri Rajendran S. 
14. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
15. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
16. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
17. Dr. Uma Saren 
18.  Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
19. Shri Taslimuddin 
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
21. Shri   Baker George  
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Dr. M.S. Gill 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27. Shri K. Parasaran 
28.   Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao 
29.  Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
30.  Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
31. Shri Abdul Wahab 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Director 
3. Shri Nishant Mehra   - Under Secretary 

 Page 5 
 
  
                                                                
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2015 -16) 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this 
Seventeenth  Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject, ‘Petroleum Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and  Fertilizers 
(Department of  Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
2. The Subject, ‘Petroleum, Chemical s and Petrochemicals Investment Regions 
(PCPIRs)’ was earlier taken by the erstwhile Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2012-
13 , 2013-14 and 2014-15) for examination and report.   The Committee took oral evidence 
of  the representatives  of the Minis try of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) on the subject at their sitting held on 30.1.2013.   As the  
examination remained inconclusive owing to dissolution of 15 th Lok Sabha,  the same was 
taken up again for examinatio n and report by the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(2015-16).   The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of 
chemicals and Petrochemicals at their sittings held  on 29 October 2015 and 17 November 
2015. 
3. The Committee (2015-16) considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 
12 January 2016. 
4. The Committee express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) and other 
Ministries/Departments for furnishing the material and other information, which they 
desired in connection with the examination of the subject, ‘Petroleum, Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs)’ and for giving evidence before the 
Committee.  
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have  been printed in bold letters at the end of the Report. 
 
                                                 
NEW DELHI; 
18 FEBRUARY, 2016                                                   (ANANDRAO ADSUL) 
29 PHALGUNA, 1937 (SAKA)                                                    CHAIRPERSON, 
         STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
         CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
  

 Page 6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – 1 
Introductory 
 
 The Government introduced the Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemical 
Investment Regions (PCPIR) policy in 2007 to develop global scale industrial clusters in the 
Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical sectors with world class infrastructure.  The PCPIR 
Policy is a window to ensure adoption of a holistic approach to promote the petroleum, 
chemical and petrochemical sectors in an integrated and environment friendly manner on a 
large scale. Such integrated PCPIRs would reap the benefits of co -sitting, networki ng and 
greater efficiency through use of common infrastructure and support services. 
1.2   A PCPIR is a specifically delineated investment region with an area of around 250 
square kilometers planned for the establishment of manufacturing facilities for dom estic 
and export led production in Petroleum, Chemicals & Petrochemicals, along with the 
associated services and infrastructure.  
1.3 The PCPIRs comprise capital and technology intensive projects and are likely to be 
operational within 10 to 15 years. Thes e projects are estimated to attract an investment of 
over Rs 7, 62,894 crore and generate employment to around 33.96 lakh persons over a 
period of time.  
1.4   A PCPIR would be a combination of production units, public utilities, logistics, 
environmental pr otection mechanisms, residential areas and administrative services. It 
would have a processing area, where the manufacturing facilities, along with associated 
logistics and other services, and required infrastructure will be located, and a non - 
processing area, to include residential, commercial and other social and institutional 
infrastructure.  
1.5  The PCPIR may include one or more Special Economic Zones, Industrial Parks, Free 
Trade & Warehousing Zones, Export Oriented Units, or Growth Centers, duly not ified under 
the relevant Central or state legislation or policy.  
1.6   The PCPIR could cover existing settlements/industries & estates/ services and 
would therefore benefit from and be complementary to the region. 
1.7  Each PCPIR would have a refinery/ petrochemical feedstock company as an anchor 
tenant. The internal infrastructure of the PCPIR will be built and managed by a Developer, 
or a group of Co -developers. The external infrastructure linkages will be provided by 
Government of India and the concerned State government. This infrastructure will be 
created/upgraded through Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) to the extent possible. 

 Page 7 
 
Central Government will provide the necessary Viability Gap Funding (VGF) through 
existing schemes.  
1.8  The massive scale of infrastructure development, industrial development and 
employment generation in the PCPIRs offer tremendous opportunities for domestic as well 
as foreign investments. Following advantages and opportunities are offered in the PCPIRs: 
 Strategic locations at ports for domestic and global markets. 
 Availability of adequate land with Government agencies and developers for 
allotment to industries.  
 Excellent connectivity by road, train, airports.  
 Institutional mechanism for management and implementation. 
 Deregulated industry and promotion of 100% FDI.  
 Ready availability of technical and skilled manpower. 
 Opportunities for investment window in infrastructure through PPP mode.  
 Forming of consortium with Indian partners e.g. r efinery/cracker complex, large 
industrial units, etc. 
 Investments in utilities and services including Waste Management, Housing, 
Hospitals, Education, Training etc.  
1.9  The Govt. has approved PCPIRs to be set up in Dahej Gujarat, Paradip in Odisha, 
Vishakhapatnam-Kakinada in Andhra Pradesh and Cuddalore- Nagapattinam in Tamil Nadu 
States. Government of West Bengal has since conveyed its decision not to develop a 
Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Region and approval of Cabinet has 
been obtained for withdrawal of West Bengal (BM, No. 3).   
 1.10 When the Committee asked the Department to state the reasons cited by West 
Bengal to withdraw their proposal for PCPIR in the State, the Department, in a  written 
reply, stated as under: 
 "Government of West Bengal conveyed its decision to abandon the Petroleum, 
Chemicals and Petrochemical Investment Region at Haldia, West Bengal and decided 
to develop a new project of industrial park, power plant and Eco Tourism Park in its 
place."  
1.11   When the Committee enquired to the Department whether there any other States 
which indicated their interest in setting up PCPIRs in their State, the Department replied in 
writing as under:-  
 "Kerala and Madhya Pradesh have shown interest in setting up of  PCPIR. However, 
Kerala in the meeting held under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary, Govt. of Kerala 
on 24.08.2015 dropped the project as it requires huge area of land which is not a 
practical proposition for the State.  Madhya Pradesh has desired to set up PCPIR near 
Bina Refinery at Bina. Department of C&PC has advised the State Govt. to get a 
feasibility study conducted to proceed further in the matter." 
 

 Page 8 
 
1.12  The Snapshot of the four PCPIRs, as provided by the Department is given below: 
PCPIR Snapshot      
Indicator  Gujarat  Andhra Pradesh  Odisha Tamil Nadu  
Location/ Region  Dahej, Bharuch  Vishakhapatnam – 
Kakinada  
Paradeep Cuddalore- Nagapattinam 
Date of Approval Feb, 2009     Feb, 2009     Dec, 2010     July,2012 
Date of MoA 07.01.2010 01.10.2009 03.11.2011  20.02.2014 
Total Area (Sq. kms.)  453.00  603.58  284.15  256.83  
Processing Area 
(Sq.kms.)  
248.00  270.00  123.00  104.00  
Anchor Tenant  ONGC Petroleum 
addition Limited  
Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation Ltd. 
(HPCL)  
Indian Oil 
Corporation 
Ltd. (IOCL)  
Nagarjuna Oil Corporation 
Ltd. (NOCL)  
Refinery / Cracker 
capacity in MMTPA  
Cracker: 
Ethylene: 1.1  
Propylene: 0.4  
9.3 to 15 (expansion of 
existing refinery) 15 
(Greenfield). 
15 (Greenfield 
refinery).  
12  (Refinery). 
Anchor Project Status Expected 
Commissioning: First 
quarter of 2016  
Anchor Tenant for 
Greenfield project yet 
to come on board. 
Expected 
Commissionin
g: First  
Quarter of 
2016 
Construction work, stalled 
since 2011, yet to restart. 
Total amount of 
infrastructure projects 
approved (Rs. crore)* 
7749.70 19031.00 13634.00 13354.00 
GoI share in form of  VGF 
(Rs. crore)* 
80.50 1206.80 716.00 1143.00 
1500 .00  
(budgetary support) 
Proposed Investment 
(Rs. Crore)*  
50,000  3,43,000  2,77,734  92,160  
Investment made 
 (Rs. Crore)  
70,649  37,010 45,000  7,812 
Projected employment 
(number)* 
8,00,000  11,98,000  6,48,000  7,50,000  
Employment generated 
(number)  
78,000  93,500  38,000  13,950  
Status of Master 
Planning notification 
Development Plan 
sanctioned  
Revised Draft final 
Master Plan, addressing 
objections from public, 
is being submitted to 
the State Government. 
Preparation of 
Master Plan is 
in process. 
Will be taken up after 
formation of PCPIR 
Management Board. 
Status of EIA  Report has been 
uploaded on the 
website of MoEF in 
September 2015.  
EMP / EIA study 
submitted to APPCB. 
Public hearing to be 
conducted. 
Proposal from 
EPTRI /NIO 
Goa is under 
evaluation by 
IDCO. 
Will be taken up after 
formation of PCPIR 
Management Board. 
*At approval stage of the Projects 
 
  

 Page 9 
 
CHAPTER  2 
Budgetary Allocation and Investment  
 
 The Committee observe d that there was  no separate budgetary support from the 
Government regarding PCPIRs. The Government's support to the PCPIR is mainly by way of 
Viability Gap Funding (VGF) for which a total sum of Rs. 80.50 crore, Rs. 1206.80 crore, 716 
crore and Rs. 2643 crore  have been c ommitted for Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and 
Tamil Nadu PCPIRs respectively.  
2.2  When the Committee asked whether Viability Gap Funding (VGF) for PCPIRs  have 
been proposed by all the concerned State Governments, the Department replied in writing 
as under:-  
 "All the four State Governments have proposed VGF as part of their PCPIR 
applications which were approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA).  The State Governments have to prepare detailed project reports as per the 
eligibility criteria of the guidelines on VGF issued by Department of Economic 
Affairs, Ministry of Finance.  The amount of VGF approved under various 
infrastructure projects for the four PCPIRs is Rs. 80.50 crore for Gujarat, Rs. 1206.80 
crore for Andhra Pradesh, Rs.  716 crore for Odisha and Rs. 1143 crore for Tamil 
Nadu. The State Governments have been requested to prepare VGF projects, 
wherever required, as per the implementation status of PCPIR projects." 
 
2.3 When the Committee enquired about the lack of budgetary support for the PCPIRs 
by the Central Government of India, the Joint Secretary of the Department during evidence 
stated as under:-  
 "In case of Government of India’s budgetary support, we have been g etting a number 
of requests from all State Governments – like Odisha, Gujarat, and Andhra Pradesh – 
that some budgetary support provision should be there. For example, in Odisha, 
EPTRI is asking for a big money for the EIA studies. The State Government is saying, 
‘where from we will pay’. They say that the Government of India has come out with 
the PCPIR policy and they should give something to the State Governments – some 
financial support. Otherwise, they say that it will only become an inspirational 
policy, if it is not supported by the funds. In the same way, Gujarat is saying, ‘we will 
create the next port infrastructure or the railway infrastructure, but some support 
should come from the Government of India.’ Unless we have some financial support, 
some financial incentive, some handholding, there are not many takers for only 
policy. Policy is to be supported by the fund. The amount of Rs. 1,000 crore is a very 
minimal amount, but even if that is agreed upon, at least, we will have something to 
tell the S tate Governments that we are also providing some support, so they should 
come forward and expedite."  
 
2.4  On the issue of Viability Gap Funding (VGF) by the Central Government for PCPIRs, 
the Secretary of the Department, during evidence stated as below:-  
 "I pointed out to the Cabinet Secretary that the 20 per cent contribution which the 
Government of India is willing to make by way of Viability Gap Funding should be 
diverted as budgetary contribution to the State public sector undertaking or to the 
State Government for the project being implemented directly by the State 

 Page 10 
 
Government. When the State Government or the State public sector undertaking is 
implementing the project very well through its own funds, the Central Government , 
instead of insisting that  you come through public, private partnership only where 
nobody is willing to come forward , can divert that money from VGF to its 
contribution towards the expenditure incurred by the State Government."  
 
 "The other issue on which there is no consensus is that we have also been telling that 
there should be a direct incentivisation of infrastructure building by the Government 
of India.  When we are talking in terms of investment of lakhs and lakhs of rupees 
and generation of 20 or 30 lakh employment opportun ities, the Government of 
India’s share is almost nil.  We have already taken a stand there that minimum Rs. 
1000 crore should be the grants amount for each PCPIR from the Government of 
India. .....These are the major issues which have been taken up for the  revision of the 
policy.  
 
2.5  Further, during the visit of the Committee at Dahej on 6.11.15, the Committee were 
apprised that PCPIR, Dahej, is badly in need of money and have asked the support of 
Government of India for developing infrastructure linkages, environmental management 
and pollution mitigation. When the Committee asked the Department how it propose s to 
help Dahej PCPIR meet its budgetary needs, the Department replied in writing as under:-  
  
 "The State Governments have demanded financi al assistance / grants for certain 
activities / projects which include the following: 
  Pollution Mitigation Measures: 
o Development of infrastructure for environmental management.  
o Carbon Credit Exchange to be set up to provide a platform for buyer -seller 
interaction 
  Waste Management: 
o Treatment, recycling & disposal of hazardous solid and liquid chemical waste  
o Environmental friendly measures & eco -townships be promoted with 
assistance from GOI. 
Escape Route: 
o Construction of at least one Escape Route with in the PCPIR to facilitate 
diversion of population/traffic in the unforeseen contingency of a disaster 
Coastal & Marine Security: 
o Coast Guard set -up and Marine Security be enhanced within the PCPIR, as a 
policy measure. 
 The Government of Gujarat (GoG) has  prepared a detailed project report for CETP 
proposed at Dahej PCPIR. The State Government has taken various steps for 
treatment, recycling and disposal of hazardous, solid and liquid chemical waste. GoG 
has made provisions for the development of eco -townships in Dahej PCPIR and has 
requested the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, GoI to provide 
budgetary support for pollution mitigation of Dahej PCPIR and other activities 
elaborated as above. Provision of budgetary support / financial grant of Rs . 1000 
crore to each PCPIR has also been incorporated in the draft revised PCPIR Polic y 
which is under consideration." 
 

 Page 11 
 
2.6  The Committee observed that the share of the GoI in the form of Viability Gap 
Funding (VGF) for the Visakhapatnam -Kakinada PCPIR is Rs. 1,206.80 crore and desire d to 
know how much of this money has been released. In reply thereto, the Department replied 
in writing as under:   
 "After finalization of Master Plan, DPRs will be prepared as per the Master Plan for the 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) viable projects in PCPIR Region. In absence of any 
proposal by Andhra Pradesh PCPIR, no amount has so far been sanctioned by the 
Government of India." 
 
2.7  The Committee noted that as per the Snapshot, the share of the GoI in the form of 
Viability Gap Funding (VGF) for the Cuddalore -Nagapattinam PCPIR is mentioned as Rs. 
1143 crore and Rs. 1500 crore. The Committe e asked the Department to explain these two 
sums mentioned and state whether the money have already been released and how it was 
spent. In reply thereto, the Department stated as under:-  
 
"The details of the VGF projects are as under - 
Rs in crore 
Project Estimated 
Investment  
 
VGF as 
approved  
by CCEA 
Budgetary 
support   
by CCEA  
External Linkages - Min. of road Transport & Highways / Min of 
Railways.  
i. Roads  - Conversion of National Highway- 45 A  into  4 Lane 
road  
ii. Conversion of State Highway 10 into National Highway  
 (Both road projects are to be taken up through PPP mode with 
VGF support from Govt of India )  
iii. Railway - Double lining &  Electrification of Villupuram – 
Mayiladuthurai  stretch at a cost @ Rs. 1500 Crores – (Full 
Budgetary support) 
 
 
1680  
 
 
734  
 
 
1500 
 
 
 
336 
 
 
147 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1500 
 
Utilities Projects  
i. Sea water Desalination Plant / Pipelines Network with  
estimated Investment @ Rs. 3000 crores with VGF support from 
Govt of india for Rs. 600 Crores  
 
ii. Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP)  
 
3000 
 
 
 
300 
 
600 
 
 
 
60 
 
  1143 1500 
  
 "The VGF proposals shall be submitted after approval of Master Plan. In absence of any 
proposal by Tamil Nadu PCPIR, no amount has so far been sanctioned by the 
Government of India." 
 
2.8  During the evidence, the Committee expressed their concern over the lack of 
investments coming in for work under  Public Private Partnership ( PPP) mode and asked 
the Department to explain the reasons for it. The Committee pointed out that  the 
Department's own  roadmap talks about developing downstream industries at Paradip 
PCPIR by 2022 , which is a long period and asked whether it is possible to expedite the 
process. In reply thereto, the representatives of the Department stated as under:-  
 

 Page 12 
 
 "Sir, I will start with the time lag in the PPP. What generally happens is that in PPP, 
the person who is a developer or a co -developer has to put a lot of money 
beforehand and there is a time lag between infrastructure creation and repayment 
by user char ges. So, given this type of large amount of money which is needed and 
there is no support – there is no concession, there is no exemption and there is no 
incentive – so, in the given scenario, since there is a lot of time lag, people are not 
willing to come on board and invest heavily beforehand. That is the problem that we 
are facing.  
 
 The Odisha Refinery will be commissioned in 2016, but the Refinery will not give 
major feedstock to anyone, to the downstream. The feedstock will come from the 
polypropylene unit, from the paraxylene unit, from the MEG unit and from the 
ethylene cracker unit. Till now, IOCL has approved only one project, that is, 
polypropylene. It will be commissioned in 2017. The other three projects which are 
on the list have not been app roved yet. Once they are approved, it will take four to 
five years to complete those projects. If we take that time frame in mind, Sir, 2020 -
2022 is a very reasonable time frame we have in mind because without feedstock 
nobody will come. That is the issue,  Sir. That is why we have kept the time frame as 
2022. In fact, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and our Ministry have taken 
it up very seriously to expedite all the projects of IOCL in a mission -mode type hurry 
so that they come out with the proj ects immediately and in turn downstream can 
also come faster. We are working on that, but these are the basic limitations that we 
have." 
  

 Page 13 
 
CHAPTER 3 
Monitoring OF PCPIRs 
 
 In order to expedite the implementation of PCPIRs, Minister, Chemicals and 
Fertilizers reviewed the progress of Andhra Pradesh and Odisha PCPIRs in July 2014 and 
formed a Steering Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary, Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals and comprising representatives from Central Ministries/ 
Departments, S tate Governments concerned, Anchor Tenants and Industry Associations. 
The Committee will coordinate and facilitate to expedite infrastructure projects, anchor 
investments and provision of building blocks for downstream industry, common utility 
projects, social infrastructure etc. 
3.2  When asked to give in detail the functioning and role of the PCPIR Steering 
Committee, the Department replied in writing as under:-   
 "A Monitoring Committee headed by Secretary (Chemicals and Petrochemicals) used 
to monitor the progress of implementation of PCPIR periodically.  In the meeting 
taken by Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers to review the progress of PCPIR on 
10.07.2014, it was decided to constitute Steering Committee for each PCPIR under 
the chairmanship of Sec retary (Chemicals and Petrochemicals) in order to expedite 
the implementation of PCPIRs.  The composition of the Steering Committee is as 
under: 
1. Secretary, Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals-Chairman 
2. Representative from the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
3. Representative from  the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance 
4. Representative from  the Ministry of Railways 
5. Representative from  the Ministry of Power 
6. Representative from the Department of Road Transport & Highways 
7. Representative from the Department of Shipping 
8. Representative from the  Ministry of Civil Aviation 
9. Principal Secretary/Secretary of the Industries Departments of State 
Government concerned. 
10. CMD/VCMD/CEO of the industrial Development Corporation of the State 
concerned. 
11. Anchor Tenant of the PCPIR concerned. 
12. Presidents/Representatives of Industry Associations (presently ICC and 
CPMA). 
13. Special Invitee as needed. 
 
 Seven meetings of the Steering Committees have been held since its constitution viz. 
on 24.02.2015 (for Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and TamilNadu) and on 08.07.2015 (for 
Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and Tamilnadu) in addition to the first meeting 
chaired by Minister C&F on 10.07.2014."  
 
3.3  When the Committee asked the Department how the implementation of PCPIRs 
were monitored prior to 10.07.2014, the Department replied that prior to 10.07.2014, a 
common monitoring Committee chaired by Secretary, Department of Chemicals and 

 Page 14 
 
Petrochemicals used to monitor implementation of PCPIRs. The Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers formed state-wise separate Steering Committee for monitoring.  
3.4  When asked to state the details and decisions of the meetings of the PCPIR Steering 
Committee held since its constitution with special reference to Gujarat PCPIR, the 
Department replied in writing as under:- 
 "The current anchor tenant is a dual feed cracker complex in the SEZ Area, because 
of which procedural delays in allowing movement of raw material input and semi 
finished products output for further value addition are arising. 
 For infrastructural Development, the present policy of approving VGF funding on 
PPP Model needs to be reviewed and need for GoI funding through budgetary 
allocation was stated. Single Window Clearance Mechanism, was welcomed as 
currently the project is gettin g delayed for want of certain explanations/ 
certifications pending with State Govt. 
 Ministry of Shipping expressed support for the amended proposals in the Policy 
including port development. The capacity of existing 4 ports at Dahej is felt to be 
limited.  In case of Sterling Port the promoter is not going ahead with the 
development project and it is suggested that the State government expedite the 
same by taking it up under PPP mode."  
 
3.5   With reference to Odisha PCPIR, the details and decisions of the  meetings of the 
PCPIR Steering Committee held since its constitution are as follows: 
 "Commissioning of refinery has started and Polypropylene plant will be 
commissioned in 2017. Naphtha is not available for cracking and no commitment to 
set up Naphtha cracker can be made at present. In future gas and other options may 
be explored. Currently there is no availability of Natural Gas in Paradeep. IOCL, 
Paradeep is making modifications to make propylene from the Fluidized Catalytic 
Cracking (FCC) unit which will be converted into Polypropylene and can be utilized 
in the proposed Plastic Park in the same PCPIR location. 
 The common view was that Anchor Tenants should supply feedstock to downstream 
industries commensurate with the incentives provided to it by th e State 
Government the existing system of utilizing feedstock in captive units by Anchor 
Tenants needs to be countered as it does not allow downstream industries to set 
up/ expand manufacturing facilities. 
 Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, stated that c urrently IOCL is having difficulty 
in putting up of Naphtha cracker at Paradeep. They also stated that a clear road map 
for refinery configuration for integration of petrochemical product needs to be built 
in at the planning stage itself. Ministry of Petro leum and Natural Gas is working on 
setting up production units of building blocks at Paradeep refinery that includes 
Ethylene derivatives, PX-PTA, MEG, Coal Gasification based products, etc." 
 
Management Boards 
3.6 As per the Department, the role of the Management Boards are as follows:-  
 "Prepare and enforce Master Plan as approved by Govt. of  India.  
 Select developer/co-developer. 
 Facilitate internal infrastructure for the PCPIR.  
 Investment and export promotion.  
 Approval and clearance to units.  
 Regulation of user charges.  
 Creation of SPV for service provision within PCPIR etc. 
 Review of functioning and performance of PCPIR. 

 Page 15 
 
 
3.7  The latest position with regard to formation of Management Boards for all the 
PCPIRs is as under:-  
 "Management Boards have been constituted in Gujarat and Odisha PCPIRs.  The 
details for all the PCPIRs is given below: 
 
 Dahej ( Gujarat) :  Gujarat PCPIR Regional Development Authority (RDA)  
constituted under the Special Investment Region (SIR) Act vide GOG Notification 
dated 18th September 2010. 
 The management Board Structure is as follows: 
Personnel Designation in GPCPSIRDA 
Chief Secretary     Ex-officio, Chairperson 
Principal Secretary,  Industry and Mines department Ex-officio, Member 
Chief Executive Officer, Gujarat Infrastructure Development Board Member 
Vice Chairman and Managing Director, Gujarat Industrial Development 
Corporation 
Member 
District Collector, Bharuch Member 
District Development Officer, Bharuch Member 
Director, School of Planning, Centre for Environmental Planning and Technology, 
Ahmedabad 
Member 
Shri U. S.  Mehta, (Retired Town Planner) Member 
Chief Engineer, Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation Member Secretary 
 
 Paradip ( Odisha) :  Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation of Odisha 
(IDCO) has been implementing the Paradeep PCPIR.  IDCO has formed a Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV), call ed Paradeep Investment Region Development Ltd. 
(PIRDL) a wholly -owned company of IDCO, under Special Investment Act 2014 to 
implement the PCPIR projects. The SPV would take up the activities of Management 
Board as envisaged in the PCPIR Policy. The CEO of PIRDL has been appointed and 
process is on to appoint other members.  The Board of Directors of the SPV include:- 
(a) CMD, IDCO 
(b) CGM (Finance), IDCO 
(c) CMD, IPICOL 
(d) Secretary, Industry Department 
(e) Expert (PMU), IDCO 
 
 Visakhapatnam-Kakinada ( Andhra Pradesh ) : As conveyed by the State 
Government as the VK -PCPIR is in the planning stage, Management Board is not yet 
formed. Special Development Authority is formed with the following structure and 
has prepared draft Master Plan and EIA report. After approval of Mas ter Plan, 
Management Board will be formed.  
 
Managing Director, Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Limited Chairman 
Vice-Chairman, Visakhapatnam Urban Development Authority Vice-Chairman 
Collector, Visakhapatnam District or his nominee (not below the rank of Joint 
Collector) 
Member 
Collector, East Godavari  District  or his nominee (not below the rank of Joint 
Collector) 
Member 
Vice-Chairman & Managing Director, INCAP Member 
Director of Town & Country Planning   Member 
General Manager, DIC, Visakhapatnam District Member 
General Manager, DIC, East Godavari District Member 
Zonal Manager, APIIC, Visakhatanam             Member 
Zonal Manager, APIIC, Kakinada Member 
Conservator of Forests, East Godavari District Member 

 Page 16 
 
Conservator of Forests, Visakhapatnam District Member 
 
 Cuddalore Nagapattinam ( Tamil Nadu) : Management Board will be formed after 
notification of the PCPIR. 
 
3.8  When the Committee enquired that there is a Management Board at the State level to 
monitor the project, and whether there can be a corresponding Management Board at the 
Central level to monitor the projects , the Joint Secretary of the Department replied du ring 
evidence as under: 
 "At present, we have Management Board at the State level and they work 
within their State. But the point that you are bringing is that if there is 
something at the Government of India level, then they can learn from each 
other. That is a very good suggestion and we will definitely try to incorporate 
it. In a very small way, we are doing the facilitation desk. But that cannot 
replace or that cannot be a substitute for the Management Board. We will take 
forward this idea and see ho w well we can incorporate that in the policy 
framework." 
 
3.9  On the issue of coordination between the Government and various other agencies 
regarding PCPIRs, the Secretary of the Department stated during evidence as under:-  
 "With regard to the coordination between the Government of India agencies and the 
State Government agencies, there is already a Coordination Committee available 
Chaired by the Cabinet Secretary in which the representatives of the State 
Governments and the Government of India are available.  In the last meeting of this 
Committee, the Chief Secretaries of the State Governments were on board through 
video conferencing.  They made their representations.  They are writing to the 
Cabinet Secretary.  We are going and meeting them.  We are constantly writing to 
them and we conduct the review meetings by inviting them.  Therefore, as far as the 
coordination between difference agencies is concerned, there is no problem. The 
problem is only in delay in approvals by the  State Governments and also that we are 
not able to give them a single window clearance and no investment from the 
Government of India along with non -committal anchor tenants on the feedstock for 
the downstream industries.  
 
 
  

 Page 17 
 
CHAPTER 4 
Master Plan, Environmental Clearances and Disaster Management 
 
A.  Master Plan (Dahej PCPIR, Gujarat) 
 
 When the Committee asked the Department about the status of the Master Plan for 
Dahej PCPIR in Gujarat, the Department furnished the information as under:-  
 "As per the information provided by the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals, Development Plan / Master Plan of Dahej (Gujarat) PCPIR has been 
sanctioned in September, 2012 and two Town Plan Schemes are under 
implementation and two Draft Town Planning  schemes are submitted for sanction.  
The PCPIR is made functional by constituting a Regional Development Authority on 
18.09.2010 under the Special Investment Region Act, 2009.  
 
4.2  The processing and non-processing area of Dahej PCPIR is as under:-  
 
 
 
Paradip PCPIR, Odisha 
4.3  As per the Department, the Master Plan of Paradip PCPIR (Odisha) is in process.  The 
master plan regarding Paradip PCPIR for 284.15 sq km. includes total processing area of 
123.014 sq km. and total non-processing area of 161.132 sq km as per the following details: 


 Page 18 
 
Phase 1 (2010-2020) Processing Area 
(Sq Km) 
Non Processing 
Area (Sq Km) 
IOCL Refinery + Petrochemical Complex 12.627 0.907 
Primary Petrochemicals Park 6.674  
Rail Freight Station 0.465  
Secondary Petrochemicals Park 1.149  
Downstream Petrochemicals Park 5.074  
Allied and Fine Chemicals Park 2.768  
Logistics Hub: Container Depot, Freight Station Warehousing, 
Tank Farms 
2.088  
Ancillary Sector Park 1.145  
Commercial Hub: Hotel, Convention Center etc. 0.486  
R&D Hub 0.283  
Deepak Fertilizers & Petrochemicals Ltd. 0.344  
Truck Terminal 0.133  
Multiproduct SEZ 7.086  
Captive Power Plant 3.201  
Airport with Air Cargo Complex 3.869  
Integrated Solid Waste Management Facility 0.623  
Sites for 6 Townships  9.090 
Rehabilitation & Resettlement |(R&R )Site  0.550 
Mixed Land use  72.700 
Phase 2 (2020-2030) Processing Area 
(Sq Km) 
Non Processing 
Area (Sq Km) 
New Refinery plants + Petrochemical Complex 2.932  
Primary Petrochemicals Park 7.969  
Secondary Petrochemicals Park 2.363  
Downstream Petrochemicals Park 9.91  
R&D Hub 0.858  
Rail Freight Station 0.611  
Sites for 3 Townships  4.577 
Mixed Land use  51.195 
Total Area 123.014 161.132 
 
 The IOCL’s 15 MMTPA refinery is at pre-commissioning stage.  
 Container Corporation Ltd. (CONCOR) has been allotted land in the PCPIR to 
set up container terminal. Establishment of Multi modal Logistics Hub 
project is also being taken up. 
 Marine Outfall Project has to be taken up after assessment of demand. 
 Common effluent treatment facilities would be taken up on assessment of 
demand in phased manner, industrial effluent being taken up separately by 
units. 
 Solid Waste Management Project to be awarded soon through biding process. 
  
Visakhapatnam-Kakinada PCPIR, Andhra Pradesh 
4.4  As per the Department,  the Master Plan of Vishakhapatnam – Kakinada PCPIR 
(Andhra Pradesh) is in process.  The latest status of the Visakhapatnam-Kakinada 
PCPIR Master Plan is as follows:  
  
1.  Preparation of Master Plan was taken up by VK PCPIR SDA and work 
entrusted to M/s.Lea Associates.  
2. Consultant has conducted village level consultations for all villages and 
conducted 13 workshops for preparation of Draft Master Plan. 
3. Draft Master Plan was published on 5.8.2013. 
4. Final Master Plan is prepared duly addressing objections/ suggestions 
received from th e public and submitted to MA & UD Dept. on 23.5.2014 for 
its approval.  
5. Municipal Administration and Urban Development (MA & UD) Department, 
Government of Andhra Pradesh has called for objections from public and 

 Page 19 
 
advised PCPIR SDA to examine these objection s and resubmit the Master 
Plan duly incorporating the revisions.  
 
Cuddalore-Nagapattinam PCPIR, Tamil Nadu 
4.5 As per the Department, the Master Plan activity for the PCPIR in Tamil Nadu would 
be initiated by the State Government after notification of PCPIR and formation of the 
Management Board. T he progress report  regarding the Master Plan and other components 
of the Cuddalore-Nagapattinam PCPIR  is as under: 
 
Important  Steps  /  Activities initiated Status 
Govt of Tamil Nadu will notify the 
PCPIR area under the relevant Act.   
- The delineated TN PCPIR is to be notified under the 
Tamil Nadu Town & Country Planning Act, 1971.  
- The report of DTCP on the proposal sent to Government 
for notifying the TN PCPIR as a  Regional Planning Area 
under the Tamil Nadu Town & Country Planning Act, 
1971 and its recommendations are under consideration 
of  Govt of Tamil Nadu. 
  
State Govt will constitute   PCPIR 
Management Board after the TN 
PCPIR notification.  
- Management Board which will be the PCPIR 
Development / Promotion entity is to be formed after 
the PCPIR Notification.  
- It may be a corporate entity with TIDCO, Anchor unit 
and others as the stakeholders.  
  
Master Plan - Upon notification of the PCPIR under  the Tamil Nadu 
Town and Country Planning Act, 1971 by Govt. of Tamil 
Nadu, the TNPCPIR Management Board will take up 
preparation of the Draft Master Plan 
EIA - Will be taken up after formation of Tamil Nadu PCPIR 
Management Board. 
 
B. Environment Clearance 
4.6  The threat to the environment because of polluting and hazardous industries is a 
major concern in India today. The Chemical industries are one of the most polluting 
industries. Hence, the need to address and take care of the environment by promoting 
environment-friendly chemical and petrochemical industries is of paramount importance.  
4.7  In this regard, when the Committee enquired about the Environment clearance 
being granted to the PCPIR during evidence,  the Secretary highlighted the various issues 
and problems being faced with regard to the PCPIRs as follows:-  
 "With regard to the law specifically intended for chemical industry, yes, it is there in 
America and that protocol is known as REACH Protocol which defines the chemicals, 
their properties and t heir usages.  In India we do not have that.  We have not done 
the preliminary study on that also.  The policy which we are proposing since 
Independence, the National Chemical Policy, in that we are making a provision for a 
national chemical development cen tre and the mandate of that innovation centre is 
to do this REACH Protocol.  The State and the business associations have done small 

 Page 20 
 
studies here and there but there is no consolidated work on this issue.  But we have 
focussed on that in the proposed policy. (Proceedings2, p. 19)  
 
4.8  During the evidence, the Committee raised questions relating to the need for eco -
friendly and green technologies in PCPIRs and asked the Department to state the extent of 
water and land pollution that will be caused due to t hese projects, especially in the context 
of waste proposals. In reply thereto,  an official of the Gujarat Government stated as under:-  
 "Dahej is getting adequate water for PCPIRs from the Narmada river through a 70 
km pipeline. We are having a common ch annel to take the affluent into the deep sea 
as per the norms of the Ministry of Environment and Forest. The tender for 
construction of the common affluent treatment plant has already been issued. The 
work has already started and we expect that within 18 o r 24 months will be 
completed in which case the affluent will be treated in a common manner. So, every 
industrial unit will not need to do the tertiary treatment itself. It will have to do the 
primary and secondary treatment and the tertiary treatment can be done in the 
common affluent treatment plant, which will lead to better quality standards and 
economy of scale.  
 Regarding the green and eco friendly technology, in the case of water, we have 
issued a circular and we are slowly enforcing that all the in dustrial units – because 
chemical, petro-chemical units are highly water intensive – will have to recycle and 
use 25 per cent of the water from their recycled source. This is our policy and we are 
trying to implement it. I would say that we have not been totally successful so far but 
it is a long term measure and we are going to implement it.  
 Regarding environment clearance, it is in the very final stages so far as Dahej PCPIRs 
is concerned. We have already submitted our application to the Committee and i t is 
in the final stages. It has been vetted by the Committee  in the Ministry of 
Environment and Forest and it has just asked us to obtain a Coastal Regulatory Zone 
(CRZ)  recommendation. In fact, CRZ Committee is to be constituted by the State 
Government. It is hopeful that it will be constituted in a month’s time after which the 
application of the State Government will go to the CRZ Committee. We are trying to 
request the Committee of the Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government of 
India to give us  conditional environmental clearance subject to observance of all the 
CRZ norms. But, in any case, we are hopeful for the CRZ recommendation. Once it is 
constituted, it will consider our CRZ application after which we are confident of 
getting the environme nt clearance. This will ensure that the individual units do not 
come to the Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government of India for their 
environment clearance. It can be given at the State level. 
 Regarding water and air pollution and green technology , one important thing is that 
a number of units in Dahej PCPIR are very large ones. OPEL, we have spoken of, will 
go into commissioning in about four months’ time. We have the Reliance units and 
other very large units which have their standards and even th e smaller units will be 
taken care of by the CETP. So, we do not expect any difficulty in it. In fact, in respect 
of water also there has not been any complaint because the water is coming from the 
Narmada river. We have not received a single complaint so far from the local people 
about the water contamination of the ground water resources. In fact, as the PCPIR 
authority and the local industries are supplying drinking water to the nearby 
villages, which was a water deficit area in the past, the people are cooperating and 
there has been no complaint on the issue of water pollution."  
 
4.9  When the Committee specifically asked whether there are any problems associated 
with environmental protection mechanisms and environmental pollution, etc. being faced 

 Page 21 
 
by the Department / Anchor Tenant in the case of Paradip PCPIR, the Department replied in 
writing as under:-   
 Preliminary Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) study had been undertaken by 
Industrial Development Corporation of Odisha (IDCO). Government of Odisha has 
taken up with Environmental Protection Training and Research Institute (EPTRI) to 
carry out detailed EIA and Environment Management Plan (EMP).  
 
4.10  On the status of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for Visakhapatnam -
Kakinada PCPIR, the Department has stated that the EMP/EIA Study have already been 
submitted to the Andhra Pradesh Pollution Contr ol Board (APPCB). However, the public 
hearing is yet to start. In this regard, the Committee desired to know the latest position with 
regard to EMP/EIA Study and the public hearing. In reply thereto, the Department stated as 
under:-   
 The status of Enviro nmental Impact Assessment studies for VK -PCPIR, through 
various agencies,  is as under: 
1) EPTRI to carry out Terrestrial Environmental Impact Assessment. 
2)  Marine Environmental Impact Assessment studies by M/s Indomer Coastal 
Hydraulics.  
3) CRZ and CZMP studies by CSIR-NIO, Goa.  
4)  Consolidated report prepared by EPTRI and draft EIA report submitted to 
APPCB on 03.11.2014.  
5)  Public hearing is to be taken up by APPCB through District Authorities of two 
Districts Visakhapatnam and East Godavari (Kakinada). 
4.11  During the evidence, the Committee expressed grave concerns over environmental 
pollution especially in the Andhra Pradesh PCPIR areas and the need for rigorous checks to 
ensure environmental compatibility. In response, the Secretary of the Department stated as 
under:-  
 "There are two aspects being raised here. One is with regard to environment 
compatibility and the issues which have arisen out of the violations of environmental 
standards and the consequences thereof. .... 
 The first is the environment compatibility issue. It is basically an issue which 
concerns the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change and we come 
into the picture because we are a development department for chemical and 
petrochemicals. From that angle it is our responsibil ity also to ensure that the 
environment does not get polluted and if it gets polluted, it will damage the interest 
of the industry. So, our interest is from that angle. We are in constant touch with the 
industry. We are acting as a bridge between the indus try and the Ministry of 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change. 
 Coming to the point about pollution, there is absolutely no difference of opinion that 
chemical industry is a very polluting industry. Most of it is polluting. It is not only in 
India but it is the same all over the world. That is the fact of life. 
 .... I fully agree that so far, Indian chemical industry is the most polluting industry as 
far as environment compatibility is concerned.  Many a time, they have been found 
reckless.  But I am not  willing to agree that nothing has been done on that.  Lot of 
action, lot of work is also going on.  The Ministry of Environment and Forests – I am 
personally aware – are taking a lot of steps.  They are standardising all the pollutants 
and lot of investme nt is being made into the ETPs and CETPs.  I am also aware that 

 Page 22 
 
when they are not controlled, it is leading to the pollution of soil, air, water, 
agriculture damage, damage to livelihood and damage to health.  I have seen with my 
own eyes, skin diseases an d health diseases.  Kidneys are failing.  Young men are 
becoming impotent.  Girls are becoming infertile.  I do not know whether somebody 
from Tamil Nadu is here.  I am a personal witness to what happened to the chemical 
industry in Tirpur.  The officers o f Tamil Nadu stand witness that in one shot, in July 
2005, the Government of India said we shut all the chemical industries of Tirpur 
irrespective of how much revenue it is earning.  At that time it was earning about 
more than Rs. 10,000 crore to the State  Government.  But they took a stand.  So, that 
awareness has to come.  
 In the meantime, I am not here to say that the State Pollution Control Boards should 
shirk their responsibility or the Central Pollution Control Board does not have their 
responsibility.  The Central Pollution Control Board can interfere in the industry 
bypassing the State Governments also.  They set the standards.  They have their own 
role.  The State Pollution Control Boards have their own role.  I was only making a 
limited point that  if there is a specific problem with a specific industry as it is being 
made out in Ramky in Visakhapatnam, the right thing to do is the Andhra Pradesh 
Pollution Control Board authorities have to shut it immediately.  That will send the 
right message to the industry."  
 
4.12  When the Committee specifically asked about the steps being taken by the 
Department to enhance marine security within the PCPIR, the Department replied that the 
required measures including Marine security are to be taken up by the Stat e Governments 
at suitable time.  The PCPIR Policy does not provide for Marine security. (RSLOP2, No. 3)     
  
C. Disaster management 
4.13 When the Committee expressed their concerns over disaster management 
mechanisms within the PCPIR, the Joint Secretary of the Department stated during evidence 
held as follows:-  
 "As regards disaster management, basically we can see it in two parts.   One is for 
anchor tenant or the major industry like  IOCL, HPCL or NOCL.  They will have their 
own disaster management plan.  They will have all the facilities of handling disaster 
whether it is fire or any chemical accident or anything else.  So they are capab le of 
handling it and that facility will be available in house.   
 Other than major industries, for small and medium size industries, the disaster 
management is basically done by the district authority.  There is a District Disaster 
Management Plan which i s headed by the concerned Collector.  Apart from that , the 
Management B oard of PCPIR will have some provision for handling the disaster 
management for the small and medium sector industries also. 
 Once this Management Board and other things are finalise d, we will be able to see 
how effective disaster management plan can be in place." 
 
4.14 In this regard, the Secretary of the Department added the following points: 
 "In fact, in our proposed National Chemical Policy, which is in a very advanced stage, 
we have proposed an institution by name, National Chemical Safety Board. One of its 
functions is how to face the disasters in the chemical industries.  There are so many 
other things. One of them is disaster management. I fully agree with the Member that 
much has not been done on that front so far. We need to do that and we are gearing 
up for that." 

 Page 23 
 
 
4.15  When the Committee enquired about mechanisms whereby the Government of India 
will provide for development of Disaster Prevention and Management Centre within each 
PCPIR, the Department replied in writing as under:-  
 "As per the PCPIR Policy 2007, Government of India will provide Viability Gap 
Funding through ex isting schemes for creation / upgradation of external 
infrastructure linkages to the PCPIR including rail, road, ports, airports etc. in Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) mode.  State Governments, as part of infrastructure 
development and establishment of i ndustry in the PCPIRs, have to set up required 
disaster prevention and management mechanism including escape route as per the 
law, during detailed master planning.  So far no Government of India assistance has 
been provided for this purpose. Requisite budg etary provisions for creation of these 
linkages through the public sector will also be made wherever necessary."  
 
4.16  The Committee further asked whether the Department proposes to provide financial 
assistance for construction of at least one escape rou te within the PCPIR to facilitate 
diversion of population/traffic in the unforeseen contingency or a disaster. In reply thereto, 
the Department stated in writing as under: 
 "As per the existing PCPIR Policy, Government of India would provide VGF for the 
eligible projects as per the guidelines of Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of 
Finance.  Construction of escape route has been earmarked in case of Dahej PCPIR 
and would be implemented during detailed Master Planning in case of rest of the 
PCPIRs. State Governments have demanded Government of India’s grant / financial 
support to create initial internal infrastructure, common utilities, CETPs, disaster 
management etc. which have been incorporated in the draft of revised PCPIR Policy." 
 
 
 
 
  

 Page 24 
 
CHAPTER 5 
IMPLEMENTATION OF PCPIRs 
 
 The Committee observed that at present there are four PCPIR s and these PCPIRs are 
at different stages of implementation and the actual progress is being monitored by PCPIR 
Steering Committee chaired by Secretary (C&PC).  The PCPIRs have been actively promoted 
both at the domestic and international levels along with the State Governments and 
committed investors through road shows, in exhibitions, seminars, conferences etc.. 
 
A Gujarat PCPIR 
5.2  As per the Department's Annual Report 2014 -15, the status of implementation of 
Dahej PCPIR as on 31.12.2014 is as given below: 
  
 "Draft Development Plan was sanctioned by the State Government in 2012 and 
at present 2 Town Planning (TP) schemes are under implementation.  
 The Gujarat Infrastructure Development Corporation (GIDC) has spent Rs. 
10,994 crore for provision of infrastructure in the PCPIR.   
 Additional expenditure of Rs. 12,000 crore by State Government is under way on 
infrastructure development like road, ports, water supply etc.   
 The important infrastructure activities to be undertaken in near future includes 
construction of roads with a proposed investment of Rs. 270 crore, construction 
of Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP) of 40 MLD capaci ty, completion of 
Water Supply Schemes, construction of setting up of a sub -station of 220 KV at 
Suva at Dahej-II. 
 ONGC Petro additions Ltd. (OPaL), the Anchor Tenant, is setting up a dual feed 
cracker complex (naphtha to be supplied from ONGC and C2 / C3 to be extracted 
from imported LNG) at Dahej SEZ with a production capacity of 1.1 million ton / 
annum (MMTPA) ethylene and 0.4  MMTPA of propylene, along with the 
matching downstream polymer capacities (polyethylene and polypropylene). 
The total proposed in vestment is Rs. 21,396 crore. The overall progress of the 
OPaL’s project as of 31 st December, 2014 was around 93% and the project is 
scheduled for commissioning by March 2016. 
 The products of OPaL’s project will be HDPE, LLDPE, Polypropylene, Benzene, 
Butadiene, PyGas and Carbon Black Feedstock (CBFS). 
 The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process is in final stage based on 
the final Terms of Reference (ToR) approved by Expert Appraisal Committee 
(EAC) of MoEF in September 2013. Final draft report has b een submitted to 
GPCB on 16.05.2014 for the public hearing. CRZ Mapping and Land use 
classification is in process . Final EIA has been submitted and uploaded on the 
website of MoEF in September 2015.   
 As a follow up of independent evaluation of the implementation of Gujarat 
PCPIR, an activity wise action plan for Dahej PCPIR has been finalized after 
discussions among Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, GIDC, OPaL 
and others on 22nd September, 2014 at Gandhinagar, Gujarat.  
 TERI conducted the socio-economic studies for all 44 villages & work has been 
completed. No relocation of any of the villages is proposed. A buffer zone of 300 
to 500 meters has been provided from the outer boundary of the village site . 
TERI has submitted a detailed report about the gap analysis of the primary 

 Page 25 
 
livelihood requirements . A number of Initiatives have been under taken by 
Gujarat PCPIR Welfare Society based on the final report submitted by TERI. 
 A PCPIR Welfare Society, registered under the Societies Registration A ct, has 
been formed to look into welfare activities in the PCPIR. GIDC charges an 
additional amount of Rs. 15 per sq.m. of industrial plots allotted to fund such 
activities. An amount of Rs. 50.00 crore has so far been collected. PCPIR Society 
Sponsors more than 350 land losers in the form of Rs. 1500/- monthly stipend & 
tuition fees of Rs. 15,700 per year for technical training through 3 Skill –
Upgradation centers. Society has sanctioned Rs. 1.7 crore for building toilets in 
16 PCPIR villages of Vagara Talu ka. GIDC has developed basic infrastructure 
such as internal roads & water supply in 10 villages and GIDC has spent Rs. 
24.00 crore. GIDC is operating a water supply scheme set up at a cost of Rs. 8 
crore to supply potable water to 5 villages. Model Anganw adi-cum-livelihood 
centers to be built by GIDC in all the 44 villages of the PCPIR." 
 
5.3  Further, an overview of Dahej and its surrounding region in terms of industries and 
infrastructure development is given as under:- 
 "The Gujarat PCPIR includes 33 villages of Vagara taluka and 11 villages of 
Bharuch Taluka of Bharuch District.  
 Dahej is a brownfield area with major players including Reliance (former IPCL), 
GACL existing since 1993. 
 The District of Bharuch witnessed a su rge in investments in chemicals & 
petrochemicals, drugs & pharmaceuticals, engineering and textiles etc. The 
district is an inherent part of the popularly referred golden corridor for chemical 
and petrochemical industries which extends from Ahmedabad to Va pi. The 
presence of existing industrial estates at Dahej, Vilayat and Panoli has enhanced 
the location attractiveness of the Region.  
 A large number of business conglomerates have set manufacturing units in this 
district including, Sanofi Aventis, Glenmark , Lupin, BASF, Bayer Crop Science EI, 
DuPont etc. 
 The Gujarat PCPIR is well connected to NH - 8, SH - 6, SH- 13, SH - 64 & SH- 161. 
It is connected by railway through Samni line to Western Railway Delhi -Mumbai 
Line. The Gujarat PCPIR is 250 km away from th e Ahmedabad International 
airport, 90 km from the Vadodara airport & 85 km from the Surat airport." 
     
B Odisha PCPIR 
 
5.4 Paradip Investment Region Development Ltd. (PIRDL), an SPV for implementation of 
Infrastructure Projects within the Paradeep PCPIR,  has been formed by IDCO. The SPV has 
been operationalized. Master Plan is under preparation. 
 "Single Window Clearance Committee framework has been put in place by the 
Government of Odisha to facilitate investment proposals in the PCPIR.  
 An MoU is expecte d to be executed between Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
(IOCL), the Anchor Tenant, and Government of Odisha by the end of March, 2015 
on the road map of various projects to be undertaken by IOCL on development of 
downstream petrochemical industries in the PCPIR. 
 IOCL has invested Rs. 32,018 crore (including contract awarded and committed) 
to set up 15 MMTPA refinery and a Polypropylene Unit. The refinery project is 
expected to be commissioned by the first Quarter of 2016.   
 Polypropylene & Ethylene Derivati ves from IOCL refinery are expected to be 
completed by 2017 & other feedstock to be available from the cracker at a later 

 Page 26 
 
stage.  Government of Odisha invites investment from other Anchor Tenants 
(Petroleum refining / petrochemical complex) in the PCPIR. 
 The PCPIR is well connected through NH 5A (six laning being undertaken by 
NHAI). New Cuttack -Paradeep Road has already been operationalized. New 
roads are planned to connect PCPIR with Bhubaneswar (greenfield) and other 
ports (Coastal Highway). Applications  to Department of Economic Affairs for 
Viability Gap Funding (VGF) shall be made after preliminary assessment of the 
project is done. 
 PCPIR is connected with a Broad Gauge double rail line. New Paradeep – 
Haridaspur rail line is expected to be operational by 2016. CONCOR is building a 
new Logistics Hub in PCPIR over 60 acres of land. 
Capacity of Paradeep Port will be augmented to 130 MMTPA by the end of 2015. 
Dedicated berth for Petroleum, Oil and Lubricants (POL) and 2nd 15 MMTPA 
Single Point Mooring projects are underway. Dhamra is an upcoming port, being 
developed by DPCL, with a capacity of 100 MMTPA out of which 25 MMTPA has 
been operationalized. 
 The Surat –Paradeep gas pipeline (bi -directional) of 30 MMSCMD is being 
developed by GAIL with an invest ment of Rs. 5,400 crore. IOCL is also putting up 
a 5 MMTPA LNG Terminal at Dhamra port near Paradeep. 
 Preliminary estimates have been prepared by Odisha Power Transmission 
Corporation Limited (OPTCL) for power supply (feeder lines+ substation). DPR 
is to b e taken up for transmission lines to PCPIR. 40 acres of land has been 
provided to OPTCL.  A 1320 MW thermal power plant by SPI Ports (P) Ltd is 
approved by High Level Clearing Authority (HLCA). Paradeep Plastic Park Ltd 
(SPV) is implementing the Plastic Pa rk project at Paradeep. 120 acres of land in 
village Siju was allotted for the project and infrastructure development like road, 
boundary wall has been initiated by IDCO.  
 Bidding process is in progress to award contract for Solid Waste Treatment & 
Disposal functions." 
 
5.5  When asked to provide  an overview of Paradip and its surrounding region in terms 
of industries and infrastructure development, the Department, in a written reply stated as 
under: 
 "The northern boundary of the PCPIR is formed by rivers Mahanadi and Nuna, the 
eastern boundary is formed by the upcoming refinery -cum-petroleum complex of 
IOCL and western boundary is formed by respective village boundaries. 
 The salient features of the region in terms of infrastructure and industries are give n 
below:- 
Location  Jagatsinghpur District 
Kujanga Block 
Ersama Block 
 Kendrapara District 
Marsaghai Block 
Mahakalapada Block 
Nearest Urban Centers  Paradeep 
 Bhubaneswar-Cuttack Metropolitan Region 
Arterial Roads  Existing roads for upgradation: 
NH-5A: Golden Quadrilateral to Paradeep Port 
SH-12: Cuttack-Paradeep 
 Proposed greenfield corridors 
Port Connectivity Corridor: Dhamra Port – Paradeep PCPIR -
Astrang Port 
Capital Connectivity Corridor: Bhubaneswar-Paradeeo PCPIR 
Rail  East Coast Railway 
Cuttack – Paradeep Rail Link: Existing 

 Page 27 
 
Haridaspur – Paradeep Rail Link: Under Construction 
Ports  Paradeep Port – major port with 71 MMTPA capacity 
  Minor port at Dhamra 
Airport  Biju Pattnaik Airport at Bhubaneswar 
Existing Major 
Industries 
 IFFCO-Fertilizer unit 
 Paradeep Phosphates Limited 
 Paradeep Carbons Limited (Goa Carbons) 
 Coal to Liquid Project (M/s SASOL & M/s Tata Steel) 
Upcoming Major 
Industrial Projects 
 Within PCPIR 
Refinery-cum-Petrochemical Complex of Indian Oil Corporation 
Ltd.  
Deepak Fertilizers and Petrochemicals Ltd. 
 In the region 
POSCO Steel Plant – South of PCPIR 
ESSAR Steel Plant 
 
5.6  As already stated in Para 3.5 above, the status of Anchor Tenant for Odisha PCPIR is 
as under:-  
 "Commissioning of refinery has started and Polypropylene plant will be 
commissioned in 2017. Naphtha is not available for cracking and no commitment to 
set up Naphtha cracker can be made at present. In future gas and other options may 
be explored. Currently there is no availability of Natural Gas in Paradeep. IO CL, 
Paradeep is making modifications to make propylene from the Fluidized Catalytic 
Cracking (FCC) unit which will be converted into Polypropylene and can be utilized 
in the proposed Plastic Park in the same PCPIR location. 
 The common view was that Anchor Tenants should supply feedstock to downstream 
industries commensurate with the incentives provided to it by the State 
Government the existing system of utilizing feedstock in captive units by Anchor 
Tenants needs to be countered as it does not allow downst ream industries to set 
up/ expand manufacturing facilities. 
 Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, stated that currently IOCL is having difficulty 
in putting up of Naphtha cracker at Paradeep. They also stated that a clear road map 
for refinery configuration for integration of petrochemical product needs to be built 
in at the planning stage itself. Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas is working on 
setting up production units of building blocks at Paradeep refinery that includes 
Ethylene derivatives, PX-PTA, MEG, Coal Gasification based products, etc." 
 
C. Andhra Pradesh PCPIR 
5.7  Draft Final Master Plan has been submitted to Government of Andhra Pradesh on 
23.05.2014 for approval. As advised by the Government of A.P; VK PCPIR SDA has 
constituted an expert committee for scrutiny of the objections / suggestions received on 
draft Master Plan. The SDA has submitted comments on each of the objections to the State 
Government for further instructions/ approval. 
 "EPTRI has completed EMP and EIA study and submitted draft EIA to VK -PCPIR 
SDA on 22.10.2014 and the same was submitted to AP Pollution Control Board 
on 03.11.2014. Public hearing is to be conducted.  
 AP PCPIR covers 6 existing SEZs.  
 In 2009 Government of India had approved financial support (Viability Gap 
Funding or VGF) of Rs. 1206.80 crore for infrastructure projects in PPP mode. 
Revised proposals for Transportation sector, Waste water infrastructure and 
Solid Waste management for Viability Gap Funding were submitted to 

 Page 28 
 
Department of Economic Affairs (DEA ), Ministry of Finance in October 2013 for 
Rs 1773.57 crore, which have been approved found eligible for VGF and 'in 
principle' approval . Preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) for PCPIR 
Expressway has been initiated by VK -PCPIR SDA. State Government  will submit 
the DPRs for approval of MEA. 
 Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL), the Anchor Tenant, is in the 
process of expansion of existing refinery from 9.3 MMTPA to 15 MMTPA. In 
order to set up a greenfield refinery -cum-petrochemical complex of 15 MMPTA 
capacity, efforts are being made to identify partners/ investors with HPCL. 
 A LNG terminal is proposed near Gangavaram port by Petronet and at Kakinada 
port by GAIL and Shell. 
 Currently Chennai – Howrah trunk line of South Central Railways (SC R) is 
serving the PCPIR area. Following railway projects are at planning stage:  
a) Rail link from Kakinada port to SCR via Kakinada SEZ (38 km),  
b) Connecting APSEZ to Gangavaram Port (26 km),  
c) Connecting SCR trunk line to AP PCPIR (7.15 km),  
d) Rail Freight Station with CFSs/ICDs, warehouses.  
e) Railway Infrastructure Technical and Economic Services (RITES) has 
conducted Feasibility Study, and Detailed Feasibility Study for DPR is in 
progress for the projects mentioned at ‘a’ and ‘b’ above. The outlay for these 
projects is Rs. 1,610 crore.  
 A Comp rehensive study on Rail network in PCPIR through RITES for the 
following projects is proposed.  
a) Branch line from Duvvada to Devada 
b) Railway line along the proposed PCPIR expressway connecting all the three 
clusters.  
 Construction of marine outfall in APSEZ,  Visakhapatnam which is a part of 
PCPIR, is under progress.  
 Tendering is in progress for construction of 1.50 MLD CETP at APSEZ, 
Visakhapatnam under EPC mode." 
 
5.8 On being asked to give details of organizations or corporations which have indicated 
their interest in making investment in the Visakhapatnam-Kakinada PCPIR, the Department 
replied in writing as under:-   
 "The details of organizations or corporations, which have indicated their interest  in 
making investment in the Visakhapatnam-Kakinada PCPIR are as under: 
1) HPCL is planning a consortium with GAIL and other strategic investors to set up 
a 15 MMTPA green field Refinery cum Petro Chemical Complex in the PCPIR 
area and has taken up feasibility study in this regard.  
2)   As per Andhra Pradesh Re -organisation act 2014, IOC or HPCL shall within six 
months from the appointed day, examine the feasibility of establishing a 
Greenfield crude oil refinery and Petrochemical complex in the s uccessor State 
of A.P.  
3)  The GMR Group has approached various international and domestic oil and gas 
majors, to understand their intention to establish a refinery in the Kakinada 
SEZ." 
5.9 In regard to the examination of the feasibility of establishing a G reenfield crude oil 
refinery as part of Andhra Pradesh PCPIR, the Committee desired to have an updated status 
report. In reply thereto, the Department stated as under:-  

 Page 29 
 
"As informed by the Anchor Tenant, M/s. HPCL greenfield project to establish a refinery 
could not be materialized due to lack of feasibility and that they are in the process of taking 
up the feasibility study for establishing petrochemical complex without a refinery. The State 
Government has informed that feasibility study for anchor  unit is expected to complete by 
June 2016 and then it would be placed before the Board of HPCL and GAIL for approval. 
After approval HPCL will inform Govt. of Andhra Pradesh and construction of anchor unit 
will take four years from commencement of the work."  
 
5.10 The Department, during evidence, presented the investment details in the Andhra 
Pradesh PCPIR as under: 
 "Total projected investment: 3,43,000 crores.  
 Proposed investment on infrastructure: Rs. 17,971 crore: 
 State Govt:   Rs. 2132 crore 
 Private:   Rs. 10565 crore 
 PPP:    Rs. 6034 crore with GOI share being  
    Rs. 1206.8 crore (@20%)  
 Investment already made in Industrial units (after notification) : Rs.37,010 crore.  
 Preparation of DPRs for Viability Gap Funding (VGF) projects for infr astructure 
in the PCPIR are in process.  
 Estimated employment generation: 11.5 lakh approx." 
  
5.11  When the Committee enquired about the existing settlements or industries and 
estates in Visakhapatnam-Kakinada PCPIR area which can be complementary to the 
proposed PCPIR, the Department replied in writing as under:- 
"The following Industrial Parks / settlements are located in or close to the PCPIR, 
which can be complementary to the proposed PCPIR 
A) Industries:  Existing Industries located in Industrial Parks, viz APSEZ, Pharamacity;  
Autonagar, Gajuwaka; Steel Palnt; Industrial Park, Vakalapudi. 
B) Settlements : Existing settlements viz. Elamanchili, Anak apalli, Parawada, Kakinada 
etc." 
D Tamil Nadu PCPIR 
5.12  State Government has taken up the activities of notification of the PCPIR and 
formation of PCPIR Management Board. Thereafter Master Planning and EIA activities will 
be taken up.   
 "The Anchor Tenant, Nagarjuna Oil Corporation Limited (NOCL), has invested Rs. 
7,812 crore in its refinery project.   The overall progress of project construction 
was around 60% when the work was disrupted by “Thane” cyclone in December, 
2011 and the company faced financial constraints. As a result the date of 
commissioning of the first phase of the project has been extended. 
 The capacity of the project is planned to be increased from 6 MMTPA to 12 
MMTPA.  
 A product jetty for evacuation of petroleum fuels and a Single Point Mooring 
system for receiving crude are under construction  and 51% overall progress has 
been achieved." 
 

 Page 30 
 
5.13 The Committee desired to know whether there any existing settlements or 
industries and estates in Cuddalore-Nagapattinam PCPIR area which can be complementary 
to the proposed PCPIR. In reply thereto, the Department stated as under:-  
 "The existing and ongoing industrial projects in the PCPIR delineated area include 
the following:  
a. The chemical industrial complex of M/s State Industries Promotion Corpn of 
Tamil Nadu (SIPCOT) in Cuddalore taluk . 
b. NOCL’s Petroleum refinery project , TN PCPIR’s Anchor unit – Under 
construction  
c. Thiruchopuram Port. 
d. IL&FS Tamil Nadu Power Company Ltd is developing a 3600 MW imported  
coal based Thermal Power Project in Tamil Nadu. The project would consist of 
a dedicated port/jetty with enabling infrastructure for import of  15 -25 million 
tonnes of coal per year and other plant and machinery." 
 
5.14  As per the Department, an investment amounting to Rs. 7812  crore only have so far 
been made in the Tamil Nadu PCPIR which is minuscule when compared with  proposed 
investment of Rs. 92,160 crore.  When the Committee asked  the Department how the 
Department plan to reach the proposed investment to the tune of Rs. 92,160 crore, the 
Department replied in writing as under:-    
 "The details of Investment -under implementation and proposed in PCPIR   in Tamil 
Nadu are as under:  
 
Projects Investment 
Estimates  
(Rs. Crs) 
Status of the Projects  
Nagarjuna Oil Corpn Ltd–Anchor Unit     
A Grass Root Petroleum refinery project 
 of 12 Million tonnes per year (mtpy) 
 capacity in two Phases   
Phase 1 @ 6 Millions tonnes per year   
Phase 2 @ 6 Millions Tonnes per year     
16,500  
10,000  
Phase 1 to be  
Commissioned in 2017 
Phase 2 to be  
commissioned in  2018-19.  
New Investments (Planned).  
i) A Deep Sea Port with a FSRU for import 
of  LNG and a  Gas based Power Plant  
ii) A Large capacity Fertilizers Complex  
     ( Urea  / Phosphatics) and 
iii) A Petrochemicals Complex 
 in Nagapattinam Dist, Tamil Nadu  
36,000  State Govt has issued orders in Oct 
2013, for setting up a Deep Sea 
Port, FSRU and a Gas based Power 
plant thro’ a Joint Venture.  
Others  
Petrochemical downstream plants / 
conversion units  
 
30,000  
 
Prospective Investments 
 (to be facilitated)  
Total  92,500   
 The investment made in the Phase 1 of the Petroleum refinery Project of Nagarjuna 
Oil Corporation Ltd as on March 2015 is about Rs 8100 crores." 
 
5.15   During the evidence, the Committee expressed strong concern over the delay caused 
to the implementation of the Tamil Nadu PCPIR due to cyclone in 2011. On the issue, a 

 Page 31 
 
representative of the Tamil Nadu Government updated the situation during evidence as 
under:- 
 "Thane cyclone did set back our project by four years. But now we have a new 
promoter coming in bringing in about Rs. 4,000 crore of fresh equity and then fresh 
loans are being sanctioned. We propose to re -start the project work by January, 
2016 and complete the refinery by about 18 months from there. As the presentation 
showed, 60 per cent of the work was completed when the cyclone hit us. This is part 
of the Nagarjuna Fertilizer Group of Hyderabad. We also have Tatas as the second 
largest shareholder. So, it is quite a reputed company.  But now with the infusion of 
funds, we are confident that it will be completed in about two years from now.  
 The other only point I wanted to mention is, in India all private refineries have been 
hit by cyclone. Reliance and Essar were also hit by cyclone in 1999.  
 My last request is this. I think the Joint Secretary has also made that point. There is a 
debate about which should come first, whether it is infrastructure or it is PCPIR. We 
believe the infrastructure, at least the transportation infrastructure like the 
highways and railways, if it comes, if not before, along with the construction of 
refinery and the other units, it will help in other downstream units to come in and 
set up.  We are happy that for the Cuddalore PCPIR, there is a Budgetary provision of 
Rs. 1,500 crore for railways for doubling the Villupuram – Mayiladuthurai line, 
which is adjacent to our compound.  But for the National Highway 45 A which is 
Cuddalore to Chidambaram there is a viability gap  funding element is there. We 
would request at least for that road if it can be a complete budgetary support, NHAI 
can immediately start the work and complete four laning of the highway."  
 
5.16  A representative from the Tamil Nadu Industrial Development Corporation Ltd 
(TIDCO) further clarified the matter during the evidence as under:- 
 "Tamil Nadu PCPIR is one of the top priority projects of the State Government.  In 
fact, it was finding a signature project category list in the Vision Tamil Nadu 2023 
released by the hon. Chief Minister in 2012. We got the approval  in July, 2012 and 
then we signed a Memorandum Agreement with the Government of India in 
February, 2014.  
 The immediate task was to do a notification and master planning. There were some 
issues; it is a large area of 49 villages, some overlapping with some local  planning 
area. Those have to be resolved. We had to choose such an relevant act which will 
really impact the local body. That took some time. Fortunately last month and this 
month, Additional Secretary of Industries Department convened a couple of 
meetings where these issues were resolved. Housing, Urban  and Counter Planning 
Departments promised that this notification process would be complete by the end 
of this year; thereafter, we would take up the master planning, clean the 
environment assessment issue. As respected Nagarjuna submitted to the Committee, 
building the infrastructure upfront is the key  to get large investment in any area in 
the country. Our own experience in Tamil Nadu Industrial Development 
Corporation, the promotion agency, we had good roads, airport, etc. We had 
automobile companies in 1990 -199; thereafter Hyundai and other big compa nies 
came. This is the history of bringing large investment in any area. So, we strongly 
feel that we have to construct road and railways not only to facilitate Nagarjuna for 
evacuation of  their 7 -8 MTs of fuel when they are coming up in three or four yea rs 
time but also invite big petro chemical plants in that area.  
 We also submit that when we submit the final proposal to the Government of India 
and got the Cabinet approval in 2012, we had done a detailed study of all these 
infrastructure components – rail, roads, and utilities. In fact, it was examined – 
thanks to the help and coordination with the Department of Chemicals and Petro 

 Page 32 
 
Chemicals – it was approved after scrutiny by the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways and Railways. When they were sanc tioned the budgetary support and 
funding, it was considered automatically that they would take up the project on their 
own because it is proved that there is a market, it is a feasible project. All those 
things were done. Then only the final report was sub mitted for the Cabinet 
Committee for approval.   
 We strongly submit to the hon. Chairman and hon. Members that these two 
infrastructure external linkage projects should be taken up with the concerned 
Department and Ministry so that we project our area for  large investment in petro 
chemicals sector. Thanks to the efforts of the State Government which has signed 
MoU recently during the Global Investment Meet with Nagarjuna that this project 
would restart its construction, 60 per cent would be complete in Jan uary and then 
we would complete the first phase of project – 6 MT per year refining capacity in 
another couple of years. Simultaneously implementation of additional capacity of up 
to 12 MT per year would be taken up. We have also planned for downstream pet ro 
chemicals based on the refinery streams and enhancement of further capacity up to 
30 MT per year in future."  
 
Other issues relating to Implementation 
 
Feed Stock 
5.17 The committee during the examination of the subject observed that provision of 
feedstock to the downstream industries is a major issue and during evidence Secretary to 
the Department stated as under:- 
 "There are two other major issues.  These are contentious issues.  ...The Anchor 
Tenants, the refineries, in simple words, they are willing to give the granules, what 
we call dana  in the market, but they are not willing to give the feedstock in liquid 
and gaseous form.  Now, the downstream industry, its feedstock is that gaseous and 
liquid in form whereas all our crackers are controlled by the refineries in India.  So, 
therefore, these refineries are telling: “We cannot give it. If we give that feedstock t o 
the downstream industry, our commerce and economic calculation will get offset 
and we will run into loss.”  These are very big issues between the two ministries, the 
Ministry of Chemicals and the Ministry of Petroleum and it is an issue which has 
been taken up in the policy.  One huge meeting took place under the Chairmanship of 
the Cabinet Secretary.  Another meeting is also proposed and this Ministry is actively 
pursing this issue because unless the downstream industries are provided with the 
feedstock in gaseous and liquid form, no downstream industry can ever come.  
Therefore, the advantage will only go to the countries like China, Japan, Singapore, 
Thailand and Taiwan.  Therefore, we are very committed.  In fact, on a day to day 
basis we are fighting with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  It is a big issue 
between the two ministries. 
 .....I appreciate the hon. Chairman’s idea that if we do not have sufficient feedstock  
within the country, we should explore the possibility of having feedstoc k from the 
nearby countries.  In that direction, my Ministry has already taken steps.  We are in 
touch with the Government of Iran.  There is an area in Chabahar in Iran, which is a 
coastal area and which is about 1,000 kilometre away from South Gujarat an d North 
Maharashtra, which is the concentration of the chemical industry.  More than 50 per 
cent production takes place in this area.  Therefore, the two Governments are in 
constant touch.  One delegation headed by the Joint Secretary has visited there, 
interacted with all the agencies of the Government of Iran. We have also given our 

 Page 33 
 
inputs to the central Committee as to how much would be the  investment and what 
are the parameters.  Our proposal is that we should take the feedstock.  
 The last point is ab out the cheap import and Free Trade Area ( FTA) and duty 
inversion. In chemical and petro -chemical what has happened is that in our own 
enthusiasm the highest level of apex duty, the import duty is at ten per cent. That 
means, other than exceptional cases, we cannot impose duty over and above ten per 
cent on anything whereas the countries at our development level like ASEAN 
countries or South East Asian countries, even for petrochemical and other products, 
they have duty as high as 30 and 40 per cent. So, on ce we have opened up our 
market and given free access through FTAs, not only MNCs but our own Indian 
companies find it better to produce there and bring hundred per cent to India rather 
than putting up manufacturing facilities in India. We have to address this issue at 
macro as well as at the micro level. Unless we do that, import will increase because 
there is no protection to the domestic industry. Simultaneously we have taken up 
very seriously the issue of FTA with the Commerce Ministry that at the time of 
review, we should be consulted and the industry should be consulted directly. That 
will definitely help."   
 
 
  

 Page 34 
 
CHAPTER 6 
Employment and Welfare Measures 
A. Employment Generation 
 One of the major aims of the PCPIR project is to generate numerous employment 
opportunities. The four PCPIRs together are envisaged to give direct and indirect 
employment to 33,96,000 people.  
 
Dahej PCPIR  
6.2  As per the Department, 78000 persons have so far been employed at Dahej PCPIR. 
When asked to provide a detailed break up of jobs/works available because of PCPIR 
project in Dahej, the Department replied as under:  
 Existing industrial units have given direct employment to above 32,000 
persons. 
 Additional around 96,000 people are indirectly employed within PCPIR (as 
on 30.09.2013). This includes:  
► Thousands of persons employed in construction activities of industrial units, 
residential townships, infrastructural works etc.  
► The large scale economic and industrial activities generate self -employment 
opportunities. 
► People employed in various activities pertaining to the logistics and 
movement of freight etc. 
 
6.3  The Department has informed that, on its complet ion, the Dahej PCPIR will give 
employment to 8,00,000 people. When asked to explain how this target is to be achieved, 
the Department replied in writing as under:- 
  "The employment target would be achieved by 2025 or after the implementation of 
all industrial units, whichever is later.  
 The direct employment generation is seen as a total of existing industrial population, 
upcoming industrial population, upcoming petrochemical unit of OPaL and proposed 
downstream units. This forms the core activity of the PCPIR which will generate 
direct employment of 190,000. The trickle down effects will be in the form of 
additional economic activities in the form of utility & service providers, transporters 
& truckers, hotels, restaurants, travel operators, etc." 
 
6.4  When the Committee asked whether the Anchor Tenant/Department have a 
recruitment policy and what benefits are accorded to the local people for employment in 
the PCPIRs, the Department stated in writing as under:   
 "The PCPIR Policy does not provide any dir ect benefit to local people for 
employment in the PCPIRs. Though the technical persons and skilled labours would 
come from outside the project area. Bulk of the labour force would comprise of 
unskilled and semi -skilled workers, a substantial number of whom  would 
presumably to be recruited from the surrounding areas itself. Majority of the 
unskilled workforce may settle near the construction sites. The direct employment 
generation is seen as a total of existing industrial population, upcoming industrial 
population, upcoming petrochemical unit of OPaL and proposed downstream units. 

 Page 35 
 
This forms the core activity of the PCPIR which will generate direct employment of 
190,000. The trickle down effects will be in the form of additional economic 
activities in the for m of utility & service providers, transporters & truckers, hotels, 
restaurants, travel operators, etc." 
 
6.18  On the issue of imparting Skills Development Programme in the Dahej PCPIR, the 
Department informed  in writing as under:   
 "GIDC has developed Sk ill Up-gradation Centers (SUCs) to provide technical skill to 
the land losers. This is in synchronization with the rapid industrial development in 
Dahej – PCPIR which would generate huge requirements of skilled labour. GIDC has 
made 3 Skill Up -gradation Ce nters (SUCs) located in Gujarat PCPIR through their 
skill development partner M/s. GOLS Academy  
 For this Skill Development Program, PCPIR Welfare Society sponsors fees of Rs. 
31,500/- per candidate of land losers and monthly stipend of Rs. 3,000/ - to each  
candidate for their two years technical course at SUC run by M/s. GOLS Academy.  
 344 candidates of land losers of PCPIR villages have been enrolled in SUCs and 
about 150 candidates have successfully completed their two years technical 
program. 
 More than 69 candidates have been placed in industries within Dahej PCPIR through 
the intervention of GIDC." 
 
Odisha PCPIR 
6.5 The Department had indicated that 38,000 persons have so far been employed at 
Paradip PCPIR. When asked to provide a detailed break up of jobs/works available because 
of PCPIR project, the Department has furnished the details as  below:-  
 "The details are as follows: 
Sl no Name of the Company Direct Indirect (Labour) 
1 Paradeep Port Trust 2257 1000 
2 IOCL 501 25000 
3 IFFCO 1333 3500 
4 Paradeep Phosphate Ltd 1061 527 
5 Goa Carbon 98 329 
6 Essar 350 1500 
7 Cargil India 62 185 
8 Skoll Breweries 82 175 
  Total 5744 32216 
 
6.6 The Department had stated that  the Paradip PCPIR plan envisaged that on its 
completion, up to 6,48,000 people will find employment in the Project. When the 
Committee enquired how this target is to be achieved, the Department replied in writing as 
under:-  
 "The details of sector wise position of actual and estimated employment as conveyed 
by the State government are as follows:  
 

 Page 36 
 
 
Sl 
No 
Sector Actual (as on  Estimated* Total (actual + estimated) 
31-03-2014) (in future) 
Direct Indirect Total Direct Indirect Total Direct Indirect Total 
1 Chemicals and 
Petrochemical 
Units 
2993 29356 32349 141007 249144 390151 144000 278500 422500 
2 Infrastructure 2257 1000 3257 42743 66500 109243 45000 67500 112500 
3 Other Industries 494 1860 2354 2500 9000 11500 2994 10860 13854 
4 Ancillary Sectors       37500 75000 112500 37500 75000 112500 
  Total 5744 32216 37960 223750 399644 623394 229494 431860 661354 
 *The direct employment potential for each of the PCPIR sectors has been estimated based on 
the industry norms and professional judgment.  
 
6.7  When the Committee enquired whether the Anchor Tenant/Department have a 
recruitment policy and whether benefits are accorded to the local people for employment in 
the Paradip PCPIR, the Department replied as under:-  
 "Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (IOCL) and Government of Odisha have a local 
employment policy. PCPIR Paradeep aims at social development and employment 
generation as top priority in the region." 
 
6.8  The Committee expressed their concern over the local people who have lost their 
land and properties as a result of the PCPIR project and asked the Department to ensure 
that the local people who sacrificed thei r land for the project be accorded preference for 
jobs and other benefits. To this, a representative from the Government of Odisha stated 
during the briefing held on 29.10.2015 as under:-  
 "This refinery is going to be commissioned very soon as was informed earlier also 
and at the time of the project implementation, there was a time when 35 to 40 
thousand people were employed in the project activities and bulk of these people 
except for very high skills were from the State of Odisha.  I agree with ho n. Member 
that our effort is fully there to employ as much as local people as possible. As far as 
direct employment within Indian oil is concerned, we are guarded by the 
Government of India Rules and depending upon the skills required and skills 
available, we are doing that.  We are also establishing a skill development centre 
within the State of Odisha which will help in generating skills locally which will be 
utilized not only in the refinery but also in the industries which are going to come up 
PCPIR." 
 
6.9 When the Committee further asked whether any Skills Development Programme 
been conducted for the local people for employment in the Paradip  PCPIR, the Department 
furnished its reply as under:-  
 "Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services (IL&FS) s hall be setting up a Skill 
development centre. Besides, Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and 
Technology (CIPET) has set up its centres at Bhubaneswar and Balasore in the S tate 
which will meet the skill development training requirements of local yo uth. Existing 
ITIs etc. are already functional." 
 

 Page 37 
 
Andhra Pradesh PCPIR 
6.10 As per the Department, the Visakhapatnam-Kakinada PCPIR plan envisaged that on 
its completion, up to 11,98,000 people will find employment in the Project. When asked to 
explain how this target is to be achieved, the Department replied in writing as under:-  
 "The sector- wise employment potential in VK-PCPIR is estimated as under: 
 
6.11  The Department has intimated that 93,500 persons have so far been employed at 
Visakhapatnam-Kakinada PCPIR. In this regard, the Committee desired to have a  detailed 
break up of jobs/works available because of PCPIR project. In reply thereto, the 
Department stated as under:-  
 "The details  of employment to be generated from the committed investments and 
the actual employment provided by the industrial units located in the industrial 
estates/SEZs/stand alone units in the VK-PCPIR, as on date, is as follows: 
S. 
No. 
Name of the Company Employment Generated as on 
today 
Employment  to be generated 
as per committed investments 
1 JNPC 4,918 10,319 
2 APSEZ 2,227 5,305 
3 Ramky Pharma City SEZ 3,320 976 
4 Bulk Allotments like Brandix, 
BARC etc., 
18,000 65,000 
5 IC Pudi 675 2,352 
6 IC Krishnampalem 0 980 
7 IC Duppituru 80 600 
8 Denotified Area in SEZ 0 7,720 
9 Parry Infrastructure 200 248 
 Total 29,420 93,500 
 
6.12  On being asked whether the Anchor Tenant/Department have a recruitme nt policy 
and about the benefits that are accorded to the local people for employment  in the PCPIRs, 
the Department replied in writing as under:-  
 "The Government of Andhra Pradesh has informed that once the Anchor tenant is 
finalized, the visibility regarding the recruitment policy and the benef its accorded to 
the local people for employment will emerge. However,  it has always been the 
endeavor of the State Government to ensure that maximum benefit s accrue to the 
local populace." 
6.13  To the Committee's query as to whether any Skills Developmen t Programme have 
been conducted for the local peop le for employment in the PCPIR, the Department replied 
as under:-  
S.No. Sector Direct Employment (Nos) Indirect Employment (Nos) 
1 Petroleum 16,000 24,000 
2 Petrochemicals 54,000 81,000 
3 Chemicals and Fertilsers 52,000 78,000 
4 Ancillary sectors 1,92,000 3,84,000 
5 Infrastructure-logistics, zone 
hubs, port etc., 
2,11,000 1,06,000 
 Total 5,25,000 6,73,000 

 Page 38 
 
 "Since the anchor unit is not finalized and grounded, so far, no skill development 
programme has been taken up for the local people in specific relation to the PCPIR. 
However, the regular Skill Development schemes by the entities of the Government 
of Andhra Pradesh have been taken up in the VK-PCPIR region." 
 
Tamil Nadu PCPIR 
6.14 The Cuddalore -Nagapattinam PCPIR plan envisaged that on its completion, up to 
7,50,000 people will find employment in the Project. When asked to explain how this target 
is to be achieved, the Department stated as under:- 
  "There are 12 major manufacturing  units operating with direct employment of 2790 
people and indirect employment of 11,160 people. The additional economic activity 
will generate employment for an estimated 7,37,200 people in direct and indirect 
employment shown in the table below: 
Type of Industries Employment Potential 
Direct Indirect Total 
Green field refinery (12 MMTPA) 1000 4000 5000 
Other units (Chemicals / Fertilizers / polymers / 
Plastics / Ancillary units) 
113,520 454,080 567,600 
Other infrastructure projects viz power plant, Port, 
logistics, etc. 
33,120 132,480 165,600 
Total 146,640 590,560 737,200 
 The Government of Tamil  Nadu has further submitted that the detailed breakup of 
actual employment created in both direct and indirect categories  and the Estimates 
on future employment  will be worked out with authentication when the Anchor 
Unit project company viz., Nagarjuna Oil Corporation Ltd (NOCL) restart the 
construction activity. 
 
6.15  As per the Department, 13,950 persons have so far been employed at Cuddalore -
Nagapattinam PCPIR. When asked about the  detailed break up of jobs/works ava ilable 
because of PCPIR project, the Department replied as under:- 
 "There are 12 major manufacturing units in the SIPCOT industrial complex Phase 1, 
Cuddalore, Taluk, with direct employment potential of 2790 people and indirect 
employment of 11,160 people. The break up details on this employment are  below. 
Name of Industry Employment Potential  (Nos)   
Direct Indirect Total 
Atofina Peroxides India Ltd 95 380 475 
Bayer Sanmar  Ltd 40 160 200 
EID Parry (India) Ltd 60 240 300 
J.K. Pharmachem  Ltd 250 1000 1250 
Tanfac Industries  250 1000 1250 
SPIC Pharma 450 1800 2250 
Shasun Chemicals  450 1800 2250 
Rallis India Ltd 30 120 150 
Pentasia Chemicals 195 780 975 
DSQ Biotech Ltd. 280 1120 1400 
Vanavil Dyes & Chemicals Ltd. 300 1200 1500 
DSQ Beverages  390 1560 1950 
Total Employment from Existing  Units  2790 11160 13950 
  

 Page 39 
 
6.16 The Committee enquired about the  benefits that are accorded to the local people for 
employment in the Cuddalore -Nagapattinam PCPIR . In reply thereto, the Department 
replied in writing as under:- 
 "The Anchor unit of the PCPIR in the Cuddalore – Nagapattinam Districts viz. the 
petroleum r efinery project of M/s. Nagarjua Oil Corporation is a Joint Venture of 
Tamil Nadu Industrial Development Corpn.Ltd., as per the Joint Venture Agreement, 
the policy with respect to employment / recruitment is given below: 
 
 The following shall be the guideli nes to be observed subject always to the pre -
requisite that the persons to be employed by the Company shall possess the 
qualifications and experience necessary for the posts, to which the recruitments 
are to be made: 
a) Employment opportunities below supervisory level shall be open primarily to the 
residents of Tamil Nadu who are well conversant with the local language and 
recruitment of Candidates to such jobs shall be made so far as possible through 
the local Employment Exchange. 
b) The creation of and recruitment to all posts at Senior Management level (i.e. the 
positions directly reporting to the Board of Directors) shall be made only with the 
sanction of the Board of Directors of the Company. 
6.17  When the Committee further asked whether any Skills D evelopment Program have 
been conducted for local peo ple for employment in the PCPIR, the Department informed 
that Skills Development Programs will be conducted for local people for employment in the 
PCPIR by the PCPIR Management Board.  
B. Compensation, Rehabilitation and Welfare Measures 
6.18  The PCPIRs are originally envisaged with each to cover an area approximately of 250 
sq. kms. Hence, acquisition of land and displacement of people living in the Region will be 
necessary. Therefore, it is important to devise proper mechanisms whereby adequate 
compensations are paid to the affected people and their rehabilitation and welfare taken 
care of.  
Dahej PCPIR 
 6.19  In this regard, when the Committee enquired about the compensations being paid to 
residents o f about 44 villages affected by the Dahej PCPIR in Gujarat , an official of the 
Gujarat Government during the evidence, inter alia, stated, as under:-  
 "It is important to note that the total PCPIR is spread over 453 square kilometre. But 
as the Joint Secretary pointed out in his presentation, it is not necessary to physically 
acquire the entire land. To give specific statistics, the Dahej PCPIR is being 
implemented by the Gujarat Industrial Corporation, which is a 100 per cent State 
owned PSU. So far we ha ve acquired 25,206 acre of land in the entire PCPIR. The 
Committee would be happy to note and we are proud that out of this 25,206 acre, 
22,541 acre, which is almost 90 per cent of the total land acquired, has been through 
consent. The price we have given is so liberal that the farmers have readily come 
forward to give their land through consent. So, the 90 per cent of the land, which has 
been acquired, has been through consent award.  

 Page 40 
 
 To give the price factor as to why this has been possible, I would say that the first 
acquisition was made for the erstwhile Indian Petrochemical Ltd., which is now 
Reliance Chemicals Ltd. in 1993-94. That time, I had the good fortune of myself being 
the Collector of Baruch and I had undertaken the process of land acquisition . The 
average market price prevailing in that area as per the Government record was 
Rs.5000 per acre as per the five yearly sale price because the Vagra block in which 
Dahej PCPIR is located used to have drought once in three years and there were 
scarcity of water. IPCL acquired the land by paying Rs.56000 per acre to the land 
owners. So, the entire land was acquired through consent. After that Gujarat Alkalies 
and other companies came there.  
 ....I would like to mention that we were paying Rs.56000 per ac re in first acquisition. 
This was increased in 1995 to Rs.1,09,000 per acre. Again, it was increased in 2010 -
11 to Rs.7,08,000 per acre. In 2011 -12 and 2012 -13, we paid Rs.18,01,000 per acre 
for the land that was acquired in Dahej.    
 But that is not all. The most important issue, which the hon. Member has raised is 
this. What are we doing for overall rehabilitation? I would just like to mention that 
we have a very liberal policy for what we are doing for the land losers in Dahej. We 
are ensuring that each member of a family of the land losers gets a job in the 
companies there. We also ensure that one per cent of the total land acquired is given 
to the village for developing a common facility / infrastructure. We have a Land 
Aggregation Policy for Dahej. In fact, one important thing is that whatever land we 
acquire, we charge an extra Rs. 15 per sq. m. and we contribute it to what is known 
as PCPIR Welfare Society. This money is directly used for the welfare of the people, 
and so far we have collected more than Rs. 100 crore, which we are using directly for 
the welfare of the people.  
 But for the land losers, we have a GIDC land aggregation policy initiative, which is a 
new comprehensive participative policy. It is in four parts. Compensa tion and 
sharing -- 10 per cent of the differential amount between the allotment price and the 
consent price is given to the land owners; land owner will be given commercial plot 
at the rate of 1 per cent of the acquired land at a token rate of Rupee one. So, if we 
acquire, let us say 10 acres from a land owner, it is 40,000 sq. m. and we will give 
him free of cost 400 sq. m. of commercial plot for developing into any commercial 
activity that he may like to do and one -time assistance equal to 750 days of 
minimum wage. It is because once land is acquired, then he takes time to relocate. 
So, two years of minimum wage we give him if he loses the entire land and if he loses 
part of the land we are giving him 500 days of minimum agriculture wage over and 
above the land acquisition price of Rs. 18 lakh per acre. We are providing training in 
ITI of up to 2 years to the people between the age of 18 and 45 years of the entire 
PCPIR so that their skills get upgraded. We have a scheme of Skill Upgradation 
Centres all ov er the State implemented by the GIDC, and in ITI or Skill Upgradation 
Centre we are upgrading their skills. The trainee is paid stipend also and it is free -of-
cost training, and over and above the expense of training that we incur, we give a 
stipend and obtain employment to one member of the land loser’s family. Three per 
cent of the total price recovered from the allottee of the land will be utilised for 
public purpose projects.  
 So, we do not just provide compensation, which is very liberal of Rs. 18 lakh per acre. 
We have a comprehensive participative policy to make him a participant in the 
development of the PCPIR. This has been a very successful policy. It has led to 90 per 
cent of the land being acquired through consent procedure." 
6.20  Regarding the  Gujarat model of Relief and Rehabilitation, a representative of the 
Department further stated during the evidence as under:-  
 "There is one more point about the Gujarat model of Relief and Rehabilitation and 
about the Management Board. Gujarat level of R &R is there which definitely all other 

 Page 41 
 
States must be trying to copy or implement a part of it. That is a good idea. What we 
will do is that we will circulate that document to the other PCPIR States also so that 
when they frame their policy or they upgrade  their policy, they can take all those 
characteristics into consideration.  
 
Paradip PCPIR 
6.21  Regarding Paradip PCPIR in Odisha, the Committee enquired whether the project 
involve any displacement of people or resettlement. In reply thereto, the Departm ent stated 
in writing as under:   
 "The Master Plan of Paradeep PCPIR is planned in such a way that the villages 
covered fall within the Non - Processing Area of PCPIR and these shall not be 
acquired. The R&R site within the PCPIR is proposed over 136 acres  to 
accommodate rehabilitation of minor R&R requirements due to road widening 
schemes, and other infrastructure up -gradations proposed in the PCPIR. The 
displacement anticipated during the land acquisition in the area for the Phase - I of 
the Processing Are a would be around 105 families. The actual displacement details 
shall be ascertained after detail socio-economic survey of the area is made.  
 
Visakhapatnam-Kakinada PCPIR 
6.22  When the Committee enquired whether the proposed Visakhapatnam-Kakinada 
PCPIR involve any displacement of people or resettlement , the Department replied that the  
Government of Andhra Pradesh had  informed them that as per the draft Master plan 
prepared by VKPCPIR Special Development Authority (SDA), no resettlement of habitati ons 
is envisaged. 
 
Cuddalore-Nagapattinam PCPIR 
6.23  Regarding  Cuddalore-Nagapattinam PCPIR in Tamil Nadu, the Committee desired to 
know whether land acquisition and other related works have been completed and whether  
there any concerns regarding land acquisition that still needs to be resolved . In reply 
thereto, the Department stated in writing as under:  
 "As of now, land availability in the PCPIR is about 2721 hectares in Cuddalore 
district. This comprises existing industrial units’ area and ongoing projects’ area 
which includes the area handed over for the Petroleum Refinery Project of NOCL.   
 About 95 hectares of additional land is under acquisition by TIDCO. This land will be 
handed over to NOCL for its expansion  plans and downstream Petrochemical units 
based on refinery streams after approval by Govt of Tamil Nadu. There are no 
concerns r egarding this land acquisition. After completion of the Master Plan the 
lands identified for the PCPIR specific projects viz., Sea Water Desalination Plant , 
CETP and STP will be acquired.  
6.24  Further, the Committee asked whether  the proposed Cuddalore-Nagapattinam 
PCPIR involve any displacement of people or resettlement  to which the Department replied  
that t he Cuddalore-Nagapattinam PCPIR may not involve any displacement of people or 
resettlement.   

 Page 42 
 
CHAPTER 7 
Other Important Issues  
Revision of Policy 
 The planning and implementation of the PCPIR Policy since 2007 has encountered 
certain problems. The sheer scale of investments envisaged and the large size of the PCPIRs 
proposed have thrown up numerous challenges.  Hence, the Department has suggested 
certain revisions in the PCPIR policy.  
7.1  In this context, the Secretary of the Department has stated during the evidence as 
under:- 
 "After an experience of seven years and since we have faced certain issues in the 
implementation of the PCPIR Policy, we h ave proposed an amendment and revision 
of the Policy. So, the review is pending before the Cabinet Secretariat. A Committee 
of Secretaries have already been constituted. One meeting of the Committee of 
Secretaries had already taken place. 
 The first major issue which we have taken up for the easy implementation of PCPIR 
is that there should be a single window clearance for all the statutory clearances 
required by any industry. 
 The second issue is that there are many States who cannot afford to have an area  of 
250 kms. Therefore, on case -to-case basis the discretion should be left to the 
Government to reduce it to a minimum of 50 sq. km. area. 
 The third main issue which have put up for review is that there should be mandatory 
availability of feedstock from the anchor tenant of the PCPIR. In addition to that, we 
should also have provision of putting additional anchor tenant and not only that, we 
should also make efforts to bring the feedstock from other countries. 
 The fourth major proposal which we have give n for review is that, as of today there 
is no budgetary support for the PCPIRs and all the expenditure is done either on PPP 
mode or by the State Governments or by the industry. So we have proposed for the 
common internal infrastructure and that the Govern ment of India should also make 
some budgetary contribution to incentivise the State Governments." 
 
Promotional Activities 
7.3 When asked to mention the details of the road shows, exhibitions, seminars and 
conferences organized by the Department to promote the PCPIRs during the last three 
years, the Department replied in writing as under:-   
 "The PCPIRs have been promoted both at the domestic and international levels along 
with the State Governments, Anchor Tenants and involving industry bodies through 
industry interactions, road shows, exhibitions, seminars, conferences etc.  Meetings 
with industry representatives were held durin g visits of delegations led by 
Secretary,  Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals to Houston, USA in 2013 
and China, Japan and Singapore in 2014. In 2015, Road shows to promote Paradeep 
PCPIR were held at Hyderabad and Chennai by the Industrial Develop ment 
Corporation of Odisha Ltd. (IDCO).   
 The following measures were taken by the Department and other agencies for the 
promotion of PCPIRs:-  
 Presentations, brochures and other marketing materials circulated during 
the visits of International delegations. 
 Newspaper Advertisements have been given by State Governments. 

 Page 43 
 
 Promotion through websites of Industries and Mines Department (IMD), 
GIDC and Gujarat Petroleum, Chemical & Petrochemical Special Investment 
Regional Development Authority's (GPCPSIRDA) webs ite, IDCO, Invest 
Odisha, APIIC etc. 
 
 The Government of Gujarat has undertaken the following promotional activities: 
 Exhibitions showcasing Gujarat PCPIR during various events listed as below: 
► Vibrant Gujarat: 2015, 2013 and 2011(Gandhinagar) 
► India Chem: 2014 (Mumbai), 2013 (Gandhinagar) & 2012 (Mumbai) 
► Vadodara Chamber of Commerce & Industry (VCCI) Exhibition: 2014, 2013 
and 2011 (Vadodara) 
► Vapi Industries Association Expo: 2015 & 2012 (Vapi) 
► Udyog Biennial International Industrial Exhibition: 2014, 2012 & 2010 
(Surat) 
► Vyapar Expo: 2013 & 2011(Surat) 
► Chemtech World Expo: 2011 (Mumbai) 
► Ummat Business Conclave: 2014 (Ahmedabad)".  
 
7.4  When asked to make a list of the visible results and benefits arising from the above -
mentioned programmes of the Departments in support of PCPIRs, the Department 
furnished its response in writing as under:-  
 "It is difficult to apportion event wise outcom e in terms of investment etc, however, 
as per the information received from State Governments the total investment made 
in the four PCPIRs as of March 2014 was around Rs. 1.48 lakh crore which has 
reached to around Rs. 1.60 lakh crore by end of March 2015.  The employment 
generated has reached from 2.22 lakh to 2.23 lakh during the same period. In case of 
Dahej PCPIR 360 MoUs have been signed during Vibrant Gujarat events 2009 to 
2015 and investment of around Rs. 41000 crore has been made in PCPIRs as follows: 
 MoUs/Investment Intention Forms (IIFs) were signed for development in 
Dahej PCPIR during various Vibrant Gujarat Summits: 
► In Vibrant Gujarat Summit 2009, 69 MoUs were signed 
► In Vibrant Gujarat Summit 2011, 151 MoUs were signed 
► In Vibrant Gujarat Summit 2013, 79 IIFs were submitted  
► In Vibrant Gujarat Summit 2015, 61IIFs were submitted"  
 
7.5  Regarding the steps being taken by Odisha PCPIR for promotional activities, the 
Department has submitted as under:- 
 "The Government of Odisha has organized Road shows in Hyderabad, Chennai, 
Bhubaneswar etc in June & July 2015 and also participated in India Chem event to 
promote chemical & petrochemical industry. Petrochemical sector has been kept in 
‘priority sector’ in the Industry Policy of Odisha to expedite investments. 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
18 FEBRUARY,  2016                                                     (ANANDRAO ADSUL) 
29 PHALGUNA, 1937 (SAKA)                                                     CHAIRPERSON, 
         STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
         CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
 
  

 Page 44 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
Budgetary provisions 
 
 During the course of the examination of the subject the Committee observed 
that there is lack of budgetary support for the PCPIRs by the Central Government and 
no p rovisions have been made in the Demands for Grants specifically for the 
implementation of PCPIRs.  The Department in this regard informed the Committee 
that State Government such as Odisha, Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh are seeking some 
kind of financial ince ntives and handholding in the form of budgetary support from 
the Central Government.  When the Committee enquired about the Viability Gap 
Funding (VGF), the Secretary of the  Department of Chemical and Petrochemical 
stated that the 20 percent contribution towards Viability Gap Funding could be 
diverted as budgetary contribution either towards State Public Sector Undertakings 
(PSUs) or the State Government implementing the PCPIR project. Further, the 
Department has stated that a minimum amount of Rs 1000 cro re should be the 
amount for each PCPIR from the Government of India. 
 The Committee therefore, recommend that the required budgetary allocation 
preferably the demand of the minimum of Rs. 1000 crore to take care of 
infrastructure, etc. for each PCPIR should be explored. The Department must take up 
the matter earnestly with t he Ministry of Finance for allocation. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this regard.  
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
Public Private Partnership (PPP)  
 
 The Committee observed that there is lack of response from investors to 
participate in the PCPIR projects under the Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode.  
In this regard, the Department has stated that the private firm who is a developer or 
co-developer h as to invest large amount of funds beforehand and there is long 
gestation period between the time money would be invested and repayment time for 
the investors.  Also the slow creation of infrastructure acts as a disincentive.  
Therefore, not many private f irms are interested in investing in projects and many 
are reluctant to come on board.    
 The Committee are deeply concerned about the lack of private funding  under 
the PPP mode in the project.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government of I ndia should mull over giving some kind of incentives or concessions 
may be in terms of easing the formalities for these projects and tax concessions, etc. 

 Page 45 
 
to the private firms to invest in the PCPIR projects so that the PCPIRs are developed 
to its full cap acity. The Committee hope that the Department will seriously consider 
these issues and come out with a comprehensive plan to address the problem at the 
earliest.    
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION NO.3 
Monitoring 
 
 The Committee noted that at the Central level a Monitoring Committee headed 
by Secretary (Chemicals and Petrochemicals) used to monitor the progress of 
implementation of PCPIR periodically prior to 2014.  The Committee were further 
informed that in the meeting called by Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers to review 
the progress of PCPIR on 10.07.2014, it was decided to constitute Steering Committee 
for PCPIR  project under the chairmanship of Secretary (Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) in order to expedite t he implementation of PCPIRs.  The Steering 
Committee, consisting of representatives from concerned central Ministries, State 
Governments and Anchor Tenants have so far held seven meetings. Further, as per 
PCPIR policy at the State level, a Management Board would monitor the project.  
 In this regard, the Committee are of the opinion that proper coordination of 
the PCPIRs at the Central and State level is lacking. Under the present arrangement, 
there seem to be no rules regarding the frequency of the sitting  of the Steering 
Committee. The wide disparities relating to implementation of the four PCPIRs is 
reflective of this lack of coordination at the Central and State levels. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should review the monitoring 
mechanism followed for implementation of PCPIRs and ensure proper coordination 
amongst the Anchor Tenants, State Governments and the Centre so that issues can be 
sorted out expeditiously. The Committee further urge that while expediting the 
establishment of  Management Board in each PCPIR, the  Department may also 
explore the feasibility of setting up Management Boards for each PCPIR both at the 
Centre and State level so that the implementation of the projects can be further 
accelerated. The Committee expect to be apprised of action taken in this regard. 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION NO 4 
Master Plan, Environmental Clearance and Disaster Management 
 
(a)  The Committee noted that the Development Plan / Master Plan of Dahej PCPIR, 
Gujarat has been sanctioned in Se ptember,  2012 and town planning schemes 

 Page 46 
 
are being implemented. The Master Plans of Paradip PCPIR, Odisha and 
Vishakhapatnam – Kakinada PCPIR, Andhra Pradesh are in process.  Master 
Plan activity for the PCPIR in Tamil Nadu would be initiated by the State 
Government after notification of PCPIR and formation of the Management 
Board. The Committee in this regard recommend that the Master Plans for 
Paradip PCPIR, Visakhapatnam -Kakinada PCPIR and Cuddalore -Nagapattinam 
PCPIRs may be finalized expeditiously in a time bound manner.  
 
(b) The Department has assured the Committee that safeguards relating to the 
environment and chemical hazards will not be compromised, but concrete 
action would be taken to ensure the same. The Committee noted that the 
environmental clearance with regard to the Dahej PCPIR is in its final stages 
but the Coastal Regulatory Zone recommendations are still awaited as the CRZ 
Committee have not yet been constituted by the State Government. The 
Committee were informed that concerns relating to air and water pollution are 
being taken care of by the companies concerned established in the region who 
have their own standards or by the Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP).  
As regards Andhra Pradesh PCPIR, the Committee observ ed with concern that 
the public hearing regarding the Andhra Pradesh PCPIR is yet to be taken up 
by Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board through the district authorities of 
two districts i.e. Vishakhapatnam and East Godavari (Kakinada). The 
Committee wer e given to understand that once the anchor unit is finalized, 
based on its location, size and configuration, Master Plan will be finalized and 
accordingly the public hearing will be conducted. Regarding Odisha PCPIR, the 
Department has informed that the Industrial Development Corporation of 
Odisha, Government of Odisha has taken up with Environmental Protection 
Training and Research Institute to carry out detailed Environmental Impact 
Assessment and Environment Management Plan. Further, during the evidence 
it was also informed that environment clearance is in the final stages and is 
with the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change for clearance.  
 
 The Department has accepted that chemical industries are very polluting 
industries.  The Committee,  therefore, desire that there should not be any 
compromises or laxity on the safety safeguards as far as environmental 
pollution is concerned.  The Committee are happy to note the positive 
developments for environment clearances relating to the Dahej PCPIR.  As 

 Page 47 
 
regards the constitution of CRZ Committee, the Committee recommend the 
Department to take up the matter with the State Government of Gujarat 
vigorously to expedite its recommendations. The Committee further desire 
that the Department/State Government s hould not leave the question of 
enforcing strict environmental cleanliness standards on the investors and 
companies alone. There should be a strict oversight mechanism so that the 
environment and public health do not suffer because of the project. The 
Committee observe that Environment Impact Assessment studies of Paradip 
PCPIR and Visakhapatnam -Kakinada PCPIR are at different stages and in 
respect of  Tamil Nadu PCPIR, EIA is yet to be undertaken. The Committee feel 
that Environmental Clearance is the main  issue in the Master Plan and as such 
cannot be isolated from the Master Plan. The success of a PCPIR project 
depends upon the expeditious environmental clearance. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that t he Department should actively coordinate with 
the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Central Pollution 
Control Board and the concerned State Pollution Control Boards to ensure that 
environmental safeguards do not suffer due to inter-Ministry and inter-Agency 
wrangles or duplication of fun ctions and that  environmental safety is not 
compromised in anyway. While appreciating the efforts made in respect of 
Paradip PCPIR and Visakhapatnam -Kakinada PCPIR, the Committee 
recommend that synergic efforts should be made to settle the issue of 
environmental clearance in a time bound manner. The Committee also 
recommend that the Department must ensure that the Tamil Nadu PCPIR 
should not lag behind on this crucial issue.  
 
(c) For addressing any event of  disaster or natural calamity occurring in any of  
the PCPIR zones, the Committee further recommend that the Department and 
the investing companies should prepare a Disaster Management plan as part 
of the Master Plan. There should be a rigorous oversight mechanism in the 
Master Plan so that public health and marine life is not endangered at the time 
of disasters. The need for a good disaster management plan is highlighted by 
the "Thane" cyclone that hit the Tamil Nadu PCPIR in 2011 which sets back the 
PCPIR project by about five years now. Since the PCPIRs  are situated in the 
coastal areas, they are susceptible to cyclones, floods, tsunami, etc. The 
Committee desire the Department to take expeditious necessary measures in 
this regard and establish the Disaster Management Plan as part of the Master 
Plan. Fur ther, the Committee desire that the detailed plan, including the 

 Page 48 
 
composition and power, for the National Chemical Safety Board, which is an 
institution to be set up for the purpose as part of the proposed National 
Chemical Policy may be finalized at the ea rliest. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
Implementation   
 
Gujarat PCPIR:  
 The Committee noted that regarding Dahej PCPIR in Gujarat, the Development 
Plan or Master Plan of Dahe j PCPIR has been sanctioned in September,  2012 and 
town planning schemes are being implemented. Environmental clearances are at 
their final stages. Processes of rehabilitation and compensation of the affected people 
are going well. The Committee hope that all components of the project of Dahej PCPIR  
will be completed soon and recommend that the Department should coordinate with 
the State Government and the anchor tenant so that the PCPIR may be completed as 
per schedule.  
 
Odisha PCPIR: 
 As for the Paradip PCPIR in Odisha, the Committee observed that 
commissioning of the refinery at Paradip has started and Polypropylene plant will be 
commissioned in 2017. According to the Department, one problem encountered is 
that Naphtha is not available  for cracking and no commitment to set up Naphtha 
cracker can be made at present. In future gas and other options may be explored. 
Currently there is no availability of Natural Gas in Paradip. The Indian Oil 
Corporation Ltd (IOCL) which is the Anchor Tenan t in Paradip is making 
modifications to make propylene from the Fluidized Catalytic Cracking (FCC) unit 
which will be converted into Polypropylene and can be utilized in the proposed 
Plastic Park in the same PCPIR location. The Department further stated th at the 
Ministry of Petroleum and  Natural Gas, had informed that currently IOCL is having 
difficulty in putting up of Naphtha cracker at Paradip.  
 In light of the above, the Committee recommend that the Department should 
sort out the problems relating to feedstock non -availability at Paradip PCPIR in 
coordination with the Anchor Tenant and the State Government at the earliest. The 
Committee are concerned that problems such as stated above were not recognized 
earlier by the Department. Given the huge import ance of the project for the overall 
development of the Paradip region, it is essential that all problems are sorted out and 

 Page 49 
 
the project commissioned as per schedule. The Committee desire to be apprised of 
the measures taken in this regard.  
 
Andhra Pradesh PCPIR:  
 The Committee are distressed and displeased  to note that the Andhra Pradesh 
PCPIR, which was approved in February 2009 is not progressing well. The 
Department has informed that the Anchor Tenant, Hindustan Petroleum Corporation 
Ltd  (HPCL)'s gre enfield project to establish a refinery could not materialize due to 
lack of feasibility and that they are in the process of taking up the feasibility study for 
establishing petrochemical complex without a refinery. The Department stated that 
feasibility study for anchor unit is expected to be completed by June 2016 and then it 
would be placed before the Board of HPCL and Gas Authority of India Ltd (GAIL) for 
approval. After approval, HPCL has informed that the construction of Anchor unit will 
take four years from commencement of the work.  
 The Committee are of the opinion that the Department had not put in concrete 
efforts to accelerate the process. Since the Anchor client is not finalized, the rest of 
the process, viz. master plan, environmental study, pu blic hearing, etc. cannot be 
concluded.  
 The Committee therefore strongly recommend that the Central Government 
should take immediate steps to promote the project as it is meant to lead to the 
development of  the region and give employment to lakhs of peo ple. The Committee 
desire that the Department should monitor the progress of the project constantly and 
ensure that the feasibility study of the anchor unit is completed by 2016 without any 
further time and cost overruns. 
Tamil Nadu PCPIR:  
 The Committee are distressed to note that not much progress have been made 
with regard to Tamil Nadu PCPIR which was approved way back in July 2012. The 
Department has informed that the construction works of the project were disrupted 
by “Thane” cyclone in December 2011. Only preservation work is going on since then. 
Restart of the construction work of NOCL’s refinery is expected only in early 2016.  
The Phase-1 of the project is to be commissioned in 2017 -18 and Phase -2 which has 
the full capacity of 12 mi llion tonnes per year is to be commissioned in 2019.  As of 
now, the PCPIR area has not been notified and the PCPIR Management Board is yet to 
be constituted.  Further, the Master Plan is yet to be prepared and the Environmental 
Impact Assessment is yet to be undertaken.  

 Page 50 
 
 The Committee therefore desire that the Department should actively 
coordinate with the State Government of Tamil Nadu and the anchor tenant, viz. 
Nagarjuna Oil Corporation Ltd (NOCL) so that the project is commissioned as 
scheduled by 201 7-18. Further, given that the onus of notifying the PCPIR area, 
constitution of the PCPIR Management Board, etc. lies with the State Government, the 
Department should proactively pursue the matter with the State Government so that 
no further delay occurs.  
 Concluding remarks: 
 The Committee observe from the status of implementation of all the four  
PCPIRs mentioned in the preceding paragraphs that  the level of progress for the four 
PCPIRs is quite uneven. There are problems and challenges specific to the location, 
etc. However, a proper coordination by the Department through a strong oversight 
mechanism at the Centre and State level will accelerate the progress of all the PCPIRs. 
The Committee desire that the Department may take necessary measures toward this 
end.  
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
Feedstock for Downstream Companies for PCPIRs  
 The Committee were given to understand that the anchor tenants of the PCPIR 
projects, or the refineries, are willing to give only the granules, or dana  in the 
market, but they are not willing to give the feedstock in liquid and gaseous form, 
saying that doing so will lead to losses for them.  On the other hand, the Department 
has informed that the downstream industry is dependent on feedstock that is 
gaseous and liquid in form. If the downstream industries are not provided with the 
feedstock in gaseous and liquid form, no downstream industry can ever come up.  
This is a critical issue involving  two ministries, viz. the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers and the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. The Department has 
stated that it is presently seized with the matter and that discussions have already 
been initiated to resolve the issue with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.   
 The Committee are distressed that this problem was realized at this late stage 
and not earlier when Anchor Tenants were selected.   In light of the above,  the 
Committee recommend that the Department should take up immediate steps to 
resolve the problem at the earliest so as to enable PCPIR projects or refineries to 
provide feedstock to downstream industries as per their requirements. The proposal 
to obtain feedstock from outside India to offset domestic scarcity should be 
expedited. Meanwhile, other issues like rates of  import duty, etc. should be examined 

 Page 51 
 
and decisions taken in consultation with all the stakeholders. Measures taken in this 
regard may be intimated to the Committee at the earliest.  
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
Employment 
 The Committee observed that  the PCPIR projects are the most ambitious 
projects ever undertaken under the aegis of the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals. They involve monetary investments in terms of thousands of crores 
of rupees.  The four PCPIR projects already approved, v iz. Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, 
Odisha and Tamil Nadu are together envisaged to provide direct and indirect 
employment opportunities to  33,96000 people. Therefore, the success of these 
projects is of vital importance for the country's development as a whole.  
 As per the Department, till now, 1,28,000 people have found  employment 
(both direct and indirect) in the Gujarat PCPIR, 37,960 people in Odisha PCPIR, 
29,420 in Andhra Pradesh PCPIR  and 13,950  people in Tamil Nadu PCPIR . The 
Committee is given to understand that on completion, the Dahej PCPIR will give 
employment to 8 lakh people.  While appreciating the progress made in the Gujarat 
PCPIR, the Committee hope that other PCPIR would also generate employment on the 
lines of Gujarat PCPIR.  
 In this re gard, the Committee desire that local people be given preference for 
employment in all the PCPIR projects. In areas where technical knowledge is 
required, the Department may undertake skills training programmes in coordination 
with the State Government and  Anchor Tenants as done in Dahej PCPIR. Action taken 
in this regard may be communicated to the Committee at the earliest.  
 
 OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
Compensation and Welfare 
 The Committee are pleased to observe that displacement of people is at the 
minimal level in some PCPIR projects as the project can co -exist with existing 
settlements. As for Paradip PCPIR, the Department had informed that the 
displacement anticipated during the land acquisition in the area for Phase - I of the 
Processing Area would be around 105 families. The actual displacement details shall 
be ascertained after detail socio-economic survey of the area is made. 
 In this regard, the Committee desire that the actual displacement details of 
people affected by all the PCPIR projects be ascertained at the earliest and adequate 
compensation and rehabilitation accorded to them.  The Committee express their 

 Page 52 
 
satisfaction over the fact that land aggregation policy and welfare measures adopted 
by Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation (GIDC) had been quite successful 
with minimum number of complaints and 90 percent of land was acquired through 
consent procedure.  The Comm ittee therefore recommend that the successful model 
of rehabilitation and compensation followed in the case of Dahej PCPIR be replicated 
as far as possible in all the remaining PCPIRs. Action taken in this regard may be 
communicated to the Committee at the earliest.  
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
Review of policy on PCPIRs 
 The Committee noted that the Government is proposing a review of the PCPIR 
policy. One idea is to reduce the size of PCPIRs from the existing 250 sq. Kms to 50 
square kilometres depe nding upon the utility area.  Second, there should be a single 
window clearance where all the statutory authorities should have participation both 
from the Government of India, State Governments and the local Governments.  That 
will allow  industrialists t o take clearance only from one body.  The Department has 
informed that on both these issues, the Committee of Secretaries has already agreed 
to the proposal.  
 In this regard, the Committee are of the opinion that the prescribed size of the 
PCPIR area need to be made flexible. If the prescribed size of the PCPIRs is reduced to 
50 sq. kms, the size of investments required and infrastructural needs will also 
accordingly come down and that will allow smaller companies also to take part. More 
States may also be  able to join the concept. The Committee desire that the 
Department may take proactive action to finalize and implement these measures.  
 Regarding the proposal for Single Window Clearance, the Committee are 
sceptical about the feasibility of the idea as P CPIRs encompass such a huge variety of 
issues ranging from environmental clearances,  feedstock issues, infrastructure, 
marketing, etc. However, the Committee desire that the Department may explore 
various options toward this end on priority. Decisions tak en in this regard may be 
communicated to the Committee at the earliest.  
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION NO 10 
Promotional Activities 
 The Committee observe that for the promotion of PCPIRs there should be 
enough publicity so that more investors specially the private firms are interested to 
invest in the PCPIR.  The Department in this regard stated that PCPIRs are being 

 Page 53 
 
marketed and publicised both at the domestic and inte rnational level along with the 
State Governments, Anchor tenants and industrial bodies thr ough industry 
interactions, road shows, exhibitions, seminars, conferences etc.   The Committee also 
note that the Department and other agencies are taking steps to promote PCPIRs on 
large scale through Newspaper Advertisements, Presentations, brochures an d other 
marketing material. 
 However, while Dahej PCPIR, Gujarat and Paradip PCPIR, Odisha have 
organized various promotional activities and road -shows to market and promote 
PCPIRs, there seems to be no such specific promotional activities taken up by the 
Visakhapatnam-kakinada PCPIR, Andhra Pradesh and Cuddalore -Nagapattinam 
PCPIR, Tamil Nadu.   
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department and the state 
Governments should step up the promotional activities and also more innovative 
measures should be taken up to promote PCPIRs  projects to attract more investors 
from international and local industrial firms. The Department should pay special 
attention to Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu PCPIRs in this regard so that there is no 
laxity on their part to promote the PCPIRs.  
 The Committee would like to be informed about the steps taken in this regard.  
 
  

 Page 54 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2012-13) 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 30 January, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1 650 hrs. in 
Room No.G-074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Dilipbhai Pandya -  In the Chair 
Members 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri S. Alagiri 
3. Shri P.P. Chauhan  
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya  
5. Shri Sk. Nurul Islam 
6. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
7. Shri Tufani Saroj 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shrimati Naznin Faruque 
9. Shri A.A. Jinnah 
10 Shri Brijlal Khabri 
 
    SECRETARIAT 
  
 1. Smt. Rashmi Jain - Joint Secretary  
 2. Shri U.B.S. Negi - Director 
 3. Shri A.K. Srivastava - Additional Director 
 
WITNESSES 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
1. Sh. Indrajit Pal  Secretary  
2. Smt. Neelkamal Darbari Joint Secretary 
3. Sh. A.J.V. Prasad Joint Secretary  
4. Smt. Geeta Menon Director 
 
II. REPRESENTATIVES  FROM STATE PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS 
 
1. Dr. Sreedhar Cherukuri Executive Di rector, Andhra Pradesh Industrial 
Infrastructure Corporation (APIIC), Andhra Pradesh  
2. Sh. Vishal K. Dev  CMD, Industrial Infrastructure Development 
Corporation (IDCO), Orissa.  
3. Sh. Sameer Vakil  Executive Director, Gujarat Industrial Development 
Corporation (GIDC), Gujarat. 
4. Sh. T.Willington  Director (Projects), Tamil Nadu Industrial 
Development Corporation (TIDCO), Government of 
Tamil Nadu  
 

 Page 55 
 
 
2. In the absence of the Chairman the Committee chose Shri Dilipbhai Pandya, MP and a 
member of the Committ ee, to act as the Chairman  for the sitting in terms of Rule 258(3) of 
the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.   
 
3. At the outset, the Acting  Chairman welcomed the members of the Com mittee.  
Thereafter, the officials of the Ministry of  Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals ) and Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) of States  were called in and 
their attention was invited to the provisions contained in Direction 55(1) of the Directions 
by the Speaker regarding c onfidentiality of the Committee's proceedings.  Then the officials 
of the Department and others introduced themselves.    
 
4. With the permission of the Acting Chairman, power point presentations were made 
by CMD, Industrial Infrastructure Development Corpora tion (IDCO) , Orissa ; Executive 
Director, Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation (GIDC) , Gujarat ; Director (Projects), 
Tamil Nadu Industrial Development Corporation (TIDCO), Government of Tamil Nadu  and 
Executive Director, Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infr astructure Corporation (APIIC), Andhra 
Pradesh, giving status report on PCPIR p rojects under implementation in Orissa, Gujarat, 
Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh respectively. Afterwards, members’ queries were 
answered by the Secretary and other officials.  
 
5. After the discussions, the Acting Chairman thanked the Se cretary and other officials 
and asked them to send replies to all remaining queries within a week to the Secretariat. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

 Page 56 
 
APPENDIX-II 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29 October, 2015 from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
  Present 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2.             Shri Idris Ali 
3. 
4. 
Smt. Anju Bala 
Shri B. N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
6. 
7.          
Shri R. Dhruvanarayanan 
Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
8. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
9. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
Shri S. Rajendran 
Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
Dr. Kulamani Samal 
Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
Shri Tasleem Uddin 
Smt. Rekha Arun verma 
16. 
17. 
Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
Shri George Baker 
                                  Rajya Sabha 
18. Shri K. Parasaran 
Secretariat 
  
            1. Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
            2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
 
List of Witness 
 Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
  
 1. Shri Surjit Kumar Chaudhary Secretary 
 2. Shri Avinash Joshi   Joint Secretary 
  
 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
 1. Shri Sandeep Poundrik  Joint Secretary 
 
 State Govt./Anchor Tenants 
 GUJARAT 
 1. Shri Manoj Agarwal  Vice Chairman & MD, GIDC 
 2. Shri M. M. Jivani  Member Secretary, Gujarat PCPIR 
 3. Shri K. Satyanarayana         CEO, ONGC Petro additions Ltd    
      (OPaL), Gujarat.  

 Page 57 
 
 
 ODISHA 
 
 1. Shri Saswat Pattnaik  Project Manager, IDCO 
 2. Shri D. Sen   Director, Indian Oil corporation Ltd.   
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the M embers of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals)  and other officials to the sitting. Their attention was invited to the 
provisions contained in Direction 55(1) of the Direc tions by the Speaker regarding 
confidentiality of the Committee's proceedings.  
 
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the Joint Secretary of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals made power point presentation to the Committee on the 
subject, "PCPIRs".  Thereafter, the Secretary, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
and other officials replied to queries raised by the Members relating to the Dahej-PCPIR and 
Paradip-PCPIR. The major issues discussed relate to, inter alia,  compensation and 
rehabilitation for the project -affected people, environmental clearances for the PCPIRs, the 
need to prioritize employment of the local people, setting up Skills Development Training 
for local people and the need to expedite the Projects, etc.  
 
4. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee as well 
as for furnishing valuable information to the Committee.  
 
5. It was also decided in the meeting that next setting of the Committee will be held on 
17.11.2015 on the subject 'PCPIR' with special reference to other PCPIRs at Andhra Pradesh 
& Tamil Nadu. 
 
6. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
   The Committee then adjourned 
  

 Page 58 
 
APPENDIX-III 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 17 November, 2015 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room 'C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Anju Bala 
3. Shri B. N. Chandrappa 
4. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
5. Shri R. Dhruvanarayanan 
6. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
7. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
8. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
9. Shri Tasleem Uddin 
10. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
 
Rajya Sabha 
11. Dr. M. S. Gill 
12. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
13. Shri K. Parasan 
14. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
 
Secretariat 
 1. Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
            2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
 
List of Witness 
 
 Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
 1. Shri Surjit Kumar Chaudhary Secretary 
 2. Shri Avinash Joshi   Joint Secretary 
  
 State Govt./Anchor Tenants 
 TAMIL NADU 
 1. Shri T. Wellington  Director (Projects), TIDCO 
 2. Shri S. Ramasundarm MDm Nagarjuna Oil corporation    
  Ltd.(NOCL) 
 
 ANDHRA PRADESH 
 
 1. Dr. T. Babu Rao Naidu Vice Chairman, Visakhapatnam Urban   
      Development Authority 

 Page 59 
 
 2. Sri Bhavani Shankar  Joint director, Special Development   
      Authority 
 3. Sri Ch. V.V.S. Prasad  Chief Engineer, APIIC, Hyderabad 
 4. Sri T. Viserswara Rao Deputy General Manager, APIIC,    
      Hyderabad 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry  of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals)  and other officials to the sitting. Their attention was invited to the 
provisions contained in Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker regarding 
confidentiality of the Committee's proceedings.  
 
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the Joint Secretary of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals made power point presentation to the Committee on the 
subject, "PCPIRs".  Thereafter, the Secretary, Department of Che micals and Petrochemicals 
and other officials replied to queries raised by the Members relating to the Andhra Pradesh-
PCPIR and Tamil Nadu -PCPIR. The major issues discussed relate to, inter alia, the delays in 
implementation of Tamil Nadu - PCPIR due to Cyclone in 2011, the problem due to the huge 
size of the PCPIRs and the need to be flexible on the issue, the need to prioritize 
employment of the local people, pollution control measures as a result of chemical 
discharge in coastal sea water, setting up Ski lls Development Training for local people and 
the need to expedite the Projects, etc.  
 
4. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee as well 
as for furnishing valuable information to the Committee.  
 
5. It was also decided in the meeting that presentation of 04 Action Taken Reports may 
be made to the House on 27.11.2015. 
 
6. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

 Page 60 
 
APPENDIX-IV 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTYH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 12 th January, 2016 from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Anju Bala 
3. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta  
4. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
5. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
6. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
7. Dr. Uma Saren  
8. Shri Tasleem Uddin 
9. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
10. Shri Innocent 
12. Shri George Baker 
Rajya Sabha 
13. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
14. Shri K. Parasaran 
15. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
16. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
 
Secretariat 
 1. Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee.   
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the Report on the subject 
‘Petroleum Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs)’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
 
4. The Draft Report Action Taken Report relating to the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals was adopted by the Committee without any changes. 
 
5. The Committee authorised the C hairperson to make consequential changes, if any, 
arising out of the factual verification of the Action Taken Report by the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
6. The Committee then decided to hold its next meetings on 27th and 28th January, 
2016 in connection with examination of the subject 'Functioning and Autonomous 
Institution-Central Institute of Plastic Engineering Technology (CIPET)' and Institute of 
Pesticides Formulation and Technology (IPFT). 
  
 The Committee then adjourned. 