FOURTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2015-2016)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in  the  Seventh Report  of the Standing Committee on
Chemicals and  Fertilizers  (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  on Demands for
Grants (2015-2016) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.11.2015
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 27.11.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2015/Kartika, 1937 ( Saka)


C.C.& F. No. 14
Price : R  63.00
© 2015 BY L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2015-2016) ............................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER IR eport ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 14
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................... 35
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration .... 36
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government are still awaited .......... 37
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee
on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2015-16) held on
22nd September, 2015 ........................................ 41
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Seventh Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014-15) on ‘Demands for Grants
(2015-16)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) ......... 43
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(2015-2016)
Shri Anandrao Adsul — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Idris Ali
3. Smt. Anju Bala
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta
6. Smt. Veena Devi
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana
8. Shri Innocent
9. Shri K. Ashok Kumar
10. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan
12. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle
13. Shri Rajendran S.
14. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
15. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu
16. Dr. Kulamani Samal
17. Dr. Uma Saren
18. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh
19. Shri Taslimuddin
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma
21. Shri Baker George
#
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary
23. Dr. M.S. Gill 
(iii)
#Nominated w.e.f. 28.9.2015.

(iv)
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade
25. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya
27. Shri K. Parasaran
28. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
29. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy
30. Dr. Sanjay Sinh
31. Shri Abdul Wahab
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Director
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers
(2015-16) having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on their behalf, present this Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014-15) on
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals).
2. The Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha
on 20.4.2015. The Action Taken Replies of the Government to all
observations/recommendations contained in the Report were received
on 23.7.2015. The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers
(2015-16) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on
22.9.2015.
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Seventh Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
   N EW D ELHI; ANANDRAO ADSUL,
11 October, 2015 Chairperson,
20 Asvina, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers
(2015-16) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants
(2015-16)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on
20.4.2015. In all, the Committee made 12 Observations/
Recommendations in the Report.
2. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish replies to
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report
within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e.
by 19.7.2015. The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect
of all the 12 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report
have been received from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. No.23003
(2)/2015-Fin. dated 23.7.2015. These Replies have been examined and
categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
the Government—
Rec. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
(Total=10)
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s reply—
Rec. No. Nil
(Total=0)
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration—
Rec. No. Nil
(Total=0)
Chapter-IV

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited—
Rec. Nos. 2 and 5
(Total=2)
Chapter-V
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report
and the Final Replies in respect of Observations/Recommendations
contained in Chapter-V for which final replies are still awaited should
be furnished expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations which
still require reiteration or merit comments.
A. Need to expedite enactment of REACH-like legislation for India
Recommendation No. 2
5. While emphasizing the need to expedite enactment of a REACH-
like legislation for India, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee also note with concern that our exports are facing
some problem in meeting the standards of the European countries
because of legislation for import of chemicals from other countries.
Keeping in view the health and environment issues in the European
countries, our industrialists and exports must meet the standards
of European countries. The European Union ’s Registration,
Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH)
standards are very strict, very rigid and very expensive also. The
Department has initiated inventorisation for which about a sum of
Rs. 27 crore has been sanctioned. Regarding REACH legislation, the
Department has convened many meetings with the stakeholders.
Initially, the industries did not agree to support REACH legislation
but finally they have agreed to go ahead with the legislation but
insisted that it should not affect Indian industry. The Committee
would like the Department to pursue the matter vigorously and a
comprehensive law on the lines of REACH may be enacted keeping
in view the interest of the Indian industry. The committee would
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. ”
Reply of the Government
6. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:—
“As a prerequisite for preparation of REACH-like legislation in the
country, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) has

3
entrusted the work of inventorization of all chemical substances to
CHEMEXCIL under Ministry of Commerce. The CHEMEXCIL has
initiated the work and prepared a model chemical inventory of
about 4613 chemical substances with their chemical structure,
physical properties, hazard category, instruction for storage etc. ”
Comments of the Committee
7. Noting that quality improvements are necessary to accelerate
the quantum of export of Indian chemical and petrochemical products
to European countries, the Committee had recommended for the
Department to vigorously expedite the proposed legislation which is
aimed to regulate and standardize Indian industries on the lines of
European Union ’s Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and
Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) law while addressing the concerns
of the Indian industry.
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals has only stated that it had initiated the process of
inventorization of all chemical substances as a prerequisite for
preparation of REACH-like legislation.
In view of the above, the Committee strongly reiterate their
recommendation for expediting the process of enacting REACH-like
legislation in the country keeping in view the interest of the Indian
industry. The Committee desire that the Department may intimate
about the progress made with regard to the consultation process
with all the stakeholders and spell out the time by which the
legislation will be introduced. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken in this regard.
B. Draft policy relating to plastic waste management
Recommendation No. 5
8. Emphasizing the need to pursue proposals to set up CIPET Centres
at Vijayawada and Medak vigorously and also to formulate a draft
policy relating to plastic waste management, the Committee had
recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that CIPET is a premier national institution
devoted to Academic, Technology Support & Research (ATR) activities
for the growth of polymer & allied industries in the country. CIPET
operates at 23 locations spread across the country with its Head
Office at Chennai. All the CIPET centres have state-of-the-art

4
infrastructural facilities in the area of Design, CAD/CAM/CAE, Tooling
& mould manufacturing, plastics processing, testing and quality
control to cater to the needs of plastics and allied industries. The
Committee also note that CIPET has proposed a scheme for
enhancing the capabilities in academic activities (Skill Development
Training Programmes) at CIPET Centres, inter-alia , including
“Establishment of Vocational Training Centre (VTC) at Vijayawada ”
at a total cost of Rs. 50 crore, on 50:50 cost sharing basis between
State and Central Government. The proposal is being considered
by the Government, as per extant norms and procedures. The
Government of Andhra Pradesh has agreed, in principle, to establish
CIPET VTC at Vijayawada with allocation of 15 acres of land. Further,
the land for CIPET Centre at Medak has been procured from
Hindustan Fluorocarbons Ltd. and the consent of the State
Government of Telangana is being obtained to start the Centre as
50 per cent of the expenditure has to be borne by the State
Government.
During the evidence, the Committee were informed that the
Department has proposed a policy for recycling of plastic waste so
that the plastic which is littered is collectible and carry economic
value. The Department has also proposed a ban on multilayer
metallised flexible packaging material in the food sector and the
regulatory framework which is being proposed should not only be
applicable for the industry but the same should also be applicable
to the user value chain. After making the littered plastic collectible,
scavengers, the rag pickers and conservancy workers would be
trained to recycle it instead of sending it to the big industry to
recycle. The proposed policy is being circulated to the rest of the
Ministries. It was also informed during the evidence that the
chemical sector is in need of skilled, semi-skilled manpower and
there is no dedicated institute in the country to supply that skilled
manpower.
In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that the
proposal to set up CIPET centres at Vijayawada and Medak may be
pursued vigorously with the respective State Governments so that
these centres may be set up without any time and cost overrun.
The Committee also desire that the proposed draft policy relating
to plastic waste management be formulated without any delay.
The Committee also recommend that a policy and programme may
be formulated in consultation with industry to meet the demand
of the chemical sector for skilled manpower and a dedicated
institute may also be set up for the purpose. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the progress made on aforesaid matters. ”

5
Reply of the Government
9. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:—
“Status report on proposal to set up CIPET Centres at Vijayawada
and Medak is as under:
(i) CIPET Centre at Medak (Telangana)
In order to establish a High Learning Centre (HCL)–cum–
Vocational Training Centre (VTC) at Medak (Telangana) a
Project proposal has been submitted to the Principal Secretary,
Higher Education, Government of Telangana on 23.03.2015,
who has referred it to Finance Department with his
recommendations on 06.05.2015 for further action. CIPET is
following up with Finance Department for early approval of
the proposal, CIPET has already acquired 15 acres of land
from M/s Hindustan Fluorocarbon Limited, Hyderabad.
In order to commence Vocational Training Programme (VTC),
CIPET has identified as Industrial Shed at Rudraram, Medak
on rental basis, necessary machinery & equipments will be
installed in the Industrial shed and vocational training
programmes will commence soon.
(ii) CIPET Centre at Vijayawada:
In order to establish a Vocational Training Centre at VTC, in
Andhra Pradesh, CIPET has approached Government of Andhra
Pradesh for land and workshop buildings. Government of
Andhra Pradesh has agreed in principle and issued consent
letter dated 16.03.2015 to allot 15 acres land to CIPET at
Vijayawada. In this connection, CIPET officials visited/
inspected various sites shown by the revenue authorities and
found that a piece of land at Ibrahimpatnam is suitable for
setting up of CIPET Centre. An application was submitted to
Joint Collector, Krishna District on 17th April, 2015 for
alienation of land to CIPET . The possession of 15 acres of land
is expected soon.
In order to commence Vocational Training Courses at VTC,
CIPET has identified a building belonging to M/s Vijayawada
Auto Cluster Development Company Ltd., Vijayawada.
M/s Vijayawada Auto Development Company Ltd. has sent its
consent letter to Joint Collector, Krishna District on 05.05.2015
agreeing in principal to permit CIPET to run Vocational Training

6
Courses in the said premises. The Possession of the building
and installation of machineries & equipments will be done
shortly and skill development programmes will be commenced
shortly.”
Comments of the Committee
10. The Committee, in their recommendation, had stressed the
need to vigorously pursue the proposals to set up CIPET centres at
Vijayawada in Andhra Pradesh and Medak in Telangana so that both
the projects are started expeditiously. The Committee had also asked
the Department to formulate a draft policy relating to plastic waste
management. Finally, the Committee had recommended that a policy
and programme be formulated in consultation with the industry to
meet the demands of the chemical sector for skilled manpower and
that a dedicated institute be set up for the purpose.
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department provided a detailed
progress report on the ongoing projects to establish a High Learning
Centre (HLC)—cum—Vocational Training Centre (VTC) at Medak and
a Vocational Training Centre (VTC) at Vijayawada. However, the
Department did not say anything about the Committee ’s
recommendations regarding a draft policy for plastic waste
management and the need for a dedicated skills training institute
for the chemical sector.
In view of the above, the Committee reiterate their
recommendations and desire that the Department should immediately
take action for formulation of a draft policy for plastic waste
management and also for a dedicated skills training institute for the
chemical sector. The Department may also highlight any initiatives
taken or proposed to be taken in furtherance of the recommendation
of the Committee at the earliest.
C. Setting up of Plastic Parks
Recommendation No. 8
11. Expressing their support for the setting up of Plastic Parks, the
Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Scheme aims at setting up of need
based Plastic Parks, and eco-systems with requisite state of the art
infrastructure and enabling common facilities to assist the sector
move up the value chain and contribute to the economy more

7
effectively. The objectives of the scheme, inter alia, are to increase
competitiveness and investments, achieve environmentally
sustainable growth and adopt the cluster development approach to
consolidate the capacities in plastic sector. This scheme was
originally approved in the year, 2010 during 11th Five Year Plan
and is proposed to be implemented over a duration of 10 years
during 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17) and 13th Five Year Plan
(2017-22). The Government has accorded approval for setting up
of four Plastic Parks in Madhya Pradesh (Raisen district), Assam
(Tinsukia district), Odisha (Jagatsinghpur district) and. Tamil Nadu
(Thiruvallur district). In December , 2014, approval has been given
for setting up of 6 additional plastic parks for implementation
during 12th and 13th Plan period. The locations of the six additional
Plastic Parks have not been decided and a decision on the location
of the Plastic Parks will be taken in consultation with the State
Governments, after examining the viability of each proposal. Under
the scheme, Government of India provides grant funding up to 50%
of the project cost subject to a ceiling of Rs. 40 crore per project.
The remaining project cost is funded by the State Government or
State Industrial Development Corporation or similar agencies of
State Government. Keeping in view aims of the Scheme the total
cost of the four Plastic Parks already approved by the Planning
Commission is Rs. 160 crore, however , the approved Plan budgetary
allocation for the scheme under 12th Plan is Rs. 75 crore, which
is inadequate even for meeting the cost of the four approved
Plastic Parks. Further, keeping in view the demand from other
States, the proposal for additional budgetary allocation of Rs. 280
crore for setting up seven Plastic Parks during the 12th Five Year
Plan was submitted to the Planning Commission, which was not
agreed to due to funds constraints. The Planning Commission advised
the Department to take up the matter during the mid-term appraisal
of the 12th Plan.
Keeping in view the objectives and the importance of the Plastic
Park, it is imperative that these parks may be set up in country at
the earliest. The proposed Plastic Parks particularly in Assam is
extremely essential so that feedstock generated by the Assam Gas
Cracker Project could be gainfully utilised. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the action plan may be charted out to
set up the proposed Plastic Parks with in a fixed time frame. The
viability of the proposal received from the States for setting of
Plastic Parks and their locations may be also be examined and
finalised expeditiously in consultation with the respective State
Governments. The Committee also recommend that Department
should vigorously take up the mater with NITI Aayog/Ministry of

8
Finance to sanction them adequate funds for setting up 10 Plastic
parks in the country during 12th and 13th Plan as also recommended
by the Committee in its First Report. The Committee hope that the
implementation of this scheme will help in realizing the goals of
Make in India and also generate ample employment. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. ”
Reply of the Government
12. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:—
“Under the scheme, Government of India provides grant funding up
to 50% of the project cost subject to a ceiling of Rs. 40 crore per
project. DCPC has accorded approval to the proposals for plastic
parks received from States of Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Assam
and also released first instalments of Government of India of
Rs. 8 crore each to the implementing agencies. In the case of
Plastic Park in Assam, part amount of 2nd instalment of Rs. 7.5
crore has also been released in March, 2015. The proposal of Tamil
Nadu has been given ‘in principle’ approval, and is being examined
and processed for approval.
The Standing Finance Committee (SFC) in its meeting held on
08.12.2014 recommended the setting up of additional 6 Plastic
Parks with GoI grant of Rs. 240 crore, to be implemented during
12th and 13th Plan period. The approval of the competent authority
has also be obtained for the same. The location of new plastic
parks will be decided in detailed consultation with the State
Governments. The action has been initiated for setting up these
new 6 Plastic Parks and we have already taken up the matter with
the Ministry of Finance for fund allocation and are pursuing with
them.
The Department is periodically monitoring the progress of the Plastic
Parks for their timely completion and also closely working for this
purpose. The physical progress of the ongoing plastic parks is as
under:
(i) Madhya Pradesh —Out of the approved project cost of
Rs. 108 crore for setting up Plastic Park in Madhya Pradesh,
tender for first phase of Infrastructure Development Works of
Rs. 25.88 crore has been issued on 01.01.2015 to M/s Shapers
Construction Ltd. and now Rs. 1.3961 crore has been spent.
The online marketing for allotment of plots has commenced.

9
Details of units are required to design the next phase of
infrastructure including common facilities for which they are
also in touch with CIPET for inputs.
(ii) Odisha—Out of approved project cost of Rs. 106.78 crore for
setting up Plastic Park at Odisha, the tender for construction
of boundary wall worth Rs. 2.09 crore has been awarded. The
tender has been awarded for construction of Approach
Road worth Rs. 6.58 crore and for Site Grading worth
Rs. 11.98 crore. Till now the SPV has incurred an expenditure
of Rs. 1.398 crore on Soft Interventions and Design, Engineering
and Supervision.
(iii) Assam—Out of approved project cost of Rs. 93.65 crore for
setting up plastic park at Assam, AIDC has incurred
expenditure of Rs. 14.08 crore out of first instalment of
Rs. 8 crore, released by GoI and also from its own resources.
The tenders for Road and Drain Infrastructure and Security
Building has been awarded. The works for boundary
demarcation by RCC pillars, jungle clearance and construction
of boundary wall has been completed. Road Network work
against the tender awarded for an amount of Rs. 1.08 crore
has been completed. ”
Comments of the Committee
13. The Committee noted that Plastic Parks are a crucial part
of the Department ’s plans to popularise and standardize the
petrochemicals sector. While there are four Plastic Parks already
approved and in various stages of construction, seven other Parks
proposed by the Department to be set up during 12th Plan could
not take off due to non-allocation of funds by the Planning
Commission. Taking note of this, the Committee had recommended
that the Department should take up the matter with NITI Ayog/
Ministry of Finance urgently so that adequate funds are sanctioned
for the same. The Committee had also stressed that the Plastic Park
proposed to be set up in Assam should be given priority since it is
designed to utilize the feedstock generated by the Assam Gas Cracker
Project.
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has informed,
inter alia, that the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) in its meeting
held on 08.12.2014 recommended the setting up of additional 6
Plastic Parks with the Government of India grant of Rs. 240 crore,
to be implemented during 12th and 13th Plan period. The approval

10
of the competent authority has also been obtained for the same.
The Department also stated that the location of new plastic parks
will be decided in detailed consultation with the State Governments.
Further, for setting up these new 6 Plastic Parks, they have already
taken up the matter with the Ministry of Finance for fund allocation.
The Department also provided details of the physical progress of
the ongoing Plastic Parks in Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Assam. The
Department has also informed that the proposal from Tamil Nadu
for setting up the Plastic Park has been given ‘in principle’ approval,
and is being examined further.
In this regard, the Committee desire that the proposal of Tamil
Nadu may be approved without further delay. The process of
development of three Plastic Parks in Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and
Assam may also be accomplished quickly. The Committee further
recommend that the consultation with the State Governments for
setting up additional six Plastic Parks in the States may also be
expedited. While considering proposals from the States, the
Department may take into consideration the development needs
and viability of the proposed locations and make sure that these
Parks contribute to overall development of the entire region where
they are set up. The Department may apprise the Committee of the
action taken in this regard.
D. Need to co-ordinate with stakeholders regarding PCPIRs
Recommendation No. 9
14. Emphasizing the need to closely co-ordinate with all the
stakeholders for expeditious operationalization of PCPIRs, the Committee
had recommended as under:—
“The Committee observe that the Petroleum, Chemical and
Petrochemical Investment Regions (PCPIRs) projects in Gujarat,
Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and Tamil Nadu are at various stages of
implementation. In the case of Gujarat, pre-commissioning activities
of the feed Cracker project have started and commissioning is
expected by end of June, 2015. Master Plan/Development plan has
been sanctioned in 2011 and Environment Impact Assessment (EIA)
study is in final stage. Draft final EIA to be submitted by National
Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI) to Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change shortly. For Andhra Pradesh
PCPIR, Environment Management Plan and EIA study has been
submitted to AP Pollution Control Board. Public hearing has to be
conducted in near future. For Odisha PCPIR, pre-commissioning

11
activities of the Refinery have started and commissioning is expected
by June 2015. Preliminary Master Planning was carried out by
M/s. L&T Ramboll. Tendering process has been initiated to engage
consultant for detail Master Planning and Zoning. As for
Tamil Nadu PCPIR, the State Government is yet to notify the PCPIR
and form a Management Board. Nagarjuna Oil Corporation Ltd.
(NOCL), the Anchor Tenant, is setting up a 6 million tone capacity
refinery which is proposed to be expanded to 12 million tons in
second phase. The construction work of refinery was stalled due
to cyclone in 2012 which has to re-start. Master Plan and
Environment Impact Assessment study will be undertaken after
notification of PCPIR and formation of Management Board.
From the foregoing, it is clear that while there is substantial progress
in the case of Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and Odisha, a lot of ground
remains to be covered in the case of Tamil Nadu. The PCPIR project
is the most ambitious project undertaken so far by the Department
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. On their completion, the four
PCPIR projects together are expected to generate employment for
around 33.96 lakh persons. Hence, the projects are crucial for the
growth and development of the national economy as a whole. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should closely
co-ordinate with the concerned State Governments, Anchor Tenants
and other stakeholders and monitor the progress of each PCPIR
with a view to ensure that the projects are expedited and
operationalised in a time bound manner. The Department should
especially co-ordinate at the highest level with the State
Government of Tamil Nadu so that the PCPIR is notified and
Management Board is formed by the State with out further delay.
The construction work of the refinery should also be re-started at
the earliest. The Committee expect to be apprised of the initiatives
taken and the progress made in respect of all the PCPIR. ”
Reply of the Government
15. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:—
“The Department welcome the appreciation of the committee on
the implementation on PCPIR Project especially in Gujarat,
Andhra Pradesh & Odisha. Indeed, PCPIR scheme is a crucial
endeavour of the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals to
provide sustainable investment regions with increased economic &
manufacturing activities to enhance employment and livelihood of

12
the public at large. The Department is committed to expenditure
implementation of the project by vigorous and continuous monitoring
of implementation through Monitoring and Steering Committees,
set up for the purpose. The Department has also prepared activity
& sub activity wise road map for implementation of PCPIR projects
with designated responsibilities and timelines to fast track the
implementation process. The Department is ensuring availability of
external physical infrastructural & implementing agencies in
dissemination of information to promote global investments in
PCPIRs. The Department is also hand holding PCPIR projects for
(i) approval of Master Plan & EIA and bringing Anchor Tenant project
for AP PCPIR project; (ii) expeditious commissioning of Cracker
unit and availability of building blocks of downstream plastic
processing industries in Gujarat; (iii) preparation of final Master
Plan and expeditious action on petrochemicals including Ethylene,
MEG & PX PTA units in Odisha PCPIR; and (iv) restart of construction
of petroleum refinery in Tamil Nadu. The notification of the Tamil
Nadu PCPIR area and formation of Management Board thereof is
expected to be completed by the State Government shortly. Keeping
in view the experience gained from the implementation so far and
suggestions received from the State Governments, Anchor Tenants
and Committee, the Department has also proposed amendments to
the PCPIR Monitoring/Steering Committee, the Department has also
proposed amendments to the PCPIR policy to speed up the various
developments in implementation of Anchor Tenant projects,
infrastructure and sectors specific critical infrastructure with funding
from Government of India on PPP model. ”
Comments of the Committee
16. The Committee, in their recommendation, had noted that
the four PCPIR projects in Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and
Tamil Nadu are crucial for the growth and development of the
national economy as a whole. The Committee had, therefore, desired
that the Department should closely coordinate with the concerned
State Governments, Anchor Tenants and other stakeholders and
monitor the progress of each PCPIR with a view to ensure that the
projects are expedited and operationalised in a time bound manner.
The Committee had stressed the need to pay special attention to
the Tamil Nadu PCPIR project, saying that the Department should
especially coordinate at the highest level with the State Government
of Tamil Nadu so that the PCPIR is notified, Management Board for
the same is formed and the construction work of the refinery re-
started at the earliest.

13
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department highlighted the latest
position with regard to these PCPIR projects and stated, inter alia,
that the notification of the Tamil Nadu PCPIR area and formation of
Management Board thereof has been expected to be completed by
the State Government shortly. The department further informed
that keeping in view the experience gained from the implementation
so far and suggestions received from the State Governments, Anchor
Tenants and the Committee, it has also proposed amendments to
the PCPIR Monitoring/Steering Committee and to the PCPIR policy to
speed up the various developments in implementation of Anchor
Tenant projects, infrastructure and sectors specific critical
infrastructure with funding from Government of India on PPP model.
Noting the above, the Committee are distressed that the
notification of Tamil Nadu PCPIR area and the formation of
Management Board for the same are not yet done. The Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation for monitoring of the projects
with close coordination with all the stakeholders so that these
Projects are completed and operationalized in a time-bound manner.
The Committee desire to apprise them of the progress made in this
regard.

14
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation No. 1
Overview of Chemicals and Petrochemicals industry
The Committee note that chemical industry is the main stay of
industrial and agricultural development of the country and provides
building blocks for several downstream industries, such as textiles,
papers, paints, soaps, detergents, pharmaceuticals, varnish etc.
Petrochemicals, which comprise of plastic and host of other chemicals,
are downstream hydrocarbons derived from crude oil and natural gas.
The value additions in the petrochemicals chain offer immense
possibilities and cater to the need of textiles and clothing, agriculture,
packaging, infrastructure, healthcare, furniture, automobiles,
information technology, power, electronics and telecommunication,
irrigation, drinking water, construction and a host of other articles of
daily and specialized usage amidst other emerging areas. However , the
Committee note with concern that the growth of production of major
chemicals and petrochemicals in the country has declined by 0.7%
from 10328 thousand MT in 2014-15 (up to September 2014) as compared
to 10402 thousand MT during the same period in 2013-14. The Committee
also note with distress that Indian chemical sector spends 1-2% of their
total turnover on R&D as compared to around 5-10% by the chemical
industry in the developed countries. The Committee further note that
imports of chemicals and products (excluding Pharmaceutical Products
and Fertilizers) contributed 9.9% of total imports in 2014-15 (Up to
September 2014) compared to 8.9% in 2013-14 (Up to September 2013)
whereas the exports contributed 9.3% of total exports in 2014-15 (Up
to September 2014), compared to 9.2% in 2013-14 (Up to September
2013). The important reason for rising imports and stagnant export of
Chemicals and Petrochemicals product is increase in the domestic
demand of these products without commensurate increase in the
domestic production. Further the export/import of chemicals and
petrochemicals is freely allowed except for a few chemicals attracting
the provisions of international conventions. However , to further increase
the growth of exports in this sector, the Government organises Events
such as POLYINDIA showcasing the strengths of the Indian petrochemical
industry which help in development, growth of chemical sector and

15
acceleration of exports of chemicals/petrochemicals from India to other
countries. Government is also implementing the ‘Petrochemical Policy’
which will help in realising the concept of ‘Make in India’. Plastic Parks
are being set up in the country with the objectives to increase the
competitiveness and investments, achieve environmentally sustainable
growth and adopt the cluster development approach to consolidate
the capacities in plastic sector. According to the Department, these
measures will increase the competitiveness and facilitate deeper value
addition to the petrochemical sector , which will result in enhancing
the exports. The Government is also exploring the possibilities of setting
up production facilities in resource rich countries i.e. reverse SEZ and
bringing intermediates in India for further value addition and
employment generation. The Committee also note that the Department
has taken various measures such as rationalization of import duty for
synergy in the chemical manufacturing chain, protection of domestic
industry by imposition of safeguard duty etc. The Department also
conducts various seminars/workshops/International Exhibition for
promotion of green chemistry/processes, chemical safety, trade
exchange of ideas and technology etc. The Department is also setting
up PCPIRs for increasing the production capacity of chemicals and
petrochemicals industry. Each PCPIR will have one anchor tenant refinery
which will provide valuable support to the chemical and petrochemical
value chain.
The Committee hope that as a result of various measures undertaken
by the Department, the production of chemicals and petrochemicals
would increase significantly and resulting in decrease in imports and
increase in exports in the sector. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that concentrated and coordinated efforts may be made to develop a
road map for indigenous development of the chemical sector in the
country and the Department should monitor expeditious establishment
of PCPIR and Plastic Parks and also expedite the process to set up
reverse SEZ in resource rich countries in order to address the shortage
of feed stock required for the chemical sector. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department is committed to expeditious implementation of
the PCPIR projects by vigorous and continuous monitoring of
implementation through Monitoring by Steering Committees, set up for
the purpose. The Department has also prepared activity & sub activity
wise road map for implementation of PCPIR projects with designated

16
responsibilities and timelines to fast track the implementation process.
The details of the initiatives and progress made in PCPIRs are given in
reply to recommendation No. 9. The Department has also proactively
taken up the proposal for setting up of production facilities of chemicals
& petrochemicals, through cluster/reverse SEZ approach at Chabahar
in Iran, in concert with stakeholders and related organizations with
regard to cost sharing and feasibility.
The Department is implementing a scheme to support setting up
of need based Plastic Parks, with requisite state-of-the-art
infrastructure, enabling common facilities through cluster development
approach, to consolidate the capacities of the domestic downstream
plastic processing industry. The scheme aims to increase investment,
production and export in the plastic sector.
Under the scheme, Government of India provides grant funding up
to 50% of the project cost subject to a ceiling of Rs. 40 crore per
project. DCPC has accorded approval to the proposal for plastic parks
received form States of Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Assam and also
released first installments of Government of India grant of Rs. 8 crore
each to the implementing agencies. In the case of Plastic Park in
Assam, part amount of 2nd instalment of Rs. 7.5 crore has also been
released in March, 2015. The proposal of Tamil Nadu has been given
‘in principle ’ approval, and is being examined and processed for
approval.
Keeping in view the demands received from various other States
for setting up of Plastic Parks, the setting up of 10 Plastic parks
(including current four Plastic Parks already approved) at a cost of
Rs. 405.00 crore has been approved for implementation during
12th and 13th plan period. The location of new plastic parks will be
decided in detailed consultation with the State Governments. This
initiative is expected to boost not only ‘Make in India ’ initiative but
also generate huge employment.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. No.23003 (2)/2015-Fin.,
dated 23.7.2015]
Recommendation No. 3
Five year plan and Annual Plans
The Committee ’s examination have revealed that as against
BE 2014-15 of Rs. 207 crore under Plan Head which was reduced to
Rs. 173 crore at RE stage, the actual expenditure was Rs. 126.25 crore.

17
During 2013-14 the actual expenditure was Rs.1158.09 crore as against
BE 2013-14 of Rs. 1200 crore which was reduced to Rs. 1175 crore at
RE stage. Similarly, under non-Plan Head, during 2014-15, the actual
expenditure was Rs.166.84 crore as against Rs.270.68 crore in BE
2014-15 which was reduced to Rs.225.73 crore in RE 2014-15.
Like-wise, out of Rs. 1343.01 crore in BE 2013-14 which was reduced
to Rs.1241.28 crore at RE stage, the actual expenditure was Rs. 1208.62
crore. This clearly shows that the Department has failed to utilize the
entire funds allocated to them during 2013-14 and 2014-15. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should
formulate a road map for effective implementation of its various
schemes/programmes to enable them to utilize the funds allocated to
them progressively and optimally and in the process to achieve the
physical and financial targets set for its various schemes/programmes.
Reply of the Government
Budget Estimates and Actual Expenditure for 2013-14 and 2014-15
is as under :—
Budget Estimates Actual Expenditure
(Upto 31.03.2015)
Plan Non-Plan Total Plan Non-Plan Total
2013-14 1200.00 143.01 1343.01 1158.09 50.63 1208.72
2014-15 207.00 63.68 270.68 151.38 44.30 191.68
(1) The short fall in release/expenditure during the year 2014-15
was mainly in the Plan Scheme of New Schemes of
Petrochemicals (Plastic Parks), Since the respective State
Government agencies did not attain the required milestones
to seek disbursal of second installment of Rs. 14.00 crore
each. Nextly, the State Government of Tamil Nadu was
requested to strengthen its DPR to enable it to obtain to
release its first instalment of Rs. 8.00 crore.
(2) Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster: Rs. 43.55 was earmarked for
disbursal of ex-gratia to Bhopal Gas Victims for the F .Y .
2014-15. But most of the cases were involving cases of litigation
involving multiple claimants, police verification, requirements
of medical certification in Cancer and Total Renal Failure
cases and time consumption involved in identification of
genuine claimants/legal heirs, and only Rs. 26.68 crore were
disbursed and Rs. 16.87 crore were reported undisbursed.

18
(3) Department has started its monitoring activity on the release
of funds early during the present financial year and it is
repeatedly requesting all the authorities concerned to
expedite the attainment of required milestone to facilitate
expeditious release of funds for the various programmes/
schemes.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. No. 23003(2)/2015-Fin.,
dated 23.7.2015]
Recommendation No. 4
Demand for Grants 2015-16
The Committee note that Rs. 188 crore was allocated by the Ministry
of Finance against the proposal of the Department for an outlay of
Rs. 1011.50 crore for 2015-16. While the proposed BE 2015-16 for
“Project Based Support to PSUs, was Rs. 236 crore, only Rs. 32 crore
has been approved by the Ministry of Finance for the same. The above
includes Rs. 17 crore approved for Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd.
(HOCL) as against the proposed outlay of Rs. 225 crore for BE
2015-16. For the Central Institute of Plastic Engineering and Technology
(CIPET), only Rs. 92.68 crore was approved against the proposed outlay
of Rs. 193.01 crore of the Department in BE 2015-16. For the Assam
Gas Cracker Project (AGCP), while the Department proposed an outlay
of Rs. 478.96 crore, the Finance Ministry approved only Rs. 0.01 crore.
As a matter of fact, allocation to the Department has been drastically
slashed in BE 2015-16 in almost all schemes/programmes. As a result
of the drastic reduction of Department ’s proposal for BE 2015-16, only
18.58% of the total amount required by the Department has been
allocated for running its schemes/programmes. According to the
Department, reduction in plan funding will affect the strengthening of
capabilities of PSUs and CIPET centres. While expressing its deep
concern, the Committee absolutely feel that the various programmes/
schemes of the Department may be badly affected as a result of
drastic reduction in the proposed plan outlay of the Department. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should approach
the Ministry of Finance and impress upon them to allocate funds as per
their requirement. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department shares the concern of the Committee on reduced
outlays for scheme & programmes of the Department. The proposal for
enhancing the Budgetary support of CIPET in the mid-term appraisal of
12th Five Year Plan has been considered by the Standing Finance

19
Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of
Chemical & Petrochemicals. The Committee has recommended the
Schemes for (i) Enhancing the Capabilities in Academic Activities and
Skill Development Training Programmes at CIPET Centres and,
(ii) Enhancing the Capabilities in Research activities at two R&D Centres
and Technology Support Services at CIPET Centres at a cost of
Rs. 491.17 crore and Rs. 168.38 crore, respectively, for implementation
during 12th Five Year Plan. The same has the approval of the
Minister for Chemicals and Fertilizers. The projection for the financial
year 2015-16 posed to Ministry of Finance is as under:—
Sl.No Head BE 2015-16
PLAN REVENUE Proposed
1. Secretariat and Economic Services 0.50
Petro Chemical Industries /nobreakspace
2. Central Institute of Plastic Engg. & Tech. 193.01
3. Subsidy to Assam Gas Projects 478.96
4. New Schemes of Petrochemicals 92.00
Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals /nobreakspace
5. Institute of Pesticides Formulation Tech. 4.28
6. Chemical Weapons Convention 1.25
7. Chemical Promotion & Development Scheme 4.50
8. Lumpsum Provision for N.E. Region 1.00
TOTAL REVENUE 775.50
PLAN CAPITAL /nobreakspace
9. CIPET(EAP) /nobreakspace
10. Loan to PSUs /nobreakspace
10.01 HFL 0.00
10.02 HIL 11.00
10.03 HOCL 225.00
/nobreakspaceTotal 236.00
11. Equity Investment in PSUs /nobreakspace
11.01 PCL 0.00
11.02 HIL 0.00
11.03 HOCL 0.00
/nobreakspaceTOTAL CAPITAL 236.00
/nobreakspaceGrand Total (Rev.+Cap.) 1011.50

20
(4) BE 2015-16 provided for various schemes/programmes as per
allocation of Ministry of Finance is as under:—
Sl.No. Head BE 2015-16
/nobreakspacePLAN REVENUE Final
1. Secretariat and Economic Services 1.00
/nobreakspacePetro Chemical Industries /nobreakspace
2. Central Institute of Plastic Engg. & Tech. 83.68
3. Subsidy to Assam Gas Projects 0.01
4. New Schemes of Petrochemicals 42.41
/nobreakspaceChemicals and Pharmaceuticals /nobreakspace
5. Institute of Pesticides Formulation Tech. 1.00
6. Chemical Weapons Convention 1.00
7. Chemical Promotion & Development Scheme 1.90
8. Lumpsum Provision for N.E. Region 25.00
TOTAL REVENUE 156.00
/nobreakspacePLAN CAPITAL /nobreakspace
9. CIPET(EAP) /nobreakspace
10. Loan to PSUs /nobreakspace
10.01 HFL 5.00
10.02 HIL 10.00
10.03 HOCL 17.00
/nobreakspaceTotal 32.00
11. Equity Investment in PSUs /nobreakspace
11.01 PCL 0.00
11.02 HIL 0.00
11.03 HOCL 0.00
/nobreakspaceTOTAL CAPITAL 32.00
/nobreakspaceGrand Total (Rev.+Cap.) 188.00
(5) Further , Supplementary Grants to the tune of 80.58 crore have
been sought in the First Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants

21
for the current financial year with the Ministry of Finance. The Detail
are as follows:—
(i) New Schemes of Petrochemicals (Rs. 29.59 crore) for setting
up of New Plastic Parks and development of common
infrastructure facilities in the country.
(ii) Central Institute of Plastic Engineering & Technology (Rs. 48.99
crores) for enhancing the capabilities in Academic Activities
and Skill Development Training Programme. Taking into account
the savings of Rs. 15.00 crore available in the Capital Section
of the Grant which will be surrendered, a Technical
Supplementary is being obtained, and Rs. 33.99 crore will
entail cash supplementary.
(iii) Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme (Rs. 2.00
crore). As this will be matched by savings available in the
Capital Section of the Grant, a Technical Supplementary is
sought.
(iv) Institute of Pesticides Formulation & Technology (Rs. 0.75
crore) Taking into account saving available in the same section
of Grant, a token supplementary is being sought.
(6) Further, requirement of funds for AGCP are being considered in
consultation with Ministry of Finance for moving the PIB.
(7) Similarly, the requirement of funds for HOCL shall be considered
after crystallization of a revival package by BIFR/BRPSW, after its
hearing on 22.07.2015.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. No. 23003(2)/2015-Fin.,
dated 23.7.2015]
Recommendation No. 6
Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited (HOCL)
The Committee are distressed to note that HOCL has been
continuously incurring heavy losses since 2011-12. During 2013-14, the
Company posted a net loss to the tune of Rs. 176.85 crore. Further,
during 2014-15 (up to December , 2014), the HOCL has achieved a
turnover of Rs. 80.37 crore and incurred a net loss of Rs. 126.56 crore,
as per the provisional, unaudited results. According to the Department,
the losses suffered by HOCL was due to withdrawal of anti-dumping
duties on its main products viz. Phenol, Acetone and Aniline, increase

22
in raw material prices which could not be passed to the customers due
to cheaper imports available and the uneconomical small capacity and
outdated technology of HOCL ’s plants, high manpower cost and high
power cost in the Rasayani unit. To address the problems, HOCL had
earlier engaged M/s FACT Engineering and Design Organization (FEDO)
as a consultant for conducting a revival study of the company. However,
the Board of Directors of HOCL decided to appoint a new consultant
for preparing a fresh revival plan as the FEDO report did not take into
account the macro economic factors such as fall in crude oil prices,
volatile markets and fast changing domestic and international scenario
in the chemical sector. Due to continuous losses since 2011-12, the Net
worth of the company was completely eroded and it became a sick
company and is registered under BIFR. The first hearing of HOCL was
held on 27.01.2015 and the next hearing is scheduled on 22.07.2015.
According to the Department, as a long term measure to revive the
company, a fresh revival plan for HOCL, based on the report to be
prepared by the new consultant, would be submitted for consideration
and further decision of BIFR at the next hearing on 22.07.2015. Further,
in order to put HOCL back on a sustained growth path, the possibility
of utilization of vacant land available at Rasayani is being explored
through various options like leasing out to other Government companies,
merger and/or joint venture etc. In this context, the Committee were
informed that a proposal of M/s Container Corporation India Ltd.
(CONCOR), a PSU under the Ministry of Railways, for long term lease
of approx. 60 acres of HOCL land at Rasayani Unit for development of
Multi Modal Logistic Park is presently under consideration of the
Department. Options for utilisation of other surplus/vacant land at
Rasayani is also being explored by HOCL with other PSUs like Bharat
Petroleum, Hindustan Petroleum, etc. However, since HOCL is already
registered with BIFR as a sick company, various options for utilization
of the vacant land at Rasayani would also require to be examined as
part of the revival plan for HOCL to be prepared by the new consultant
and submitted for consideration and further decision of BIFR. In view
of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that vigorous and
coordinated efforts may be made to put HOCL back on a sustained
growth path with in a fixed time frame. The Committee expect the
new consultant to prepare and submit the fresh revival plan on priority
basis. In the meantime efforts may be made to generate revenue by
reducing the cost of production by the units of HOCL and the decision
on the possibility of utilization of vacant land available at Rasayani
may also be expedited for the benefit of the company and its employees.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in the
matter.

23
As for Hindustan Fluorocarbons Ltd (HFL) which is a subsidiary
company of HOCL, the Committee note that while the company incurred
a net loss to the tune of Rs. 24.82 crore during 2013-14, the company
has achieved a turnover of Rs. 22.55 crore during 2014-15 (up to
December 2014) and a net profit of Rs. 0.13 crore, as per the provisional,
unaudited results. The Committee note that HFL has adopted a strategy
to further develop fluoro specialty chemicals to fetch higher profit
margins and a result thereof, the Committee hope that the company
will be able to achieve better results and generate more revenue. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made by the
company.
As regards Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL), the Committee
note that the profit of the company has gone up from Rs. 5.61 crore
in 2009-10 to Rs. 10.92 crore in 2013-14. However , the net profit of
the company has gone down from Rs. 3.06 crore in 2009-10 to Rs. 1.84
crore in 2013-14 due to increase in interest burden from Rs. 2.54 crore
to Rs. 9.07 crore due to delay in releasing the payment of DDT from
the Ministry of Health. The Department has taken up the matter with
Ministry of Finance as the final price of the products is computed and
recommended by Ministry of Finance. HIL has taken new initiatives to
develop alternative vector control method and Long Lasting Insecticidal
Net (LLIN). A new product, to be used for Indoor Residual Spray (IRS)
as an alternative for DDT , is also under development. The Committee
hope that as a result of new initiatives under taken by HIL, the fortune
of the company will change around to the path of sustained growth
and development. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress of the new initiatives under taken by HIL.
Reply of the Government
Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd. (HOCL)
The Company during the year 2014-15 has achieved a turnover of
Rs. 168.31 crore and posted a net loss of Rs. 215.49 crore after making
provision of Rs. 39.92 crore towards impairment of JNPT Assets.
The plants at HOCL Kochi unit were restarted in the month of
April, 2015 and were continuously operated upto 27th May, 2015. The
plants are again under shutdown since 27th May, 2015 due to
non-availability of raw material, high inventory of phenol and acetone,
downward price trend of phenol and acetone.
The Nitrobenzene and N2O4 plants at Rasayani were operated during
the month of April and May, 2015 and ISRO has assured to provide
working capital support for continuous supply of N 2O4 fuel required for
their rocket launching programmes.

24
Appointment of consultant for Revival Study:
The Company has now appointed M/s JPS Associated Pvt. Ltd. as
consultant for preparation of Revival Report for HOCL. The Consultants
have submitted their Draft Revival Report which is under consideration
of the Management/Board. The final report after approval of Board
will be submitted to Ministry.
Hindustan Fluorocarbons Limited (HFL)
(i) Financial Status of the company as on 31.03.2015: The
Company has turnover of Rs. 32.75 crores and loss of Rs. 3.77
crore as per the audited financial results of the company.
Contribution in PTFE is very less as compared to fluorospeciality
chemicals.
The company is continuing focusing on development of
Fluorospeciality chemicals. Accordingly, one of the fluoro
speciality chemical facility is commissioned in the month of
June 2015. Similarly, Development work on other speciality
chemical is being taken. With this effort, it is expected that
financial condition will start improving.
(ii) Project status till date: Government has disbursed Rs.16.80
crore in the financial year 2014-15 for MPTFE and various
small projects and refurbishment.
The Company has completed the MPTFE Project. Production
was started and exported 1.5 MT to Italy in the financial
year 2014-15. Company is in the process of refurbishment of
the existing plant which will increase the operational
efficiency.
Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL)
(i) Alternative for DDT: ICT after detailed literature survey for
the synthesis of the new molecule has isolated molecule which
has been sent for bio-efficacy testing. Once the insecticidal
property is proved, chemical assay, toxicology and other studies
will be undertaken, after which the pilot plant will be put
up.
(ii) Long Lasting Insecticidal Net: The pilot studies are successful.
CIPET is in the process of developing a net which will exactly
match the international specification, after which we will
initiate registration process.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. No. 23003(2)/2015-Fin.,
dated 23.7.2015]

25
Recommendation No. 7
Assam Gas Cracker Project
The Committee note that as on 15.03.2015, the overall physical
progress of Assam Gas Cracker Project is 99.5%, the overall construction
progress is 98.7% and the financial progress is 93.25%. The project is
expected to be commissioned in June, 2015 and various measures have
been taken to ensure that the project is completed within the revised
schedule. A committee was also constituted to look into the reasons
for time and cost escalations and as per their findings and the
conclusions, some of the reasons identified by the them which led to
delay in commissioning of the project are lack of adequate and effective
supervision by Engineers India Limited (EIL), the Engineering and Project
Management Consultant (EPMC) for the project; delay in permission
from statutory authorities (Forest Department, Government of Assam)
for utilizing sand/earth for construction purpose; inadequate
mobilization of resources (manpower & machinery); under Estimation
of storage capacity of raw material; misplacement/mismanagement of
material, loss of working days due to bandh, strike, rain etc. Further,
in order to make the project economically viable, Brahmaputra Cracker
& Polymer Limited (BCPL) has proposed feedstock subsidy on natural
gas of Rs. 7,775.71 crore (NPV is Rs. 3,447.19 crore) for 15 years of
plant operation and revenue subsidy of Rs. 240.86 crore to fund the
cash deficit during initial 3 years. The project is expected to generate
substantial employment in the region. In view of the foregoing, the
Committee felt great concern regarding the time and cost overruns
and desire that earnest efforts would be made to finally commission
the Project as per the revised schedule of June, 2015. In this context,
the Committee would also like to a reiterate its earlier recommendation
that as far as practicable, the local people would be given preference
for employment in the project for the growth and the development of
the region. The Committee expect the Department to apprise them of
the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In view of time overrun, foreign exchange fluctuations, price
escalation, increase in statutory levies etc. further cost and time
escalation has occurred and therefore BCPL has proposed revised project
cost of Rs. 9833.52 crore. The estimated increase in project cost of
Rs. 913.52 crore is proposed to be funded by Capital Subsidy, debt and
equity of Rs. 478.96 crore, Rs. 304.19 crore and Rs. 130.37 crore
respectively. The commissioning of project has been scheduled for

26
June, 2015. Further , in order to make the project economically viable,
BCPL has proposed feedstock subsidy on natural gas of Rs. 7,775.71
crore (NPV is Rs. 3,447.19 crore) for 15 years of plant operation and
revenue subsidy of Rs. 240.86 crore to fund the cash deficit during
initial 3 years. The proposal is based on existing natural gas price of
$ 5.61/mmbtu and three year ’s average polymer price. The proposal
for revised project cost has been forwarded to the Ministry of Finance
and will be placed before PIB and Cabinet for their consideration as
per laid down procedure.
Overall physical progress of Assam Gas Cracker project being
implemented by BCPL, achieved as on 15.05.2015 is 99.74%.
Mechanical completion of all the units at BCPL, Lepetkata has
been broadly achieved. Following units have been commissioned as on
date:
• Plant Air, Instrument Air and Nitrogen unit.
• Flare system, Fuel gas header.
• Fire Water system.
• GTG-1 with HRSG-1, Utility Boiler–1 at CPP . Power & steam
generation has already started on trial basis.
• Duliajan-Lepetkata Rich and Lean gas pipeline.
• Cooling Towers.
• Raw Water Treatment Plant.
• DM Water Plant.
• Bagging Units at PPU & LLDPE.
• Compressor Train — B of GDU, Duliajan.
Pre-commissioning/commissioning activities of balance units are
presently going on in full swing. The project is expected to be
commissioned by June, 2015.
As on date, the total number of employees on the roll of BCPL is
499 (Executives 354, Non-Executives 145). Out of which 65% of the
total employees belong to North East Region.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. No. 23003(2)/2015-Fin.,
dated 23.7.2015]

27
Recommendation No. 8
Setting up of Plastic Parks
The Committee note that the Scheme aims at setting up of need
based Plastic Parks, and ecosystems with requisite state of the art
infrastructure and enabling common facilities to assist the sector move
up the value chain and contribute to the economy more effectively.
The objectives of the scheme, inter-alia, are to increase competitiveness
and investments, achieve environmentally sustainable growth and adopt
the cluster development approach to consolidate the capacities in
plastic sector. This scheme was originally approved in the year 2010
during 11th Five Year Plan and is proposed to be implemented over a
duration of 10 years during 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17) and 13th Five
Year Plan (2017-22). The Government has accorded approval for setting
up of four Plastic Parks in Madhya Pradesh (Raisen district), Assam
(Tinsukia district), Odisha (Jagatsinghpur district) and Tamil Nadu
(Thiruvallur district). In December , 2014, approval has been given for
setting up of 6 additional plastic parks for implementation during
12th and 13th Plan period. The locations of the six additional Plastic
Parks have not been decided and a decision on the location of the
Plastic Parks will be taken in consultation with the State Governments,
after examining the viability of each proposal. Under the scheme,
Government of India provides grant funding upto 50% of the project
cost subject to a ceiling of Rs. 40 crore per project. The remaining
project cost is funded by the State Government or State Industrial
Development Corporation or similar agencies of State Government.
Keeping in view aims of the Scheme, the total cost of the four Plastic
Parks already approved by the Planning Commission is Rs. 160 crore,
however, the approved Plan budgetary allocation for the scheme under
12th Plan is Rs. 75 crore, which is inadequate even for meeting the
cost of the four approved Plastic Parks. Further , keeping in view the
demand from other States, the proposal for additional budgetary
allocation of Rs. 280 crore for setting up seven Plastic Parks during the
12th Five Year Plan was submitted to the Planning Commission, which
was not agreed to due to funds constraints. The Planning Commission
advised the Department to take up the matter during the mid-term
appraisal of the 12th Plan.
Keeping in view the objectives and the importance of the Plastic
Park, it is imperative that these parks may be set up in country at the
earliest. The proposed Plastic Parks particularly in Assam is extremely
essential so that feedstock generated by the Assam Gas Cracker Project
could be gainfully utilised. The Committee, therefore, recommend

28
that the action plan may be charted out to set up the proposed Plastic
Parks with in a fixed time frame. The viability of the proposal received
from the States for setting of Plastic Parks and their locations may also
be examined and finalised expeditiously in consultation with the
respective State Governments. The Committee also recommend that
Department should vigorously take up the mater with NITI Aayog/
Ministry of Finance to sanction them adequate funds for setting up
10 Plastic parks in the country during 12th and 13th Plan as also
recommended by the Committee in its First Report. The Committee
hope that the implementation of this scheme will help in realizing the
goals of Make in India and also generate ample employment. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
Under the scheme, Government of India provides grant funding
upto 50% of the project cost subject to a ceiling of Rs.40 crore per
project. DCPC has accorded approval to the proposals for plastic parks
received from States of Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Assam and also
released first instalment of Government of India of Rs. 8 crore each
to the implementing agencies. In the case of Plastic Park in Assam,
part amount of 2nd instalment of Rs. 7.5 crore has also been released
in March, 2015. The proposal of Tamil Nadu has been given ‘in principal’
approval, and is being examined and processed for approval.
The Standing Finance Committee (SFC) in its meeting held on
08.12.2014 recommended the setting up of additional 6 Plastic Parks
with GoI grant of Rs. 240 crore, to be implemented during 12th and
13th Plan period. The approval of the competent authority has also
been obtained for the same. The location of new plastic parks will be
decided in detailed consultation with the State Governments. The
action has been initiated for setting up these new 6 Plastic Parks and
we have already taken up the matter with the Ministry of Finance for
fund allocation and are pursuing with them.
The Department is periodically monitoring the progress of the Plastic
Parks for their timely completion and also closely working for this
purpose. The physical progress of the ongoing plastic parks is as under:—
(i) Madhya Pradesh —Out of the approved project cost of
Rs. 108 crore for setting up Plastic Park in Madhya Pradesh,
tender for first phase of Infrastructure Development Works of
Rs. 25.88 crore has been issued on 01.01.2015 to M/s Shapers

29
Construction Ltd. and now Rs. 1.3961 crore has been spent.
The online marketing for allotment of plots has commenced.
Details of units are required to design the next phase of
infrastructure including common facilities for which they are
also in touch with CIPET for inputs.
(ii) Odisha—Out of approved project cost of Rs. 106.78 crore for
setting up Plastic Park at Odisha, the tender for construction
of boundary wall worth Rs. 2.09 crore has been awarded. The
tender has been awarded for construction of Approach Road
worth Rs. 6.58 crore and for Site Grading worth Rs. 11.98
crore. Till now the SPV has incurred an expenditure of
Rs. 1.398 crore on Soft Interventions and Design, Engineering
and Supervision.
(iii) Assam— Out of approved project cost of Rs. 93.65 crore for
setting up plastic park at Assam, AIDC has incurred
expenditure of Rs. 14.08 crore out of first instalment of
Rs. 8 crore, released by GoI and also from its own resources.
The tenders for Road and Drain Infrastructure and Security
Building has been awarded. The works for boundary
demarcation by RCC pillars, jungle clearance and construction
of boundary wall has been completed. Road Network work
against the tender awarded for an amount of Rs. 1.08 crore
has been completed.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. No. 23003 (2)/2015-Fin.,
dated 23.7.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation No. 9
Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs)
The Committee observe that the Petroleum, Chemicals and
Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs) projects in Gujarat,
Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and Tamil Nadu are at various stages of
implementation. In the case of Gujarat, pre-commissioning activities
of the feed Cracker project have started and commissioning is expected
by end of June, 2015. Master Plan/Development plan has been
sanctioned in 2011 and Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) study is
in final stage. Draft final EIA to be submitted by National Environmental

30
Engineering Research Institute (NEERI) to Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change shortly. For Andhra Pradesh PCPIR, Environment
Management Plan and EIA study has been submitted to AP Pollution
Control Board. Public hearing has to be conducted in near future. For
Odisha PCPIR, pre-commissioning activities of the Refinery have started
and commissioning is expected by June 2015. Preliminary Master
Planning was carried out by M/s. L&T Ramboll. Tendering process has
been initiated to engage consultant for detail Master Planning and
Zoning. As for Tamil Nadu PCPIR, the State Government is yet to notify
the PCPIR and form a Management Board. Nagarjuna Oil Corporation
Ltd. (NOCL), the Anchor Tenant, is setting up a 6 million tons capacity
refinery which is proposed to be expanded to 12 million tons in second
phase. The construction work of refinery was stalled due to cyclone in
2012 which has to re-start. Master Plan and Environment Impact
Assessment study will be undertaken after notification of PCPIR and
formation of Management Board.
From the foregoing, it is clear that while there is substantial progress
in the case of Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and Odisha, a lot of ground
remains to be covered in the case of Tamil Nadu. The PCPIR project
is the most ambitious project undertaken so far by the Department of
Chemicals and Petrochemicals. On their completion, the four PCPIR
projects together are expected to generate employment for around
33.96 lakh persons. Hence, the projects are crucial for the growth and
development of the national economy as a whole. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Department should closely coordinate with
the concerned State Governments, Anchor Tenants and other
stakeholders and monitor the progress of each PCPIR with a view to
ensure that the projects are expedited and operationalised in a time
bound manner. The Department should especially coordinate at the
highest level with the State Government of Tamil Nadu so that the
PCPIR is notified and Management Board is formed by the State with
out further delay. The construction work of the refinery should also be
re-started at the earliest. The Committee expect to be apprised of the
initiatives taken and the progress made in respect of all the PCPIR.
Reply of the Government
The Department welcomes the appreciation of the committee on
the implementation on PCPIR Project especially in Gujarat,
Andhra Pradesh & Odisha. Indeed, PCPIR scheme is a crucial endeavor
of the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals to provide sustainable
investment regions with increased economic & manufacturing activities
to enhance employment and livelihood of the public at large. The

31
Department is committed to expenditure implementation of the project
by vigorous and continuous monitoring of implementation through
Monitoring and steering Committees, set up for the purpose. The
Department has also prepared activity & sub activity-wise road map
for implementation of PCPIR projects with designated responsibilities
and timelines to fast track the implementation process. The Department
is ensuring availability of external physical infrastructural and
implementing agencies in dissemination of information to promote
global investments in PCPIRs. The Department is also hand holding
PCPIR projects for (i) approval of Master Plan & EIA and bringing
Anchor Tenant project for AP , PCPIR project; (ii) expeditious
commissioning of Cracker unit and availability of building blocks of
downstream plastic processing industries in Gujarat; (iii) preparation
of final Master Plan and expeditious action on petrochemicals including
Ethylene, MEG & PX PTA units in Odisha, PCPIR; and (iv) restart of
construction of petroleum refinery in Tamil Nadu. The notification of
the Tamil Nadu, PCPIR area and formation of Management Board thereof
is expected to be completed by the State Government shortly. Keeping
in view the experience gained from the implementation so far and
suggestions received from the State Governments, Anchor Tenants and
Committee, the Department has also proposed amendments to the
PCPIR Monitoring/Steering Committee, the Department has also
proposed amendments to the PCPIR policy to speed up the various
developments in implementation of Anchor Tenant projects,
infrastructure and sectors specific critical infrastructure with funding
from Government of India on PPP model.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. No. 23003(2)/2015-Fin.,
dated 23.7.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation No. 10
Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster
The Committee note that the Bhopal Gas Tragedy occurred on the
intervening night of 2-3 December, 1984 causing death and injury to
a large number of people. Various relief and rehabilitation measures
were initiated immediately after the disaster, some of which are still
continuing. In compliance with the orders dated 26th October , 2004 of
the Supreme Court of India, pro-rata compensation has been awarded

32
to 5,62,986 cases out of originally settled cases of 5,74,386, with
payment of a sum of Rs. 1511.53 crore, till 28.02.2015. A total number
of 11,400 claimants [originally awarded/disbursed cases 5,74,386 minus
pro-rata compensation paid cases 5,62,986 (till 28.02.2015)] did not
turn up to the designated courts for receiving pro-rata compensation.
Every possible effort has been made to trace the genuine claimants or
their legal heirs by sending them several notices at their address, as
well as through NGOs, print and electronic media but remained futile.
As considerable period has elapsed, to afford a last opportunity, final
notification containing names along with details of claims, wards etc,
is being published in local newspapers and People’s Samachar at regular
interval.
The Committee were informed that it would be difficult to assign
any cut-off date for applications received under Cancer and TRF (Total
Renal Failure) category for payment of ex-gratia as per the experts
opinion. The Office of the Welfare Commissioner has stated that
identification of genuine claimants/legal heirs is a time consuming job
and they currently receive 25 to 30 applications at an average per
week from Bhopal Gas victims continuously for payment of ex-gratia.
The Government of Madhya Pradesh has stated whenever Cancer and
TRF is detected in any Gas victims, freedom to file application/claim
must be available to him, because it cannot be said that after a cut-
off date, no gas victim will be detected with cancer and TRF .
The Committee take note of the stand taken by the State
Government of Madhya Pradesh in the matter and recommend that
genuine claims of all the applicants of the victims of the tragedy
should be considered regardless of the time lapse and they should be
duly compensated as per the decisions/orders in the matter. The
progress in the disbursement of claims should be regularly monitored
and the applications of the claimants should be disposed of in a
transparent and time bound manner. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the updated progress in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The Supreme Court in an Order passed in the year 2004, had
directed the Welfare Commissioner, Bhopal Gas Victims, Bhopal to
disburse the balance amount (the amount deposited by Union Carbide
Corporation) which had accumulated with the Reserve Bank of India on
account of accrual of interest and exchange rate variation, on pro-rata
basis (in the ratio of 1:1 of original compensation) to the claimants
whose cases had been settled. A sum of Rs. 1511.58 crore as pro-rata
compensation has been paid in 5,62,996 awarded cases till May, 2015.

33
There are 11,390 cases (Originally settled cases 5,74,386 minus
pro-rata awarded cases till May, 2015 5,62,996) in which the claimants
concerned or their legal heirs did not turn up. To settle such absentee
cases, the Office of the Welfare Commissioner has issued a notification
published in local newspaper with the direction to attend the Claim
Tribunals for settlement of pro-rata Compensation. Besides this, list of
absentees were also provided tothe local, NGOs working for the Bhopal
Gas Victims, to trace the genuine claimants. In these efforts about 100
claimants/legal heirs turned up pursuing their respective claim cases.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. No. 23003(2)/2015-Fin.,
dated 23.7.2015]
Recommendation No. 11
Miscellaneous
The Committee express their deep concern about pollution and
environmental degradation caused by effluents from chemical industries.
In this context, the Secretary of the Department explained that
regulation of environment compatibility of treatment plants is a subject
matter of the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change.
Nevertheless, the Department is involved to ensure that the chemical
and petrochemical industries are also environment compatible. The
Committee desire that the Department should work in tandem with
the Central Pollution Control Board and the Ministry of Environment,
Forests and Climate Change so that the environment pollution caused
by the chemical industries could be effectively checked.
Reply of the Government
Central Pollution Control Board under Ministry of Environment and
Forests and State Pollution Control Board of different States are
monitoring implementation of water , soil, air pollution/emission
standards for different sectors of the industry under relevant provisions
of water (Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Air
(Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1981. Ministry of Environment,
Forests and Climate Change(MoEF&CC) is the nodal Ministry to enforce
compliance with the above regulatory framework the above chemical
units with respect to implementation of environment related measures.
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) is already
working in this regard with the Ministry of Environment, Forests and
Climate Change and Industry stakeholders for meeting the prescribed
Environmental norms for sustainable development in the chemical sector.

34
The Department is working on evolving an effective Plastic Waste
Management Programme in consultation with the concerned Ministries/
Departments, including Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate
Change, Central Pollution Control Board and other stakeholders.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. No. 23003(2)/2015-Fin.,
dated 23.7.2015]
Recommendation No. 12
The Secretary of the Department pointed out during the evidence
that the administration in chemicals and petrochemicals is very
disjointed as for each sector, there is one Department in each Ministry
whereas, this Ministry of Chemicals and Petrochemicals does not deal
with all the chemicals and petrochemical items. As for illustration, the
Secretary pointed out that agro-chemicals are with Ministry of
Agriculture, soaps and detergents are with DIPP . Out of four units,
three petrochemical units are under the control of the Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas. It was reported to the Committee that the
Department has already initiated steps to ensure that all these units
are brought together and all the subjects genuinely belonging to the
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should be brought under
the control the Department so that all the issues relating to the
development of Chemical and Petrochemical sector could be cohesively
and critically dealt with. The Committee fully endorse the view
expressed by the Secretary of the Department on this issue and expect
the Department to pursue the matter vigorously till its logical
conclusion.
Reply of the Government
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has already taken up
the issues for transfer of subjects such as “ Insecticides Act, 1968 ” and
“paints, soaps and detergents ” with Ministry of Agriculture and
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) respectively.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. No. 23003(2)/2015-Fin.,
dated 23.7.2015]

35
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
WANT TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLIES
—NIL—

36
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
—NIL—

37
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation No. 2
The Committee also note with concern that our exports are facing
some problem in meeting the standards of the European countries
because of legislation for import of chemicals from other countries.
Keeping in view the health and environment issues in the European
countries, our industrialists and exports must meet the standards of
European countries. The European Union ’s Registration, Evaluation,
Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) standards are very
strict, very rigid and very expensive also. The Department has initiated
inventorisation for which about a sum of Rs. 27 crore has been
sanctioned. Regarding REACH legislation, the Department has convened
many meetings with the stakeholders. Initially, the industries did not
agree to support REACH legislation but finally they have agreed to go
ahead with the legislation but insisted that it should not affect Indian
industry. The Committee would like the Department to pursue the
matter vigorously and a comprehensive law on the lines of REACH may
be enacted keeping in view the interest of the Indian industry. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As a prerequisite for preparation of REACH-like legislation in the
country, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) has
entrusted the work of invetorsation of all chemical substances to
CHEMEXCIL under Ministry of Commerce. The CHEMEXCIL has initiated
the work and prepared a model chemical inventory of about 4613
chemical substances with their chemical structure, physical properties,
hazard category, instruction for storage etc.
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and
Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. No. 23003(2)/2015-Fin.,
dated 23.7.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)

38
Recommendation No. 5
Central Institute of Plastic Engineering and Technology (CIPET)
The Committee note that CIPET is a premier national institution
devoted to Academic, Technology Support & Research (ATR) activities
for the growth of polymer & allied industries in the country. CIPET
operates at 23 locations spread across the country with its Head Office
at Chennai. All the CIPET centres have state-of-the-art infrastructural
facilities in the area of Design, CAD/CAM/CAE, Tooling & mould
manufacturing, plastics processing, testing and quality control to cater
to the needs of plastics and allied industries. The Committee also note
that CIPET has proposed a scheme for Enhancing the Capabilities in
Academic Activities (Skill Development Training Programs) at CIPET
Centres, inter alia , including “Establishment of Vocational Training
Centre (VTC) at Vijayawada ” at a total cost of Rs. 50 crore, on 50:50
cost sharing basis between State and Central Government. The proposal
is being considered by the Government, as per extant norms and
procedures. The Government of Andhra Pradesh has agreed, in principle,
to establish CIPET VTC at Vijayawada with allocation of 15 acres of
land. Further, the land for CIPET Centre at Medak has been procured
from Hindustan Fluro and the consent of the State Government of
Telangana is being obtained to start the Centre as 50 per cent of the
expenditure has to be borne by the State Government.
During the evidence, the Committee were informed that the
Department has proposed a policy for recycling of plastic waste so that
the plastic which is littered is collectible and carry economic value.
The Department has also proposed a ban on multilayer metallised
flexible packaging material in the food sector and the regulatory
framework which is being proposed should not only be applicable for
the industry but the same should also be applicable to the user value
chain. After making the littered plastic collectible, scavengers, the
rag pickers and conservancy workers would be trained to recycle it
instead of sending it to the big industry to recycle. The proposed
policy is being circulated to the rest of the Ministries. It was also
informed during the evidence that the chemical sector is in need of
skilled, semi-skilled manpower and there is no dedicated institute in
the country to supply that skilled manpower.
In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that the
proposal to set up CIPET centres at Vijayawada and Medak may be
pursued vigorously with the respective State Governments so that these
centres may be set up without any time and cost overrun. The

39
Committee also desire that the proposed draft policy relating to plastic
waste management be formulated without any delay. The Committee
also recommend that a policy and programme may be formulated in
consultation with industry to meet the demand of the chemical sector
for skilled manpower and a dedicated institute may also be set up for
the purpose. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
made on aforesaid matters.
Reply of the Government
Status report on Proposal to set up CIPET Centres at Vijayawada
and Medak is as under:—
(i) CIPET Centre at Medak (Telangana)
In order to establish a High Learning Centre (HCL)–cum–Vocational
Training Centre (VTC) at Medak (Telangana) a Project proposal has
been submitted to the Principal Secretary, Higher Education,
Government of Telangana on 23.03.2015, who has referred it to Finance
Department with his recommendations on 06.05.2015 for further action.
CIPET is following up with Finance Department for early approval of
the proposal, CIPET has already acquired 15 acres of land from
M/s Hindustan Fluorocarbon Limited, Hyderabad.
In order to commence Vocational Training Courses at VTC, CIPET
has identified an Industrial Shed at Rudraram, Medak on rental basis,
necessary machinery & equipments will be installed in the Industrial
Shed and vocational training programmes will commence soon.
(ii) CIPET Centre at Vijayawada
In order to establish a Vocational Training Centre (VTC) in Andhra
Pradesh, CIPET has approached Government of Andhra Pradesh for
land and workshop buildings. Government of Andhra Pradesh has agreed
in principle and issued consent letter dated 16.03.2015 to allot
15 acres land to CIPET at Vijayawada. In this connection, CIPET officials
visited/inspected various sites shown by the revenue authorities and
found that a piece of land at Ibrahimpatnam is suitable for setting up
of CIPET Centre. An application was submitted to Joint Collector,
Krishna District on 17th April, 2015 for alienation of land to CIPET . The
possession of 15 acres of land is expected soon.
In order to commence Vocational Training Courses at VTC, CIPET
has identified a building belonging to M/s Vijayawada Auto Cluster
Development Company Ltd., Vijayawada. M/s Vijayawada Auto

40
Development Company Ltd. has sent its consent letter to Joint Collector
Krishna District on 05.05.2015 agreeing in principal to permit CIPET to
run Vocational Training Courses in the said premises. The possession of
the building and installation of machineries & equipment will be done
shortly and skill development programmes will be commenced shortly. ”
 [Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals
and Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. No. 23003(2)/2015-Fin.,
dated 23.7.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANDRAO ADSUL,
11 October, 2015 Chairperson,
20 Asvina, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers.

41
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2015-16)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 22 September , 2015 from 1500
hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Anandrao Adsul— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Idris Ali
3. Shri Anju Bala
4. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta
5. Shri K. Ashok Kumar
6. Shri Chhedi Paswan
7. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu
8. Dr. Kulamani Samal
9. Shri Tasleemuddin
10. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma
11. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya
13. Shri K. Parasaran
14. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya
15. Shri Abdul Wahab
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Director
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the members
of the Committee.

42
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:—
(a) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals
and Petrochemicals); and
(b) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals).
4. Both the draft Action Taken Reports were adopted by the
Committee without any amendment.
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to make
consequential changes, if any, arising out of the factual verification of
the Reports by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals and
the Department of Pharmaceuticals of the Ministry of Chemicals and
Fertilizers and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
6. The Committee decided to undertake a study tour to Kochi,
Munnar , Chennai, Mumbai, Vadodra and Dahej from 2nd to 6th November,
2015. The Committee also decided to hold the next sitting on 7 October,
2015.
The Committee then adjourned.

43
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT
(16TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND
FERTILIZERS (2014-15) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-2016) ’ OF THE
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS
AND PETROCHEMICALS)
I. Total No. of Recommendations 12
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government:—
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11 and 12) 10
Percentage of Total 83.33%
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s
replies:—
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil) 0
Percentage of Total Nil
IV . Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
reply of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:—
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil) 0
Percentage of Total Nil
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government are still awaited:—
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 2 and 5) 2
Percentage of Total 16.67%