1 
 
 
10 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2014-2015) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the First Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-2015) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals  and Petrochemicals)] 
 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
22 July, 2015 / 31  Ashadha 1935, (Saka) 
 


2 
 
 
CC&F No. - 10 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2014-15) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2014-2015) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the First Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-2015) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals  and Petrochemicals)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.07.2015 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.07.2015 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
22 July, 2015 / 31  Ashadha 1935, (Saka) 
  


3 
 
 
(i) 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-15) ………………………………...  
Introduction. …………………………………………………..…………………………  
Chapter I Report ……………….…………………………………………………..  
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of  Seventeenth    Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2014-15) held on  16 June 2015 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the First Report (16 th Lok Sabha ) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2014 -15) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2014 -15)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals  and Petrochemicals).  
 
  

4 
 
 
(ii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Idris Ali 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N Chandrappa 
5. ShriSankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
9. Shri K Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi 
11. ShriChhediPaswan 
12. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle 
13. Shri Rajendran S 
14. Shri ChanduLal Sahu 
15. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
16. Dr. Uma Saren 
17. Dr. Krishan Pratap Singh 
18. Shri Taslimuddin 
19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20.* Shri Innocent 
21.* ShriKotha Prabhakar Reddy 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Dr. MS Gill 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Narayan LalPanchariya 
26. Shri K Parasaran 
27. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao 
28. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
29.* Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
30.% Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
31.$ Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Smt Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Nishant Mehra   - Under Secretary 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Changed the nomination of ShriMurliDeora, Member of RajyaSabha from the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers to the Committee on 
External Affairs w.e.f. 25-09-2014. 
* ShriPalvaiGovardhan Reddy, Member of RajyaSabha nominated w.e.f. 08-10-2014 
Shri Mohanbhai KalyanjibhaiKundariya Nominated as Minister of State w.e.f. 09.11.2014 
The term of ShriBrijlalKhabri, MP (RS) has expire w.e.f. 25.11.2014 
Changed the nomination of Adv. Joice George, Member of LokSabha from the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers to the Personnel, Public  
Grievances, Law and  Justice w.e.f. 24-12-2014. 
*Shri Innocent, and ShriKothaPrabhakar Reddy, Member of LokSabhanominated w.e.f. 22-12-2014 
% ShriMansukh L. Mandaviya, Member of RajyaSabha nominated w.e.f. 31-12-2014 
% Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav, Member of RajyaSabha nominated w.e.f. 29.01.2015 
$Changed the nomination of Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav, Member of Rajya Sabha from the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers to the 
Committee on Industry w.e.f. 07.05.2015 

5 
 
 
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014 -15) having 
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Tenth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014 -2015) on Demands for Grants  
(2014-2015) of the Ministry of Chemicals and  Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals). 
 
2. The First Report  (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on  10.12.2014 .  The Action Taken replies of 
Government to all observations/recommendations contained in the Report were received on  
17.3.2015 .   The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers(2014 -2015) considered 
and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 16.6.2015. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/  
recommendations contained in the First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is 
given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
  
 
 
New Delhi; 
14 January, 2014   .           ANANDRAO ADSUL 
23  ASHADHA,1937 (Saka)             Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

6 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014-15) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the First Report (Six teenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (20 14-
15)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals  and 
Petrochemicals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 10.12.2014. In all, the Committee 
made 10 Observations / Recommendations in the Report. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
were requested to furn ish replies to the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
First Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e. by 9.3.2015. 
The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 10 Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from  the Minist ry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers  (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals ) vide their O.M. 
No.23003 (i)/2014-Fin.-I Vol. - III, dated 17.3.2015 .  These Replies have been examined and 
categorized as follows:-  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government- 
 Rec. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 10.                          (Total =8) 
            Chapter-II  
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply-  
Rec. No. Nil         (Total =0) 
             Chapter-III  
 
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration-  
      Rec. No. Nil                         (Total=0) 
              Chapter-IV  
 
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  final replies of the 
Government are still awaited- 
Rec. Nos. 2 and 9.                     (Total =2) 
              Chapter-V  
  

7 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the  Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and the Final Replies in 
respect of Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter V for which final 
replies are still awaited should be furnished expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Gov ernment on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. Need to expedite to set up Reverse SEZs and action plan to produce specialty 
chemicals.  
 
Recommendation No.1 
5. While noting with concern the continuous increase in import of major chemicals and 
petrochemicals, the Committee had recommended as under:   
 "The Committee note with concern that import of major chemicals and petrochemicals 
has been continuously increasing at the rate of 20 per cent from 2009-2013 due to gap 
between production and consumption in the country. While the value of import of 
major chemicals & petrochemicals was pegged at Rs. 202347 crore and its share in the 
total imports was 7.6% during 2012 -13, the same rose to Rs. 234258 crore 
contributing 8.6% to the total imports during 2013 -14. During the course of evidence, 
the Committee were informed that there is a shortage of feedstock like gas and petrol 
for petrochemicals companies in the country and  therefore, these companies have to 
import the feedstock which leads to increase in cost and other associated problems. 
The Committee were also informed that in order to address the shortage of feedstock 
for the petrochemicals companies, the Government has  conceptualized to set up 
Reverse SEZs in foreign countries primarily in oil rich countries like Iran and Myanmar 
where the processing plants will be set up and then the finished products will be 
imported to India at cheaper rates. In this context, initial  discussions, exchange of 
ideas, concept building and cooperation with these countries have already been 
initiated by the Government. It was also informed that the efforts are being made to 
promote manufacturing of specialty chemicals which are small volum e chemicals but 
high priced and performance chemicals. These chemicals are not used directly but they 
act as catalysts and change the performance of the chemicals. Most of these chemicals 
are produced in the West. The Committee are of the view that the che micals and 
petrochemicals sector is a major segment of manufacturing industry and plays a 
pivotal role in various downstream industries and therefore, the Government  
should map out strategies for the growth of this sector reducing thereby the country’s 
dependence upon foreign imports of chemicals and petrochemicals, boosting 
employment and reduction in expenditure of valuable foreign exchange. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make concerted and 
coordinated efforts to expedite the process of consultation with all concerned with a 
view to set up Reverse SEZs safeguarding the interests of Indian workers and 
investments in these countries. The Department should also formulate action plan to 
produce specialty chemicals . The Committe e would like to be apprised of the 
initiatives taken by the Department in this regard.” 
  

8 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
  
6. In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“Specialty chemical segment is declared as a thrust area.   This segment with an 
estimated size of US$ 23 billion and a share of 16% of the Indian chemical industry 
constitutes one of the largest sectors.   This is a niche and sunrise sector, and to 
promote this segment, the following measures are envisaged:- 
·  Special zones are proposed to be demarcated in the PCPIRs to take care 
of feedstock like Ethylene Oxide  to this segment. 
·  Government prop oses to set up reverse SEZs in oil  rich countries for 
providing feedstock to chemical sector. 
·  National Chemical Policy is being evolved which emphasizes the setting 
up of chemical clusters, building enabling infrastructure, facilitating fast 
track project clearances, Research& Development, green chemistry, 
technology up -gradation to enhance the competitive edge of this 
segment, as specialty chemicals are knowledge based chemicals.   
The Department has taken up with the stake holding Ministries i.e. Mini stry of 
External Affairs, Department of Economic Affairs, M/o Com merce, M/o Petroleum and 
Natural Gas and Department  of Fertilizers to send their comments on formation of 
Reverse SEZs in raw material rich countries like Iran and Myanmar to ensure cheap 
and sustainable supply of feedstock / building blocks/  intermediate s for the chemical 
and petrochemical industries in India, specially in the PCPIRs. As part of the 
consultation process, a meeting was held with the respective Ministries and FICCI. 
FICCI, one of the industry representatives and played important role in the se 
interactions, has been requested to provide information of companies interested to 
invest in such Reverse SEZs through Joint Ventures and identify the chemical/ 
petrochemical feedstocks / building blocks for the purpose. Final decisions in the 
matter will be taken only after examination of policy regimes investment, guarantees 
provided by the Government to Indian investors / promoters, pricing policies on long -
term supply of Crude Oil / Natural Gas, export -import and setting up of industrial 
zones in the  countries identified. In case of Iran, the interactions have been held with 
Ambassador of Ind ia in Iran and Secretary, Department  of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals to facilitate discussions / interactions with Government Agencies / 
Companies in Iran about t he possibilities and modalities to develop Reverse SEZs 
model through collaboration / joint ventures." 
  
Comments of the Committee 
7.  While noting with concern the continuous increase in  import of major 
chemicals and petrochemicals at th e rate of 20 per cent from 2009 to 2013 and 
shortage of feedstock like gas and petrol for petroche micals companies in the 
country, the Committee  had recommended  that the Department should make 
concerted and coordinated efforts to expedite the process of consultation with all 
concerned with a view to set up Reverse SEZs and formulate action plan to produce 
specialty chemicals.  In its Action Taken R eply, the Department has stated that 
specialty chemical segment has been  declared as a thrust area and to pro mote this 

9 
 
 
segment, various  measures are proposed to be envisaged like demarcation  of special 
zones in PCPIRs to take care of feedstock,  setting up of reverse SEZs in oil rich 
countries for providing feedstock to chemical sector  and to evolve  National Chemical 
Policy which emphasizes the setting up of chemical clusters, building enabling 
infrastructure, facilitating fast track project clearances, Research& Development, 
green chemistry, technology up -gradation to enhance the competitive edge of this 
segment, as specialty chemicals are knowledge based chemicals.   According to  the 
Department, the stake holding Ministries i.e. Ministry of External Affairs, Department 
of Economic Affairs, M/o Commerce, M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas and Department 
of Fertilizers have been asked to send their comments on formation of Reverse SEZs 
in raw material rich countries like Iran and Myanmar to ensure cheap and 
sustainable supply of feedstock / building blocks/  intermediates for the chemical and 
petrochemical industries in India, speciall y in the PCPIRs. As part of the consultation 
process, a meeting was held with the respecti ve Ministries and FICCI. FICCI  has been 
requested to provide information of companies interested to invest in such Reverse 
SEZs through Jo int Ventures and identify the chemical/ petrochemical feed  stocks / 
building blocks for the purpose. Final decisions in the matter will be taken only after 
examination of policy regimes investment, guarantees provided by the Government 
to Indian investors / promoters, pricing policies on long -term supply of Crude Oil / 
Natural Gas, export -import and setting up of industrial zones in the countries 
identified. In case of Iran, the interactions have been held with Ambassador of India 
in Iran and Secretary, Dep artment of Chemicals and Petrochemicals to facilitate 
discussions / interactions with Government Agencies / Companies in Iran about the 
possibilities and modalities to develop Reverse SEZs model through collaboration / 
joint ventures. In view of the forego ing actions initiated, the Committee hope that the 
Department would pursue the matter vigorously and expedite the process of 
consultation/interaction with  all concerned so that Reverse SEZs could be set up in 
collaboration/joint ventures at the earliest  which in turn would ensure cheap and 
sustainable supply of feedstock / building blocks/  intermediates for the chemicals 
and petrochemicals sector .  In this context, the Committee would like the Department 
to urge  FICCI to  expedite the requisite information of companies interested to invest 
in Reverse SEZs through Joint Ventures and identify the chemical/ petrochemical feed 
stocks / building blocks for the purpose. The Committee would like the Department 
to apprise them of the initiatives undertaken and the progress made in the matter. 
 
B.       Expeditious finalization of National Chemical Policy document 

10 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
8.  While noting with   distress  that  chemical manufacturing companies are a major 
source of environment pollution, the Committee  had recommended as under: 
“The Committee are distressed to note that chemical manufacturing companies are a 
major source of environment pollution. The hazardous wastes are reportedly being 
discharged by the factories without being treated, causi ng environment and water 
pollution in and around the complex of the factory adversely affecting the human 
health as well as aquatic life of the region. During the course of evidence, it was 
reported that industrial wastes are being pumped into Hussain Saga r, a lake situated 
at the heart of Hyderabad city, polluting the lake and causing skin disease to the 
nearby residents, etc. The issue is assuming critical dimensions leading to soil 
degradation, water pollution, coastal pollution adversely affecting pisci culture and 
aquaculture and the livelihood of fishermen community, etc. The Committee also 
firmly believe that economic growth cannot be sustained without taking care of the 
environment. During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the Department was 
candid enough to accept the fact that awareness about environment and environment 
compatibility is very poor in India. The toxic and hazardous wastes discharged by the 
chemical factories are contaminating our water bodies and turning our soil into barren 
land. According to him, though the regulatory power enforcing environment 
compatibility norms rests with the Ministry of Environment and Forest and only they 
have the authority to issue orders and punish the culprits, however, the Department 
will come out with a Policy in this regard soon. In this regard, the Committee were also 
informed that a National Chemical Policy is being prepared by the Department on the 
issue which will be brought out very soon. After various rounds of consultations with 
all the stakeholders during the period from July 2012 to December 2013, the updated 
version of draft policy have now been sent for Inter -Ministerial consultation and the 
policy document is expected to be finalized soon. According to the Department, the 
Policy aims to ma ke strategies for sustainable growth and development, increasing 
investments, ensuring feedstock availability, R&D promotion and that the emphasis 
has been on Green Chemistry, HRD, technology up -gradation, disaster management, 
safety in chemical plants, et c. The Committee are of the strong view that the 
Department cannot escape their responsibility on the issue and being the nodal 
authority, it is their primary duty to allow establishment of only those factories which 
are environmentally compatible. The Com mittee believe that the said policy would 
address the various problems afflicting the chemicals and petrochemicals sector in the 
country. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the process of consultation on the 
National Chemical Policy and finalization of the policy document incorporating both 
the growth of the sector and environmental sustainability may be expedited. The 
Committee also desire that the Department should take remedial measures in 
coordination with Ministry of Environment, Forest and Clima te Change and with all 
concerned to check pollution caused by the chemical factories. The Committee expect 
to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard." 
 
Reply of the Government 
9.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“Compliance with environment standards is imperative for the long -term viability of 
the chemical sector.   Central Pollution Control Board under Ministry of Environment 
and Forests and State Pollution Control Boards of different states are the regulatory 
authorities for monitoring implementation of water pollution and air emission 

11 
 
 
standards for different sectors of the industry under relevant provisions of Water 
(Prevention &  Control of Pollution) Act 1974 and Air (Prevention & Control of 
Pollution) Act 1981.   MoEF & CC is the nodal Ministry to enforce compliance with the 
above regulatory framework by the chemical units with respect to implementation of 
environment related measures. 
·         DCPC has formulated a draft National Chemical Policy which envisages the 
promotion of sustainable and green technologies.   Awareness workshops are 
conducted by the Department for implementation of Green Technologies in the 
industrial undertakings. 
·         The Department conducts workshops for adoption of different codes of 
Responsible Care for creating awareness about environment friendly and green 
technologies to control pollution. 
·         The Department is working on the Swachh Bharat  Abhiyan to check pollution 
from industrial wastes." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
10. The Committee were distressed to note that chemical manufacturing companies 
are a major source of environment pollution. It was also reported that the  hazardous 
wastes are  being discharged by the factories without being treated, causing 
environment and water pollution in and around the complex of the factory adversely 
affecting the human health as well as aquatic life of the region.  The Committee were of 
the strong view tha t the Department cannot escape their responsibility on the issue 
and being the nodal authority, it is their primary duty to allow establishment of only 
those factories which are environmentally compatible. The Committee believed that 
the  policy  being evo lved by  the Department  would address the various problems 
afflicting the chemicals and petrochemicals sector in the country. The Committee, 
therefore, had recommended that the process of consultation on the National Chemical 
Policy and finalization of th e policy document incorporating both the growth of the 
sector and environmental sustainability may be expedited. The Committee also desired 
that the Department should take remedial measures in coordination with Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate C hange (MoEF & CC) and with all concerned to check 
pollution caused by the chemical factories. In its Action Taken Reply, however, the 
Committee regret to note that the Department has placed the entire responsibility on 
MoEF & CC  and State Pollution Contro l Boards  to enforce  compliance of regulatory 
framework for monitoring implementation of water pollution and air emission 
standards for different sectors of the industry under the relevant provisions of the 
Acts. The Department is also conspicuously silen t about the details of the National 
Chemical Policy and its present status including the time by which the said Policy is 
likely to be finalized and implemented.     In view of this, the Committee are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Department and reiterate that the Department can not 
escape its responsibility on this issue and hence, the Department  should not allow 

12 
 
 
establishment of  those factories which are  not  environmentally sustainable and 
compatible. The C ommittee, therefore, reiterate its recommendation   that the 
Department should take  initiatives in coordination with MoEF & CC and States 
Pollution Board to check environmental and water polluti on being caused by the 
chemical industries.  
The Committee also recommend that  concerted and vi gorous efforts  be made to 
expedite the  formulation of National Chemical Policy  which envisages the promotion 
of sustainable and green technologies.  The  Committee would  like  to be informed 
about the initiatives undertaken by the Department and the progr ess made in this 
regard. 
 
C.  Expeditious execution of PCPIR projects.  
Recommendation No. 7 
11.  While expressing  expeditious  execution of PCPIR projects , the Committee had 
recommended as under:-  
  “The Committee note that the concept of Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
Investment Regions (PCPIRs) is a cluster approach to promote the Petroleum, 
Chemical and Petrochemical sectors in an integrated and environmental friendly 
manner, on a large sca le. The PCPIR policy was formulated in April 2007 to give a 
boost to this sector. At present, PCPIR projects are being set up in four States of 
Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and Odisha and Tamil Nadu. All these PCPIRs except Tamil 
Nadu, have made some progress. As for Tamil Nadu PCPIR, the Department has signed 
Memorandum of Agreement with Government of Tamil Nadu in February 2014 and it 
has yet to make any significant progress. The Department has also constituted a 
Steering Committee for each of the PCPIRs excep t Tamil Nadu to monitor the 
implementation progress. This would help in expediting the implementation of various 
projects in the PCPIRs. The Committee also note that these PCPIRs were envisioned to 
give boost to petrochemical industries, add productivity a nd decrease India’s 
dependence on import of petrochemical feedstock and to develop the region 
holistically in an environmentally manner as well as to provide huge employment 
opportunities particularly to the local people. Keeping in view the benefits which  
would accrue to the economy and the local region as  a result of PCPIRs projects , the 
Committee recommend that  the Department, being the nodal authority ,  should make 
vigorous and coordinated efforts to expedite the execution of PCPIR projects being set 
up in aforesaid four States. The Committee hope that as a result of PCPIRs projects, a 
large number of people of the area will be benefited in terms of empl oyment and the 
economy of the country would get a tremendous boost. The Committee expect from 
the Department to regularly monitor the progress of each of these projects. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this 
regard." 
 
Reply of the Government 
12.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 

13 
 
 
 “As per the existing PCPIR Policy 2007, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, 
Government of India is coordinating with the Central Ministries / Departments 
concerned, State Governments and Anchor Tenants to implement PCPIRs. Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is also monitoring environmental clearances, 
development of external p hysical infrastructure, which includes road, rail, ports, 
airports etc. and preparation of Viability Gap Funding (VGF) proposals for 
infrastructure projects by the State Governments concerned. 
The Department has noted the recommendations of the Committee t o regularly 
monitor the progress of each of the PCPIR projects. In order to expedite 
implementation of these projects to achieve the objectives of boosting petrochemical 
industries, promote investment and generate employment, Minister, Chemicals and 
Fertilizers reviewed progress of PCPIRs on 10 th July, 2014. Detailed review of Odisha 
PCPIR was undertaken by the Minister, C&F on 26 th November, 2014. Meeting of the 
Steering Committee chaired by Secretary, C&PC and comprising members of Ministries 
/ Departments, State Governments concerned will be held on 24 th February, 2015. 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL), the Anchor Tenant of Odisha PCPIR, has informed 
that its refinery project at Paradeep PCPIR is sched uled for commissioning by June 
2015. Industrial Development Corporation Odisha (IDCO) has started discussions with 
EPTRI, Hyderabad and National Institute of Oceanography, Goa for preparation of 
Terms of Reference for Environment Impact Assessment of the PCPIR region."   
  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
13.   The  Committee  noted that PCPIRs were envisioned to give boost to 
petrochemical industries, add productivity and decrease India’s dependence on 
import of petrochemical feedstock and to develop the region holistically in an 
environmentally sustainable manner as well as to provi de huge employment 
opportunities particularly to the local people. The  Committee, therefore, 
recommended that  the Department, being the nodal authority,  should make 
vigorous and coordinated efforts to expedite the execution of PCPIR projects being set 
up in aforesaid four States. In its Action Taken Reply, the Committee note that the 
Minister, Chemicals and Fertilisers reviewed the progress of PCPIRs on 10 th July 2014. 
Detailed review of Odisha PCPIR was undertaken by the Minister, C&F on 26 th 
November, 2014. However, the Committee regret to note that the Department is silent 
about the outcome of  the review undertaken by the Minister . The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the outcome of  the review undertaken by the Minister 
and that of the Steering committee which may been held  as scheduled on 24 th 
February, 2015, may be conveyed to them . The Committee would also like to know  
the follow up action taken by the Department  on the basis of the outcome  to expedite 
execution of PCPIR projects in all the four States with in a fixed time frame.  
 
D.  Need to prepare a road map to set up   Plastic Parks. 

14 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
14.  Emphasizing the need to prepare a  road map to set up Plastic Parks in all the States of   
the country, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that the Indian Plastics industry is large but highly fragmented 
with dominance of tiny, small and medium units and thus the Department has 
formulated setting up of Plastic Parks scheme with a view to synergize and consolidate 
the capaci ties through cluster development. The scheme aims at setting up plastic 
parks with requisite state of the art infrastructure and enabling common facilities to 
assist the petrochemical sector to move the value chain and contribute to the economy 
more effectively. The Department has approved four Plastic Parks, one each in Madhya 
Pradesh, Odisha, Assam and Tamil Nadu and all the States have been advised to 
compress the timelines and aim to complete the Parks by mid 2016. According to the 
Department, the exist ing 12th Plan budgetary allocation for the scheme is insufficient 
even for the four proposals under implementation and the proposals from States like 
Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and Kerala are not being considered for the present. 
But the Department wo uld request Planning Commission during Mid -Term Appraisal 
to enhance the Plan allocation for Plastic Parks to Rs. 400 crore to enable it to set up 
10 Plastic Parks. During the course of evidence, the Committee were informed that 
while the per capita global  consumption of Plastic is 30 kg and that of USA is more 
than 100 kg, India’s consumption of Plastic is only 10 kg. The imports of petrochemical 
has been increasing at a growth rate of 20% which is primarily due to a huge gap 
between production and consumption of petrochemicals in the country. 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee are of the opinion that establishment of Plastic 
Parks in each State in the country is very essential for augmenting production of 
petrochemicals and also for reduction of its i mports in the country. It is, therefore, 
imperative for the Department to make vigorous efforts to set up Plastic Parks in all 
the States of the country. Keeping this aspect in view, the Committee recommend that 
the Department should present a strong case before the Planning Commission during 
the Mid -Term Appraisal of the 12th Plan for allocation of sufficient funds to enable 
them to set up initially 10 Plastic Parks in the country. The Committee further 
recommend that the Department should prepare a road m ap to set up at least one 
Plastic Parks in all the States of the country. The Committee hope that four plastic 
parks would be set up as per the time schedule by mid 2016  with out any delay. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the  Department in this 
regard."  
Reply of the Government 
15.  In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The Department is pleased to inform that keeping in view aims of the scheme to 
create quality infrastructure and increase investment in the sector leading to 
enhanced capacity, production and employment, the Standing Finance Committee 
(SFC) in its meeting held on 08.12.2014 recommended setting up of additional 6 
Plastic Parks with GoI grant of Rs.240 crore, to be implemented during 12th and 13th 
plan periods.  The approval of the competent authority has also been obtained." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
16.  The Committee noted that Plastic Parks were designed to synergize and 
consolidate the capacities of the highly fragmented Indian plastics industry through 

15 
 
 
cluster development. The Committee observed that there is a huge scope for growth 
in the sector as th e per capita consumption level of plastics in India is one of the 
lowest in the world. In view of the above, the Committee were of the opinion that 
establishment of Plastic Parks in each State in the country is very essential for 
augmenting production of p etrochemicals and also for reduction of its imports in the 
country. While strongly supporting the Department's plan to set up 10 Plastic Parks 
in the Country, the Committee recommended that the Department should prepare a 
road map to set up at least one Pl astic Park in all the States of the country.  In  its 
Action Taken Reply. the Department has  informed that the Standing Finance 
Committee (SFC) in its meeting held on 08.12.2014 had recommended the setting up 
of add itional six  Plastic Parks with the Government's grant of Rs.  240 cror e, to be 
implemented during 12 th  and 13 th  plan periods.  The approval of the competent 
authority for the same has also been obtained. In view of the foregoing, t he 
Committee hope that these additi onal six Plastic Parks would be set up in a time 
bound manner. However, the Committee are anguished to note that the  Department 
is silent  on the recommendation of the Committee for preparing a road map to set up 
at least one Plastic Park in each State of  the Country. The Committee , therefore, 
strongly reiterate its   recommendation regarding the  need to set up at least one 
Plastic Park in each State of the Country  and desire that a road map for the same be 
prepared for expeditious growth and development of Indian Plastics Industry . The 
Committee expect the Departme nt to apprise them of the initiatives undertaken and 
progress made in this regard.  
  

16 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
  
 The Committee note with concern that import of major chemicals and 
petrochemicals has been continuously increasing at the rate of 20 per cent from 2009 -
2013 due to gap between production and consumption i n the country. While the value 
of import of major chemicals & petrochemicals was pegged at Rs. 202347 crore and its 
share in the total imports was 7.6% during 2012 -13, the same rose to Rs. 234258 
crore contributing 8.6% to the total imports during 2013 -14. During the course of 
evidence, the Committee were informed that there is a shortage of feedstock like gas 
and petrol for petrochemicals companies in the country and therefore, these 
companies have to import the feedstock which leads to increase in cost an d other 
associated problems. The Committee were also informed that in order to address the 
shortage of feedstock for the petrochemicals companies, the Government has 
conceptualized to set up Reverse SEZs in foreign countries primarily in oil rich 
countries like Iran and Myanmar where the processing plants will be set up and then 
the finished products will be imported to India at cheaper rates. In this context, initial 
discussions, exchange of ideas, concept building and cooperation with these countries 
have already been initiated by the Government. It was also informed that the efforts 
are being made to promote manufacturing of specialty chemicals which are small 
volume chemicals but high priced and performance chemicals. These chemicals are not 
used directly but they act as catalysts and change the performance of the chemicals. 
Most of these chemicals are produced in the West. The Committee are of the view that 
the chemicals and petrochemicals sector is a major segment of manufacturing industry 
and plays a p ivotal role in various downstream industries and therefore, the 
Government should map out strategies for the growth of this sector reducing thereby 
the country’s dependence upon foreign imports of chemicals and petrochemicals, 
boosting employment and reduc tion in expenditure of valuable foreign exchange. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make concerted and 
coordinated efforts to expedite the process of consultation with all concerned with a 
view to set up Reverse SEZs safeguardi ng the interests of Indian workers and 
investments in these countries. The Department should also formulate action plan to 
produce specialty chemicals The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives 
taken by the Department in this regard.  
 

17 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Specialty chemical segment is declared as a thrust area.   This segment with an 
estimated size of US$ 23 billion and a share of 16% of the Indian chemical industry 
constitutes one of the largest sectors.  This is a niche and sunrise sector, and to promote 
this segment, the following measures are envisaged:- 
·         Special zones are proposed to be demarcated in the PCPIRs to take care of 
feedstock like Ethylene Oxide  to this segment. 
·         Government proposes to set up reverse SEZs  in Oil, rich countries for 
providing feedstock to chemical sector. 
·         National Chemical Policy is being evolved which emphasizes the setting up 
of chemical clusters, building enabling infrastructure, facilitating fast track 
project clearances, Rese arch& Development, green chemistry, technology up -
gradation to enhance the competitive edge of this segment, as specialty 
chemicals are knowledge based chemicals.   
 
The Department has taken up with the stake holding Ministries i.e. Ministry of 
External Af fairs, Deptt. of Economic Affairs, M/o Commerce, M/o Petroleum and 
Natural Gas and Deptt. of Fertilizers to send their comments on formation of Reverse 
SEZs in raw material rich countries like Iran and Myanmar to ensure cheap and 
sustainable supply of feed stock / building blocks/  intermediates for the chemical and 
petrochemical industries in India, specially in the PCPIRs. As part of the consultation 
process, a meeting was held with the respective Ministries and FICCI. FICCI, one of the 
industry representa tives and played important role in these interactions, has been 
requested to provide information of companies interested to invest in such Reverse 
SEZs through Joint Ventures and identify the chemical/ petrochemical feedstocks / 
building blocks for the pur pose. Final decisions in the matter will be taken only after 
examination of policy regimes investment, guarantees provided by the Government to 
Indian investors / promoters, pricing policies on long -term supply of Crude Oil / 
Natural Gas, export-import and setting up of industrial zones in the countries identified. 
In case of Iran, the interactions have been held with Ambassador of India in Iran and 
Secretary, Deptt. of Chemicals and Petrochemicals to facilitate discussions / 
interactions with Government Agencies / Companies in Iran about the possibilities and 
modalities to develop Reverse SEZs model through collaboration / joint ventures. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 23003 (1)/2014-FinI Vol. III dated 17.3.2015] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 3 

18 
 
 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that funds allocated to certain schemes 
of the Department have not been fully utilized during the preceding year 2013 -14. As 
for example, HOCL failed to utilize its allocated amount of Rs. 8.04 crore totally. In this 
regard, the Department has explained that Rs. 8.04 crore could not be released as they 
could not get any approval from Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. 
Similarly, out of Rs. 3.00 crore allocated to CPDS during 2013 -14 at RE stage, Rs. 0.14 
crore could not be utilized due to non -receipt of approval of Department of 
Expenditure to the proposal of the Department for grant of assistance to FICCI for 
organising “India Chem Gujarat 2013” . Again, out of Rs. 1.50 crore meant for CWC for 
2013-14, Rs. 0.5 4 crore could not be spent on several awareness programmes which 
could not be implemented during the year. The Committee are not convinced with the 
grounds/reasons given by the Department for underutilisation of funds allocated 
during the year 2013 -14. The  situation highlights the poor financial and physical 
performance of the Department which may have adversely affected the programmes of 
the Department in achieving some of its planned targets during the year. The Budget 
Estimate (BE) for 2014 -15 is Rs. 207  crore which includes Rs. 15 crore for HIL, Rs. 
20.50 crore for HFL and Rs. 102.98 crore for CIPET. The Committee expect the 
Department to formulate plans well in advance to utilize fully the funds allocated for 
2014-15 for various schemes. The Committee r ecommend that the Department should 
work in close co -ordination with all concerned so as to ensure optimum and timely 
utilization of allocated funds to achieve the laid down financial and physical targets. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the ini tiatives undertaken by the 
Department in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
The initiatives taken by the Department for timely optimum utilization of fund 
allocated under CPDS are as under: 
i. A meeting was convened with premier Industry Associations to fi nalize an 
action plan/calendar of programmes/events, that are proposed to be 
organized during the financial year, with details of their schedules, 
themes, requirement of grants etc . 
ii. On the request of the Department, Industry Associations have agreed to 
organize  on behalf of the Department , various workshops/Seminars  on 
sensitizing the industry about their obligations under Rotterdam and 
Stockholm Convention, creating awareness on Health, Safety and Security 

19 
 
 
and Environment issues, Safety and security ra ting system, Green 
chemistry  etc. 
iii. Study programmes  (i)  study to identify the impediments  to the Industry 
with respect to specialty chemicals and dyestuff chemicals and (2) study 
about the status of implementation of Health, Safety, Security and 
Environment in MSME sector have been planned to be undertaken 
through M/s Projects Development India Ltd; (PDIL) by utilizing the CPDS 
fund. 
iv. Grant-in-aid would defray from CPDS for  organization of events such as 
India Chem ,2014, Advancements in Polymeric Materi als (APM) -2015, 
Cheminar -2014, Annual India Chemical Industry Outlook Conference, 
CORCON-2014 , Asian Oceanic Conference on Green and sustainable 
chemistry  etc 
v. It is also proposed to release Grant -in-aid to Industry Associations for 
conducting programme on Green Chemistry at various places , awareness 
programme about positive attributes of Plastic during 2014 -15, workshop 
on polymer processing, campaign for the promotion of chemical industry 
(whole year campaign programme), programme on ”Innovative 
experiments in Chemistry” in school and colleges for the year 2014 -15, 
National conference on “Waste to Health: The action Agenda”, Conference 
on shaking growth of petrochemicals in India, Training/workshop on safe 
handling of Chlorine and chlorine containers at various places, etc.  
 
This is aimed to ensure planned and proper utilization of the fund 
allocation under CPDS. 
 
Chemical Weapons Convention 
 
India is one of the signatories to the Chemical Weapons Convention. An amount 
of Rs. 1.20 crore  has been allocated in 2014 -15 under CWC head of account. The fund 
under this head of account is utilized for conducting CWC awareness programmes and 
continuation of CWC Help Desks set up in PPP mode in association with Indian 
Chemical Council at Vadodara,  Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Delhi. The 
activities undertaken by using the fund are dissemination of information on CWC, 
assisting the Indian Chemical industry in filing of their declarations as stipulated in the 
CWC Act, conducting awareness p rogrammes etc. In order to help the Indian Chemical 
industry to file error free declarations, more awareness programmes have been 
decided to be organized during the current financial year 2014-15.   

20 
 
 
    
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 23003 (1)/2014-FinI Vol. III dated 17.3.2015] 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
The Committee note that Central Institute of Plastic Engineering and 
Technology (CIPET) , apart from conducting academic programmes in various  areas of 
polymer technology, also renders technology support services to the plastics and allied 
industries viz. design, tooling, plastic processing & testing, inspection, quality control, 
etc. The Non Plan support to CIPET was discontinued from 2007 - 08 as it has be en 
managing its day to day functioning from the revenue generated through internal 
resources since then and does not depend on Government of India for those 
expenditures. CIPET caters to Academic, Technology Support and Research (ATR) 
activities through it s 23 Centres across the country for the growth of polymer and 
allied industries in the country. Every year, CIPET trains around 40,000 students 
through long term professional and short term skill development programme. With 
anticipated growth rate of 8 to 10% in the plastics processing machinery, there is an 
increased requirement of skilled manpower to operate these machineries and lead the 
industrial growth. In order to meet the manpower requirements of ever growing 
polymer and allied industries, CIPET has  been increasing the infrastructure 
capabilities to augment its intake capacity. The Department also plans to expand 
CIPET centre - one in Hyderabad by way of high learning centre and vocational 
training centre and another vocational training centre in Vij ayawada. The Department 
through CIPET is also conducting various awareness programmes on positive 
attributes of plastic/recyclable properties of plastics along with various technological 
options for recycling of waste plastics. The Committee appreciate the  good work being 
done by the CIPET to generate industry responsive skilled manpower and technical 
support services for all the plastic manufacturing industries etc. As a result thereof, the 
Committee hope that India will be able to face the challenges pose d by imports of 
plastic products including from China. The Committee also expect that the Department 
in coordination with CIPET will continue to conduct its awareness programmes on 
positive attributes of plastic and recycling of plastic waste to check its adverse impact 
on environment. Keeping in view the increased requirement of skilled man power for 
the growth of petrochemical sector, it is imperative for CIPET to expand its centres 
which may be set up near planned plastic parks and PCPIRs. The Committee would like 
CIPET to prepare an action plan for the purpose. The proposed CIPET centres 
including one in Hyderabad and the other in Vijayawada will also be set up with in a 

21 
 
 
fixed time frame without any delay in order to cater the needs of petrochemical 
industries of the region. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
programme of the Department in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  The Department of Chemicals &  Petrochemicals welcome the appreciation of 
the committee on the good work being done by the CIPET to impart skill development 
training programme and provide technical support services to plastic sector. The 
Department also welcome the recommendation of th e committee on requirement of 
expansion of CIPET centres and activities.  The establishment of four PCPIRs 
(Petroleum, Chemicals & Petrochemicals Investment Regions) at Andhra Pradesh, 
Odisha, Gujarat and Tamil  Nadu is underway.  The dedicated plastic park s are also set 
up, within PCPIR and outside, to promote a cluster approach for development of 
downstream plastic processing industries.  These industries would require skilled 
manpower in plastic technology.  In this direction, CIPET is providing required 
facilities through its centres near plastic parks and PCPIRs i.e. Bhubaneshwar  & 
Balasore for PCPIR & Plastic Park in Odisha, Chennai & Madurai for PCPIR in 
Tamilnadu, Ahmedabad for PCPIR in Gujarat and Hyderabad for PCPIR in Andhra 
Pradesh. The Department , in addition to proposed establishment of CIPET Vocational 
Training Centres (VTCs) at Hyderabad and Vi jaywada, has also proposed to establish 
VTCs at Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh), Baddi (Himachal Pradesh) and Dharampur 
(Gujarat) to meet the manpower requiremen ts of plastics industries, with reference to 
setting up of PCPIRs and plastic parks.  The Department has firmed up the requisite 
proposal for proposed plan funding for setting up of these centres in the next two 
years. The establishment of these centres is  very significant for CIPET in terms of its 
mandate to fulfill the skill requirements of the growing plastic industry in the country, 
especially its specific commitment to train over 6 lakh persons as part of the Prime 
Minister’s National Skill Development initiative providing specialized education across 
the spectrum of polymer science & technology from the diploma to the PhD levels.   
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 23003 (1)/2014-FinI Vol. III dated 17.3.2015] 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
The Committee note with great concern that despite of revival efforts of 
Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited (HOCL) in 2008, the Company is making losses 
over the past few years. The major reasons elaborated by the Department for the poor 
financial conditi on of HOCL are the uneconomic small capacity of its plants, obsolete 

22 
 
 
technology, excess manpower and dumping of its main products by foreign countries. 
The Company was referred to BIFR on 27 November 2013 due to total erosion of the 
net-worth. M/s FACT Eng ineering & Design Organisation (FEDO) has been engaged to 
conduct a revival study and they have submitted a report to HOCL and action will be 
taken as decided by the Government on the FEDO study. The Committee were 
informed that in order to put HOCL back o n a sustained growth path, the possibility of 
utilization of vacant land available at Rasayani is being explored through various 
options like leasing out to other government companies, merger and /or joint venture 
etc. Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilisers ( RCF), Narmada Fertilisers Plant in Gujarat 
and Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) have shown their interest to invest 
money. In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that FEDO study report on 
HOCL may be examined in detail and action to revive the Company may be taken at the 
earliest. The Department may also explore the possibility of utilization of vacant land 
available at Rasayani particularly to put HOCL on sustained growth path. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives under taken by the Departme nt 
and the progress made therein. 
Similarly, Hindustan Fluorocarbon Ltd (HFL) which is a subsidiary of HOCL and 
engaged in the manufacture of Poly Tetra Fluoro Ethylene (PTFE) has also been 
incurring losses due to low sales reali zation, high material cost, high interest, 
depreciation burden and uneconomical plant size. Consequent upon the complete 
erosion of net worth, HFL was declared a sick industrial company. As part of the 
revival plan, the Department has released an amount of  Rs.3.60 crore for Modified 
Poly Tetra Fluoro Ethylene (M-PTFE) this year and action for release of Rs. 13.20 crore 
for various refurbishment schemes and new activities has been under progress. The 
Department has informed that the company is expected to st art making profits after 
implementation of the above Plan projects. In this regard, the Committee are of the 
view that the revival of HFL Plant at Rudraram in erstwhile Medak district of Andhra 
Pradesh (and now in Telangana state) is very crucial for the p eople of Telangana State 
and it will go a long way in building the industrial base for the new State of Telangana. 
Hence, revival plan needs to be expedited on a priority basis. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should pay special att ention and expedite 
the revival plan of HFL. The Committee expect from the Department to work out the 
concrete strategy for turnaround of the HOCL and HFL in right earnest and to ensure 
that these companies achieve breakeven at the earliest. The Committee desire to be 
apprised of initiatives taken by the Department and the progress made in this regard.  

23 
 
 
The Committee were informed that Hindustan Insecticides Ltd (HIL) was 
allocated Rs. 14 crore for investment in enhancing the capacity of existing Mancozeb 
Plant at Udyogmandal. The Committee note that the construction of Mancozeb Plant is 
under progress. The mechanical work of the Plant is nearing completion and the 
production is likely to start by March, 2015. HIL has also taken initiatives to develop a 
new product to be used as Indoor Residual Spray, as an alternative to DDT, which is 
expected to be a major breakthrough in vector control. The Committee consider these 
two major projects to be of huge importance not only for the growth of the Company 
but also for the country at large. Therefore, the Committee recommend that every 
efforts may be made to ensure that Mancozeb Plant is completed within the stipulated 
time. The Committee also recommend that the initiatives taken by HIL for developing 
Indoor Residual Spray may also be taken to its logical conclusion and vigorous efforts 
may be made to establish a pilot plant for the purpose. The Committee may be 
intimated about progress made in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
HOCL: 
 
HOCL has been making efforts  to reduce the cost of production and generate 
revenue. At Rasayani, retrofitting of Nitric Acid plant, where di -nitrogen tetra -oxide 
(N2O4) is produced, has been completed. Disposal of the Non - Performing Assets 
(NPAs) has been undertaken to generate fund s. Similarly, at Kochi unit, burner and 
other accessories in boiler, hot oil unit, etc.  have been modified to suit Low Sulphur 
Furnace Oil (LSFO) and Re -Liquefied Natural Gas (RLNG), i.e. dual fired, which will 
bring down the cost of production of Phenol and Acetone. The debottlenecking of 
Hydrogen Peroxide plant has also been completed. Further, in order to put HOCL back 
on a sustained growth path, the possibility of utilization of vacant land available at 
Rasayani is being explored through various option s like leasing out to other 
government companies, merger and/ or joint venture etc.  A proposal received from 
M/s Container Corporation of India Ltd. regarding leasing of 60 acres land at upfront 
premium of Rs. 72 crore at HOCL premises in Rasayani for development of Multi Modal 
Logistic Park (MMLP) has been under consideration of the Department and has been 
sent to Department of Legal Affairs for advice.  
The company has appointed a consultant M/s FEDO (FACT Engineering and 
Design Organization) for conduct ing a revival study. The consultants have submitted 
their draft report which is under consideration for approval. It is mentioned that a 
meeting on FEDO Report and issues relating to HOCL, was taken by the Hon’ble 

24 
 
 
Minister for Chemicals & Fertilizers on 18 th September 2014 in which a presentation 
was made by FACT Engineering and Design Organization (FEDO).   
HFL: 
As part of revival of HFL, the company has undertaken the development of 
specialized PTFE, i.e.  modified PTFE, and a plan loan of Rs. 3.60 crore  has been 
provided for this purpose by the Department to the company  which plans to 
manufacture this product in the existing set up with some modifications. At present, 
the modified PTFE is being imported, but it has wide market potential owing to its 
versatile applications.   
Further, the company has plans to take up the following projects: 
 
A plan loan of Rs. 13.20 crore has already been provided for refurbishment and 
HFP and FEP related projects by the Department to the company  for implementing its 
schemes. These will help HFL to turn around and earn profits in the near future.  
 
HIL: 
  The updated status of the HIL projects are as follows:- 
 Mancozeb Expansion Project. 
The mechanical and electrical commissioning is expected to be completed by 
March, 2015 and most items of the equipment have been procured. The trial run is 
expected to start from April, 2015. 
DDT Alternative Project 
 
 Institute of Chemical Technology (ICT), after detailed research, has isolated a 
lab scale product which has been tested for its efficacy and the results are found to be 
encouraging. Now, work is going on establish ing the best sample and also its stability 
on shelf. After obtaining the desired stability, the other chemical properties will be 
A Refurbishment Plans 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Refrigeration System 
Furnace with Pyrolysis Coil 
Fluid Energy Grinding Mill 
TFE Compressor and Vacuum/Jet pump 
CFM Compressor & Air Compressor 
Instrumentation 
 
B 
 
New Schemes/Projects 
1 
 
 
2 
3 
Hexafluoro propene (HFP) and Fluorinated Ethylene Propylene 
(FEP) related investments 
New Reactor Set 
Debottlenecking of the Monomer Plant 
Pilot Plant for Product Development 

25 
 
 
determined and final route for synthesis shall be finalized for pilot scale. Once the 
product meets various requirements of Central Insecticides Board, registration activity 
will be initiated. This will run parallel to scaling up activities. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 23003 (1)/2014-FinI Vol. III dated 17.3.2015] 
  
Recommendation No. 6 
The Committee regret to note that the Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP) has 
not yet been commissioned. It was conceptualized in pursuance of Memorandum of 
Settlement signed between Central Government, All Assam Students Union and All 
Assam GanaParishad on 15 August 1985. The initial cost of the project was Rs.5460.61 
crore. A joint venture company namely Brah maputra Cracker & Polymer Limited 
(BCPL) is implementing the project. The revised cost estimate of the project is Rs.8920 
crore. Th e pre -commissioning activities in several units are in progress. The project 
will lead to setting up of plastic processing units in the neighbouring areas. 
Consequently, substantial employment is envisaged to be generated on its completion. 
The Committee w ere informed that the mechanical completion of the project is likely 
to be completed by end of November, 2014 and pre -commission and commission 
activities have already started. It was schedule to commission in September 2014 
which has now been further revi sed to June 2015. The Committee note with concern 
that the per capita consumption of plastic in North East is only two kilograms while for 
the rest of India, it is 10 kilograms. Thus, there is a huge scope for development of 
plastic parks in the North East ern States and the Department is chalking out a 
programme to push it. A proposal has also been made to the Assam Government to set 
up a plastic park at Guwahati apart from the one proposed at Tinsukia to make use of 
the huge quantum of feedstock produced b y AGCP. The Department also plans to 
advocate plastic parks in the nearby north -eastern states to set up their own plastic 
parks for which feed stocks could be conveniently supplied by AGCP. Further, the 
Department proposes to involve CIPET to train the lo cal people in plastics-related skill 
development programmes so that they may be able to get suitable placement in AGCP 
and other related industries.  
In view of the foregoing, the Committee now hope that the timelines for 
completion of the project will be strictly adhered to without any further delay so as to 
achieve the mechanical completion of the project by November 2014 and its 
commissioning by June 2015 and recommend that the Department should make 
vigorous efforts in coordination with all concerned in cluding DONER to set up plastic 
parks in North East States and organize skill development programme for the local 

26 
 
 
public to enable them to get employed by major industries. The Committee also 
recommend that the Department should also organize awareness pro grammes 
simultaneously extensively so that the local people are aware of the opportunities 
available for them for training and to get employment in this sector. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  The department shares the concern of the Committee  regarding delay in 
commissioning of the AGCP. All efforts are being made for achieving commissioning by 
June, 2015. Pre-commissioning and commissioning activities are presently in progress. 
The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) has approved  setting up of 
Plastic Park at Tinsukia district, Assam on an area of 173 acres of land.  The Plastic 
Park is being developed by Assam Industrial Development Corporation (AIDC), for 
which the Department has released the first installment of Rs.8 crore of G rant in Aid in 
2013-14.  The park is expected to generate total employment of 16, 471 which 
includes a direct employment of 6, 806 and an indirect employment of 9,665. The 
construction of boundary wall, internal roads and electrification of the proposed Pa rk 
has been completed and site infrastructure development works are being initiated. 
Further, with a view to develop downstream plastic processing industries in Assam 
and NER, BCPL along with GAIL (the main promoter of BCPL and marketer of BCPL 
products) h ave conducted several awareness workshops across Assam. BCPL is also 
planning to organize two more awareness workshops in Guwahati and Imphal. CIPET, 
NEDFI, Industrial Department (GoA) have been involved in all awareness workshops 
and related programmes. I n addition, industrial visit of entrepreneurs have been 
arranged by BCPL in association with GAIL to Kanpur and GAIL Polymer Technology 
Center, Noida for technical upgradation. 671 nos. of new entrepreneurs have been 
approached for setting up downstream pl astic processing industries in North Eastern 
region.  CIPET has been entrusted by DCPC with the mandate to fulfill the skill 
requirements of the plastic industry in the country.  CIPET has two training centres in 
North Eastern region, at Guwahati and Impha l, which offer short and long duration 
courses including job oriented operator level training programme in the areas of 
plastic processing etc..  The facilities and expertise of these centres are utilized by NE 
states to meet the trained skilled manpower r equirement of the plastic and allied 
industry.   
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 23003 (1)/2014-FinI Vol. III dated 17.3.2015] 
  

27 
 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
The Committee note that the concept of Petroleum, Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs) is a cluster approach to promote the 
Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical sectors in an integrated and environmental 
friendly manner, on a large sca le. The PCPIR policy was formulated in April 2007 to 
give a boost to this sector. At present, PCPIR projects are being set up in four States of 
Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and Odisha and Tamil Nadu. All these PCPIRs except Tamil 
Nadu, have made some progress. As for Tamil Nadu PCPIR, the Department has signed 
Memorandum of Agreement with Government of Tamil Nadu in February 2014 and it 
has yet to make any significant progress. The Department has also constituted a 
Steering Committee for each of the PCPIRs excep t Tamil Nadu to monitor the 
implementation progress. This would help in expediting the implementation of various 
projects in the PCPIRs. The Committee also note that these PCPIRs were envisioned to 
give boost to petrochemical industries, add productivity a nd decrease India’s 
dependence on import of petrochemical feedstock and to develop the region 
holistically in an environmentally manner as well as to provide huge employment 
opportunities particularly to the local people. Keeping in view the benefits which  
would accrue to the economy and the local region as result of PCPIRs projects, the 
Committee recommend that , the Department being the nodal authority should make 
vigorous and coordinated efforts to expedite the execution of PCPIR projects being set 
up in aforesaid four States. The Committee hope that as a result of PCPIRs projects, a 
large number of people of the area will be benefited in terms of employment and the 
economy of the country would get a tremendous boost. The Committee expect from 
the Departm ent to regularly monitor the progress of each of these projects. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this 
regard.  
Reply of the Government 
  As per the existing PCPIR Policy 2007, Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals, Government of India is coordinating with the Central Ministries / 
Departments concerned, State Governments and Anchor Tenants to implement 
PCPIRs. Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is also monitoring 
environmental clearances, developm ent of external physical infrastructure, which 
includes road, rail, ports, airports etc. and preparation of Viability Gap Funding (VGF) 
proposals for infrastructure projects by the State Governments concerned. 
  The Department has noted the recommendations of the Committee to regularly 
monitor the progress of each of the PCPIR projects. In order to expedite 

28 
 
 
implementation of these projects to achieve the objectives of boosting petrochemical 
industries, promote inv estment and generate employment, Minister, Chemicals and 
Fertilizers reviewed progress of PCPIRs on 10 th July, 2014. Detailed review of Odisha 
PCPIR was undertaken by the Minister, C&F on 26 th November, 2014. Meeting of the 
Steering Committee chaired by Secretary, C&PC and comprising members of Ministries 
/ Departments, State Governments concerned will be held on 24 th February, 2015. 
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (IOCL), the Anchor Tenant of Odisha PCPIR, has informed 
that its refinery project at Paradeep PCP IR is scheduled for commissioning by June 
2015. Industrial Development Corporation Odisha (IDCO) has started discussions with 
EPTRI, Hyderabad and National Institute of Oceanography, Goa for preparation of 
Terms of Reference for Environment Impact Assessment of the PCPIR region. 
 [Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
 OM No. 23003 (1)/2014-FinI Vol. III dated 17.3.2015] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
The Committee note that the primary objective for development or 
construction of any project like PCPIR is to create employment opportunities to the 
local people particularly those who have been displaced/affected by the project and 
whose land has been acquired for the project. However, it has come to the notice of the 
Committee that only 30 -40 per cent of the people are being employed from the local 
market and the rest are outsiders. According to the Department, certain projects like 
the PCPIR project in O disha, the first preference for the job is given to the local people 
and outsiders are employed only in cases where local people are not available for 
certain specialized areas in construction or if they do not have adequate skill for the 
job. The Committe e are of the view that since the local people have sacrificed their 
land for construction of industrial projects, the benefits in terms of employment ought 
to be given first to the local people to the extent possible and in case they do not have 
adequate s kill then it is obligatory on the part of the Government/Company to train 
and engage them for the job in their project. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the  Department and concerned PSUs, as well as anchor tenants in projects like 
PCPIRs should mak e it a policy to give first preference to the local people for 
employment at their project site. The Committee also recommend that the Department 
should take the initiative in coordination with all stakeholders to undertake skill 
development programmes to train local people for their employment in the industrial 

29 
 
 
projects set up/being set up in the area. Such Skill development programmes should 
be made an essential component to the project itself. The Department should 
undertake regular visits to PCPIRs, to monitor the skill development programmes and 
also to address the problems of the local people of the regions. While undertaking such 
visits, the Committee and the Members of Parliament of the area should also be 
invariably kept informed. The Committee woul d like to be apprised of the initiatives 
being taken by the Department in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  The Department has conveyed the recommendation of the Committee to the 
State Governments concerned and PSUs working as Anchor Tenants for the  respective 
PCPIRs for necessary action to the extent possible to give preference to the local 
people for empl oyment at their project site vis -a-vis keeping the provisions of Indian 
Constitution into consideration. In order to meet the requirement of plast ics and allied 
industries and create employment, Department is promoting skill development 
through Long -term and Short -term Skill Development Programmes, which include 
Diploma and Vocational Training to unemployed / semi-employed youth to make them 
employable in the industries in public / private sector. In the PCPIR States, the Central 
Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology (CIPET) provides skill development 
training through CIPET Centres at Bhubaneswar and Balasore (Odisha), Chennai and 
Madurai (Tamil Nadu), Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh) and Ahmedabad (Gujarat). The 
Skill Development Training programmes are conducted in a number of processing 
streams which include Injection Moulding, Blow Moulding, Tool -Room, Plastic 
Processing etc. Secretary, Deptt .of C&PC visited Paradeep PCPIR on 24.12.2014 and 
reviewed the progress of the project.  
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 23003 (1)/2014-FinI Vol. III dated 17.3.2015] 
  
Recommendation No. 10 
The Committee regret to note that various relief and rehabilitation measures 
initiated immediately after the Bhopal Gas Leak disaster in the intervening night of 
2nd/3rd December,1984, are still continuing. The Office of the Welfare Commissioner 
awarded/disbursed Rs. 1548.59 crore as compensation, out of money provided by 
Union Carbide Corporation, USA, in settled cases of 5,74,386 claimants belonging to 
the categories of death, permanent disability, temporary disability, injury of utmost 
severity cases, mi nor injury, loss of property/PSU and loss of livestock. The Supreme 

30 
 
 
Court in its order dated 26th October, 2004 approved further payment of pro -rata 
compensation to the Bhopal Gas Victims whose cases had earlier been settled. In 
compliance, pro-rata compensation was awarded to 5,62,959 claimants with payment 
of a sum of Rs. 1511.379 crore made till 31.07.2014. An application moved by the 
Welfare Commissioner to treat the remaining 11,427 cases of absentee claimants as 
closed is pending decision in the Supre me Court. As per the decision of the Cabinet in 
June, 2010, disbursal of ex -gratia of Rs. 874.28 crore to the Gas victims was 
commenced by the Office of the Welfare Commissioner on 19.12.2010. That was for 
the specific cases where people had suffered speci fic injuries – heart diseases, kidney 
diseases, permanent disabilities and temporary disabilities. Out of that amount, a sum 
of Rs.742 crore has already been disbursed and the balance amount of Rs.130 crore is 
pending. In view of the foregoing, the Committ ee hope that all genuine claims of the 
victims of the gas leak disaster for the compensation may have been settled and every 
efforts may have been made to trace the genuine claimant before approaching the 
Apex Court to write off those cases which are untra ceable. Apart from financial 
assistance granted to the gas victims, the Committee would like to know the various 
rehabilitation measures undertaken by the Government in coordination with State 
Government for gas victims. The Committee would like to know th e progress of the 
pending case before the Apex Court.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Compensation:-  
Office of the Welfare Commissioner, Bhopal awarded/disbursed Rs. 1548.59 
crore as compensation in decided cases of 5,74,386 claimants belonging to the 
categories of death, permanent disability, temporary disability, injury of utmost 
severity, minor injury , loss of property/PSU and loss of livestock. The Supreme Court 
in an order da ted 26 th October, 2004, had directed payment of the unspent 
compensation amount, on pro -rata basis (1:1) , to those gas victims whose original 
claims had been settled. An amount of Rs. 1511.48 crore has been paid in 5,62,970 
cases till 31/12/2014.  
The substantial part of disbursement of pro -rata compensation had completed 
by the beginning of 2006 and appearance of claimants in the pending cases had 
declined. The Registrar, O/o WC filed an application (I.A. Nos. 56 -57/2006) on behalf 
of the Welfare C ommissioner (WC) in the Supreme Court in 2006 seeking permission 
of the Apex Court to allow the WC to close all the remaining claim cases for all times to 
come, as the said claimants, even after publication of notices in the newspapers in 
addition to notices sent on their last known address, had failed to appear by 30.4.2006. 

31 
 
 
The Supreme Court heard the matter on 23.8.2006 and directed the Welfare 
Commissioner to provide the list of absentee claimants (numbering 18,983 at that 
time) to local NGOs, who would  make efforts to trace those persons. The said list was 
given to the NGOs. 
As reported by the Office of the Welfare Commissioner, Bhopal that for the 
period ending December, 2014, a total number of 11,416 claimants (Originally  
awarded/disbursed cases 5,74 ,386 – pro-rata compensation paid cases   5,62,970(till 
31/12/2014) did not turn up to the designated courts for receiving pro -rata 
compensation. Every possible effort has been made to trace the genuine claimants or 
their legal heirs by sending them severa l notices at their address, as well as through 
NGOs, print and electronic media but remained futile. As considerable period has 
elapsed, to afford a last opportunity,  final notification containing  names along with 
details of claims, wards etc., is being published in local daily newspaper, People’s 
Samachar, since 17.12.2014 onwards regularly. On completion of publication of these 
lists, the outcome will be observed for a period of one month. Thereafter, the proposal 
for closing of pro-rata Compensation will be pursued before the Supreme Court.  
Various rehabilitation measures undertaken for gas victims. 
 
The Central Government had provided financial assistance to the extent of Rs. 
102 crore over a period of 4 years from 1985 for rehabilitation work. Subseq uently, 
the Government approved an Action Plan with an outlay of Rs. 258 crore, for medical, 
economic, social and environmental rehabilitation of the gas victims. The outlay was to 
be shared between the Central Government and State Government of Madhya Pra desh 
(GoMP) in the ratio of 75:25. The Action Plan was implemented from 1990 to 1999.  
The major component of the Action Plan was medical rehabilitation which 
included establishment of six full -fledged Gas Relief hospitals, 9 Day Care Units and 3 
Ayurvedic, 3 Homeopathic and 3 Unani Dispensaries for free treatment of gas victims. 
Under Social Rehabilitation, measures included pension to the widows of gas victims 
and construction of 2486 houses for family members of deceased gas victims. Under 
Economic Rehab ilitation, an Industrial Training Institute was set up for providing 
vocational training to gas affected children. Further, schemes were implemented for 
providing training, skill up gradation to the gas victims in various fields of traditional 
crafts such as tailoring, embroidery, zari -zardosi.  Under Environmental 
Rehabilitation, activities such as plantation of trees, development of green belts were 
undertaken. 
Further, Rs.14.18 crore was provided by Government of India under Jawaharlal 
Nehru National Urb an Renewal Mission (JNNURM), in April, 2006 for supply of piped 

32 
 
 
drinking water to 14 localities around UCIL plant site where the ground water is not 
potable. 
On directions of the Supreme Court, a Specialty Hospital named Bhopal 
Memorial Hospital and Resear ch Centre (BMHRC) was established at Bhopal with 
money provided by Union Carbide Company, for free treatment of gas victims. The 
Hospital with super specialty facilities in 12 disciplines started functioning in July, 
2000. The administration of the hospita l was taken over by the Government of India 
from a private trust in 2010 and at present it is being managed by Department of 
Health Research.  
New Plan of Action-  
Based on another Plan of Action for taking up further rehabilitation measures 
for Bhopal Gas  Victims submitted by the Government of M.P. in 2008, Govt. of India 
sanctioned a plan with an outlay of Rs. 272.75 crore on 75:25 basis to the State 
Government for medical, economic and social rehabilitation, and also provision for 
safe drinking water. An  amount of Rs. 204.56 crore, comprising the grant component 
of Additional Central Assistance, was sanctioned on 08.07.2010.  
Govt. M.P. is in the process of implementation of various rehabilitation schemes 
as approved in the New Plan of Action. The State G overnment has apprised that till 
November, 2014, an amount of Rs. 129.45crore has been spent / Administrative 
approvals issued, out of allocated sum of Rs. 272.75 crore.  
Some of the important schemes under the various sectors are given below:- 
Social Rehabilitation:- (i) An estimated 5000 Widows of Gas Victims are to be 
paid pension @ Rs. 1000 p.m. for a period of five years, for which Rs. 30 crore 
has been allocated. (ii) Construction of free houses for shifting the families of 
gas victims residing around  the UCIL factory, where the ground water is not 
potable, for which a sum of Rs. 40 crore was allocated. (iii) Construction and 
Renovation of 16 schools in gas affected area. (iv) Upgradation of sewage 
system in existing Gas Victims’ colony.  
Medical Rehabilitation:- (i) Construction of new buildings/ renovations of 
the existing  six Gas Relief Hospitals. (ii) Procurement of new equipments for 
these hospitals. 
Economic Rehabilitation:-  For ensuring employment to gas victims, an 
entrepreneurship training programme scheme with built -in employment 
opportunity undertaken by State Government . 21 Institutes selected for 
providing training in different trades to the gas victims, who are being trained 
in different fields and given placement.   

33 
 
 
 
Clean Drinking Water:- Rs. 50 crore allocated for implementing a scheme 
for providing clean drinking water to the gas victims.  Bhopal Municipal 
Corporation is implementing this scheme.  
ICMR:- Indian Council Medical Research (ICMR) had established a research 
center in Bho pal in 1984, and conducted epidemiological research and clinical 
studies. ICMR stopped its research work on 31.12.1994 and handed over the 
research center (Center for Rehabilitation Studies) to the Govt. of M.P. In 2010, 
the Government decided that ICMR ma y resume its research on gas victims by 
establishing a full -fledged Research Centre in Bhopal. Accordingly, ICMR has 
established its 31 st Research Center namely “National Institute for Research in 
Environmental Health (NIREH)” at Bhopal in October, 2010 fo r conducting 
research studies on the affected population in identified areas of health.  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 23003 (1)/2014-FinI Vol. III dated 17.3.2015] 
  
  

34 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT WANT TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
-- NIL-- 
  

35 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
  
-- NIL-- 
  

36 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
The Committee are distressed to note that chemical manufacturing companies 
are a major source of environment pollution. The hazardous wastes are reportedly 
being discharged by the factories without being treated, causing environment and 
water pollution in and around the complex of the factory adversely affecting the 
human health as well as aquatic life of the region. During the course of evidence, it 
was reported that industrial wastes are being pumped into Hussain  Sagar, a lake 
situated at the heart of Hyd erabad city, polluting the lake and causing skin disease to 
the nearby residents, etc. The issue is assuming critical dimensions leading to soil 
degradation, water pollution, coastal pollution adversely affecting pisciculture and 
aquaculture and the liveli hood of fishermen community, etc. The Committee also 
firmly believe that economic growth cannot be sustained without taking care of the 
environment. During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the Department was 
candid enough to accept the fact that aw areness about environment and 
environment compatibility is very poor in India. The toxic and hazardous wastes 
discharged by the chemical factories are contaminating our water bodies and turning 
our soil into barren land. According to him, though the regula tory power enforcing 
environment compatibility norms rests with the Ministry of Environment and Forest 
and only they have the authority to issue orders and punish the culprits, however, 
the Department will come out with a Policy in this regard soon. In thi s regard, the 
Committee were also informed that a National Chemical Policy is being prepared by 
the Department on the issue which will be brought out very soon. After various 
rounds of consultations with all the stakeholders during the period from July 201 2 to 
December 2013, the updated version of draft policy have now been sent for Inter -
Ministerial consultation and the policy document is expected to be finalized soon. 
According to the Department, the Policy aims to make strategies for sustainable 
growth a nd development, increasing investments, ensuring feedstock availability, 
R&D promotion and that the emphasis has been on Green Chemistry, HRD, 
technology up -gradation, disaster management, safety in chemical plants, etc. The 
Committee are of the strong vie w that the Department cannot escape their 
responsibility on the issue and being the nodal authority, it is their primary duty to 
allow establishment of only those factories which are environmentally compatible. 
The Committee believe that the said policy wo uld address the various problems 

37 
 
 
afflicting the chemicals and petrochemicals sector in the country. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the process of consultation on the National Chemical 
Policy and finalization of the policy document incorporating b oth the growth of the 
sector and environmental sustainability may be expedited. The Committee also 
desire that the Department should take remedial measures in coordination with 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and with all concerned to ch eck 
pollution caused by the chemical factories. The Committee expect to be apprised of 
the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard.  
   
Reply of the Government 
Compliance with environment standards is imperative for the long -term viability of 
the chemical sector.   Central Pollution Control Board under Ministry of Environment 
and Forests and State Pollution Control Boards of different states are the regulatory 
authorities for monitoring implementation of water pollution and air emission 
standards for different sectors of the industry under relevant provisions of Water 
(Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act 1974 and Air (Prevention & Control of 
Pollution) Act 1981.   MoEF & CC is the nodal Ministry to enforce compliance with the 
above regulatory fra mework by the chemical units with respect to implementation of 
environment related measures. 
·         DCPC has formulated a draft National Chemical Policy which envisages the 
promotion of sustainable and green technologies.   Awareness workshops are 
conducted by the Department for implementation of Green Technologies in the 
industrial undertakings. 
·         The Department conducts workshops for adoption of different codes of 
Responsible Care for creating awareness about environment friendly and green  
technologies to control pollution. 
·         The Department is working on the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan to check pollution 
from industrial wastes. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 23003 (1)/2014-FinI Vol. III dated 17.3.2015] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation No. 9 
The Committee note that the Indian Plastics industry is large but highly 
fragmented with dominance of tiny, small and medium units and thus the Department 
has formulated setting up of Plastic Parks scheme with a view to synergize and 

38 
 
 
consolidate the capacities through cluster development. The scheme aims at setting up 
plastic parks with requisite state of the art infrastructure and enabling common 
facilities to assist the petrochemical sector to move the value chain and contribute to 
the economy more effect ively. The Department has approved four Plastic Parks, one 
each in Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Assam and Tamil Nadu and all the States have been 
advised to compress the timelines and aim to complete the Parks by mid 2016. 
According to the Department, the exist ing 12th Plan budgetary allocation for the 
scheme is insufficient even for the four proposals under implementation and the 
proposals from States like Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and Kerala are not being 
considered for the present. But the Department wo uld request Planning Commission 
during Mid-Term Appraisal to enhance the Plan allocation for Plastic Parks to Rs. 400 
crore to enable it to set up 10 Plastic Parks. During the course of evidence, the 
Committee were informed that while the per capita global consumption of Plastic is 30 
kg and that of USA is more than 100 kg, India’s consumption of Plastic is only 10 kg. 
The imports of petrochemical has been increasing at a growth rate of 20% which is 
primarily due to a huge gap between production and consump tion of petrochemicals 
in the country.  In view of the foregoing, the Committee are of the opinion that 
establishment of Plastic Parks in each State in the country is very essential for 
augmenting production of petrochemicals and also for reduction of its imports in the 
country. It is, therefore , imperative for the Department to make vigorous efforts to set 
up Plastic Parks in all the States of the country. Keeping this aspect in view, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should present a strong case before the 
Planning Commission during the Mid-Term Appraisal of the 12th Plan for allocation of 
sufficient funds to enable them to set up initially 10 Plastic Parks in the country. The 
Committee further recommend that the Department should prepare a road map to set 
up at least one Plastic Parks  in all the States of the country. The Committee hope that 
four plastic parks would be set up as per the time schedule by mid 2016with out any 
delay. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department 
in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
  The Department is pleased to inform that keeping in view aims of the scheme to 
create quality infrastructure and increase investment in the sector leading to 
enhanced capacity, production and employment, the Standing Finance Committee 
(SFC) in its meeting held on 08.12.2014 recommended setting up of additional 6 
Plastic Parks with GoI grant of Rs.240 crore, to be implemented during 12th and 13th 
plan periods.  The approval of the competent authority has also been obtained. 

39 
 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 23003 (1)/2014-FinI Vol. III dated 17.3.2015] 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                         (ANANDRAO ADSUL) 
14, July 2015                                            CHAIRPERSON 
23 Ashadha 1937 (SAKA)                                                           STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
                 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
  

40 
 
 
Appendix – I 
 
MINUTES 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2014-15) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 16 June, 2015 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Room 
No. 139, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Shri Anandrao Adsul  -    Chairperson 
 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Idris Ali 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Shankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
9. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
10. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
11. Dr. Krishan Pratap Singh 
12. Smt. Rekha Arim Verma 
13. Shri Innocent 
Rajya Sabha 
 
14. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
15. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
 
Secretariat 
  
1.  Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary  
2.  Shri U.B.S. Negi  - Director 
3.  Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee.  
 
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
 
 a) ******   ******   ******   ****** 
 
b) Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals); and 
 
 c) ******   ******   ******   ****** 
 
4. The draft Reports relating to the Department of Fertilizers, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals and Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals were adopted by the 
Committee without any amendment.   
 

41 
 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequent ial changes, if any, 
arising out of the factual verification of the Reports by the Department of Fertilizers, 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals and Department of Pharmaceuticals of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
6. The Committee then decided to hold its next meeting on 25th June, 2015 for briefing 
on the subject "  Functioning of National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
(NIPER)" by the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
________________________________________________ 
***** Matters not related to this Report. 
  

42 
 
 
 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
  
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDA TIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2014 -15) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2014 -2015)’ OF THE 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND 
PETROCHEMICALS).  
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 10 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 10)   
 
8 
Percentage of Total 80% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation  No. Nil)  
 
0 
Percentage of Total Nil 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. Nil)  
0 
Percentage of Total Nil 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are still awaited:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 2 and 9) 
 
2 
Percentage of Total 20% 
 