FIFTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS)
JAN AUSHADHI SCHEME
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in  the  Fourth Report  of the Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Jan Aushadhi
Scheme of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Department of Pharmaceuticals)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.11.2015
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 27.11.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2015/Kartika, 1937 ( Saka)


C.C.&F. No. 15
Price : R  53.00
© 2015 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Aegean Offset Printers, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE N O.
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2015-16) ................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 19
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................... 28
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ......................................... 29
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are of interim
nature........................................................ 31
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee
on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2015-16) held on
7th October , 2015 .............................................. 33
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2014-15) on ‘Jan Aushadhi Scheme’
of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department
of Pharmaceuticals) ............................................ 35
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(2015-16)
Shri Anandrao Adsul — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Idris Ali
3. Smt. Anju Bala
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta
6. Smt. Veena Devi
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana
8. Shri Innocent
9. Shri K. Ashok Kumar
10. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan
12. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle
13. Shri Rajendran S.
14. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
15. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu
16. Dr. Kulamani Samal
17. Dr. Uma Saren
18. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh
19. Shri Taslimuddin
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma
21. Shri Baker George
#
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary
23. Dr. M.S. Gill 
(iii)
#Nominated w.e.f. 28.9.2015.

(iv)
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade
25. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya
27. Shri K. Parasaran
28. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
29. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy
30. Dr. Sanjay Sinh
31. Shri Abdul Wahab
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava — Director
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers
(2015-2016) having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on their behalf, present this Fifteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014-2015) on
Jan Aushadhi Scheme of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Department of Pharmaceuticals).
2. The Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on
4.3.2015. The Action Taken replies of Government to all observations/
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 10.8.2015.
The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2015-2016)
considered and adopted this Report on Action Taken Replies at their
sitting held on 7.10.2015.
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANDRAO ADSUL,
07 October, 2015 Chairperson,
15 Asvina, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers
(2015-16) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Jan Aushadhi Scheme ’ of
the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 04.03.2015.
In all, the Committee made 09 Observations/Recommendations in the
Report.
1.2 The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) were requested to furnish replies to the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report within three months
from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e., by 03.06.2015. The
Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the
09 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have been
received from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) vide their O.M. No. F .No. 54012(3)/2015-Pl-IV , dated
10.08.2015. These Replies have been examined and categorized as
follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8 and 9
(Total=07)
Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s reply:
Sl. No. Nil
(Total=Nil)
Chapter III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Sl. No. 1
(Total=01)
Chapter IV

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl. No. 6
(Total=01)
Chapter V
1.3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I, Chapter IV
in respect of which reply of the Government has not been accepted
by the Committee and Chapter V for which final reply is still awaited,
of this Report, should be furnished expeditiously.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations which
still require reiteration or merit comments.
A. Need for augmenting Financial Assistance for opening of Jan
Aushadhi Stores
Recommendation No. 1
1.5 Stressing the need to increase the one time financial assistance
for opening of JASs, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that a one time financial assistance of
Rs. 2.00 lakhs as establishment cost and Rs. 50,000/- as an one
time start-up cost is given to NGOs/Institutions/Co-operative
Societies identified by the State Government. In case of any other
entity, such as reputed NGO/Charitable Society/Self Help Group
and individuals, financial assistance as incentive linked to sale of
medicines at the rate of 10% of the monthly sales amount subject
to a ceiling of Rs. 10,000/- per month for a period of 12 months
is provided. In case of stores opened in North-Eastern States and
other difficult areas  i.e. naxal affected area, tribal area etc., the
rate of incentive would be 15% of monthly sale amount subject to
a ceiling of Rs. 15,000/- per month. However , during the course of
examination of the subject, it was brought to the notice of the
Committee that the one-time grant for opening of Jan Aushadhi
Store is not sufficient and the amount should be increased to
Rs. 3.5 lakh as the earlier rate was fixed in 2008. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Department should examine the
possibility of increasing one time grant from Rs. 2.5 lakh to Rs. 3.5
lakh as establishment cost for opening Jan Aushadhi Stores in the
country. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken in this regard. ”

3
Reply of the Government
1.6 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“The Committee has recommended that the Department of
Pharmaceuticals should examine the possibility of increase in one
time grant from Rs. 2.5 lakhs to Rs. 3.5 lakhs towards established
cost for opening Jan Aushadhi Stores in the country.
It is true that the one time grant for opening of Jan Aushadhi Store
i.e. Rs. 2.50 lakhs was fixed in 2008 and that too it is extended
only to the operating agencies identified and nominated by the
State Government for running the JASs located in Government
Hospitals. For any JAS proposed outside the Government Hospital
premises, no one time grant is permitted. In place of one time
grant, incentive @ 10% of the sales value subject to the ceiling of
Rs. 10,000/- per month for a period of one year only is included.
However , in case of North Eastern States and other naxal affected
area and tribal areas, the rate of incentive @ 15% of the monthly
sales value subject to the ceiling of Rs. 15,000 per month for a
period of one year is offered.
It is also seen that one time financial grant is extended only to
those Jan Aushadhi Stores, opened in the Government hospital
premises where space is provided free of cost by the State
Government Whereas in case of Jan Aushadhi Stores opened outside
Government hospital premises run by Private Entrepreneurs,
un-employed Pharmacists, NGOs, one time grant is not extended
for the commencement of Jan Aushadhi Stores. They are expected
to have their own/hired space, establishment cost of the stores as
per the layout design of BPPI and other requirement as per the
Drug and Cosmetic law.
Suggestion of increasing the one time grant of Rs. 2.5 lakh to
Rs. 3.5 lakh was evaluated. It is learnt that the amount of
Rs. 2.5 lakh is sufficient to meet the expenses in connection with
commencing of operation of JAS. BPPI intends to focus more on
ensuring supply of 504 medicines and 161 consumables strengthening
supply chain and strengthening BPPI. ”
Comments of the Committee
1.7 The Committee in their earlier recommendation had stated
that the one time financial assistance for establishment cost for
opening of Jan Aushadhi Stores in the country should be increased
from Rs. 2.5 lakh to Rs. 3.5 lakh.

4
The Department in the Action Taken Reply has stated that one
time financial grant is extended only to those Jan Aushadhi Stores,
opened in the government hospital premises where space is provided
free of cost by the State Government. Whereas in case of Jan Aushadhi
Stores opened outside the Government Hospital premises, no one
time grant is permitted. In place of one time grant, incentive @ 10%
of the sales value subject to the ceiling of Rs. 10,000/- per month
for a period of one year is included. However, in case of North
Eastern States and other naxal affected areas and tribal areas, the
rate of incentive @ 15% of the monthly sales value subject to the
ceiling of Rs. 15,000 per month for a period of one year is offered.
The Department has further stated that the recommendation of
increasing one time grant of Rs. 2.5 lakh to Rs. 3.5 lakh was evaluated
and the Department has found that Rs. 2.5 lakh is sufficient to meet
expenses in connection with opening up of Jan Aushadhi Stores.
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply given by the
Department and are of the view that with increased inflation Rs. 2.5
lakh is not sufficient for opening up of Jan Aushadhi Store. The
Committee felt that the quantum of one time financial assistance
should be adequate to meet the price rise of infrastructural
requirements to make Jan Aushadhi Store operational within the
space provided for the purpose. The Committee, therefore once
again strongly reiterate its earlier recommendation and state that
the Department and BPPI should once again re-evaluate the amount
granted and increase the one time grant for opening up of Jan
Aushadhi Stores to Rs. 3.5 lakh. This issue should also be periodically
evaluated in the context of price rise of furnishing material and
other accessories such as computer etc. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the action taken in the matter.
B. Utilisation of Funds allocated for Jan Aushadhi Scheme
Recommendation No. 2
1.8 Emphasizing the need for utilization of funds allocated for JASs,
the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are distressed to note that Rs. 20 crore earmarked
at BE stage for Jan Aushadhi Scheme was reduced to Rs. 4.50 crore
at RE stage during the year 2012-13, out of which only Rs. 1.66 crore
were utilized. For the period from 2013-14, Rs. 25 crore was
allocated for the Scheme but based on the requirement of BPPI,
only Rs. 15.20 crore, was released for the year 2013-14. The
Committee also regret to note that for the year 2014-15, Rs. 30 crore

5
was allocated at BE stage for the Jan Aushadhi Scheme but due to
non-utilisation of the allocation till September 2014, the Ministry of
Finance reduced the allocation of the Department at RE stage to
NIL. The Committee strongly feel that the under-utilisation or non-
utilisation of funds is bound to have its cascading effect on the
targets set by the Department under the scheme during 12th Plan
period. The Committee also feel that the Department does not
seem to have undertaken any proactive measures to overcome the
bottlenecks which have impeded the optimum utilisation of funds.
The very fact that during 2014, only 11 stores could be opened in
the country as indicated in the Annexure-I, clearly indicates the
slow pace of progress in setting JASs across the country. This also
shows the lack of proper planning and concerted and coordinated
efforts on the part of the Department to address those constraints
which were impeding the implementation of the scheme. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should
resolve and take initiative and formulate plan for optimum utilisation
of funds for opening of stores as per the plan target. The Committee
also recommend that the Department should also monitor timely
and full utilization of funds for the purpose. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in
this regard. ”
Reply of the Government
1.9 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“The total budget envisaged in the new business plan for the years
2013-14 and 2014-15 were Rs. 25.00 crore and Rs. 38.21 crore
respectively. However , only a total of Rs. 16.86 crore were released
as BPPI has utilized only 14.6 crore till 31st May, 2015. BPPI has also
submitted a plan of utilization of Rs. 69.35 crore for the current
year and Rs. 154.94 crore for the next year 2016-17.
BPPI is in the process of opening another 200 JAS during the current
year. They have already initiated various actions required for
increasing their basket of products and services. Procurement
activities for 504 medicines and 161 consumables against the present
level of 361 medicines is in progress. They have also prepared a
detailed plan of media activities to be undertaken in and around
the existing 111 JAS and also around every JAS being opened through
hoardings, bulk SMS, Mobile exhibitions, distribution of pamphlets
etc. For achieving the above target BPPI is getting strengthened
through augmentation of manpower. All these improvements will
ensure the full utilization of funds allotted for Jan Aushadhi Scheme.”

6
Comments of the Committee
1.10 The Committee in their earlier recommendation had stated
that the Department should resolve and take initiative and formulate
plan for optimum utilization of funds for opening of store as per the
plan target. The Committee further recommended that the Department
should monitor timely and full utilization of funds for the purpose.
The Department in the Action Taken Reply has stated that the
total budget envisaged in the new business plan for the years
2013-14 and 2014-15 were Rs. 25.00 crore and Rs. 38.21 crore
respectively. However, only a sum of Rs. 16.86 crore was released
as BPPI has utilized only Rs. 14.6 crore till 31st May 2015. BPPI has
also submitted a plan of utilization of Rs. 69.35 crore for the current
year and Rs. 154.94 crore for the next year 2016-17. The Department
has further stated that BPPI has been taking various initiatives during
the current year, such as opening more JAS stores, procurement of
more medicines for the store and plan for media activities for
advertisement of JAS etc.
The Committee are happy to note that the Department and BPPI
are taking various measures to promote Jan Aushadhi Stores and
also to strengthen the infrastructure for Jan Aushadhi Scheme making
it viable for maximum number of people. The Committee in this
regard expect that the Department should completely utilize the
funds earmarked for the Jan Aushadhi scheme and the initiative
undertaken would give desired and planned results. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress in the matter.
C. Need to improve the functioning of Bureau of Pharma PSUs of
India (BPPI)
Recommendation No. 3
1.11 Stressing the need to improve the functioning of BPPI, the
Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Bureau of Pharma Public Sector
Undertaking India (BPPI) comprising all the central Pharma PSUs
(CPSUs) namely IDPL, RDPL, KAPL, HAL and BCPL was set up on
1st December , 2008 with major objective to have focused and
empowered structure to implement the Jan Aushadhi Campaign
initiated by Department of Pharmaceuticals. It is a registered society
under Societies Registration Act, 1860 with Government of NCT of
Delhi on 21.04.2010. BPPI is monitoring the functioning of Jan

7
Aushadhi Stores. It is also involved in promotion of unbranded generic
drugs. The Committee note that one of the main functions of BPPI
is to have coordination with the State Governments for opening of
Jan Aushadhi Stores. The BPPI takes up the issue with the State
Governments and meets the officials concerned for explaining about
the scheme and opening of Jan Aushadhi Stores. Further, the nodal
officials appointed by BPPI and placed in the State, meet with the
State Government officials regularly in matters relating to
Jan Aushadhi Scheme Stores. However , the functioning of BPPI does
not seem to be satisfactory. The very fact that till date only
170 JAS have been opened and out of that only 99 are functional
clearly shows that BPPI has not been very effective in its functioning.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should
take remedial measures for improving the functioning of BPPI so
that the opening and maintenance of JAS and availability of
medicines therein could be done in an effective and efficient manner.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken/
being taken by the Department in this regard. ”
Reply of the Government
1.12 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“DoP has initiated few steps to improve the functioning of BPPI.
BPPI has submitted a detailed Strategic Action Plan for improving
the Jan Aushadhi Scheme. BPPI is getting strengthened with adequate
man power and standard operating procedures are being laid down
for different activities in BPPI clearly defining the functions and
responsibilities of each and every Executive in the organization.
The recruitment process has already been initiated through open
advertisement in leading newspapers. The recruitment process is
expected to be completed by the end of August 2015. ”
Comments of the Committee
1.13 The Committee had earlier recommended that the
Department should take remedial measures for improving the
functioning of BPPI which would facilitate the opening and
maintenance of Jan Aushadhi Stores and availability of medicines
therein in an effective and efficient manner.
In this regard, the Department in the action taken reply has
stated that they have taken various steps to improve the functioning

8
of BPPI. It has also been stated that BPPI has submitted a detailed
Strategic Action Plan for improving the Jan Aushadhi Scheme. The
Department has further stated that BPPI is being strengthened with
adequate man power and standard operating procedures are being
laid down for different activities in BPPI clearly defining the functions
and responsibilities of each and every Executive in the organization.
Further, the recruitment process has already been initiated through
open advertisement in leading newspapers. The recruitment process
is expected to be completed by the end of August 2015.
While appreciating the efforts made by the Department based on
Strategic Action Plan submitted by BPPI for strengthening BPPI with
adequate manpower and laying down standard operating procedure,
the Committee recommend that all the requisite formalities in this
regard should be finalized expeditiously and the Action Plan may
accordingly be implemented in the current financial year. The
Committee hope to find some substantial improvement in the
functioning of BPPI by the end of this financial year.
D. Implementation of Jan Aushadhi Scheme
Recommendation No. 4
1.14 Noting the need for effective implementation of Jan Aushadhi
Scheme, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that access to quality medicines at affordable
prices is a key challenge for the Government. The prices of branded
medicines are generally higher than generic medicines due to various
reasons including limited regulation through Drug Prices Control
Order , 1995 etc. A countrywide campaign in the name of
‘Jan Aushadhi Campaign ’ was also launched in November 2008 by
the Department of Pharmaceuticals for ensuring availability of
generic medicines at affordable prices to all in collaboration with
the State Governments as a direct market intervention strategy.
Under this Campaign, less priced quality generic medicines are
being made available through Jan Aushadhi Stores (JAS) which are
of same and equivalent quality, efficacy and safety as compared to
branded generic medicines. Under this Scheme, the State
Government has to provide space in Government Hospital premises
for the running of the Jan Aushadhi Stores. Government hospitals,
NGOs, Charitable Organizations and public societies like Red Cross
Society, Rogi Kalyan Samitis typically constituted for the purpose
could be operating agencies for the JAS. The operational expenditure

9
is met from trade margins admissible for the medicines. The first
Jan Aushadhi Generic Drug Store was opened in civil hospital Amritsar
on 25th November , 2008. However , the Committee regret to note
that the Jan Aushadhi Scheme during the first six year of its
implementation, has not been able to make much headway in
opening of Jan Aushadhi Stores in each district of the country as
was proposed. The poor performance of the scheme is quite evident
from the fact that as against the target of opening of one JAS in
each of the 630 districts, only 170 stores have been opened so far.
However , with a view to remove the shortcomings noticed in the
original Jan Aushadhi scheme, a revised New Business Plan has
been worked by the Department. The Committee were informed
that various steps were being undertaken under the New Business
Plan to remove/rectify bottlenecks in implementation of the
campaign. The steps include relaxation of eligibility conditions for
operating entities, review of existing list of medicines, improving
supply chain management, sourcing of drugs, working capital,
prescription of generic medicines health policies and media campaign
etc. The Committee also note that the Department proposes to
issue advertisements calling for applications from interested parties
for opening of Jan Aushadhi Stores in all the States. The Committee
also note that New Business Plan envisage to open 3000 new JAS
by 2016-17. Against this backdrop, the Committee hope that the
New Business Plan would take care of bottlenecks in effective and
efficient implementation of the scheme and the Department would
take proactive measures and make co-ordinated efforts with all
concerned to open maximum JASs as envisaged under New Business
Plan by 2016-17 so that the benefits of low cost improved generic
drugs are reached to maximum number of common people. However,
the Committee recommend that the execution and progress of the
scheme should be monitored at regular intervals so that the target
to open 3000 JASs by 2016-17 under New Business Plan could be
achieved. The Committee would like to know the initiatives taken
by the Department and progress made under the New Business Plan
from time to time. ”
Reply of the Government
1.15 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“BPPI has prepared and submitted their Strategic Action Plan which
elaborates various steps and plans undertaken by the BPPI for
revamping the Jan Aushadhi Scheme. As per the plan, it is proposed
to open 200 Stores during 2015-16 and 3000 Stores during 2016-17.

10
It is also proposed that Jan Aushadhi Stores can be opened not only
inside the hospital but also anywhere outside the hospital premises
too. The sole objective is to improve the accessibility of JAS for the
poor people. The report includes the relaxation of eligibility
conditions for operating agencies. ”
Comments of the Committee
1.16 The Committee in their earlier recommendation had noted
that the Department has envisaged New Business Plan to open 3000
new Jan Aushadhi Stores by 2016-17. Against this background the
Committee had hoped that New Business Plan would take care
bottlenecks and be more effective in the implementation of the
scheme. The Committee had also recommended execution and
progress of Jan Aushadhi Scheme should be monitored at regular
intervals for its effective implementation.
The Department in the Action Taken Reply has stated that BPPI
has prepared and submitted their Strategic Action Plan which
elaborates various steps and plans undertaken by the BPPI for
revamping the Jan Aushadhi Scheme. As per the plan, it is proposed
to open 200 Stores during 2015-16 and 3000 Stores during 2016-17.
The Department has also proposed that Jan Aushadhi Stores can be
opened not only inside the hospital but also anywhere outside the
hospital premises too. The sole objective is to improve the
accessibility of Jan Aushadhi Stores for the poor people. The report
includes the relaxation of eligibility conditions for operating agencies.
In the light of above, while appreciating the initiatives taken by
the Department, the Committee are of the opinion that BPPI and the
Department should take steps to expedite the revamping of
Jan Aushashi Scheme and ensure that the Strategic Action Plan which
includes opening of 200 stores during 2015-16 and opening of
3000 stores in 2016-17 is implemented without fail and meets its
target within a fixed time frame. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard.
E. Availability of Medicines in Jan Aushadhi Stores (JASs)
Recommendation No. 5
1.17 Emphasizing the need for availability of medicines in
Jan Aushadhi Stores, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note during oral evidence of non-official witnesses
that major complaint of the general public has been the
non-availability of all the listed medicines in JASs. The Committee

11
also note that the in-house production of medicines manufactured
by the CPSUs is able to cover approximately 138 medicines out of
the existing range of 361 medicines committed by them. Now to
mitigate the situation of non-availability of medicines in the JAS,
rate contracts/price fixation have been finalized in respect of 249
products which covers 144 items produced by CPSUs and 105 items
produced by private manufacturers. In addition, finalization of rate
contract, in respect of 20 more products through open tender is
under process. The Committee are, therefore of the view that the
very purpose for which JASs were opened is defeated if adequate
number of listed medicines are not available with them. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that BPPI and the Department
should take immediate steps to increase the production of medicines
listed for JASs by the CPSUs and also to expedite the process of
undertaking contracts for acquiring medicines from private pharma
manufacturers. The Committee also recommend that the Department
should expedite the revival of sick CPSUs and increase production
capacity of working CPSUs to increase the production of medicines
specially those listed for JASs. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the initiatives taken in this regard. ”
Reply of the Government
1.18 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“BPPI has initiated various steps to increase the basket of products
and services with a list of 504 medicines and 161 consumables.
Rate contract for 314 medicines has already been finalized and the
tender for remaining 190 medicines has already been published.
131 medicines have already been identified for PSUs and a list of
173 medicine has already been forwarded to Pharma PSUs with a
request of exploring the possibility of undertaking the manufacturing
the same. As per the Strategic Action Plan in place of existing 40%
advance extended to PSUs, 50% advance is proposed thereby
expediting the revival of sick PSUs and also it can improve the
utilization of their existing plant. The BPPI is planning to include
all the products being manufactured by the Central Pharma PSUs in
their basket of products. ”
Comments of the Committee
1.19 Noting that the very purpose of opening of Jan Aushadhi
Stores was defeated when adequate numbers of listed medicines
were not available with them, the Committee, therefore,

12
recommended that BPPI and the Department should take immediate
steps to increase the production of medicines for Jan Aushadhi Stores
by the CPSUs and also expedite the process of undertaking contracts
for acquiring medicines from private pharma manufacturers.
The Department in the Action taken Reply has stated that BPPI
has initiated various steps to increase the basket of products and
services with a list of 504 medicines and 161 consumables. Rate
contract for 314 medicines has already been finalized and the tender
for remaining 190 medicines has already been published. 131
medicines have already been identified for PSUs and a list of 173
medicines has already been forwarded to Pharma PSUs with a request
of exploring the possibility of undertaking the manufacturing the
same. As per the Strategic Action Plan in place of existing 40%
advance extended to PSUs, 50% advance is proposed thereby
expediting the revival of sick PSUs and also it can improve the
utilization of their existing plant. The BPPI is planning to include all
the products being manufactured by the Central Pharma PSUs in
their basket of products.
The Committee are happy to note that the BPPI and the
Department are taking various steps to increase the number of
medicines available in JASs. The Committee further hope that BPPI
would increase the basket of products and services with a list of 504
medicines and 161 consumables. The Committee also hope that BPPI
would pursue CPSUs to increase the production of medicines and
supply of the same to JASs. The Committee, however, once again
reiterate that the Department should expedite the revival of the
sick CPSUs and increase the capacity of production of medicine
specially the medicines being supplied to Jan Aushadhi Stores. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made by the
Department in this regard.
F. Timely Supply of Medicines
Recommendation No. 6
1.20 Stressing the need for timely supply of medicines to JASs, the
Committee had recommended as under:—
“It has also come to the notice of the Committee that supply of
listed medicines to far-flung JAS stores takes very long time specially
to States such as Jammu & Kashmir. The Committee, therefore,
strongly feel that warehouses should be opened in every State for
stocking of medicines so that the same are timely supplied to the

13
JASs. The Committee also feel that the supply chain for timely
provision of JAS medicines should be strengthened and streamlined
as envisaged under the New Business Plan and periodical inspection
of the JASs should be conducted by BPPI to ascertain the availability
of medicines and the Action Taken Report thereon should be placed
on the website of the Department. In this regard, the Department
in coordination with State Governments and stake holders may also
work out the feasibility of introducing mobile vans for supply of
medicines to the people at far flung areas of the State.
In this context, the Committee were informed that an IT based
management information system software has been installed to
keep track of availability of medicines at the JASs as well as super
market. This has become partially operational and the same is
expected to become fully operational by 31 January 2015. The
Committee hope that the system might have become fully
operational by this time to maintain an efficient supply chain to
distribute the generic medicines to all the JASs seamlessly specially
in the far flung and remote areas of the country. However , the
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this
regard.”
Reply of the Government
1.21 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“BPPI has initiated various steps for improving the supply chain like
selection and appointment of C&F agents/Distributors in various
States. The administration of the Central Warehouse in Gurgaon has
already been handed over to experienced operating agency. The
BPPI has also appointed nodal officers at different locations for
close monitoring of the availability of medicine in JAS ensuring
timely supply and distribution to C&F and JAS.
IT based MIS software has already been established at CWH, C&F
and distributors level to keep track of availability of medicine at
different levels. The IT-based retail software has also been provided
to every JAS for accounting retail sale. Integration of the above
two software ’s is in progress and is expected to be completed by
end of Aug 2015.
The recommendations regarding the feasibility of introducing mobile
vans for supply of medicine to the people at far flung areas of J&K
and also remote villages in other State is being looked into as per
the Drug and Cosmetic Act 1940 and rules 1945. ”

14
Comments of the Committee
1.22 The Committee in its earlier recommendation had observed
that an IT based management information system software has been
installed to keep a track on the availability of medicines at the JASs
as well as in the super market and the same was expected to be
fully operational by 31.01.2015. The Committee hoped that the
system might have become fully operational by this time to maintain
an efficient supply chain to distribute the generic medicines to all
the JASs seamlessly specially in the far flung and remote areas of
the country.
The Department in its Action Taken Reply has stated that the
administration of central warehouse in Gurgaon has already been
handed over to experienced operating agency. Further, BPPI has
appointed nodal officers at different locations for close monitoring
of availability of medicine in Jan Aushadhi Store. Also, IT based MIS
software has already been established at Central Ware Housing (CWH),
Carry and Forwarding (C&F) and distributors level to keep track of
availability of medicines at different levels. IT based retail software
has been provided to every Jan Aushadhi Stores for accounting retail
sale and also integration of both the software is expected to be
completed by August 2015. Further, the Department has stated that
the feasibility of mobile vans for supply of medicine to far flung
areas and remote areas are being looked into.
The Committee are satisfied to note that the progress has been
made to ensure timely supply of medicines to various Jan Aushadhi
Stores in various parts of the country. The Committee have also
noted that the Department is looking into the feasibility of introducing
mobile vans for supply of medicines to far flung areas. The Committee
hope that the IT based software both at Central Ware Housing (CWH)/
Carry and Forwarding (C&F)/distributor level of Jan Aushadhi Scheme
might have been integrated by now. The Committee are now hopeful
that the steps being taken by BPPI and the Department would yield
results and improve the timely supply of medicines and that the
Department would keep up the pace of supplying medicines to Jan
Aushadhi Stores at regular and timely intervals. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the steps being taken in this regard.
G. Media Campaign for Jan Aushadhi Scheme
Recommendation No. 8
1.23 Emphasizing the need to increase the media campaign for
JASs, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“A large population of poor people in the country find it difficult
to afford the expensive branded medicines and therefore, the key

15
objective of the Jan Aushadhi campaign is to provide low cost and
quality controlled unbranded generic drugs to the common man.
However , the Committee are disappointed to note that the media
campaign or creation of awareness for Jan Aushadhi Scheme has
not been very significant. Jan Aushadhi medicines are apparently
not being accepted either by the public or the drugs under the
scheme are not being prescribed by the doctors to the patients.
Even after six years, no concerted efforts have been made by the
Government to educate the people and to reach out to the doctors ’
community in this regard. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that a vigorous campaign should be launched by the Department to
create awareness among the people about the generic drugs and its
quality, efficacy and safety comparable with branded medicines
and to reach out to the doctors ’ community by way of conferences
to impress upon them to prescribe generic drugs to the patients.
An effective mechanism for media campaign for Jan Aushadhi
medicines on the lines of campaigning of “Jago Garhak Jago’ should
be worked out by the Department/BPPI. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this
regard.
The Committee further note that JAS toll free helpline functions
for limited time of the day and days of the week. The Committee
feel that the purpose of JAS is not served if the toll free number
is functioning for limited time of the day and days of the week. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department
should take effective steps to improve the working of toll free
helpline number. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
initiatives being taken in this regard. ”
Reply of the Government
1.24 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“The Committee has recommended that Media campaign shall be
launched by the Deptt. to create awareness among the people
regarding Jan Aushadhi Scheme. BPPI has initiated various media
and publicity campaigns around each Jan Aushadhi Store through
hoardings, bulk SMS, Mobile exhibitions, distribution of pamphlets
etc. Production of an appropriate 30 sec. TV spot (Jago Grahak
Jago) is also being taken up through DAVP . Telecast through DD and
other TV Channels in regional languages for a period of 30 days is
also being planned at the time of re-launching of Jan Aushadhi

16
Scheme. A campaign through social media is also being taken up.
The required fund for the above referred campaign has been included
in the revised budget for the year 2015-16 & 2016-17 and submitted
to the Ministry.
The existing toll-free help line is functioning only on Monday to
Saturday from 9.30 A.M. to 5.30 P .M. BPPI has taken up the matter
of extending helpline to 24 x 7 days basis with the present operating
agency, Consumer Online Foundation. ”
Comments of the Committee
1.25 The Committee with a view to create more awareness among
the public about Jan Aushadhi Scheme had recommended that
vigorous media campaign on the lines of campaigning of “Jago Grahak
Jago” should be worked out by Department and BPPI. The Committee
had also recommended that the Department should take effective
steps to improve the working of toll free helpline number.
The Department in the action taken reply has stated that BPPI
has initiated various media and publicity campaigns around each Jan
Aushadhi Store through hoardings, bulk SMS, Mobile exhibitions,
distribution of pamphlets etc. Production of an appropriate 30 sec.
TV spot Jago Grahak Jago) is also being taken up through DA VP.
Telecast through DD and other TV Channels in regional languages for
a period of 30 days is also being planned at the time of re-launching
of Jan Aushadhi Scheme. A campaign through social media is also
being taken up. The required fund for the above referred campaign
has been included in the revised budget for the year 2015-16 and
2016-17 and submitted to the Ministry. The existing toll-free help
line is functioning only on Monday to Saturday from 9.30 A.M. to
5.30 P.M. BPPI has taken up the matter of extending helpline to
24 x 7 days basis with the present operating agency, Consumer
Online Foundation.
The Committee though appreciative of the steps being taken by
BPPI to create mass awareness among the people about Jan Aushadhi
Scheme through hoardings, SMS, TV, Social media etc., however,
feel that more efforts should be made with regard to the media
campaign for Jan Aushadhi Scheme specially for the rural and far
flung areas of the country. The Committee also reiterate its earlier
recommendation that the Jan Aushadhi Scheme helpline should be
made compulsorily available 24x7 as it would be more helpful to
persons in emergency circumstances. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the progress achieved in the matter.

17
H. Quality Control of Jan Aushadhi Medicines
Recommendation No. 9
1.26 Noting the need for quality control of Jan Aushadhi medicines,
the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that BPPI is vested with the responsibility to
ensure that only quality drugs are supplied through Jan Aushadhi
Store and samples should be sent for testing on a regular basis. The
Committee recommend that the Department should strictly monitor
the quality of drugs before it comes out of the manufacturing units
of the company and after that it should again be checked by a
national level laboratory. The Company should also upgrade all its
manufacturing units conforming WHO-GMP standards. The
Department should also work in close co-ordination with Central
Drug Standard Control Organisation which comes within the purview
of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and State Drug Control
Authority to monitor and keep strict vigilance over circulation of
spurious drugs in the market. In this regard, the Committee reiterate
its recommendation contained in its 29th Report of the Committee
(15th Lok Sabha) that quality control and regulatory mechanism
should come under the Department of Pharmaceuticals. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Department in this regard. ”
Reply of the Government
1.27 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“BPPI is assuring receipt of in-house test reports along with
medicines. Besides, when material is received in Central Warehouse,
our Quality control Department draws sample of each batch of each
medicine at random basis and send to NABL accredited labs for
testing. Medicines will be dispatched to distributor/JASs only on
receipt of test reports which indicate of standard quality from
empanelled NABL accredited laboratory.
The steps to be taken by the CPSU in upgrading its manufacturing
units conforming WHO/GMP standards: Rs. 11.39 crore has been
released to RDPL in two installments as grant in aid for making the
company WHO/GMP compliant.

18
Comments of the Committee
1.28 The Committee in their earlier recommendation had
impressed upon strict monitoring of quality of drugs and also stated
that BPPI should ensure the quality of the drugs being supplied
through Jan Aushadhi Stores. The Committee had also recommended
that the company should upgrade all the manufacturing units
conforming to WHO-GMP standards.
The Department in the Action Taken Reply has stated that BPPI
is ensuring receipt of in house test reports along with the medicines.
Further, the medicines are dispatched to Jan Aushadhi Stores only
when test reports from empanelled NABL accredited laboratory
indicate the standard quality. It has also been stated that Rs. 11.39
crore has been released to RDPL in instalments for making the
company WHO/GMP compliant.
In view of the above, the Committee once again reiterate its
recommendation that the Department and BPPI should ensure strict
compliance with the quality control of the medicines being supplied
to Jan Aushadhi Stores. The Department should also ensure that all
medicine producing manufacturing units comply with WHO-GMP
standards. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken by the Department in this regard.

19
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
A. Utilisation of Funds allocated for Jan Aushadhi Scheme
Recommendation No. 2
The Committee are distressed to note that Rs. 20 crore earmarked
at BE stage for Jan Aushadhi Scheme was reduced to Rs. 4.50 crore at
RE stage during the year 2012-13, out of which only Rs. 1.66 crore were
utilized. For the period from 2013-14, Rs. 25 crore was allocated for
the Scheme but based on the requirement of BPPI, only Rs. 15.20
crore, was released for the year 2013-14. The Committee also regret
to note that for the year 2014-15, Rs. 30 crore was allocated at BE
stage for the Jan Aushadhi Scheme but due to non-utilisation of the
allocation till September 2014, the Ministry of Finance reduced the
allocation of the Department at RE stage to NIL. The Committee strongly
feel that the under-utilisation or non-utilisation of funds is bound to
have its cascading effect on the targets set by the Department under
the scheme during 12th Plan period. The Committee also feel that the
Department does not seem to have undertaken any proactive measures
to overcome the bottlenecks which have impeded the optimum utilisation
of funds. The very fact that during 2014, only 11 stores could be
opened in the country as indicated in the Annexure-I, clearly indicates
the slow pace of progress in setting JASs across the country. This also
shows the lack of proper planning and concerted and coordinated efforts
on the part of the Department to address those constraints which were
impeding the implementation of the scheme. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Department should resolve and take initiative and
formulate plan for optimum utilisation of funds for opening of stores as
per the plan target. The Committee also recommend that the Department
should also monitor timely and full utilization of funds for the purpose.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the
Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The total budget envisaged in the new business plan for the years
2013-14 and 2014-15 were Rs. 25.00 crore and Rs. 38.21 crore
respectively. However, only a total of Rs. 16.86 crore were released as

20
BPPI has utilized only 14.6 crore till 31st May 2015. BPPI has also
submitted a plan of utilization of Rs. 69.35 crore for the current year
and Rs. 154.94 crore for the next year 2016-17.
BPPI is in the process of opening another 200 JAS during the current
year. They have already initiated various actions required for increasing
their basket of products and services. Procurement activities for 504
medicines and 161 consumables against the present level of 361
medicines is in progress. They have also prepared a detailed plan of
media activities to be undertaken in and around the existing 111 JAS
and also around every JAS being opened through hoardings, bulk SMS,
Mobile exhibitions, distribution of pamphlets etc. For achieving the
above target BPPI is getting strengthened through augmentation of
manpower. All these improvements will ensure the full utilization of
funds allotted for Jan Aushadhi Scheme.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals),
OM No. F .No. 54012(3)/2015-P1-IV , dated 10.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter-1 of the Report)
B. Need to improve the functioning of Bureau of Pharma PSUs of
India (BPPI)
Recommendation No. 3
The Committee note that the Bureau of Pharma Public Sector
Undertaking India (BPPI) comprising all the Central Pharma PSUs (CPSUs)
namely IDPL, RDPL, KAPL, HAL and BCPL was set up on 1st December,
2008 with major objective to have focused and empowered structure
to implement the Jan Aushadhi Campaign initiated by Department of
Pharmaceuticals. It is a registered society under Societies Registration
Act, 1860 with Government of NCT of Delhi on 21.04.2010. BPPI is
monitoring the functioning of Jan Aushadhi Stores. It is also involved in
promotion of unbranded generic drugs. The Committee note that one
of the main functions of BPPI is to have coordination with the State
Governments for opening of Jan Aushadhi Stores. The BPPI takes up the
issue with the State Governments and meets the officials concerned for
explaining about the scheme and opening of Jan Aushadhi Stores. Further,
the nodal officials appointed by BPPI and placed in the State, meet
with the State Government officials regularly in matters relating to
Jan Aushadhi Scheme Stores. However , the functioning of BPPI does not
seem to be satisfactory. The very fact that till date only 170 JAS have

21
been opened and out of that only 99 are functional clearly shows that
BPPI has not been very effective in its functioning. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Department should take remedial
measures for improving the functioning of BPPI so that the opening and
maintenance of JAS and availability of medicines therein could be done
in an effective and efficient manner. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the initiatives taken/being taken by the Department in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
DoP has initiated few steps to improve the functioning of BPPI. BPPI
has submitted a detailed Strategic Action Plan for improving the Jan
Aushadhi Scheme. BPPI is getting strengthened with adequate man
power and standard operating procedures are being laid down for
different activities in BPPI clearly defining the functions and
responsibilities of each and every Executive in the organization.
The recruitment process has already been initiated through open
advertisement in leading newspapers. The recruitment process is
expected to be completed by the end of August 2015.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals),
OM No. F .No. 54012(3)/2015-P1-IV , dated 10.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter-1 of the Report)
C. Implementation of Jan Aushadhi Scheme
Recommendation No. 4
The Committee note that access to quality medicines at affordable
prices is a key challenge for the Government. The prices of branded
medicines are generally higher than generic medicines due to various
reasons including limited regulation through Drug Prices Control Order ,
1995 etc. A countrywide campaign in the name of ‘Jan Aushadhi
Campaign’ was also launched in November 2008 by the Department of
Pharmaceuticals for ensuring availability of generic medicines at
affordable prices to all in collaboration with the State Governments as
a direct market intervention strategy. Under this Campaign, less priced
quality generic medicines are being made available through Jan Aushadhi
Stores (JAS) which are of same and equivalent quality, efficacy and
safety as compared to branded generic medicines. Under this Scheme,

22
the State Government has to provide space in Government Hospital
premises for the running of the Jan Aushadhi Stores. Government
hospitals, NGOs, Charitable Organizations and public societies like Red
Cross Society, Rogi Kalyan Samitis typically constituted for the purpose
could be operating agencies for the JAS. The operational expenditure
is met from trade margins admissible for the medicines. The first Jan
Aushadhi Generic Drug Store was opened in civil hospital Amritsar on
25th November , 2008. However, the Committee regret to note that the
Jan Aushadhi Scheme during the first six year of its implementation,
has not been able to make much headway in opening of Jan Aushadhi
Stores in each district of the country as was proposed. The poor
performance of the scheme is quite evident from the fact that as
against the target of opening of one JAS in each of the 630 districts,
only 170 stores have been opened so far. However, with a view to
remove the shortcomings noticed in the original Jan Aushadhi scheme,
a revised New Business Plan has been worked by the Department. The
Committee were informed that various steps were being undertaken
under the New Business Plan to remove/rectify bottlenecks in
implementation of the campaign. The steps include relaxation of
eligibility conditions for operating entities, review of existing list of
medicines, improving supply chain management, sourcing of drugs,
working capital, prescription of generic medicines health policies and
media campaign etc. The Committee also note that the Department
proposes to issue advertisements calling for applications from interested
parties for opening of Jan Aushadhi Stores in all the States. The
Committee also note that New Business Plan envisage to open 3000 new
JAS by 2016-17. Against this backdrop, the Committee hope that the
New Business Plan would take care of bottlenecks in effective and
efficient implementation of the scheme and the Department would
take proactive measures and make co-ordinated efforts with all
concerned to open maximum JASs as envisaged under New Business
Plan by 2016-17 so that the benefits of low cost improved generic drugs
are reached to maximum number of common people. However, the
Committee recommend that the execution and progress of the scheme
should be monitored at regular intervals so that the target to open
3000 JASs by 2016-17 under New Business Plan could be achieved. The
Committee would like to know the initiatives taken by the Department
and progress made under the New Business Plan from time to time.
Reply of the Government
BPPI has prepared and submitted their Strategic Action Plan which
elaborates various steps and plans undertaken by the BPPI for revamping
the Jan Aushadhi Scheme. As per the plan, it is proposed to open

23
200 Stores during 2015-16 and 3000 Stores during 2016-17. It is also
proposed that Jan Aushadhi Stores can be opened not only inside the
hospital but also anywhere outside the hospital premises too. The sole
objective is to improve the accessibility of JAS for the poor people. The
report includes the relaxation of eligibility conditions for operating
agencies.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals),
OM No. F .No. 54012(3)/2015-P1-IV , dated 10.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
D. Availability of Medicines in Jan Aushadhi Stores (JASs)
Recommendation No. 5
The Committee note during oral evidence of non-official witnesses
that major complaint of the general public has been the non-availability
of all the listed medicines in JASs. The Committee also note that the
in-house production of medicines manufactured by the CPSUs is able to
cover approximately 138 medicines out of the existing range of
361 medicines committed by them. Now to mitigate the situation of
non-availability of medicines in the JAS, rate contracts/price fixation
have been finalized in respect of 249 products which covers 144 items
produced by CPSUs and 105 items produced by private manufacturers.
In addition, finalization of rate contract, in respect of 20 more products
through open tender is under process. The Committee are, therefore of
the view that the very purpose for which JASs were opened is defeated
if adequate number of listed medicines are not available with them.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that BPPI and the Department
should take immediate steps to increase the production of medicines
listed for JASs by the CPSUs and also to expedite the process of
undertaking contracts for acquiring medicines from private pharma
manufacturers. The Committee also recommend that the Department
should expedite the revival of sick CPSUs and increase production
capacity of working CPSUs to increase the production of medicines
specially those listed for JASs. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the initiatives taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
BPPI has initiated various steps to increase the basket of products
and services with a list of 504 medicines and 161 consumables. Rate
contract for 314 medicines has already been finalized and the tender

24
for remaining 190 medicines has already been published. 131 medicines
have already been identified for PSUs and a list of 173 medicine has
already been forwarded to Pharma PSUs with a request of exploring the
possibility of undertaking the manufacturing the same. As per the
Strategic Action Plan in place of existing 40% advance extended to
PSUs, 50% advance is proposed thereby expediting the revival of sick
PSUs and also it can improve the utilization of their existing plant. The
BPPI is planning to include all the products being manufactured by the
Central Pharma PSUs in their basket of products.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals),
OM No. F .No. 54012(3)/2015-P1-IV , dated 10.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
E. Sale of Surgical Items through JASS
Recommendation No. 7
The Committee note that one of the suggestions made by the non-
official witnesses is that other OTC (Over the counter) items, including
essential surgical goods such as dispo-Syringes, Dextrose, Drip sets etc.
should be provided through Jan Aushadhi Stores so that the consumer
gets most of essential medical items at affordable rates with in the
hospital premises. In this context, the Department informed the
Committee that presently surgical items are not supplied through Jan
Aushadhi Stores but the matter would be examined in consultation with
BPPI. The Committee feel that sale of low cost surgical items through
JASs would largely benefit the poor and the common people. It would
also be convenient for the patients if surgical items are also available
for sale through JASs along with the medicines so that they need not
to go in search for surgical items in chemist shops. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Department should explore the feasibility
of selling low cost surgical items through JASs specially through those
stores which are within the premises of Government Hospitals. It has
also been brought to the notice of the Committee that prices of some
of the Jan Aushadhi medicines are higher than the MRP or higher than
other branded medicines. While explaining the position in this regard,
the Department has assured the Committee to look in to it and to take
corrective action in this regard. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the initiatives taken in the matter.

25
Reply of the Government
A list of 161 surgical items and other consumables have been
finalized. Tender for 29 items out of these has already been floated and
same will be finalized by end of July 2015. Tender for remaining
132 items will be published by 1st week of August. BPPI is planning to
complete the procurement process of all these items by October 2015.
The formula for MRP has been scrutinized, modified and finalized.
Comparison of MRP with that of braded medicines has been completed
and it is ensured that MRP of JAS medicines are always less than of
other branded available in the market.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals),
OM No. F .No. 54012(3)/2015-P1-IV , dated 10.08.2015]
F. Media Campaign for Jan Aushadhi Scheme
Recommendation No. 8
A large population of poor people in the country find it difficult to
afford the expensive branded medicines and therefore, the key objective
of the Jan Aushadhi campaign is to provide low cost and quality
controlled unbranded generic drugs to the common man. However , the
Committee are disappointed to note that the media campaign or creation
of awareness for Jan Aushadhi store has not been very significant. Jan
Aushadhi medicines are apparently not being accepted either by the
public or the drugs under the scheme are not being prescribed by the
doctors to the patients. Even after six years, no concerted efforts have
been made by the Government to educate the people and to reach out
to the doctors ’ community in this regard. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that a vigorous campaign should be launched by the
Department to create awareness among the people about the generic
drugs and its quality, efficacy and safety comparable with branded
medicines and to reach out to the doctors ’ community by way of
conferences to impress upon them to prescribe generic drugs to the
patients. An effective mechanism for media campaign for Jan Aushadhi
medicines on the lines of campaigning of “Jago Garhak Jago” should be
worked out by the Department/BPPI. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard.
The Committee further note that JAS toll free helpline functions
for limited time of the day and days of the week. The Committee feel
that the purpose of JAS is not served if the toll free number is functioning
for limited time of the day and days of the week. The Committee,

26
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should take
effective steps to improve the working of toll free helpline number.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives being taken
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has recommended that Media campaign shall be
launched by the Department to create awareness among the people
regarding Jan Aushadhi Scheme. BPPI has initiated various media and
publicity campaigns around each Jan Aushadhi Store through hoardings,
bulk SMS, Mobile exhibitions, distribution of pamphlets etc. Production
of an appropriate 30 sec. TV spot (Jago Grahak Jago) is also being
taken up through DAVP . Telecast through DD and other TV Channels in
regional languages for a period of 30 days is also being planned at the
time of re-launching of Jan Aushadhi Scheme. A campaign through
social media is also being taken up. The required fund for the above
referred campaign has been included in the revised budget for the year
2015-16 & 2016-17 and submitted to the Ministry. The existing toll-free
help line is functioning only on Monday to Saturday from 9.30 A.M. to
5.30 P .M. BPPI has taken up the matter of extending helpline to
24 x 7 days basis with the present operating agency, Consumer Online
Foundation.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals),
OM No. F .No. 54012(3)/2015-P1-IV , dated 10.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.27 of Chapter-I of the Report)
G. Quality Control of Jan Aushadhi Medicines
Recommendation No. 9
The Committee note that BPPI is vested with the responsibility to
ensure that only quality drugs are supplied through Jan Aushadhi Store
and samples should be sent for testing on a regular basis. The Committee
recommend that the Department should strictly monitor the quality of
drugs before it comes out of the manufacturing units of the company
and after that it should again be checked by a national level laboratory.
The Company should also upgrade all its manufacturing units conforming
WHO-GMP standards. The Department should also work in close
co-ordination with Central Drug Standard Control Organisation which
comes with in the purview of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
and State Drug Control Authority to monitor and keep strict vigilance

27
over circulation of spurious drugs in the market. In this regard, the
Committee reiterate its recommendation contained in its 29th Report
of the Committee (15th Lok Sabha) that quality control and regulatory
mechanism should come under the Department of Pharmaceuticals. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the
Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
BPPI is assuring receipt of in-house test reports along with medicines.
Besides, when material is received in Central Warehouse, our Quality
control Department draws sample of each batch of each medicine at
random basis and send to NABL accredited labs for testing. Medicines
will be dispatched to distributor/JASs only on receipt of test reports
which indicate of standard quality from empanelled NABL accredited
laboratory.
Steps to be taken by the CPSU in upgrading its manufacturing units
conforming WHO/GMP standards: Rs. 11.39 crore has been released to
RDPL in two installments as grant in aid for making the company WHO/
GMP compliance.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals),
OM No. F .No. 54012(3)/2015-P1-IV , dated 10.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.30 of Chapter-I of the Report)

28
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
—NIL—

29
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Need for augmenting Financial Assistance for opening of Jan Aushadhi
Stores
Recommendation No. 1
The Committee note that a one time financial assistance of
Rs. 2.00 lakhs as establishment cost and Rs. 50,000/- as an one time
start-up cost is given to NGOs/Institutions/Co-operative Societies
identified by the State Government. In case of any other entity, such
as reputed NGO/Charitable Society/Self Help Group and individuals,
financial assistance as incentive linked to sale of medicines at the rate
of 10% of the monthly sales amount subject to a ceiling of Rs. 10,000/-
per month for a period of 12 months is provided. In case of stores
opened in North-Eastern States and other difficult areas  i.e.  naxal
affected area, tribal area etc., the rate of incentive would be 15% of
monthly sale amount subject to a ceiling of Rs. 15,000/- per month.
However , during the course of examination of the subject, it was brought
to the notice of the Committee that the one-time grant for opening of
Jan Aushadhi Store is not sufficient and the amount should be increased
to Rs.3.5 lakh as the earlier rate was fixed in 2008. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Department should examine the
possibility of increasing one time grant from Rs. 2.5 lakh to Rs. 3.5 lakh
as establishment cost for opening Jan Aushadhi Stores in the country.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
The Committee has recommended that the Department of
Pharmaceuticals should examine the possibility of increase in one time
grant from Rs. 2.5 lakhs to Rs. 3.5 lakhs towards established cost for
opening Jan Aushadhi Stores in the country.
It is true that the one time grant for opening of Jan Aushadhi Store
i.e. Rs. 2.50 lakhs was fixed in 2008 and that too it is extended only
to the operating agencies identified and nominated by the State
Government for running the JASs located in Government Hospitals. For

30
any JAS proposed outside the Government Hospital premises, no one
time grant is permitted. In place of one time grant, incentive @ 10%
of the sales value subject to the ceiling of Rs. 10,000/- per month for
a period of one year only is included. However , in case of North-Eastern
States and other naxal affected area and tribal areas, the rate of
incentive @ 15% of the monthly sales value subject to the ceiling of
Rs. 15,000 per month for a period of one year is offered.
It is also seen that one time financial grant is extended only to
those Jan Aushadhi Stores, opened in the Government hospital premises
where space is provided free of cost by the State Government. Whereas
in case of Jan Aushadhi Stores opened outside Government hospital
premises run by Private Entrepreneurs, un-employed Pharmacists, NGOs,
one time grant is not extended for the commencement of Jan Aushadhi
Stores. They are expected to have their own/hired space, establishment
cost of the stores as per the layout design of BPPI and other requirement
as per the Drug and Cosmetic law.
Suggestion of increasing the one time grant of Rs. 2.5 lakh to
Rs. 3.5 lakh was evaluated. It is learnt that the amount of Rs. 2.5 lakh
is sufficient to meet the expenses in connection with commencing of
operation of JAS. BPPI intends to focus more on ensuring supply of
504 medicines and J61 consumables strengthening supply chain and
strengthening BPPI.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals),
OM No. F .No. 54012(3)/2015-P1-IV , dated 10.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report)

31
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
Timely Supply of Medicines
Recommendation No. 6
It has also come to the notice of the Committee that supply of
listed medicines to far-flung JAS stores takes very long time specially
to States such as Jammu & Kashmir. The Committee, therefore, strongly
feel that warehouses should be opened in every State for stocking of
medicines so that the same are timely supplied to the JASs. The
Committee also feel that the supply chain for timely provision of JAS
medicines should be strengthened and streamlined as envisaged under
the New Business Plan and periodical inspection of the JASs should be
conducted by BPPI to ascertain the availability of medicines and the
action Taken Report thereon should be placed on the website of the
Department. In this regard, the Department in coordination with
State Governments and stakeholders may also work out the feasibility
of introducing mobile vans for supply of medicines to the people at far
flung areas of the State.
In this context, the Committee were informed that an IT based
management information system software has been installed to keep
track of availability of medicines at the JASs as well as super market.
This has become partially operational and the same is expected to
become fully operational by 31 January, 2015. The Committee hope
that the system might have become fully operational by this time to
maintain an efficient supply chain to distribute the generic medicines
to all the JASs seamlessly specially in the far flung and remote areas
of the country. However, the Committee would like to be apprised of
the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
BPPI has initiated various steps for improving the supply chain like
selection and appointment of C&F agents/Distributors in various States.
The administration of the Central Warehouse in Gurgaon has already
been handed over to experienced operating agency. The BPPI has also
appointed nodal officers at different locations for close monitoring of
the availability of medicine in JAS ensuring timely supply and distribution
to C&F and JAS.

32
IT based MIS software has already been established at CWH, C&F
and distributors level to keep track of availability of medicine at different
levels. The IT-based retail software has also been provided to every JAS
for accounting retail sale. Integration of the above two software ’s is in
progress and is expected to be completed by end of August 2015.
The recommendations regarding the feasibility of introducing mobile
vans for supply of medicine to the people at far flung areas of J&K and
also remote villages in other State is being looked into as per the Drug
and Cosmetic Act 1940 and rules 1945.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals),
OM No. F .No. 54012(3)/2015-P1-IV , dated 10.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter-I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANDRAO ADSUL,
07 October, 2015 Chairperson,
15 Asvina, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers.

33
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2015-16)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 07th October , 2015 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Anandrao Adsul— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Smt. Anju Bala
3. Shri B.N. Chandrappa
4. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta
5. Shri K. Ashok Kumar
6. Shri S. Rajendran
7. Dr. Kulamani Samal
8. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh
9. Shri Tasleemuddin
10. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya
12. Shri K. Parasaran
13. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
14. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy
15. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya
16. Shri Abdul Wahab
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava — Director

34
2. At the outset, the Hon ’ble Chairperson welcomed the members
of the Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:—
(a) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Fertilizers); and
(b) Action Taken Report on the subject “Jan Aushadhi Scheme” of
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals).
4. Both the draft Action Taken Reports were adopted by the
Committee without any amendment.
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to make
consequential changes, if any, arising out of the factual verification of
the Reports by the Department of Fertilizers and the Department of
Pharmaceuticals of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers and present
the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

35
APPENDIX II
[Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT (16TH LOK
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS
(2015-16) ON ‘JAN AUSHADHI SCHEME ’ OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS
AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS)
I. Total No. of Recommendations 09
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been 07
accepted by the Government:—
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8 and 9)
Percentage of Total 77.77%
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 0
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s
reply:—
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil)
Percentage of Total 0%
IV . Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 1
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:—
(Vide Recommendation No. 1)
Percentage of Total 11.11%
V . Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 1
replies of the Government are still awaited:—
(Vide Recommendation No. 6)
Percentage of Total 11.11%