 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
36 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Thirty First Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  "Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
 
 
 REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
   August, 2017/   Shravana, 1939 (Saka) 
  


Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 
 
 
CC&F No.36  
 
THIRTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Thirty First Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  "Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  10.08.2017 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2017 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
   August, 2017/   Shravana, 1939 (Saka)  


Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 
(i) 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) ………………………………... ii 
Introduction. …………………………………………………..………………………… iii 
Chapter I Report ……………….…………………………………………………..  
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2016-17) held on  09 August, 2017. 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Sixth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (201 6-17) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
 
 
  

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 
(ii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(2016-17) 
 
  Shri Anandrao Adsul - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N Chandrappa 
5. ShriSankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Innocent 
9. Shri K Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
11. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
12. Shri S. Rajendran  
13. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
14. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
15. Dr. Uma Saren 
16. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
17. Shri Taslimuddin 
18. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
19.  Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
20. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
21.  Dr. (Smt.) Ratna De (Nag) 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27. Shri K Parasaran 
28. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
29. Shri Abdul Wahab 
30. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
31.* Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava    - Director  
3. Shri R.C. Sharma    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri S. Vijayaraghavan   - Senior Committee Assistant 
 
* Demise of Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy, MP (RS) on 09.06.2017. 
 
 
 
 
 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
  
                                                                
 
(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(2016-2017) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on 
their behalf, present this Thirty Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken 
by the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Thirty 
First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (201 6-2017) on Demands for Grants (201 7-2018) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
 
2. The Thirty First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 20.03.2017. The Action 
Taken replies of Gov ernment to all observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 21.07.2016.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (201 6-2017) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
09.08.2017.  
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/  
recommendations contained in the Thirty First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                        ANANDRAO ADSUL 
09 August,  2017                           Chairperson 
18 Shravana, 1939 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on  
                                    Chemicals and Fertilizers 
  

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2016-17) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Demands 
for Grants (20 17-18)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of  
Fertilizers) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 20.3.2017. In all, the Committee made 10 
Observations / Recommendations in the Report. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were requested to 
furnish replies to the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Thirty First Report 
within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e. by 20.6.2017. The 
Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 10 Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from  the Minist ry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers  (Department of  Fertilizers) vide their O.M. No.  14 (1)/2016 -Fin 
(Vol 1) dated 21.7.2017.  These Replies have been examined and categorized as follows:-  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government- 
 Rec. Nos. 1, 2,3,7 and 9  
                                                 (Total =5) 
  This may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report    
   
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply-  
Sl. No. Nil  
        (Total =0) 
  This may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report    
       
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration-  
      Rec. No. 5 and 10    
           (Total=2) 
  This may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report    
        
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  final replies of the 
Government are still awaited- 
 Rec. Nos. 4, 6 and 8.   
                   (Total =3) 
  This may be included in Chapter V of the Draft Report    
       
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the  Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and the Final Replies in 
respect of Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter V for which final 
replies are still awaited should be furnished expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. Need to Provide Incentive to Fertilizers Sector 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl.No.1 
 
5. While stressing that the Chemicals Fertilizers are vital for ensuring the country's food 
security, the Committee had recommended as under:    

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 
'The Committee note that the installed capacity of DAP &  complex fertilizers of 
fertilizer manufacturing units in the country during 2016 -17 has reached to the level 
of 146 lakh MT as against 144.04 lakh MT in 2015-16. The actual production of all the 
fertilizers during the year 2015 -16 was 413.03 Lakh MT. The Committee are glad to 
note that the estimated production of all the fertilizers during the year 2016 -17 is 
430.99 Lakh MT showing an increase of more than 4% in comparison to previous 
year. At present, there are 30 large size urea plants in the country, ma nufacturing 
urea annually, 21 units produce DAP and complex fertilizers and 2 units manufacture 
Ammonium Sulphate as by -product. The country is however, fully dependent on 
imports in Potassic sector and to the extent of 90% in Phosphatic sector in the form  
of either finished products or its raw material. Non availability of raw material is the 
main factor which has impeded the self -sufficiency in P&K fertilizers in the country. 
Other factors which impeded growth in fertilizer sector is low profitability, de lay in 
payment of subsidy, inadequate gas availability in the country and no favorable tax 
incentives for indigenous manufacturers. 
 
The Committee are of the view that chemical fertilizers are vital for ensuring the 
country's food security and felt concerned about the low profitability of the sector 
and also absence of any incentives like low taxes/duties to indigenous fertilizer 
manufacturers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to evaluate 
the reasons for the low profitability of the  sector and also to look into the tax 
structure and work out and send a proposal for exemption of taxes for indigenous 
fertilizer manufacturers to Ministry of Finance to boost their profitability. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
6. In reply to the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "The objective of Government’s policy is to maximize indigenous production of 
nitrogenous fertilizers based on utilization of indigenous feedstock to reach self -
sufficiency levels. For sustained agricultural growth and to promote balanced 
nutrient application, it is imperative that fertilizers are made available to farmers at 
affordable prices.  With this objective, urea being the only controlled fertilizer, is sold 
at statutorily notified uniform MRP of Rs 5360/ - per MT (exclusive of the 
Central/State Taxes).  
 The difference between the delivered cost of urea at farm gate and MRP payable by 
the farmer is given as subsidy to the fertilizer manufacturer/importer by the 
Government of India. The subsidy is paid to the urea manufacturing units through 
concession rates comprising of Fixed Cost and Variable Cost. The urea manufacturing 
units are ensured viable returns in the form of Fixed Costs. 
 Further, the urea manufacturing units are incentivized for the production beyond re -
assessed capacity. 
 The Department h as put a cap of 12% profit in the P&K fertilizer sector. The 
Department declares the MRP of P&K Fertilizers as unreasonable if MRP is found to 
include more than 12% profit to P&K  fertilizer manufacturers/ importers. In case, 
where after scrutiny, unreasona bleness of MRP is established or where there is no 
correlation between the cost of production or acquisition and the MRP printed on the 
bags, the subsidy may be restricted or denied even if the product is otherwise eligible 
for subsidy under NBS. In proven case of abuse of subsidy mechanism, Department of 
Fertilizers, on the recommendation of Inter -Ministerial Committee (IMC) may 
exclude any grade/grades of fertilizers of a particular company or the fertilizer 
company itself from the NBS Scheme. 
In respect of tax benefits to the indigenous manufacturers of P&K fertilizers, it is 
informed that a proposal for reduction in Customs Duty on raw materials used for 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
indigenous production of P&K fertilizers was forwarded to Ministry of Finance 
during each of the last  three years for consideration in the budget proposals. 
However, the above proposal has not been considered yet. 
  The Department has been taking up the matter with Ministry of Finance to reduce 
the taxes  on Fertilizers. As a result of these efforts, the Government has finally 
reduced the taxes from 12% to 5% on fertilizers under GST. 
 Accordingly, with the implementation of GST w.e.f 01.07.2017, average weighted 
MRP of has come down to 5909/tonne(or Rs.295.47 per 50 Kg b ag) as compared to 
the previous (before GST) All India weighted average of Rs.5923/tonne (or Rs.296.18 
per Kg bag)". 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
7. While acknowledging the steady growth of the production of fertilizers in the 
country, the Committee had noted that import of fertilizer to the extent of 90% 
in phosphatic sector in the form of either finished products or its raw material 
is an area of con cern which has impeded the self sufficiency in phosphorus and 
Potassium fertilizers in the country. As Chemical fertilizers are vital for 
securing food security and also ameliorating the lot of farmers in the country, 
the Committee recommended the Departme nt to evaluate the reasons for low 
profitability of the sector and also look into the tax structure and send a 
proposal for exemption of taxes for indigenous fertilizer manufacturers to 
Ministry of Finance to boost their profitability.  
 In this regard, th e Department in its Action taken replies informed that the 
objective of Government's policy was to maximize indigenous production of 
nitrogenous fertilizers based on utilization of indigenous feed stock to reach 
self sufficiency levels.  With the objective  of sustained agricultural growth and 
to promote balanced nutrient application and also making available of 
fertilizers to farmers at affordable prices, urea being  the only controlled 
fertilizers is sold at statutorily notified uniform MRP of Rs. 5360/ - per MT 
(exclusive of the central/State taxes) 
 The difference between the delivered cost of urea at farm gate and MRP 
payable by the farmer was given as subsidy to the fertilizer 
manufacturer/importer by the Government of India.  The subsidy is paid to the 
urea manufacturing units are incentivized for the production beyond 
reassessed capacity. The Department has put a cap of 12% profit to P&K 
fertilizer manufacturer/importers.  
 As regards tax benefit to the indigenous manufacturers of P&K fertilizers, a 
proposal for reduction in customs duty on raw materials used for indigenous 
production of P&K fertilizers was forwarded to Ministry of finance each of the 
last three years for consideration in the budget proposals which is yet to be 
considered. 
 The Department has been taking up the matter with the Ministry of Finance to 
reduce the taxes on fertilizers, as a result, the Government had reduced the 
taxes from 12% to 5% on fertilizers under GST w.e.f. 01.07.2017 due to which 
average weighted MRP has come down to Rs. 295.47 per 50 KG bag as 
compared to the previous (before GST) All India weighted average of Rs. 296.18 
per 50 Kg. bag).   
 The Committee are satisfied to note that the Government has accepted the 
Committee's recommendation and making efforts for reduct ion in taxes and in 
customs duty on raw materials used for indigenous production of P&K 
fertilizers.  It is however, pained to note that Ministry of Finance has still not 
considered the proposal for reduction in customs duty on raw materials used 
for indigenous production of P&K fertilizers, which are imported due to their 
unavailability in the country.  The Committee expect that the Department will 
continue to strongly take up the issue for reduction in customs duty on raw 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
material used for indigenous prod uction of P&K fertilizers with Ministry of 
Finance.  Further, the Committee have noted that the Department is silent on 
its recommendation to evaluate the reasons for low profitability of the sector.  
The Committee, therefore, reiterate  its recommendations  and would like the 
Department to have a detailed study in this regard and apprise the Committee 
of the action taken in the matter.  
 
B.  Need for Budgetary allocation of subsidy 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.2 
 
8. While emphasizing the need for concerted efforts  to be made by the Department to 
get its budgetary allocation of subsidy, the committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that the projected requirement of the Department under Non -
plan section for the year 2014 -15 was Rs.156420.48 Crore (gros s) against which RE 
allocation was Rs.75092.73 Crore and the actual expenditure was Rs.75089.67 Crore, 
although the actual requirement was much higher as the Department had to carry 
over liabilities of Rs.31830.77 Crore at the end of the year. Against the  projected 
requirement of Rs.108691.44 Crore (gross) for the year 2015 -16, the Department 
was allocated an amount of Rs.76562.47 Crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure 
during the year was Rs.76561.65 Crore. The Department has carry over liabilities of  
Rs.43356.23 Crore at the end of the year. Against the projected requirement of 
Rs.100945.66 Crore for the year 2016 -17, the Department was allocated an amount 
of Rs.74130.85 Crore at RE stage. Even BE 2017-18 is kept at Rs.74264.71 Crore. 
 
In view of the forgoing, the Committee strongly feel that the funds allocated to the 
Department by the Ministry of Finance is abysmally low in comparison to their 
projected requirement. As a result, a huge amount of carryover liability of subsidy 
burden is piling up ever y year. As a reason of which, the subsidy continues to remain 
unpaid to the fertilizer companies. During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the 
Department had also accepted the fact that the Department never gets exactly what is 
being demanded. The C ommittee are of the view that unpaid arrears of subsidy are 
affecting the fertilizers companies adversely. This delay in payment of subsidy is also 
one of the factors which has impeded growth in the fertilizers sector. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend t hat the Department of Fertilizers should make concerted 
efforts to get its budgetary allocation of subsidy increased by Ministry of Finance to 
commensurate with its requirement. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
9. In reply to the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "The Department had projected a requirement of Rs.110388.81 Crore at RE 2016 -17 
that included the carry over liabilities of Rs.43356.23 Crore of previous years. 
However, Ministry of Finance granted no additional amount over the original BE 
allocation of Rs.74100.00 Crore for 2016 -17. For BE 2017 -18 a requirement of 
Rs.74245.00 Crore was projected as the estimated  requirement in 2017 -18 without 
any carry over liabilities of previous year as the same could only be known after the 
close of FY 2016-17.  Carry over liabilities would be projected at RE 2017 -18 stage to 
MOF for additional allocation. Against the projecte d requirement of Rs.74245.00 
Crore at BE 2017-18, MOF has allocated an amount of Rs.74232.00 Crore only 
 In order to clear the pendency of bills of Indigenous Urea and Indigenous P&K 
Fertilizers, the Department had made a Special Banking Arrangement for an  amount 
of Rs.9969 Crore in 2016-17, which has since been disbursed to Indigenous Urea and 
Indigenous P&K Fertilizers units and repaid to bank." 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
10. The Committee while examining yearwise allocation of funds noted that 
Department of Fertilizers did not get adequate budgetary allocation during the 
last four years commensurate to their projected requirement.  As a result, a 
huge amount of carryover liabi lity of subsidy was piling up every year.  This 
unpaid arrears of subsidy was affecting the fertilizers companies adversely and 
also one of t he factors which had  impeded growth in the fertilizer sector.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommended that the Depar tment of fertilizers should 
make concerted efforts to get its budgetary allocation of subsidy increased by 
Ministry of finance commensurate with its requirement. 
 In this regard, the Department in its Action Taken Replies informed that the 
Department had projected a requirement of Rs. 110388.81 crore at RE 2016 -17 
that included the carry over liability of Rs 43356.23 crore of previous years.  
However, Ministry of finance granted no additional amount over the original 
BE allocation of Rs 74,100,00 crore for the year 2016 -17.  For BE 2017 -18 a 
requirement of Rs. 74245.00 crore was projected as estimated requirement 
without any carry over liabilities of previous year as the same could only be 
known after the close of FY 2016 -17.  Carry over liabilities would -be projected 
at RE 2017-18 stage to Ministry of Finance for additional allocation. Further, in 
order to clear the pendency of bills of indigenous urea and indigenous P&K 
fertilizers, the Department had made a special Banking Arrangement for an 
amount of Rs. 9969 crore in 2016 -17, which has since been disbursed to 
indigenous urea and indigenous P&K fertilizes units and repaid to Bank. 
 The Committee are pained to note that Ministry of finance is successively not 
allocating the budgetary allocation including ca rryover liability of subsidy 
burden to the Department of fertilizers which is adversely affecting the 
fertilizer sector.  However, the Committee are satisfied to note that the 
Department of fertilizers is making efforts to get its budgetary allocation 
increased commensurate with its requirement before the Ministry of finance. 
In this regard the Committee desire that efforts be made at the Ministry's level 
to get the required amount from Ministry of Finance .  While appreciating  the 
efforts of the Department  of Fertilizers  for making special Banking 
Arrangement for an amount of Rs 9969 crore in 2016 -17 for clearing the 
pendency of bills of indigenous urea and indigenous P&K fertilizers units which 
would boost the confidence of the companies, t he Committee expe ct the 
Department to make concerted efforts to get its budgetary allocation of subsidy 
increased at RE stage in 2017-18 and apprise the committee in this regard. 
 
C. Need for investment in R&D Fertilizers Sector 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.3 
 
 11. While emphasizing the need for investment in R&D Fertilizers Sector, the committee 
had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that the Science & Technology (S&T) Programme of 
Department of Fertilizers primarily lays emphasis at research & development of 
processes and equipments. The Department has been taking up project proposals 
from Engineering/Research Institutions/fertilizer industry on indigenous research & 
development in the field of fertilizer industry for ensuring optimum levels and 
international stan dards in terms of achieving higher capacity utilization, 
upgradation/modernization of process technologies & equipment to reduce the 
specific energy consumption and pollutants including Coal and Coal Bed Methane as 
feedstocks for manufacturing fertilizers.  The Committee further, note that 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
Department of Fertilizers has taken a major initiative by setting up an exclusive 
institution for promotion of research, S&T etc., in the fertilizer sector. The Indian  
Council of Fertilizer & Nutrient Research (ICFNR) has been set up on 16.09.2016. 
 
ICFNR has a Governing Council under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers and an Executive Council under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (Fertilizers), The terms of reference of ICFNR inter alia  include to 
undertake/promote research in the area of fertilizer manufacturing technology, use 
of raw material and innovation in fertilizer products through partnership ad 
collaboration with various research institutions, fertilizer industry and other 
stakeholders, etc. R&D is primarily driven by the industry. The ICFNR, agency which 
has been recently created within the Ministry is still in the process of being grounded. 
 
Further, for the industry side, the Department of Public Enterprises keeps providing 
guidance to the public sector enterprises that they must allocate a certain proportion 
of their expenditure to research in their subject area. It is essentially an industry 
driven exercise where they identify the problem areas, the areas of research and 
create the necessary facilities or get it executed by the academic institutions etc. 
 
In view of the above, the Committee are perturbed to note that a very small provision 
for S&T scheme was made during 2012 -13 to 2014 -15 and no funds were allocated 
during 2014-15 to 2016 -17. Further, the actual expenditure capital during the year 
2013-14, 2014 -15, 2015 -16 were Rs.0.19 Crore, Rs.0.24 Crore and nil respectively. 
The Committee are of the view that for the growth and development of the Chemicals 
and Fertilizers industries, there is a need to increase expenditure under the R&D. The 
Committee, expect the Department to ensure that the new agency which has recently  
been created within the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers is operationalized 
expeditiously so that latest fertilizers and nutrient research can be provided to the 
Chemicals and Fertilizers industries. The Committee therefore, recommend the 
Department to make full utilization of the allocated funds for the purpose and also 
ensure that the Fertilizer PSUs  allocate their certain proportion of expenditure 
towards research in fertilizer sector as mandated by the Department of Public 
Enterprises. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
12. In reply to the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "Science & Technology Scheme, is no more operative w.e.f. 01.04.2016. Therefore, no 
fund allocation was provided for the years 2016 -17 & 2017-18. Accordingly, no new 
proposal was invited. However, D/o Fertilizers has taken a major initiative by setting 
up an exclusive institution for promotion of research, S&T etc. in the fertilizer sector. 
In order to promote research in the field of fert ilizers, Indian Council for Fertilizers 
and Nutrient Research (ICFNR), an institution exclusively devoted to promotion of 
research in fertilizer sector under the Department of fertilizers has been set up on 
16.09.2016. ICFNR has a Governing Council under t he chairmanship of Minister of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers and an Executive Committee under the chairmanship of 
Secretary (Fertilizers).   
 The first meeting of Governing Council of ICFNR under the chairmanship of Hon’ble 
Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers and Parliamentary Affairs was held on 
09.11.2016. Thereafter, under the chairmanship of Secretary (Fertilizers), first 
meeting of Executive Committee was held on 23.12.2016 & three sub -groups were 
constituted to look into specific proposals rel ating to “Promotion of bio -fertilizers”, 
“Development of eco-friendly micro-nutrients and pesticide coated controlled release 
fertilizers” and “Nano natural fertilizers” and to submit their recommendations. Sub -

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
Groups have submitted recommendations on the above proposals. A meeting of 
Executive Committee will be held soon to take final decision on the aforesaid projects 
based upon recommendations of sub-groups. 
 As regards allocation by fertilizer PSUs towards research in fertilizer sector, the 
National Fer tilizer Ltd (NFL) and Rashtriya Chemical and Fertilizer Ltd (RCF) have 
made an allocation of Rs.34.00 Lakh and Rs.64.83 Lakh respectively." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
13. The Committee had noted that the science & Technology (S&T) programme of 
the Departme nt of Fertilizers primarily la id emphasis at R esearch & 
Development of processes & equipments and it has been taking up project 
proposals from various research institutions and industries.   
 The Committee further noted that Department of Fertilizers had t aken a major 
initiative by creating an exclusive institution namely The Indian Council of 
Fertilizers & Nutrient Research (ICFNR) on 19.09.2016.  The terms of reference 
of ICFNR inter -alia included to undertake and promote research in the area of 
fertilizer manufacturing technology, use of raw material and innovation in 
fertilizer products through partnership and collaboration with various 
research institutions, fertilizer industry and other stakeholders.   
 Further, Department of Public Enterprises had man dated to the public sector 
enterprises that they must allocate a certain proportion of their expenditure to 
research in their area. 
 The Committee was pained to note that a very small provision for the S&T 
scheme was made during 2012 -2013 - 2014-2015 and n o funds were allocated 
during 2014 -2015 to 2016 -2017.  Further, the actual expenditure capital 
during the year 2013 -2014, 2014 -2015 were Rs.0.19 crore, Rs.0.24 crore and 
nil respectively.  
 The Committee, therefore, desired that new institution for R&D nam ely The 
Indian Council of Fertilizer and Nutrient Research (ICFNR) be operationalised 
expeditiously so that latest fertilizer and Nutrient -research could be provided 
to chemicals and fertilizers industries.  
 The Committee, further expected the Department to make full utilization of the 
allocated funds for the purpose of research and development and also ensure 
that the Fertilizer PSUs allocated their certain proportion of expenditure 
towards research in fertilizers sector as mandatory by the Department of 
Public Enterprises.  
 In this regard, the Department in its Action Taken Replies informed that 
Science & Technology scheme, was no more operative w.e.f. 01.04.2016.  
Therefore, no fund allocation was provided for the years 2016 -17 & 2017 -18.  
Accordingly, no new proposal was invited.  However, for promotion of research 
in the field of fertilizers, Indian Council for Fertilizer and Nutrient Research 
(ICFNR) was created on 16.09.2016.  IFFNR has a Governing Council under the 
Chairmanship of Ministry of Chemic als and Fertilizers and an executive 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Fertilizers). 
 As regards  the allocation by fertilizer PSUs towards research in fertilizer 
sector, the National Fertilizer Ltd. (NFL) and Rashtriya Chemica l and Fertilizers 
Ltd. (RCF) had  made an allocation of Rs.34 lakh and Rs.64.83 lakh respectively.  
 The Committee note that Research and Development has been a neglected area 
in fertilizer sector over the past many years which is reflected in the allocati on 
of budget and actual expenditure made thereon over the years.  Further, the 
Committee express its displeasure over the fact that Indian Council for 
Fertilizers and Nutrient Research (ICFNR)  which was created on 19.09.2016 is 
still has to take a concrete  shape for its establishment on the g round.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate its earlier recommendation for expeditious 
operationalization of ICFNR with adequate allocation of funds and the 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
Department make optimum utilization of the allocated funds for the purpose.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
D. Need for providing DBT to farmers 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.4 
 
14.  While emphasizing the need for providing DBT to farmers, the committee had 
recommended as under:- 
"The Committee have time and again emphasized the need for expeditious 
implementation of Direct Benefits Transfer (DBT) system which was conceptualized 
in 2011 on the recommendation of Task Force constructed by the Ministry of Finance 
to recommend implementable solution for direct transfer subsidy on kerosene, LPG 
and fertilizers. The Task Force has suggested four phase approach for direct 
disbursement of fertilizer subsidy to the intended beneficiaries. In the Phase I: 
Information visibility till t he retailer's level where part subsidy is disbursed to the 
manufacturers on the basis of the information of retail acknowledgements reported 
in mFMS (Mobile Fertilizers Management System), Phase II: Part subsidy payment to 
the manufacturers on the basis of  the information of retailer sales of fertilizers 
captured in mFMS., Phase III: Subsidy payment to the retail customer on the basis of 
fertilizer sales made to him/her, Phase IV: Subsidy payment to the farmer on the 
basis of details of sales made to him/her. 
In divergence from the above the Committee have been informed that 100% subsidy 
on various fertilizer grades shall be released to the fertilizer companies instead of the 
beneficiaries, on the basis of actual sales made by the retailer to the beneficiari es. 
Initially, the modified subsidy procedure under DBT System will be introduced on 
pilot basis in 16 select districts. Three more districts, Dhanbad in Jharkhand, 
Begusarai in Bihar and Gorakhpur in UP have been included in the pilot project. The 
Committee are also given to understand that the DBT in fertilizer subsidy is slightly 
different from the beneficiary directed subsidy administrated in LPG, etc. as 
traditionally subsidy in the fertilizer sector has been given to industry and the 
difference of cos t of production and margin of profit is passed on to the farmers in 
the form of subsidized rates. 
 
The Committee are not satisfied with the performance of the Department in 
implementing DBT Scheme, and are of the view that the Department has not been 
able to implement the Scheme in a time bound manner which was conceptualized in 
2011. The Committee are unhappy regarding modification made in the subsidy 
procedure under DBT System, wherein, 100% subsidy on various grades is to be 
released to the fertilizers c ompanies instead of the beneficiary. The Committee 
expect that after implementation of DBT, divergence or smuggling of fertilizer will be 
reduced to a large extent and the Government will save subsidy eventually. The 
Committee believe that the soil Health Card which contains particulars like name of 
the farmer, land holding, irrigated area, bank details etc., may be beneficial in 
disbursing subsidy directly in the farmer's bank account. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department to reconsider i ts decision and disburse subsidy to 
farmer directly. The Committee also,  
reiterate its earlier recommendation that the Department of fertilizer in coordination 
with the Ministry of Agriculture may make  earnest efforts towards expeditions 
implementation of Soil Health card scheme and ensure that every farmers is provided 
with a Soil Health card having bank details for direct transfer of subsidy to them. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
15. In reply to the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
"Mobile Fertilizer Monitoring System  (mFMS) Phase -I was introduced in November 
2012 in which the receipt of fertilizers upto the retailers is being tracked through 
Mobile based Fertilizer Monitoring System (mFMS).  The Department of Fertilizers is 
implementing Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme on pilot basis in 19 districts.  
The pilot DBT captures the details of retailer sales through PoS devices and 
beneficiary/buyer details (as proposed in mFMS Phase-II).   
Under the conventional DBT being implemented  in other Government Welfare 
Schemes such as LPG, the subsidy amount is directly transferred to beneficiaries 
immediately after purchase of the subsidized product by the beneficiary. However, in 
case of fertilizer subsidy the subsidy will be released to th e fertilizer company after 
the sale of fertilizers by the retailers to beneficiary and submission of claim to Dept. 
of Fertilizers. All sales of fertilizers will be made through Point of Sale (PoS) devices 
at retailer level. The subsidized fertilizers will  be available to the beneficiaries at 
subsidized MRP.  
Implementation of DBT in Fertilizers like other traditional DBT schemes is complex 
due to the following: 
i. Beneficiary is not defined. 
ii. Entitlement of the beneficiary is not defined. 
iii. Subsidy amount is more than twice of subsidized price.  
iv. Moving MRP to Market Price will cause huge burden on farmers as they would 
be required to pay the market price upfront. 
v. Multiple products (Urea, Phosphatic and Potassic etc.) have varied subsidy 
amounts. 
vi. Subsidy component varies from company to company even for the same 
product. 
Further, to facilitate smooth rollout of DBT and passing on the intended benefits of DBT in 
fertilizers to the end beneficiaries, the Department of Fertilizers has taken up w ith D/o 
Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare to expedite the issue/distribution of the Soil 
Health Cards to the targeted beneficiaries (copy enclosed at Annexure-I)." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
16. The Committee noted that on the basis of the sugges tion of the Task force 
constituted in 2011 by Ministry of Finance, the Department of fertilizers was 
required to transfer subsidy on fertilizers directly t o farmers in four phases.  
While dwelling upon the Direct Benefit Transfer  (DBT) scheme, the 
Department of Fertilizers informed that 100 percent subsidy on various 
fertilizer grades shall be released to the fertilizer companies instead of the 
beneficiaries on the basis of actual sales made by the retailers to the 
beneficiaries.  Initi ally, the modified subsidy procedure under DBT system 
would be introduced on pilot basis in 19 districts.  The Committee found that 
the Department was not able to implement the scheme in a time bound manner 
as envisaged and modification made in the subsidy  procedure under DBT 
system was not in right direction.  The Committee suggested the Department to 
reconsider its decision and disburse subsidy to farmers directly.  The 
Committee further suggested that in coordination with the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers welfare earnest efforts  should be made towards 
expeditious implementation of Soil Health Scheme and ensure that every 
farmers was provided with a Soil Health Card  having bank details for direct 
transfer of subsidy to them. 
 In this regard, the Department in its Action Taken replies informed that Mobile 
Fertilizer Monitoring System  (mFMS) Phase -I was introduced in November 
2012 in which the receipt of fertilizers upto the retailers was being tracked 
through Mobile based Fertilizer Monitoring System (mFMS).  The Department 
of Fertilizers was  implementing Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme on pilot 
basis in 19 di stricts.  The pilot DBT captured  the details of retailer sales 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
through PoS devices and beneficiary/buyer details (as proposed in mFMS 
Phase-II).   
 Under the conventional DBT being implemented in other Government Welfare 
Schemes such as LPG, the subsidy a mount was  directly transferred to 
beneficiaries immediately after purchase of the subsidized product by the 
beneficiary. However, in case of fertilizer subsidy the subsidy would be 
released to the fertilizer company after the sale of fertilizers by the retailers to  
beneficiary and submission of claim to Dept. of Fertilizers. All sales of 
fertilizers would be made through Point of Sale (PoS) devices at retailer level. 
The subsidized fertilizers will be available to the beneficiaries at subsidized 
MRP.  Implementation of DBT in Fertilizers like other traditional DBT schemes 
is complex  
 Further, to facilitate smooth rollout of DBT and passing on the intended 
benefits of DBT in fertilizers to the end beneficiaries, the Department of 
Fertilizers had taken up with D/o Agr iculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare 
to expedite the issue/distribution of the Soil Health Cards to the targeted 
beneficiaries. 
 The Committee are distressed to note that  Department is unable to implement 
the DBT Scheme citing various reasons including  the experience gained in 
implementing DBT scheme in 19 pilot districts.  Though Committee agree with 
the Department that the DBT scheme is comp lex compared to other traditional 
DBT scheme s but it cannot be assumed as the basis for deviation in 
implementation of the scheme.  Further, the Department is silent on the 
outcome of the study on 19 pilot  districts which were chosen for 
implementation of the scheme.  While appreciating the efforts made by the  
Department regarding the issue of soil health card s with the Department of 
Agriculture, C ooperation & Farmers welfare for smooth roll out of DBT and 
passing on the intended benefits of DBT in ferti lizers to the end beneficiaries, 
the Committee strongly recommend that other issues like Definition of 
beneficiaries, Entitlement of beneficiaries, Fixation of subsidy,  MRP vs Market 
price and  waived subsidy amounts for different fertilizers shall also be 
resolved expeditiously in a time bound manner 
    Considering the importance of the scheme, the Committee reiterate to 
implement the scheme to benefit the end users.  The Committee would like to 
be apprised of tangible efforts in terms of concrete deliverables.  
 
E. New Investment Policy - 2012 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.5 
 
17. With regard to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector to reduce India’s import 
dependency in urea production, the committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that the New Investment Policy 2012 (NIP -2012) was notified 
by the Government on 2nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7th October 
2014 in order to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector to reduce India’s import 
dependency in urea production. The Department at present has received 06 
proposals for setting up o f Revamp, Expansion, Revival and Greenfield plants. The 
Department in April, 2015 had advised all the project proponents to furnish Bank 
Guarantee & take all necessary steps as per the provisions of NIP -2012 and its 
amendment. In this regard, three project  proponents viz., Chambal Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited, Kanpur Fertilizers & Cement Limited and Matix have written 
letters to the Department in respect of their proposals. However, no communication 
has been received from Indo -Gulf Fertilizers Limited an d Nagarjuna Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited. As far as Matrics Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited is concerned, 
they have been requesting for exemption from bank guarantee. To this effect PDIL 
has been deputed to see the level of execution of the project as M FCL are ready for 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
commissioning. Further, vide letter dated 29 th February, 2016 and 11 th January, 
2017, the Department of Fertilizers has advised the other project proponents to 
provide the present status of their projects and furnish the Bank Guarantee as per the 
provisions of NIP-2012 and its amendment. 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that apart from issuing the reminders, no 
progress has been made since the last year in implementing the New Investment 
Policy which was notified on 2 nd January, 2013. T he Committee further note that the 
commissioning of new fertilizer plant takes around 3 to 3.5 years from the zero date. 
In view of this, it is imperative that these investment proposals are implemented at 
the earliest. Considering the importance of the fr esh investment in the fertilizer 
sector, the Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Department of 
Fertilizers should make more sustained and proactive efforts to review periodically 
the progress made by the project proponents in a time bo und manner and take 
corrective measures to ensure their timely execution. The Department may also take 
up the matter to furnish the Bank Guarantee regularly with the project proponents & 
also to take all necessary further steps as per the provisions of NIP-2012. Further, the 
Department is also expected to take decision regarding MFCL expeditiously and press 
upon PDIL to come out with a report without any delay. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
18. In reply to the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"At present, there are following 6 proposals for setting up of Greenfield and 
Brownfield (Expansion) projects received under  NIP-2012 and its amendment with 
the Department of Fertilizers: -    
 
S. No. Company Projects Ownership State 
1. 9
. 
Kanpur Fertilizers & 
Cement Limited 
Greenfield Project at 
Jabalpur 
Private Madhya 
Pradesh 
2. 2
. 
Indo-Gulf Fertilizers 
Limited –Jagdishpur 
Brownfield Expansion 
urea project at Jagdishpur. 
Private Uttar Pradesh 
3. 3
. 
Chambal Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited -
Gadepan 
Brownfield of Ammonia -
Urea units at Gadepan -
Kota.  
Private  Rajasthan 
4. 6
. 
Matix Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited, 
Panagarh 
Greenfield/Brownfield 
Ammonia-Urea Fertilizers 
Complex at Panagarh.   
Private West Bengal 
5. 7
. 
Rashtriya Chemicals & 
Fertilizers Limited-Thal 
Brownfield Ammonia -
Urea Expansion project at 
Thal. 
CPSU  Maharashtra 
6. 1
1
. 
Nagarjuna Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Ltd. 
Brownfield Project at 
Kakinada, Andhra 
Pradesh. 
Private Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
As per para (ii) of the amendment to NIP -2012, all the project proponents are 
required to furnish Bank Guarantee (BG) of Rs. 300.00 Crore for each project linked 
to milestone in the project cycle, to ensure seriousness/credibility of the project 
proponents under NIP -2012 and for timely execution of the projects.   Out of Rs. 
300.00 Crore, Rs. 100.00 Crore of BG is to be released after finalization of Lump sum 
Turn Key (LSTK)/Engineeri ng Procurement Construction (EPC) contractors and 
release of advance to the contractor’s account; Rs. 100.00 Crore on completion of 
requirements ordering and supply to the site or midpoint of the project cycle, 
whichever is earlier, and the balance of Rs. 100.00 Crore of BG on completion of the 
project.  PSUs are, however, exempted from furnishing the BG. 
This Department vide its letter dated 21 st April, 2015 and had advised all the project 
proponents to furnish Bank Guarantee &  take all necessary steps as per the 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
provisions of NIP-2012 and its amendment.  In this regard, three project proponents 
viz., Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (CFCL), Kanpur Fertilizers & Cement 
Limited (KFCL) and Matix have written letter to this Department in respect of their 
proposals, the details of which are as follows: - 
 
S. No. Company Present Status 
1. CFCL-
Brownfield 
of 
Ammonia-
Urea units 
at 
Gadepan-
Kota 
As per the terms of the NIP Policy, CFCL has furnished the 
Bank Guarantee of Rs. 300 Crore to the Government of 
India. On achieving the first milestone of the project, Rs 
100 Crore has been released to CFCL. 
 
2. KFCL-
Greenfield 
project at 
Jabalpur 
The request of KFCL, Jai Prakash Associates Limited for 
allocation of sufficient quantity of gas for the proposed 
urea plant at Jabalpur and to expedite the Surat - Paradip 
gas pipeline with a provision to connect Jabalpur to this 
pipeline was taken up with MoP&NG. 
 
 In this regard, GAIL informed that they are presently 
carrying out detailed route survey of Dhamra- Ang ul-Durg 
Section of Surat -Paradip-Dhamra Pipeline along with a 
spurline to Balaghat/Jabalpur. GAIL has requested to 
provide the indicative schedule/ plan for setting up a 
fertilizer plant at Balaghat/Jabalpur. 
In response t o the above letter of GAIL, KFCL has 
communicated that the acquisition of the desired land is 
under process by the state government, pending which, it 
would be difficult for them to communicate the indicative 
schedule. Subsequent to the land allotment, the y will be 
starting the process for environment clearance. KFCL has 
indicated that the project for setting up a Greenfield 
fertilizer unit will take 36 months from receipt of 
Environment clearance.  
The same has been informed to MoP&NG. 
3. Matix Matix Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited has proposed to set 
up a Greenfield Project of 3 Million Metric Tonne Per 
Annum gas based Ammonia -Urea complex (Train -I & II) at 
Pannagarh, West Bengal  with the investment of over Rs. 
6000 Crore.   The Matix plant will use Coal B ed Methane 
(CBM) gas as feedstock for manufacturing urea.   Matix has 
confirmed its readiness to commence production of urea 
subject to the availability of minimum 1.7 mmscmd of 
CBM.  There is no domestic gas allocation for this project 
by the Government of  India and also the unit is not 
connected to National Gas Grid Network.  In order to 
facilitate the commissioning of plant, DoF has taken up the 
matter of allocation of CBM Gas with MoP&NG. 
Matix has requested for the exemption of Bank 
Guarantee for Train-I. The request of Matix has been 
examined by the Committee of Secretaries constituted 
under amendment to NIP -2012. During its meeting held  
on 29 th June, 2017 it has decided that Matix will have to 
submit Rs.300.00 Crore BG as per NIP -2012 read with its 
amendment. Rs.200.00 Crore will be released in view of 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
attainment of first two milestones.  
      So far as Train -II is concerned, vide letter dated 24 th 
April, 2016, Matix has informed that they shall take all 
necessary action as required and also take steps to achieve 
Financial Closure.  They agree to submit Bank Guarantee 
on achieving financial closure but before making any 
LSTK/EPC financially effective. 
 
However, no communication has been received from Indo -Gulf Fertilizers Limited 
(IGFL) and Nagarjuna Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (NFCL). Vide letter dated 29 th 
February, 2016 and 11 th January, 2017, Department of Fertilizers has advised the 
project proponents to provide the present status of the project and furnish the Bank 
Guarantee as per the provisions of NIP-2012 and its amendment." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
19. The Committee noted that the New Investment Policy 2012 was notified by the 
Government on 2nd January, 2013 and its amendment was made on 7th 
October, 2014 in order to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector to reduce 
India's import dependency in urea production.  Departm ent received 06 
proposals for setting up of Greenfield and Brownfield (Expansion) projects 
under NIP -2012 and its amendment.  The Department o n 21 April 2015 had 
advised all the project proponents to furnish bank guarantee  and take all 
necessary steps, M atrix Fertilizer & Chemicals Limited had requested the 
Department for  exemption from bank guarantee.  In this regard, PDIL was 
deputed to see the leve l of execution of the project as  MFCL was ready for 
commissioning.  Further, vide letter dated 29th February , 2016 and 11th 
January 2017, the Department of Fertilizers had advised the other project 
proponents to provide up to date status of their projects.  The Committee, 
advised the Department of fertilizers to make more sustained and proactive 
efforts to review periodically the progress made by the project proponent s in a 
time bound manner and take connective measures to ensure their timely 
execution.  It was also recommended by the Committee that t he Department of 
Fertilizers may also take up the matter to furnish the Bank Guarantee regularly 
with the project proponent s and also take decision regarding MFCL 
expeditiously.   
 In this regard, the Department in its Action Taken Replies informed that as per 
para (ii) of the amendment to NIP -2012, all the project proponents were 
required to furnish Bank Guarantee (BG) of Rs. 300.00 Crore for each project 
linked to milestone in the project cycle, to ensure seriousness/credibility of the 
project proponents under NIP -2012 and for timely execution of th e projects.   
Out of Rs. 300.00 Crore, Rs. 100.00 Crore  of BG wa s to be released after 
finalization of Lump sum Turn Key (LSTK)/Engineering Procurement 
Construction (EPC) contractors and release of advance to the contractor’s 
account; Rs. 100.00 Crore on c ompletion of requirements ordering and supply 
to the site or midpoint of  the project cycle, whichever was  earlier, and the 
balance of Rs. 100.00 Crore of BG on completion of the project.  PSUs  were, 
however, exempted from furnishing the BG. 
 This Departmen t vide its letter dated 21 st April, 2015 and had advised all the 
project proponents to furnish Bank Guarantee & take all necessary steps as per 
the provisions of NIP -2012 and its amendment.  In this regard, three project 
proponents viz., Chambal Fertilizer s & Chemicals Limited (CFCL), Kanpur 
Fertilizers & Cement Limited (KFCL) and Matix had written letter to th e 
Department in respect of their proposals 
 The Committee observe that the Department of Fertilizers has taken various 
steps on the proposal of all the three companies.  While noting the initiatives 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
taken by the Department and the companies , the Committee recommend  that 
all-out efforts be ma de to help the project proponent s to complete their 
projects at the earliest .  The Committee als o observe that  no communication 
had been received from Indo -Gulf Fertilizers Limited (IGFL) and Nagarjuna 
Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (NFCL).  The Committee were informed that 
Vide letter dated 29 th February, 2016 and 11 th January, 201 7, Department of 
Fertilizers had advised the project proponents to provide up to date status of 
the project and furnish the Bank Guarantee as per the provisions of NIP -2012 
and its amendment.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to 
proactively engage with other project proponents in the matter and also make 
sustained efforts to encourage them to do all the formalities and solve their 
problem, if any , by relaxing norms for furtherance of their proposed projects 
under NIP 2012.  The Committee have found that RCF is a CPSU, as such they are 
exempted from furnishing bank guarantee.  The Committee are therefore failed 
to understand as to why RCF has not proceeded with their plan.   The 
Committee would like to know the rea sons for this from the Department.  The 
Committee would also recommend that the Department should periodically 
monitor the progress made by the project proponents.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised in this regard. 
 
F. Need to expedite restructuring process of FACT and MFL 
RECOMMENDATION SL.NO.6 
 
20. While expressing the need for restructuring process of FACT and MFL, the Committee 
had recommended as under:-  
"The Committee note that out of 9 public sector fertilizer companies under 
administrative control of the Department of Fertilizers, one PSU namely Project 
Development India Ltd. (PDIL) is loss making and 2 PSUs viz. Fertilizers and 
Chemicals (FACT) and Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) are sick and 2 companies viz. 
Fertilizer Corporation of Indi a Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation 
Limited (HFCL) are lying closed since 2002. The Committee also not that MFL and 
FACT had approached the Department of Fertilizers with a financial and business 
restructuring proposal, which is under con sideration in the Department. Further, a 
sum of Rs.1000 Crore has been transferred to FACT, which would monetise its land in 
order to liquidate Government loan. 
 
The Committee note with deep concern that the proposals for financial restructuring 
of the two  sick companies MFL and FACT is pending with the Department since last 
year. The Committee are of the strong view that loan given to sick companies like 
FACT should have been a soft loan so that such companies are not forced to sell of 
their precious asset s in order to repay loan. Further, the Committee are of the view 
that due to delay in finalization of the proposal for financial restructuring FACT and 
MFL are not able to carry out renovation and modernization/repair and construction 
activities. The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make 
earnest efforts to expedite the implementation of financial restructuring proposal of 
FACT and MFL without any further delay. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
21. In reply to the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"Department of Fertilizers has taken up the matter regarding higher interest rate on 
Plan loan of Rs. 1000.00 Crore granted to FACT, with Department of Economic 
Affairs.  

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
Department of Fertilizers is actively considering the proposals submitted by MFL and 
FACT for their Financial Re-structuring: 
 Further Progress made for the Financial Restructuring of MFL: 
In terms of DPE guidelines regarding streamlining the mechanism for revival and 
restructuring of sick Central Public Sector Enterprises, DOF had approved to engage 
an external expert agency wh ich has experience and expertise of the business 
environment, operational issues, technology option and financial viability of the 
sector in which such CPSE is working. Accordingly, MFL was asked to initiate 
process for engagement of an external expert age ncy on urgent basis. MFL engaged 
PDIL as expert agency on 02.06.2016. MFL vide letter dated 20.12.2016 has 
submitted the study report prepared by PDIL with the approval of its Board.  
In its study report, PDIL has given six options for the revival of MFL. MFL has 
submitted its report on PDILs recommendation for its revival. Report of MFL is under 
examination of DoF. A meeting was held on 5.4.2017 under chairmanship of 
Secretary (Fertilizers). All the six options recommended by PDIL were deliberated in 
the meeting. MFL has been asked to present all option before Board of Directors and 
submit proposal to the Department of Fertilizers with clear recommendation.  
Accordingly, MFL has submitted their recommendation on revival plan to this 
Department vide letter dated 1.6.2017 which is under consideration. 
Further Progress made for the Financial Restructuring of FACT: 
To avert immediate financial crisis of FACT GoI has granted a plan loan of Rs. 1000 
Crore to FACT during 2015-16. In that regard: 
FACT has submitted a  comprehensive proposal for its financial restructuring to DoF. 
Proposal inter-alia seeks approval for the waiver of GoI loan & interest thereon, one -
time compensation for the use of high cost LNG, approval for sale of its land and 
waiver of income tax on profit on sale of land. In its proposal FACT has proposed to 
repatriate the Plan loan of Rs 1000 crore, which was sanctioned by GoI in 2015 -16, 
by the money generated by the sale of land.  
FACT was asked on 15.11.2016 to submit details for preparing of Cab inet Note in the 
matter. FACT furnished the details on which Dept. of Fertilizers sought certain 
clarification. 
FACT was advised for the following: 
a To make the projections of financial performance from 2017 -18 to 2021 -22 in 
the proposal. 
b. To submit the  proposal to National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) for 
obtaining clearance for sale of land as proposed in the financial restructuring 
proposal immediately. 
On 27.03.2017 FACT has furnished the projection of financial performance from 
2017-18 to 2021-22. The same is under examination in the Department. 
Government of Kerala vide letter dated 27.03.2017 intimated that Govt. of Kerala has 
no objection on the proposed transfer of the 170 acres of land from FACT Ltd. to 
BPCL. MoPNG vide letter dated 31.03.2017 re quested DoF to expedite the matter and 
consent of FACT to transfer the 170 acres of land to BPCL. Comments of FACT were 
sought on this matter. FACT has furnished its comments and the same are under 
examination.  
Govt. of Kerala vide Order dated 28.04.2017 has accorded approval for the negotiated 
purchase of 600 acres of the land by Kerala Industrial Infrastructure Development 
Corporation (KINFRA) from the land acquired for FACT. The matter is under 
examination in Dept. of Fertilizers." 
 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
22. The Committee had noted that the proposals for financial restructuring of the 
two sick companies MFL and FACT was pending with the Department since last 
year.  Further, a sum of Rs. 1000 crore which were transferred to FACT on the 
condition t hat the company would monetise its land in order to liquidate 
Government loan.  The Committee felt that sick companies like FACT should 
have been given a soft loan so that such companies were not forced to sell their 
precious assets in order to repay loan.   Further delay in finalization of the 
proposal for financial restructuring of the companies were adversely affecting 
them.  The Committee, therefore, asked the Department of Fertilizers to 
expedite the implementation of financial restructuring proposal of  FACT and 
MFL. 
 In this regard, the Department in its Action tak en replies informed that it had 
taken up the matter regarding higher interest rate on plan loan of Rs. 1000.00 
crore granted to FACT with Department of Economic Affairs. 
 In regard to progress  made for the financial restructuring of MFL, t he 
Department of fertilizers had  stated that in terms of DPE guidelines regarding 
streamlining the mechanism for revival and restructuring of sick central Public 
Sector Enterprises, Department of Fertilizers h ad approved to engage an 
external expert agency which has experience and expertise of the business 
environment, operational issues, technology option and financial viability of  
the sector in which such CPSE wa s working.  Accordingly MFL engaged PDIL as 
expert agency on 2.6.2016 for its revival.  Subsequently, MFL submitted their 
recommendation on revival plan to the Department on 1. 6.2017 as asked by 
them which was under the consideration of Department.  
 As regards progress made for the financial restructu ring of FACT, the 
Government of India granted a plan loan of Rs 1000 crore t o FACT during 2015-
16. FACT furnished the projection of financial performance from 2017 -18 to 
2021-22 on 27.3.2017 which were  under the examination of Department of 
Fertilizers. Further, comments of FACT were sought to transfer the 170 acres of 
land to BPCL as requested by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 31.3.2017 
and approval accorded by Government of Kerala for the negotiated purchase of 
600 acres of the land by Kerala Indus trial Infrastructure Development 
corporation from the land acquired for FACT, are under the examination o the 
Department of fertilizers. 
 While noting that matter regarding higher interest rate on plan loan of Rs. 
1000.00 crore to FACT was taken up with th e Department of Economic Affairs , 
the Committee expects the Department to make concerted efforts regarding 
higher rate on plan loan to FACT to its logical conclusion.  Further, the 
Committee are dismayed to note that restructuring process of the FACT and 
MFL is still pending with the Department for consideration which is adversely 
affecting these PSUs.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate that Department 
should make concerted efforts to expedite the implem entation of financial 
restructuring proposals of FACT and MFL without any further loss of time.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised in this regard. 
 
G. Need for revival of closed/sick units of fertilizers 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.7 
23. While emphasizing the need for revival of closed/sick units of fertilizers, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
"Apart from these 2 sick PSUs, there are 8 fertilizer units lying closed at present. Out 
of these closed units, 5 are of FCIL and 3 are of HFCL. The Committee were informed 
that the pre -project activities for revival of Talcher and Ramagundam units of FCIL 
are in progress. The Talcher Unit of FCIL is being revived on ‘Nomination basis’ by a 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
Consortium of PSUs namely RCF, GAIL, CIL and FCIL by setting u p a coal based 
fertilizer plant of 1.27 MMTPA capacity. JV Company named “Talcher Fertilizers 
Limited (TFL)” has been formed. Selection of Coal Gasification Technology is under 
progress. The Ramagundam unit of FCIL is being revived on nomination basis by 
consortium of PSUs namely Engineers India Limited (EIL), National Fertilizers 
Limited (NFL) and FCIL by setting up a gas based fertilizer plant. JV Company named 
“Ramagundam Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited” has been formed. 
 
As regards Sindri, Gorakhpur and  Barauni units of FCIL the Union Cabinet in its 
meeting held on 13.07.2016 approved to revive these units by means of a Special 
Purpose Vehicle of Public Sector Units namely, National Thermal Power Corporation, 
Coal India Limited, Indian Oil Corporation Limited and Fertilizer Corporation India 
 
Limited/Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited, through “nomination route”. In 
pursuance to the decision of the Government of India, a SPV by name Hindustan 
Urvarak & Rasayan Limited (HURL) has been formed by a consortium of PSUs namely 
NTPC, CIL, IOCL and FCIL/HFCL. Pre -project activities to revive Gorakhpur, Sindri & 
Barauni Units are under progress. Considering the significant role which is expected 
to be played by these sick units after their revival, the Commit tee reiterate its 
recommendation that the process of revival of closed/ sick units of fertilizers be 
expedited with in a fixed time frame. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
24. In reply t o the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "Eight fertilizer units of HFCL & FCIL are lying closed at present. Out of these 8, five 
closed units are of FCIL and three are of HFCL.  
 CCEA in i ts meeting held on 4.8.2011 had approved revival of Sindri, Talcher & 
Ramagundam Units of FCIL through nomination route and revival of Gorakhpur, 
Korba unit of FCIL and Barauni, Durgapur & Sindri units of HFCL through bidding 
route. CCEA in its meeting hel d on 9.5.2013, inter -alia, approved waiver of 
Government of India loan and interest to facilitate FCIL to arrive at positive net 
worth. This enabled FCIL to get de -registered from the purview of Board for 
Industrial and Financial reconstruction (BIFR). Thi s paved way to revive closed units 
of FCIL. CCEA also decided that Proposal/Action plan on revival of HFCL units be 
taken up once revival of FCIL units is on track.  Unit wise progress made on revival of 
these 5 closed units of FCIL/HFCL is as under: 
  
 a. Progress made in respect of Gorakhpur, Sindri  Units of FCIL & Barauni Unit of 
HFCL: 
 Cabinet in its meeting held on 25.05.2016 has approved Financial Restructuring of 
HFCL by way of w aiver of the GoI loans and the outstanding interest thereon. This 
decision of the Cabinet helped in making net -worth of HFCL positive and resulted 
into discharge of HFCL from the purview of BIFR. Therefore, it has been decided to 
revive Barauni unit of HFCL also. 
 In terms of poor response during bidding process in respe ct of Gorakhpur and Sindri, 
it was considered that it is not feasible to revive these units on ‘bidding route’ as 
decide earlier by the Union Cabinet. Therefore, for the timely revival of these units, 
the Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 13.07.2016 app roved to revive Gorakhpur, 
Sindri & Barauni units by means of a Special Purpose Vehicle of Public Sector Units 
namely, National Thermal Power Corporation, Coal India Limited, Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited and Fertilizer Corporation India Limited/Hindustan  Fertilizer 
Corporation Limited, through “nomination route”. In pursuance to the decision of the 
Government of India, a SPV by name Hindustan Urvarak & Rasayan Limited (HURL) 
has been formed by a consortium of PSUs namely NTPC, CIL, IOCL and FCIL/HFCL. 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
Pre-project activities to revive Gorakhpur, Sindri & Barauni Units  are under progress 
and these projects are likely to be commissioned by August 2020, September 2020 
and October 2020 respectively. 
  
 b. Progress made in respect of Talcher and Ramagundam units FCIL: 
  Talcher Unit: 
Talcher Unit of FCIL is being revived on ‘Nomination basis’ by a Consortium of PSUs 
namely RCF, GAIL, CIL and FCIL by setting up a coal based fertilizer plant of 1.27 
MMTPA capacity.   
 JV Company named “Talcher Fertilizers Limited (TFL)” has been formed. 
 Coal Gasification Technology shortlisted.  
 Tendering for Coal gasification, Urea Ammonia and other offsite projects are 
under progress. Award of LSTK contract by January 2018. 
  Ramagundam Unit: 
 Ramagundam unit of FCIL is being revived on nomination basis b y consortium of 
PSUs namely Engineers India Limited (EIL), National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) and 
FCIL by setting up a gas based fertilizer plant of 1.27 MMTPA capacity.   
 JV Company named “Ramagundam Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited” has been formed. 
 Project activities are in progress. The project likely to be commissioned by 
30.9.2018". 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
25. The Committee were  earlier informed that pre -project activities for revival of 
Talcher and Ramagundam units of FCIL were in progress. Further,  after 
approval of the proposal for revival of  Sindri, Gorakhpur and Barauni units of 
FCIL by Union Cabinet by means of a Special Purpose V ehicle of Public Sector 
units through nomination route, pre project activities to revive, Gorakhpur 
Sindri and Barauni units had  started.  After consideri ng the significant role 
which were  expected to be played by these sick units after their revival, the 
Committee recommended that the process of revival of closed/sick units of 
fertilizes be expedited with a fixed time frame. 
 In this regard, the Department in its Action Taken Report has stated that CCEA 
in its meeting held on 4. 8. 2011. had approved revival of Sindri, Talcher & 
Ramagundam Units of FCIL through nomination route and revival of 
Gorakhpur, Korba unit of FCI L and  Barauni, Durgapur & Sindri units of HFCL 
through bidding route. CCEA in its meeting held on 9.5.2013, inter -alia, 
approved waiver of Government of India loan and interest to facilitate FCIL to 
arrive at positive net worth. This enabled FCIL to get de -registered from the 
purview of Board for Industrial and Financial reconstruction (BIFR). This 
paved way to revive closed units of FCIL. CCEA also decided that 
Proposal/Action plan on revival of HFCL units be taken  up once revival of FCIL 
units was on track. 
 As regards progress made in respect of Gorakhpur and  Sindri units of FCIL, and 
Barauni unit of HFCL , the Department has stated that pre-project activities 
were under progress and these projects were likely to be completed by August 
2020, September, 2020 and October, 2020 respectively.  As regards progress 
made in respect of Talcher and Ramagundam units of PCIL, the Department has 
stated that project activities were in progress and the projects were likely to be 
commissioned by January 2018 and September 2018 respectively.   
 The Committee have noted that pre project activities to revive the sick units 
are under progress and their commis sioning period have been fixed. While 
expressing satisfaction that initiatives at last have been taken by the 
Government for revival of closed and sick units, t he Committee desire that 
sustained efforts may  be continued s o as to expedite the process of riv al of 
these units with periodical review of the projects.  The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
H. Need to ensure adequate supply of domestic  gas to urea sector 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.8 
 
26. While emphasizing the need to provide adequate supply of domestic gas to urea 
sector, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that the inadequate availability of gas is one of the major 
limiting factors to the growth of urea industry in the country. Presently, a gainst the 
requirement of approximately 49 MMSCMD of gas, the urea sector is getting 
approximately 21 MMSCMD of domestic gas and the gap of 28 MMSCMD is being 
filled up by RLNG. It may be noted that out of 31.5 MMSCMD of domestic gas as 
allocated by CCEA, only 21 MMSCMD of domestic gas is being supplied to urea sector. 
The availability of domestic natural gas is not even sufficient to meet the demand of 
existing gas based urea units. Considering pricing and firm availability of natural gas 
for existing and new units of fertilizer companies vital to increase their indigenous 
production, the Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to vigorously take 
up this issue with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and ensure that the 
existing and new fertili zer plants are supplied domestic gas at least to the extent of 
31.5 MMSCMD as allocated to the urea sector. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
27. In reply to the aforementioned recommendat ions of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"Vide D.O letters dated 22 nd June, 2016, and 26 th September, 2016, Secretary 
(Fertilizers) has written to Secretary (MoP&NG) to ensure the supply of domestic gas 
at least to the ext ent of 31.5 mmsmcd to the urea sector as per EGoM decision dated 
23.08.2013. 
The matter regarding shortfall in supply of domestic gas has been again taken up 
with Ministry of Petroleum and Natural gas vide letter dated 5.7.2017." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
28. The Committee noted that out of 31.5 MMSCMD of domestic gas as allocated by 
CCEA, only 21 MMSCMD of domestic gas is being supplied to urea sector.  
Considering the need for availability of g as, the Committee recommended the 
Department to vigo rously take up the issue of short supply of gas with the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and ensure that the existing and new 
fertilizer plants were supplied domestic gas at least to the extent of 31.5 
MMSCMD as allocated to urea sector.  
 In their A ction Taken Replies the Department has informed that Secretary 
(fertilizers) has written to secretary (Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas) 
on 26 September, 2016 to ensure the supply of domestic gas at least to the 
extent of 31.5 MM SMCD to the urea secto r as per E GoM decision dated 
23.8.2013 and also reminded them on 5.7.2017. 
 The Committee are anguished to  note that even after the decision of EGo M 
about four years back, the requisite supply of gas to urea sector has not been 
made which is affecting the production of urea in the county.  The Committee 
also express their dismay over the fact that Department of Fertilizers also did 
not bother to remind Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas before 5.7.2017 
i.e. for about four years, as such no initiative was  taken form either side.  The 
Committee feel that this lackadaisical attitude of Government is not conducive 
for the growth of urea sector.  The Committee therefore strongly desire that 
Department to take up the issue at the Minister's level at the earliest. 
  
 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
I. Need to provide pipeline connectivity to 3 Fertilizers plants 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.9 
 
29. While insisting to overcome hindrances in pipeline connectivity to fertilizers plants, 
the Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that three urea units, viz., Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) -
Manali, Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (MCFL) -Mangalore and Southern 
Petrochemicals Industries Limited (SPIC) -Tuticorin are producing urea using 
Naphtha in absence of gas allocation and pi peline connectivity. With regards gas 
pipeline connectivity to (SPIC) -Tuticorin, the Committee were informed that SPIC is 
about 142.5 
 Km away from ONGC’s Ramanad gas field. It is proposed to be connected with ONGC’s 
Ramnad gas field by laying a 142.5 Km p ipeline by M/s IOCL as a part of its 
authorized pipeline Ennore - Thiruvallur- Bengaluru-Puducherry- Nagapattinam- 
Madurai-Tuticorin Natural Gas Pipeline (ETBPNMTPL). Target for completion of 
Ramnad-Tuticorin section is June 2018. However, the same would be  dependent on 
receipt of Wild Life Clearance/ Environment Clearance as well as permissions from 
State Government for laying this pipeline as per the finalized pipeline alignment. 
With regards Madras Fertilizers Ltd (MFL) - Manali, it is proposed to be conne cted 
with IOCL’s proposed LNG Terminal at Ennore by ETBPNMTPL. Ennore LNG terminal 
is likely to be commissioned by June 2018. Further, as an alternative supply to MFL -
Manali, GAIL has also plans to connect the plant through a spurline of about 270 kms 
from its Kochi-Koottannad- Bangalore-Mangalore pipeline. With regard to Mangalore 
Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd., the Committee were informed that due to stiff 
resistance from farmers in the state of Kerala and Tamilnadu, the Koottannad – 
Mangalore pipeline se ction and Koottannad - Bangalore pipeline section are getting 
delayed in execution. Malappuram & Kozhikode Districts, Survey & Panchnama is 
completed for 55Km till date. Looking into the progress of Survey & Panchnama 
works, GAIL resumed construction works of Kochi- Koottannad- Mangaluru Pipeline 
Section which will connect MCFL, Mangaluru. This pipeline Section is targeted to be 
completed by December 18, subject to availability of hindrance free right of way in 
Malappuram & Kozhikode Districts by March 2017. 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that Department has not been able to ensure 
assured supply of gas to these plants so far. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Department to overcome the above cited hindrances to provide pipeline 
connectivity to the se plants and to prepare a road map to complete all related  tasks 
in a time bound manner. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
30. In reply to the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"As per decision of CCEA, notified by the Department on 17 th June, 2015, the three 
Naphtha based urea units viz, MFL-Manali, MCFL-Mangalore and SPIC-Tuticorin, have 
been allowed to continue urea production on Naphtha as a feedstock till these plants 
get assured supply of gas either by pipeline or by any another means. 
SPIC and MCFL have conveyed that they have converted from Naphtha based to Gas 
based urea units and are awaiting gas pipeline connectivity. MFL has conveyed that 
50 % gas conversion has been completed by them and complete conversion is 
expected by 2018. 
DoF regularly reviews the progress  of infrastructure for supply of gas a nd readiness of 
these three Naphtha based urea units to receive gas with Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas. As per the feedback received from the MoP&NG, the latest status of Gas 
Pipeline Connectivity to Naphtha based Urea units is as follows: 
 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 
 Southern Petrochemicals Industries Corporation 
 
 SPIC is about 142.5 Km away from ONGC’s Ramanad gas field. ONGC has informed the 
availability of non -APM gas for allocation from Kanjirangudi (KJR) field, Ramnad 
under Cauvery Assets in Tamil Nadu. Based on the requests made by M/s SPIC to 
allocate 0.9 MMS CMD of natural gas from Ramnad field for its urea manufacturing 
unit located at Tuticorin in Tamilnadu and as per recommendations of DoF, Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas has earmarked 0.9 MMSCMD of Non -APM gas from 
ONGC’s Kanjirangudi (KJR) field, Ramnad for SPIC, Tuticorin.  
 SPIC, Tuticorin is proposed to be connected with ONGC’s Ramnad gas field by laying a 
142.5 Km pipeline by M/s IOCL as a part of its authorized pipeline Ennore - 
Thiruvallur- Bengaluru-Puducherry- Nagapattinam- Madurai- Tuticorin Natural Gas 
Pipeline (ETBPNMTPL). This pipeline has been awarded in Dec. 2015. IOCL has 
provided the updated status as under: 
i. Joint meeting between ONGC, SPIC and IOCL held in April 2016 & August 2016 
and modalities for gas supply finalized.  
ii. Detailed Engineering Route Survey of Ramnad - Tuticorin, pipeline section has 
been completed and pipeline alignment finalized.  
iii. Right of users (RoU) acquisition under Petroleum & Minerals Pipelines, Act 
1962 initiated and 3(i) notifications for entire pipeli ne section (142.5 Km) 
have been prepared and submitted to MoP&NG for publishing.  
iv. Appointment of Engineering Consultant for compressor station at Ramnad has 
been awarded.  
v. Application submitted for obtaining Environment clearance. Terms of 
Reference (ToR) have been received from MoEF & CC and the EIA & RA study 
is currently in progress.  
vi. Coastal Regulatory Zone (CRZ) mapping work is awarded to Anna University 
for obtaining CRZ clearance, which has been completed.  
vii. Application for obtaining crossing permissions across rivers/nala, NH/SH, 
Railway etc submitted and follow up is being maintained.  
viii. Wild Life clearance permission has been applied and follow up is being 
maintained.  
ix. Detailed Design & Engineering of pipeline is in progress.  
x. Target for completion of Ramnad - Tuticorin section is June 2018. However, 
the same would be dependent on receipt of Wild Life Clearance/ Environment 
Clearance as well as permissions from state government for laying this 
pipeline as per the finalized pipeline alignment.  
 
 Madras Fertilizers Ltd (MFL)- Manali: 
 Option1: MFL, Manali is proposed to be connected with IOCL’s proposed LNG 
Terminal at Ennore by Ennore -Thiruvallur- Bengaluru-Puducherry-Nagapattinam-
Madurai-Tuticorin Natural Gas Pipeline (ETBPNMTPL) through 18”OD spur pipeline. 
Ennore LNG terminal is likely to be commissioned by June 2018. This plant is only 22 
kms away from the proposed LNG terminal. In order to connect this plant, PNGRB has 
granted authorization to I OCL on 15 th December, 2015 to construct ETBPNMTPL. 
This, MFL, Manali may be connected in synchronization with the commissioning of 
Ennore LNG terminal. IOCL has provided the updated status as under: 
i. Detailed Engineering Route Survey for spur pipeline fr om Ennore LNG 
terminal to MFL Manali has been completed and pipeline alignment has been 
finalized.  
ii. The spur pipeline to MFL, Manali would be laid in common corridor between 
Ennore port to Manali. Common corridor acquisition (outright purchase/lease ba sis) 
in Govt. Land is in progress for which support of State Administration has been 
sought.  
iii.  3(i) notification published in Gazette of India for RoU Acquisition in Private land. 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
iv. Coastal Regulatory Zone (CRZ) mapping work completed for obtaining CRZ 
clearance.  
v. Application for obtaining crossing permissions across rivers/nala, NH/SH, 
Railway etc. submitted to respective authorities and follow up in hand.  
vi. Detailed Design & Engineering of pipeline progress.  
vii. EIA & RA study work has been awarded and the same is in progress.  
viii. Pipeline will be commissioned in synchronization with commissioning of 
Ennore LNG terminal i.e. by June 2018. 
 Option2:  As an alternative supply to MFL -Manali, GAIL has also plans to connect the 
plant through a  spurline of about 270 kms from its Kochi -Koottannad- Bangalore-
Mangalore (KKBMPL) pipeline. Further, gas can also be supplied from Dabhol LNG 
terminal of RGPPL through Dabhol - Bangalore pipeline with extension to MFL, 
Manali. For execution of the pipeline , GTA and GSA are required to be signed by GAIL 
with MFL, Manali. GAIL had offered MFL to supply RLNG at  
 Henry Hub (HH) linked prices for a Long term period of 20 years and for the initial 
period of 2017-18. MFL is yet to execute the necessary agreements.  
 Mangalore Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd. (Mangalore) 
 GAIL planned to connect this plant with Kochi LNG terminal laying Kochi - 
Koottannad- Bengaluru-Mangalore Pipeline (KKBMPL). GAIL has taken up KKBMPL 
in phases. KKBMPL (Phase -I) involving the first 1 7 Km Pipeline section of Kochi - 
Koottannad – Mangaluru section in Kochi city was commissioned in Aug’13 in 
synchronization with commissioning of Kochi LNG Terminal. Balance Pipeline section 
of Kochi – Koottannad- Mangaluru Pipeline is being taken up as par t of KKBMPL 
(Phase-II). Construction works of KKBMPL (Phase-II) were started initially in Feb’ 12. 
However, due to stiff resistance from farmers in the state of Kerala and Tamilnadu, 
the Koottannad – Mangalore pipeline section and Koottannad - Bangalore pip eline 
section are getting delayed in execution.  
 With the active involvement of Government of Kerala since Jun’15, the survey and 
panchnama activities for RoU acquisition resumed in Kerala. As on date, Survey and 
Panchnama Works are completed in all other  districts enroute Kochi - Koottannad- 
Mangaluru section except Malappuram & Kozhikode Districts. Out of 130 Km RoU in 
Malappuram & Kozhikode Districts, Survey & Panchnama is completed for 55Km till 
date. Looking into the progress of Survey & Panchnama work s, GAIL resumed 
construction works of Kochi - Koottannad- Mangaluru Pipeline Section which will 
connect MCFL, Mangaluru. This pipeline Section is targeted to be completed by 
Dec’18, subject to availability of hindrance free RoU in Malappuram & Kozhikode 
Districts by March 2017." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
31. The Committee noted that t he Department of Fertilizers had  not been able to 
ensure assured supply of gas to Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) Manali, 
Mangalore Chemicals and Southern Petrochemicals Industries Limited (SPIC) - 
Tuticorin.  The Committee also noted that there were certain hindrances being 
faced by the Department to provide Pipeline connectivity to these plants. 
 The Committee, therefore recommended that the Department should overcome 
hindrances and try to provide pipeline connectivity to all the these plants by 
preparing a road map to complete all related tasks in a time bound manner. 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Department has started that as p er decision of 
CCEA, the Naphtha based urea units have been allowed to continue urea 
production on Naphtha as a  feed stock till these plants go t assured su pply of 
gas either by pipeline or by any other means SPIC and MCFL have conveyed that 
they have converted from Naphtha based to gas based urea units and are 
awaiting gas pipeline connectivity MFL has conveyed that 50% gas conversion 
has been completed by them and complete conversion is expected by 2018. 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 As regard Mangalore chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd (Mangalore),  GAIL planned 
to connect its plant with Kochi LNG  and this pipeline section is targeted to be 
completed by December 2018. 
 The Committee, appreciate the action initiated by the Government and 
reiterate its recommendation that the Department should make vigorous and 
coordinated efforts in coordination with all concerned to expedite the assured 
supply of gas to all the three plants in a time bound  manner and if felt 
necessary the Department may also pursue the matter at the highest level to 
get the work done. The Committee hope that there should not be any time and 
cost overrun in converting these three plants in to gas based and also caution 
that in any case of time and cost overrun, Department of Fertilizers shall be 
held responsible. The committee would like to be informed of the action taken 
in this regard. 
 
J. Effect of demonetization on Demands and Availability of fertilizers  
RECOMMENDATION SL NO.10 
32. While recommending the Department to recheck the data regarding availability of 
fertilizers to farmers during the period of demonetization, the committee had recommended 
as under  
"The Committee note that in the backdrop of demonetization, various 
arrangements have been made for smooth delivery of fertilizers to farmers by 
Department of Fertilizers (DoF). The Department took various steps like adequate 
availability of Urea, DAP, MOP, NPK and other fertilizers was ensured to every 
nook & corn er of the country in close coordination done with Companies, State 
Governments, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Shipping etc; m anufacturing 
Companies and Importers of various fertilizers were directed to provide fertilizers 
to dealers/ wholesalers/ retailers on credit and the credit limit was extended by 
additional 30 days by the Companies; similarly, Companies were asked to instruct 
their dealers/ wholesalers/ retailers to use all modes of transaction including sales 
on credit, debit card, credit card, c heques etc., for sale of fertilizers to the farmers; 
States were issued an advisory that they should ensure that fertilizers are readily 
made available to the farmers as per demand without fail and also necessary 
instructions be issued by State Governments  to the cooperatives, private 
retailers/wholesalers to provide fertilizers on credit and accept all modes of 
payment viz. debit card, credit card, cheques etc. As per the Data provided by the 
Department, the availability of all the fertilizers during Novem ber 2016 and 
December 2016 was more than that in November 2015 and December 2015. 
During November - December 2016 total requirement of fertilizers was 107.76 
LMT, the availability was 142.59 LMT and sales were 99.63 LMT. 
 
However, the Committee are apprehen sive about the data furnished by the 
Department. The Committee would therefore like the Department to recheck the 
data regarding availability of fertilizers to farmers during November -December 
2016. The data furnished relates to November and December, 2016  however, 
during this period withdrawal of even Rs.1000 to Rs.2000 was very difficult. The 
Committee are of the view that after demonetization farmers neither had money 
nor credit / debit card and any other facility. They did not even have the facility of 
withdrawing money from their bank accounts. Some villages even do not have 
banking facility and even if banks were available Government has imposed 
withdrawal limit on such banks. The Committee, therefore, recommend that post 
demonetization the Department should effectively monitor the situation at district 
and at the village level and take adequate measures to ensure that the farmers do 
not suffer due to dearth of cash in hand an fertilizers are made available to each 
and every farmer. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard. 
 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
33. As ascertained from the first point sales data the sale during demonetization period 
(Nov.’16 - Dec.’16) was more as compared to last years and no shortage of fertilizers 
has been reported from any of the States/UTs. Further, a statement showing 
requirement & availability of fertilizers upto the month of March 2017 is enclosed 
(Annexure-II) 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
34. The Committee noted that in the backdrop of demonetization, various 
arrangements were made for smooth, delivery of fertilizers to farmers.  As per 
data provided by the Department, the availability of all the fertilizers during 
November/December 2016 was more than that in same period during 2015. 
 The Committee, recommended the Department to recheck the data regarding 
availability of fertilizers to farmers during November-December 2016. 
 The Department in its action taken reply furnished that from the first point 
sales data the sale during demonetization period was more as compared to last 
years and no shortage of fertilizers has been reported from any of the 
states/UTs. 
 The Committee express their displeasure over the fact that the statement 
furnished by the Department of Fertilizers does not indicat e the figures of 
November-December, 2016 i.e. demon etization period.  In the absence of 
specific data it cannot be deduced,  that sale during the period was more as 
compared to period before demonetization. The Committee therefore 
recommend that specific da ta of the month of November -December 2016 vis -a 
vis of previous month s be furnished.  The Committee are apprehensive that 
during the demonetization period i.e. during November -December 2016 the 
sale of fertilizers dropped drastically.  The committee would therefore like to 
be apprised in this regard at the earliest.  
  

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl.No.1 
 
 While stressing that the Chemicals Fertilizers are vital for ensuring the country's food 
security, the Committee had recommended as under:    
 
'The Committee note that the installed capacity of DAP & complex fertilizers of 
fertilizer manufacturing units in  the country during 2016-17 has reached to the level 
of 146 lakh MT as against 144.04 lakh MT in 2015-16. The actual production of all the 
fertilizers during the year 2015 -16 was 413.03 Lakh MT. The Committee are glad to 
note that the estimated production of all the fertilizers during the year 2016 -17 is 
430.99 Lakh MT showing an increase of more that 4% in comparison of previous 
year. At present, there are 30 large size urea plants in the country, manufacturing 
urea annually, 21 units produce DAP and compl ex fertilizers and 2 units manufacture 
Ammonium Sulphate as by -product. The country is however, fully dependent on 
imports in Potassic sector and to the extent of 90% in Phosphatic sector in the form 
of either finished products or its raw material. Non ava ilability of raw material is the 
main factor which has impeded the self -sufficiency in P&K fertilizers in the country. 
Other factors which impeded growth in fertilizer sector is low profitability, delay in 
payment of subsidy, inadequate gas availability in  the country and no favorable tax 
incentives for indigenous manufacturers. 
 
The Committee are of the view that chemical fertilizers are vital for ensuring the 
country's food security and felt concerned about the low profitability of the sector 
and also abs ence of any incentives like low taxes/duties to indigenous fertilizer 
manufacturers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to evaluate 
the reasons for the low profitability of the sector and also to look into the tax 
structure and work out and  send a proposal for exemption of taxes for indigenous 
fertilizer manufacturers to Ministry of Finance to boost their profitability. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the afore mentioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "The objective of Government’s policy is to maximize indigenous production of 
nitrogenous fertilizers based on utilization of indigenous feedstock to reach sel f-
sufficiency levels. For sustained agricultural growth and to promote balanced 
nutrient application, it is imperative that fertilizers are made available to farmers at 
affordable prices.  With this objective, urea being the only controlled fertilizer, is sold 
at statutorily notified uniform MRP of Rs 5360/ - per MT (exclusive of the 
Central/State Taxes).  
 The difference between the delivered cost of urea at farm gate and MRP payable by the 
farmer is given as subsidy to the fertilizer manufacturer/importer by the Government of 
India. The subsidy is paid to the urea manufacturing units through concession rates 
comprising of Fixed Cost and Variable Cost. The urea manufacturing units are ensured 
viable returns in the form of Fixed Costs. 
 Further, the urea manu facturing units are incentivized for the production beyond re -
assessed capacity. 
 The Department has put a cap of 12% profit in the P&K fertilizer sector. The 
Department declares the MRP of P&K Fertilizers as unreasonable if MRP is found to 
include more th an 12% profit to P&K  fertilizer manufacturers/ importers. In case, 
where after scrutiny, unreasonableness of MRP is established or where there is no 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
correlation between the cost of production or acquisition and the MRP printed on the 
bags, the subsidy may be restricted or denied even if the product is otherwise eligible 
for subsidy under NBS. In proven case of abuse of subsidy mechanism, Department of 
Fertilizers, on the recommendation of Inter -Ministerial Committee (IMC) may 
exclude any grade/grades of fer tilizers of a particular company or the fertilizer 
company itself from the NBS Scheme. 
In respect of tax benefits to the indigenous manufacturers of P&K fertilizers, it is 
informed that a proposal for reduction in Customs Duty on raw materials used for 
indigenous production of P&K fertilizers was forwarded to Ministry of Finance 
during each of the last three years for consideration in the budget proposals. 
However, the above proposal has not been considered yet. 
  The Department has been taking up the matte r with Ministry of Finance to reduce 
the taxes  on Fertilizers. As a result of these efforts, the Government has finally 
reduced the taxes from 12% to 5% on fertilizers under GST. 
 Accordingly, with the implementation of GST w.e.f 01.07.2017, average weigh ted 
MRP of has come down to 5909/tonne(or Rs.295.47 per 50 Kg bag) as compared to 
the previous (before GST) All India weighted average of Rs.5923/tonne (or Rs.296.18 
per Kg bag)". 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.2 
 
 While emphasizing the need for concerted efforts to be made by the Department to 
get its budgetary allocation of subsidy, the committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that the projected requirement of the Departm ent under Non -
plan section for the year 2014 -15 was Rs.156420.48 Crore (gross) against which RE 
allocation was Rs.75092.73 Crore and the actual expenditure was Rs.75089.67 Crore, 
although the actual requirement was much higher as the Department had to carr y 
over liabilities of Rs.31830.77 Crore at the end of the year. Against the  projected 
requirement of Rs.108691.44 Crore (gross) for the year 2015 -16, the Department 
was allocated an amount of Rs.76562.47 Crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure 
during the year was Rs.76561.65 Crore. The Department has carry over liabilities of 
Rs.43356.23 Crore at the end of the year. Against the projected requirement of 
Rs.100945.66 Crore for the year 2016 -17, the Department was allocated an amount 
of Rs.74130.85 Crore at RE stage. Even BE 2017-18 is kept at Rs.74264.71 Crore. 
 
In view of the forgoing, the Committee strongly feel that the funds allocated to the 
Department by the Ministry of Finance is abysmally low in comparison to their 
projected requirement. As a resu lt, a huge amount of carryover liability of subsidy 
burden is piling up every year. As a reason of which, the subsidy continues to remain 
unpaid to the fertilizer companies. During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the 
Department had also accepted the fact that the Department never gets exactly what is 
being demanded. The Committee are of the view that unpaid arrears of subsidy are 
affecting the fertilizers companies adversely. This delay in payment of subsidy is also 
one of the factors which has imp eded growth in the fertilizers sector. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should make concerted 
efforts to get its budgetary allocation of subsidy increased by Ministry of Finance to 
commensurate with its requirement. Th e Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 "The Department had projected a requ irement of Rs.110388.81 Crore at RE 2016 -17 
that included the carry over liabilities of Rs.43356.23 Crore of previous years. 
However, Ministry of Finance granted no additional amount over the original BE 
allocation of Rs.74100.00 Crore for 2016 -17. For BE 2017-18 a requirement of 
Rs.74245.00 Crore was projected as the estimated requirement in 2017 -18 without 
any carry over liabilities of previous year as the same could only be known after the 
close of FY 2016-17.  Carry over liabilities would be projected a t RE 2017-18 stage to 
MOF for additional allocation. Against the projected requirement of Rs.74245.00 
Crore at BE 2017-18, MOF has allocated an amount of Rs.74232.00 Crore only 
 In order to clear the pendency of bills of Indigenous Urea and Indigenous P&K 
Fertilizers, the Department had made a Special Banking Arrangement for an amount 
of Rs.9969 Crore in 2016-17, which has since been disbursed to Indigenous Urea and 
Indigenous P&K Fertilizers units and repaid to bank." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
C. Need for investment in R&D Fertilizers Sector 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.3 
 
 While emphasizing the need for investment in R&D Fertilizers Sector, the committee had 
recommended as under:- 
"The Committee not e that the Science & Technology (S&T) Programme of 
Department of Fertilizers primarily lays emphasis at research & development of 
processes and equipments. The Department has been taking up project proposals 
from Engineering/Research Institutions/fertilizer industry on indigenous research & 
development in the field of fertilizer industry for ensuring optimum levels and 
international standards in terms of achieving higher capacity utilization, 
upgradation/modernization of process technologies & equipment to reduce the 
specific energy consumption and pollutants including Coal and Coal Bed Methane as 
feedstocks for manufacturing fertilizers. The Committee further, note that 
Department of Fertilizers has taken a major initiative by setting up an exclusive 
institution for promotion of research, S&T etc., in the fertilizer sector. The Indian  
Council of Fertilizer & Nutrient Research (ICFNR) has been set up on 16.09.2016. 
 
ICFNR has a Governing Council under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of 
Chemicals and Fert ilizers and an Executive Council under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (Fertilizers), The terms of reference of ICFNR inter alia  include to 
undertake/promote research in the area of fertilizer manufacturing technology, use 
of raw material and innovation in f ertilizer products through partnership ad 
collaboration with various research institutions, fertilizer industry and other 
stakeholders, etc. R&D is primarily driven by the industry. The ICFNR, agency which 
has been recently created within the Ministry is still in the process of being grounded. 
 
Further, for the industry side, the Department of Public Enterprises keeps providing 
guidance to the public sector enterprises that they must allocate a certain proportion 
of their expenditure to research in their subject area. It is essentially an industry 
driven exercise where they identify the problem areas, the areas of research and 
create the necessary facilities or get it executed by the academic institutions etc. 
 
In view of the above, the Committee are perturbed to note that a very small provision 
for S&T scheme was made during 2012 -13 to 2014 -15 and no funds were allocated 
during 2014-15 to 2016 -17. Further, the actual expenditure capital during the year 
2013-14, 2014 -15, 2015 -16 were Rs.0.19 Crore, Rs.0.24 Crore and nil respectively. 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
The Committee are of the view that for the growth and development of the Chemicals 
and Fertilizers industries, there is a need to increase expenditure under the R&D. The 
Committee, expect the Department to ensure that the new agency which has recently  
been created within the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers is operationalized 
expeditiously so that latest fertilizers and nutrient research can be provided to the 
Chemicals and Fertilizers industries. The Committee therefore, recommend the 
Department to make full utilization of the allocated funds for the purpose and also 
ensure that the Fertilizer PSUs allocate their certain proportion of expenditure 
towards research in fertilizer sector as mandated by the Department of Public  
Enterprises. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "Science & Technology Scheme, is no more operative w.e.f. 01.04.2016. Therefore, no 
fund allocation was provided for the years 2016 -17 & 2017 -18. Accordingly, no new 
proposal was invited. However, D/o Fertilizers has taken a major initiative by setting 
up an exclusive institution for promotion of research, S&T etc. in the fertilizer sector. 
In order to promote research in the field of fertilizers, Indian Council for Fertilizers 
and Nutrient Research (ICFNR), an institution exclusively devoted to promotion of 
research in fertiliz er sector under the Department of fertilizers has been set up on 
16.09.2016. ICFNR has a Governing Council under the chairmanship of Minister of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers and an Executive Committee under the chairmanship of 
Secretary (Fertilizers).   
 The first meeting of Governing Council of ICFNR under the chairmanship of Hon’ble 
Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers and Parliamentary Affairs was held on 
09.11.2016. Thereafter, under the chairmanship of Secretary (Fertilizers), first 
meeting of Executive Committee was held on 23.12.2016 & three sub -groups were 
constituted to look into specific proposals relating to “Promotion of bio -fertilizers”, 
“Development of eco-friendly micro-nutrients and pesticide coated controlled release 
fertilizers” and “Nano nat ural fertilizers” and to submit their recommendations. Sub -
Groups have submitted recommendations on the above proposals. A meeting of 
Executive Committee will be held soon to take final decision on the aforesaid projects 
based upon recommendations of sub-groups. 
 As regards allocation by fertilizer PSUs towards research in fertilizer sector, the 
National Fertilizer Ltd (NFL) and Rashtriya Chemical and Fertilizer Ltd (RCF) have 
made an allocation of Rs.34.00 Lakh and Rs.64.83 Lakh respectively." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.7 
 While emphasizing the need for revival of closed/sick units of fertilizers, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
"Apart from these 2 sick PSUs, there are 8 fertilizer units lying closed at present. Out 
of these closed units, 5 are of FCIL and 3 are of HFCL. The Committee were informed 
that the pre -project activities for revival of Talcher and Ramagundam units of FCIL 
are in progress. The Talcher Unit of FCIL is being revived on ‘Nomination basis’ by a 
Consortium of PSUs namely RCF, GAIL, CIL and FCIL by setting up a coal based 
fertilizer plant of 1.27 MMTPA capacity. JV Company named “Talcher Fertilizers 
Limited (TFL)” has been formed. Selection of Coal Gasifi cation Technology is under 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
progress. The Ramagundam unit of FCIL is being revived on nomination basis by 
consortium of PSUs namely Engineers India Limited (EIL), National Fertilizers 
Limited (NFL) and FCIL by setting up a gas based fertilizer plant. JV Com pany named 
“Ramagundam Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited” has been formed. 
 
As regards Sindri, Gorakhpur and Barauni units of FCIL the Union Cabinet in its 
meeting held on 13.07.2016 approved to revive these units by means of a Special 
Purpose Vehicle of Pub lic Sector Units namely, National Thermal Power Corporation, 
Coal India Limited, Indian Oil Corporation Limited and Fertilizer Corporation India 
 
Limited/Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited, through “nomination route”. In 
pursuance to the decision of the Government of India, a SPV by name Hindustan 
Urvarak & Rasayan Limited (HURL) has been formed by a consortium of PSUs namely 
NTPC, CIL, IOCL and FCIL/HFCL. Pre -project activities to revive Gorakhpur, Sindri & 
Barauni Units are under progress. Consideri ng the significant role which is expected 
to be played by these sick units after their revival, the Committee reiterate its 
recommendation that the process of revival of closed/ sick units of fertilizers be 
expedited with in a fixed time frame. The Committ ee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "Eight fertilizer units of HFCL & FCIL are ly ing closed at present. Out of these 8, five 
closed units are of FCIL and three are of HFCL.  
 CCEA in its meeting held on 4.8.2011 had approved revival of Sindri, Talcher & 
Ramagundam Units of FCIL through nomination route and revival of Gorakhpur, 
Korba u nit of FCIL and Barauni, Durgapur & Sindri units of HFCL through bidding 
route. CCEA in its meeting held on 9.5.2013, inter -alia, approved waiver of 
Government of India loan and interest to facilitate FCIL to arrive at positive net 
worth. This enabled FCIL  to get de -registered from the purview of Board for 
Industrial and Financial reconstruction (BIFR). This paved way to revive closed units 
of FCIL. CCEA also decided that Proposal/Action plan on revival of HFCL units be 
taken up once revival of FCIL units i s on track.  Unit wise progress made on revival of 
these 5 closed units of FCIL/HFCL is as under: 
  
 a. Progress made in respect of Gorakhpur, Sindri  Units of FCIL & Barauni Unit of 
HFCL: 
 Cabinet in its meeting held on 25.05.2016 has approved Financial Restructuring of 
HFCL by way of w aiver of the GoI loans and the outstanding interest thereon. This 
decision of the Cabinet helped in making net -worth of HFCL positive and resulted 
into discharge of HFCL from the purview of BIFR. Therefore, it has been deci ded to 
revive Barauni unit of HFCL also. 
 In terms of poor response during bidding process in respect of Gorakhpur and Sindri, 
it was considered that it is not feasible to revive these units on ‘bidding route’ as 
decide earlier by the Union Cabinet. Theref ore, for the timely revival of these units, 
the Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 13.07.2016 approved to revive Gorakhpur, 
Sindri & Barauni units by means of a Special Purpose Vehicle of Public Sector Units 
namely, National Thermal Power Corporation, Co al India Limited, Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited and Fertilizer Corporation India Limited/Hindustan Fertilizer 
Corporation Limited, through “nomination route”. In pursuance to the decision of the 
Government of India, a SPV by name Hindustan Urvarak & Rasay an Limited (HURL) 
has been formed by a consortium of PSUs namely NTPC, CIL, IOCL and FCIL/HFCL. 
Pre-project activities to revive Gorakhpur, Sindri & Barauni Units  are under progress 
and these projects are likely to be commissioned by August 2020, September  2020 
and October 2020 respectively. 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
  
 b. Progress made in respect of Talcher and Ramagundam units FCIL: 
  Talcher Unit: 
Talcher Unit of FCIL is being revived on ‘Nomination basis’ by a Consortium of PSUs 
namely RCF, GAIL, CIL and FCIL by setting up a coal based fertilizer plant of 1.27 
MMTPA capacity.   
 JV Company named “Talcher Fertilizers Limited (TFL)” has been formed. 
 Coal Gasification Technology shortlisted.  
 Tendering for Coal gasification, Urea Ammonia and other offsite projects are 
under progress. Award of LSTK contract by January 2018. 
  Ramagundam Unit: 
 Ramagundam unit of FCIL is being revived on nomination basis b y consortium of 
PSUs namely Engineers India Limited (EIL), National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) and 
FCIL by setting up a gas based fertilizer plant of 1.27 MMTPA capacity.   
 JV Company named “Ramagundam Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited” has been formed. 
 Project activities are in progress. The project likely to be commissioned by 
30.9.2018". 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.9 
 
 While insisting to overcome hindrances in pipeline connectivity to fertilizers plants, 
the Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that three urea units, viz., Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) -
Manali, Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (MCFL) -Mangalore and Southern 
Petrochemicals In dustries Limited (SPIC) -Tuticorin are producing urea using 
Naphtha in absence of gas allocation and pipeline connectivity. With regards gas 
pipeline connectivity to (SPIC) -Tuticorin, the Committee were informed that SPIC is 
about 142.5 
 Km away from ONGC’s Ramanad gas field. It is proposed to be connected with ONGC’s 
Ramnad gas field by laying a 142.5 Km pipeline by M/s IOCL as a part of its 
authorized pipeline Ennore - Thiruvallur- Bengaluru-Puducherry- Nagapattinam- 
Madurai-Tuticorin Natural Gas Pipeline ( ETBPNMTPL). Target for completion of 
Ramnad-Tuticorin section is June 2018. However, the same would be dependent on 
receipt of Wild Life Clearance/ Environment Clearance as well as permissions from 
State Government for laying this pipeline as per the final ized pipeline alignment. 
With regards Madras Fertilizers Ltd (MFL) - Manali, it is proposed to be connected 
with IOCL’s proposed LNG Terminal at Ennore by ETBPNMTPL. Ennore LNG terminal 
is likely to be commissioned by June 2018. Further, as an alternative s upply to MFL -
Manali, GAIL has also plans to connect the plant through a spurline of about 270 kms 
from its Kochi-Koottannad- Bangalore-Mangalore pipeline. With regard to Mangalore 
Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd., the Committee were informed that due to stif f 
resistance from farmers in the state of Kerala and Tamilnadu, the Koottannad – 
Mangalore pipeline section and Koottannad - Bangalore pipeline section are getting 
delayed in execution. Malappuram & Kozhikode Districts, Survey & Panchnama is 
completed for 5 5Km till date. Looking into the progress of Survey & Panchnama 
works, GAIL resumed construction works of Kochi - Koottannad- Mangaluru Pipeline 
Section which will connect MCFL, Mangaluru. This pipeline Section is targeted to be 
completed by December 18, sub ject to availability of hindrance free right of way in 
Malappuram & Kozhikode Districts by March 2017. 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that Department has not been able to ensure 
assured supply of gas to these plants so far. The Committee, therefore, r ecommend 
the Department to overcome the above cited hindrances to provide pipeline 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
connectivity to these plants and to prepare a road map to complete all related  tasks 
in a time bound manner. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"As per decision of CCEA, notified by the Department on 17 th June, 2015, the three 
Naphtha based urea units viz, MFL-Manali, MCFL-Mangalore and SPIC-Tuticorin, have 
been allowed to continue urea production on Naphtha as a feedstock till these plants 
get assured supply of gas either by pipeline or by any another means. 
SPIC and MCFL have conveyed that they have converted from Naphtha based to Gas 
based urea units and are awaiting gas pipeline connectivity. MFL has conveyed that 
50 % gas conversion has been completed by them and complete conversion is 
expected by 2018. 
DoF regularly reviews the progress  of infrastructure for supply of gas a nd readiness of 
these three Naphtha based urea units to receive gas with Ministry of Petroleum & 
Natural Gas. As per the feedback received from the MoP&NG, the latest status of Gas 
Pipeline Connectivity to Naphtha based Urea units is as follows: 
 
 Southern Petrochemicals Industries Corporation 
 
 SPIC is about 142.5 Km away from ONGC’s Ramanad gas field. ONGC has informed the 
availability of non -APM gas for allocation from Kanjirangudi (KJR) field, Ramnad 
under Cauvery As sets in Tamil Nadu. Based on the requests made by M/s SPIC to 
allocate 0.9 MMSCMD of natural gas from Ramnad field for its urea manufacturing 
unit located at Tuticorin in Tamilnadu and as per recommendations of DoF, Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas ha s earmarked 0.9 MMSCMD of Non -APM gas from 
ONGC’s Kanjirangudi (KJR) field, Ramnad for SPIC, Tuticorin.  
 SPIC, Tuticorin is proposed to be connected with ONGC’s Ramnad gas field by laying a 
142.5 Km pipeline by M/s IOCL as a part of its authorized pipelin e Ennore - 
Thiruvallur- Bengaluru-Puducherry- Nagapattinam- Madurai- Tuticorin Natural Gas 
Pipeline (ETBPNMTPL). This pipeline has been awarded in Dec. 2015. IOCL has 
provided the updated status as under: 
i. Joint meeting between ONGC, SPIC and IOCL held in April 2016 & August 2016 
and modalities for gas supply finalized.  
ii. Detailed Engineering Route Survey of Ramnad - Tuticorin, pipeline section has 
been completed and pipeline alignment finalized.  
iii. Right of users (RoU) acquisition under Petroleum & M inerals Pipelines, Act 
1962 initiated and 3(i) notifications for entire pipeline section (142.5 Km) 
have been prepared and submitted to MoP&NG for publishing.  
iv. Appointment of Engineering Consultant for compressor station at Ramnad has 
been awarded.  
v. Application submitted for obtaining Environment clearance. Terms of 
Reference (ToR) have been received from MoEF & CC and the EIA & RA study 
is currently in progress.  
vi. Coastal Regulatory Zone (CRZ) mapping work is awarded to Anna University 
for obtaining CRZ clearance, which has been completed.  
vii. Application for obtaining crossing permissions across rivers/nala, NH/SH, 
Railway etc submitted and follow up is being maintained.  
viii. Wild Life clearance permission has been applied and follow up is be ing 
maintained.  
ix. Detailed Design & Engineering of pipeline is in progress.  
x. Target for completion of Ramnad - Tuticorin section is June 2018. However, 
the same would be dependent on receipt of Wild Life Clearance/ Environment 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
Clearance as well as per missions from state government for laying this 
pipeline as per the finalized pipeline alignment.  
 
 Madras Fertilizers Ltd (MFL)- Manali: 
 Option1: MFL, Manali is proposed to be connected with IOCL’s proposed LNG 
Terminal at Ennore by Ennore -Thiruvallur- Bengaluru-Puducherry-Nagapattinam-
Madurai-Tuticorin Natural Gas Pipeline (ETBPNMTPL) through 18”OD spur pipeline. 
Ennore LNG terminal is likely to be commissioned by June 2018. This plant is only 22 
kms away from the proposed LNG terminal. In order to connect this plant, PNGRB has 
granted authorization to IOCL on 15 th December, 2015 to construct ETBPNMTPL. 
This, MFL, Manali may be connected in synchronization with the commissioning of 
Ennore LNG terminal. IOCL has provided the updated status as under: 
i. Detailed Engineering Route Survey for spur pipeline from Ennore LNG 
terminal to MFL Manali has been completed and pipeline alignment has been 
finalized.  
ii. The spur pipeline to MFL, Manali would be laid in common corridor between 
Ennore port to Manali. C ommon corridor acquisition (outright purchase/lease basis) 
in Govt. Land is in progress for which support of State Administration has been 
sought.  
iii.  3(i) notification published in Gazette of India for RoU Acquisition in Private land. 
iv. Coastal Regul atory Zone (CRZ) mapping work completed for obtaining CRZ 
clearance.  
v. Application for obtaining crossing permissions across rivers/nala, NH/SH, 
Railway etc. submitted to respective authorities and follow up in hand.  
vi. Detailed Design & Engineering of pipeline progress.  
vii. EIA & RA study work has been awarded and the same is in progress.  
viii. Pipeline will be commissioned in synchronization with commissioning of 
Ennore LNG terminal i.e. by June 2018. 
 Option2:  As an alternative supply to MFL -Manali, GAIL has also plans to connect the 
plant through a spurline of about 270 kms from its Kochi -Koottannad- Bangalore-
Mangalore (KKBMPL) pipeline. Further, gas can also be supplied from Dabhol LNG 
terminal of RGPPL through Dabhol - Bangalore pipeline with e xtension to MFL, 
Manali. For execution of the pipeline, GTA and GSA are required to be signed by GAIL 
with MFL, Manali. GAIL had offered MFL to supply RLNG at  
 Henry Hub (HH) linked prices for a Long term period of 20 years and for the initial 
period of 2017-18. MFL is yet to execute the necessary agreements.  
 Mangalore Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd. (Mangalore) 
 GAIL planned to connect this plant with Kochi LNG terminal laying Kochi - 
Koottannad- Bengaluru-Mangalore Pipeline (KKBMPL). GAIL has taken up KK BMPL 
in phases. KKBMPL (Phase -I) involving the first 17 Km Pipeline section of Kochi - 
Koottannad – Mangaluru section in Kochi city was commissioned in Aug’13 in 
synchronization with commissioning of Kochi LNG Terminal. Balance Pipeline section 
of Kochi – Koottannad- Mangaluru Pipeline is being taken up as part of KKBMPL 
(Phase-II). Construction works of KKBMPL (Phase-II) were started initially in Feb’ 12. 
However, due to stiff resistance from farmers in the state of Kerala and Tamilnadu, 
the Koottannad – Mangalore pipeline section and Koottannad - Bangalore pipeline 
section are getting delayed in execution.  
 With the active involvement of Government of Kerala since Jun’15, the survey and 
panchnama activities for RoU acquisition resumed in Kerala. As on date,  Survey and 
Panchnama Works are completed in all other districts enroute Kochi - Koottannad- 
Mangaluru section except Malappuram & Kozhikode Districts. Out of 130 Km RoU in 
Malappuram & Kozhikode Districts, Survey & Panchnama is completed for 55Km till 
date. Looking into the progress of Survey & Panchnama works, GAIL resumed 
construction works of Kochi - Koottannad- Mangaluru Pipeline Section which will 
connect MCFL, Mangaluru. This pipeline Section is targeted to be completed by 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
Dec’18, subject to availabili ty of hindrance free RoU in Malappuram & Kozhikode 
Districts by March 2017." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 31  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
NIL 
  

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF TH E 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE  COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
  
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.5 
 
  With regard to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector to reduce India’s import 
dependency in urea production, the committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that the New Investment Policy 2012 (NIP -2012) was notified 
by the Government on 2nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7th October 
2014 in order to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector to reduce India’s import 
dependency in urea production. The Department at present has received 06 
proposals for setting up of Revamp, Expansion, Revival and Greenfield plants. T he 
Department in April, 2015 had advised all the project proponents to furnish Bank 
Guarantee & take all necessary steps as per the provisions of NIP -2012 and its 
amendment. In this regard, three project proponents viz., Chambal Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Lim ited, Kanpur Fertilizers & Cement Limited and Matix have written 
letters to the Department in respect of their proposals. However, no communication 
has been received from Indo -Gulf Fertilizers Limited and Nagarjuna Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited. As far a s Matrics Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited is concerned, 
they have been requesting for exemption from bank guarantee. To this effect PDIL 
has been deputed to see the level of execution of the project as MFCL are ready for 
commissioning. Further, vide letter  dated 29 th February, 2016 and 11 th January, 
2017, the Department of Fertilizers has advised the other project proponents to 
provide the present status of their projects and furnish the Bank Guarantee as per the 
provisions of NIP-2012 and its amendment. 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that apart from issuing the reminders, no 
progress has been made since the last year in implementing the New Investment 
Policy which was notified on 2 nd January, 2013. The Committee further note that the 
commissioning of new fertilizer plant takes around 3 to 3.5 years from the zero date. 
In view of this, it is imperative that these investment proposals are implemented at 
the earliest. Considering the importance of the fresh investment in the fertilizer 
sector, the Committe e reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Department of 
Fertilizers should make more sustained and proactive efforts to review periodically 
the progress made by the project proponents in a time bound manner and take 
corrective measures to ensure the ir timely execution. The Department may also take 
up the matter to furnish the Bank Guarantee regularly with the project proponents & 
also to take all necessary further steps as per the provisions of NIP-2012. Further, the 
Department is also expected to take decision regarding MFCL expeditiously and press 
upon PDIL to come out with a report without any delay. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the aforementioned recommendations  of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"At present, there are following 6 proposals for setting up of Greenfield and 
Brownfield (Expansion) projects received under NIP -2012 and its amendment with 
the Department of Fertilizers: -    
 
S. No. Company Projects Ownership State 
1. 9Kanpur Fertilizers & Greenfield Project at Private Madhya 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
. Cement Limited Jabalpur Pradesh 
2. 2
. 
Indo-Gulf Fertilizers 
Limited –Jagdishpur 
Brownfield Expansion 
urea project at Jagdishpur. 
Private Uttar Pradesh 
3. 3
. 
Chambal Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited -
Gadepan 
Brownfield of Ammonia -
Urea units at Gadepan -
Kota.  
Private  Rajasthan 
4. 6
. 
Matix Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited, 
Panagarh 
Greenfield/Brownfield 
Ammonia-Urea Fertilizers 
Complex at Panagarh.   
Private West Bengal 
5. 7
. 
Rashtriya Chemicals & 
Fertilizers Limited-Thal 
Brownfield Ammonia -
Urea Expansion project at 
Thal. 
CPSU  Maharashtra 
6. 1
1
. 
Nagarjuna Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Ltd. 
Brownfield Project at 
Kakinada, Andhra 
Pradesh. 
Private Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
As per para (ii) of the amendment to NIP -2012, all the project proponents are 
required to furnish Bank Guarantee (BG) of Rs. 300.00 Crore for each project linked 
to milestone in the project cycle, to ensure seriousness/credibility of the project 
proponents under NIP -2012 and for timely execution of the projects.   Out of Rs. 
300.00 Crore, Rs. 100.00 Crore of BG is to be released after finalization of Lump sum 
Turn Key (LSTK)/Engineering Procurement Construction (EPC) contractors and 
release of advance to t he contractor’s account; Rs. 100.00 Crore on completion of 
requirements ordering and supply to the site or midpoint of the project cycle, 
whichever is earlier, and the balance of Rs. 100.00 Crore of BG on completion of the 
project.  PSUs are, however, exempted from furnishing the BG. 
This Department vide its letter dated 21 st April, 2015 and had advised all the project 
proponents to furnish Bank Guarantee & take all necessary steps as per the 
provisions of NIP-2012 and its amendment.  In this regard, three project proponents 
viz., Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (CFCL), Kanpur Fertilizers & Cement 
Limited (KFCL) and Matix have written letter to this Department in respect of their 
proposals, the details of which are as follows: - 
 
S. No. Company Present Status 
1. CFCL-
Brownfield 
of 
Ammonia-
Urea units 
at 
Gadepan-
Kota 
As per the terms of the NIP Policy, CFCL has furnished the 
Bank Guarantee of Rs. 300 Crore to the Government of 
India. On achieving the first milestone of the project, Rs 
100 Crore has been released to CFCL. 
 
2. KFCL-
Greenfield 
project at 
Jabalpur 
The request of KFCL, Jai Prakash Associates Limited for 
allocation of sufficient quantity of gas for the proposed 
urea plant at Jabalpur and to expedite the Surat - Paradip 
gas pipeline with a provision to connect Jabalpur to this 
pipeline was taken up with MoP&NG. 
 
 In this regard, GAIL informed that they are presently 
carrying out detailed route survey of Dhamra- Ang ul-Durg 
Section of Surat -Paradip-Dhamra Pipeline along with a 
spurline to Balaghat/Jabalpur. GAIL has requested to 
provide the indicative schedule/ plan for setting up a 
fertilizer plant at Balaghat/Jabalpur. 
In response to the above letter of GAIL, KFCL has 
communicated that the acquisition of the desired land is 
under process by the state government, pending which, it 
would be difficult for them to communicate the indicative 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
schedule. Subsequent to the land allotment, they will be 
starting the process for environment clearance. KFCL has 
indicated that the project for setting up  a Greenfield 
fertilizer unit will take 36 months from receipt of 
Environment clearance.  
The same has been informed to MoP&NG. 
3. Matix Matix Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited has proposed to set 
up a Greenfield Project of 3 Million Metric Tonne Per 
Annum gas based Ammonia -Urea complex (Train -I & II) at 
Pannagarh, West Bengal  with the investment of over Rs. 
6000 Crore.   The Matix plant will use Coal Bed Methane 
(CBM) gas as feedstock for manufacturing urea.   Matix has 
confirmed its readiness to commence pro duction of urea 
subject to the availability of minimum 1.7 mmscmd of 
CBM.  There is no domestic gas allocation for this project 
by the Government of India and also the unit is not 
connected to National Gas Grid Network.  In order to 
facilitate the commissioning of plant, DoF has taken up the 
matter of allocation of CBM Gas with MoP&NG. 
Matix has requested for the exemption of Bank 
Guarantee for Train -I. The request of Matix has been 
examined by the Committee of Secretaries constituted 
under amendment to NIP -2012. During its meeting held  
on 29 th June, 2017 it has decided that Matix will have to 
submit Rs.300.00 Crore BG as per NIP -2012 read with its 
amendment. Rs.200.00 Crore will be released in view of 
attainment of first two milestones.  
      So far as Tr ain-II is concerned, vide letter dated 24 th 
April, 2016, Matix has informed that they shall take all 
necessary action as required and also take steps to achieve 
Financial Closure.  They agree to submit Bank Guarantee 
on achieving financial closure but befo re making any 
LSTK/EPC financially effective. 
 
However, no communication has been received from Indo -Gulf Fertilizers Limited 
(IGFL) and Nagarjuna Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (NFCL). Vide letter dated 29 th 
February, 2016 and 11 th January, 2017, Department of Fertilizers has advised the 
project proponents to provide the present status of the project and furnish the Bank 
Guarantee as per the provisions of NIP-2012 and its amendment." 
 
Comments of The Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter -I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL NO.10 
 
 While recommending the Department to recheck the data regarding availability of 
fertilizers to farmers during the period of demonetization, the committee had recommended 
as under  
"The Committee note that in the backdrop of demonetization, various 
arrangements have been made for smooth delivery of fertilizers to farmers by 
Department of Fertilizers (DoF). The Department took various steps like adequate 
availability of Urea, DAP, MOP, NPK and other fert ilizers was ensured to every 
nook & corner of the country in close coordination done with Companies, State 
Governments, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Shipping etc; m anufacturing 
Companies and Importers of various fertilizers were directed to provide fe rtilizers 
to dealers/ wholesalers/ retailers on credit and the credit limit was extended by 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
additional 30 days by the Companies; similarly, Companies were asked to instruct 
their dealers/ wholesalers/ retailers to use all modes of transaction including sales 
on credit, debit card, credit card, cheques etc., for sale of fertilizers to the farmers; 
States were issued an advisory that they should ensure that fertilizers are readily 
made available to the farmers as per demand without fail and also necessary 
instructions be issued by State Governments to the cooperatives, private 
retailers/wholesalers to provide fertilizers on credit and accept all modes of 
payment viz. debit card, credit card, cheques etc. As per the Data provided by the 
Department, the availabi lity of all the fertilizers during November 2016 and 
December 2016 was more than that in November 2015 and December 2015. 
During November - December 2016 total requirement of fertilizers was 107.76 
LMT, the availability was 142.59 LMT and sales were 99.63 LMT. 
 
However, the Committee are apprehensive about the data furnished by the 
Department. The Committee would therefore like the Department to recheck the 
data regarding availability of fertilizers to farmers during November -December 
2016. The data furnished relates to November and December, 2016 however, 
during this period withdrawal of even Rs.1000 to Rs.2000 was very difficult. The 
Committee are of the view that after demonetization farmers neither had money 
nor credit / debit card and any other f acility. They did not even have the facility of 
withdrawing money from their bank accounts. Some villages even do not have 
banking facility and even if banks were available Government has imposed 
withdrawal limit on such banks. The Committee, therefore, re commend that post 
demonetization the Department should effectively monitor the situation at district 
and at the village level and take adequate measures to ensure that the farmers do 
not suffer due to dearth of cash in hand an fertilizers are made availabl e to each 
and every farmer. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As ascertained from the first point sales data the sale during demonetization period 
(Nov.’16 - Dec.’16) was more as compared to  last years and no shortage of fertilizers 
has been reported from any of the States/UTs. Further, a statement showing 
requirement & availability of fertilizers upto the month of March 2017 is enclosed 
(Annexure-II) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  34  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLI ES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED- 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.4 
 
  While emphasizing the need for providing DBT to farmers, the  committee had 
recommended as under:- 
"The Committee have time and again emphasized the need for expeditious 
implementation of Direct Benefits Transfer (DBT) system which was conceptualized 
in 2011 on the recommendation of Task Force constructed by the Ministry of Finance 
to recommend implementable solution for direct transfer subsidy on kerosene, LPG 
and fertilizers. The Task Force has suggested four phase approach for direct 
disbursement of fertilizer subsidy to the intended beneficiaries. In the Phase I:  
Information visibility till the retailer's level where part subsidy is disbursed to the 
manufacturers on the basis of the information of retail acknowledgements reported 
in mFMS (Mobile Fertilizers Management System), Phase II: Part subsidy payment to 
the manufacturers on the basis of the information of retailer sales of fertilizers 
captured in mFMS., Phase III: Subsidy payment to the retail customer on the basis of 
fertilizer sales made to him/her, Phase IV: Subsidy payment to the farmer on the 
basis of details of sales made to him/her. 
In divergence from the above the Committee have been informed that 100% subsidy 
on various fertilizer grades shall be released to the fertilizer companies instead of the 
beneficiaries, on the basis of actual sales made by t he retailer to the beneficiaries. 
Initially, the modified subsidy procedure under DBT System will be introduced on 
pilot basis in 16 select districts. Three more districts, Dhanbad in Jharkhand, 
Begusarai in Bihar and Gorakhpur in UP have been included in the pilot project. The 
Committee are also given to understand that the DBT in fertilizer subsidy is slightly 
different from the beneficiary directed subsidy administrated in LPG, etc. as 
traditionally subsidy in the fertilizer sector has been given to indu stry and the 
difference of cost of production and margin of profit is passed on to the farmers in 
the form of subsidized rates. 
 
The Committee are not satisfied with the performance of the Department in 
implementing DBT Scheme, and are of the view that the  Department has not been 
able to implement the Scheme in a time bound manner which was conceptualized in 
2011. The Committee are unhappy regarding modification made in the subsidy 
procedure under DBT System, wherein, 100% subsidy on various grades is to be  
released to the fertilizers companies instead of the beneficiary. The Committee 
expect that after implementation of DBT, divergence or smuggling of fertilizer will be 
reduced to a large extent and the Government will save subsidy eventually. The 
Committee believe that the soil Health Card which contains particulars like name of 
the farmer, land holding, irrigated area, bank details etc., may be beneficial in 
disbursing subsidy directly in the farmer's bank account. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department to reconsider its decision and disburse subsidy to 
farmer directly. The Committee also,  
reiterate its earlier recommendation that the Department of fertilizer in coordination 
with the Ministry of Agriculture may make  earnest efforts towards  expeditions 
implementation of Soil Health card scheme and ensure that every farmers is provided 
with a Soil Health card having bank details for direct transfer of subsidy to them. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard." 
 
  

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 In reply to the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 
"Mobile Fertilizer Monitoring System  (mFMS) Phase -I was introduced in November 
2012 in which the receipt of fertilizers upto the retailers is being tracked through 
Mobile based Fertilizer Monitoring System (mFMS).  The Department of Fertilizers is 
implementing Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme on pilot basis in 19 districts.  
The pilot DBT captures the details of retailer sales through PoS devices and 
beneficiary/buyer details (as proposed in mFMS Phase-II).   
Under the conventional DBT being implemented  in other Government Welfare 
Schemes such as LPG, the subsidy amount is directly transferred to beneficiaries 
immediately after purchase of the subsidized product by the beneficiary. However, in 
case of fertilizer subsidy the subsidy will be released to th e fertilizer company after 
the sale of fertilizers by the retailers to beneficiary and submission of claim to Dept. 
of Fertilizers. All sales of fertilizers will be made through Point of Sale (PoS) devices 
at retailer level. The subsidized fertilizers will  be available to the beneficiaries at 
subsidized MRP.  
Implementation of DBT in Fertilizers like other traditional DBT schemes is complex 
due to the following: 
i. Beneficiary is not defined. 
ii. Entitlement of the beneficiary is not defined. 
iii. Subsidy amount is more than twice of subsidized price.  
iv. Moving MRP to Market Price will cause huge burden on farmers as they would 
be required to pay the market price upfront. 
v. Multiple products (Urea, Phosphatic and Potassic etc.) have varied subsidy 
amounts. 
vi. Subsidy component varies from company to company even for the same 
product. 
Further, to facilitate smooth rollout of DBT and passing on the intended benefits of DBT in 
fertilizers to the end beneficiaries, the Department of Fertilizers has taken up w ith D/o 
Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare to expedite the issue/distribution of the Soil 
Health Cards to the targeted beneficiaries (copy enclosed at Annexure-I)." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL.NO.6 
 
 While expressing the need for restructuring process of FACT and MFL, the Committee had 
recommended as under:-  
"The Committee note that out of 9 public sector fertilizer companies under 
administrative control of the Department of F ertilizers, one PSU namely Project 
Development India Ltd. (PDIL) is loss making and 2 PSUs viz. Fertilizers and 
Chemicals (FACT) and Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) are sick and 2 companies viz. 
Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan  Fertilizer Corporation 
Limited (HFCL) are lying closed since 2002. The Committee also not that MFL and 
FACT had approached the Department of Fertilizers with a financial and business 
restructuring proposal, which is under consideration in the Department. Further, a 
sum of Rs.1000 Crore has been transferred to FACT, which would monetise its land in 
order to liquidate Government loan. 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 
The Committee note with deep concern that the proposals for financial restructuring 
of the two sick companies MFL and FACT i s pending with the Department since last 
year. The Committee are of the strong view that loan given to sick companies like 
FACT should have been a soft loan so that such companies are not forced to sell of 
their precious assets in order to repay loan. Furt her, the Committee are of the view 
that due to delay in finalization of the proposal for financial restructuring FACT and 
MFL are not able to carry out renovation and modernization/repair and construction 
activities. The Committee, therefore, recommend tha t the Department should make 
earnest efforts to expedite the implementation of financial restructuring proposal of 
FACT and MFL without any further delay. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"Department of Fertilizers has taken up the matter regarding higher interest rate on 
Plan loan of Rs. 1000.00 Crore granted to FACT, with Department of Economic 
Affairs.  
Department of Fertilizers is actively considering the proposals submitted by MFL and 
FACT for their Financial Re-structuring: 
 Further Progress made for the Financial Restructuring of MFL: 
In terms of DPE guidelines regarding streamlining the mechanism for revival and 
restructuring of sick Central Public Sector Enterprises, DOF had approved to engage 
an external expert agency which has experience and expertise of the business 
environment, op erational issues, technology option and financial viability of the 
sector in which such CPSE is working. Accordingly, MFL was asked to initiate 
process for engagement of an external expert agency on urgent basis. MFL engaged 
PDIL as expert agency on 02.06. 2016. MFL vide letter dated 20.12.2016 has 
submitted the study report prepared by PDIL with the approval of its Board.  
In its study report, PDIL has given six options for the revival of MFL. MFL has 
submitted its report on PDILs recommendation for its revival. Report of MFL is under 
examination of DoF. A meeting was held on 5.4.2017 under chairmanship of 
Secretary (Fertilizers). All the six options recommended by PDIL were deliberated in 
the meeting. MFL has been asked to present all option before Board of  Directors and 
submit proposal to the Department of Fertilizers with clear recommendation.  
Accordingly, MFL has submitted their recommendation on revival plan to this 
Department vide letter dated 1.6.2017 which is under consideration. 
Further Progress made for the Financial Restructuring of FACT: 
To avert immediate financial crisis of FACT GoI has granted a plan loan of Rs. 1000 
Crore to FACT during 2015-16. In that regard: 
FACT has submitted a comprehensive proposal for its financial restructuring to DoF. 
Proposal inter-alia seeks approval for the waiver of GoI loan & interest thereon, one -
time compensation for the use of high cost LNG, approval for sale of its land and 
waiver of income tax on profit on sale of land. In its proposal FACT has proposed to 
repatriate the Plan loan of Rs 1000 crore, which was sanctioned by GoI in 2015 -16, 
by the money generated by the sale of land.  
FACT was asked on 15.11.2016 to submit details for preparing of Cabinet Note in the 
matter. FACT furnished the details on which Dep t. of Fertilizers sought certain 
clarification. 
FACT was advised for the following: 

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
a To make the projections of financial performance from 2017 -18 to 2021 -22 in 
the proposal. 
b. To submit the proposal to National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) for 
obtaining clearance for sale of land as proposed in the financial restructuring 
proposal immediately. 
On 27.03.2017 FACT has furnished the projection of financial performance from 
2017-18 to 2021-22. The same is under examination in the Department. 
Government of Kerala vide letter dated 27.03.2017 intimated that Govt. of Kerala has 
no objection on the proposed transfer of the 170 acres of land from FACT Ltd. to 
BPCL. MoPNG vide letter dated 31.03.2017 requested DoF to expedite the matter and 
consent of FACT to transf er the 170 acres of land to BPCL. Comments of FACT were 
sought on this matter. FACT has furnished its comments and the same are under 
examination.  
Govt. of Kerala vide Order dated 28.04.2017 has accorded approval for the negotiated 
purchase of 600 acres o f the land by Kerala Industrial Infrastructure Development 
Corporation (KINFRA) from the land acquired for FACT. The matter is under 
examination in Dept. of Fertilizers." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.8 
 
 While emphasizing the need to provide adequate supply of domestic gas to urea 
sector, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that the inadequate availability of gas is one of the major 
limiting factors to the gro wth of urea industry in the country. Presently, against the 
requirement of approximately 49 MMSCMD of gas, the urea sector is getting 
approximately 21 MMSCMD of domestic gas and the gap of 28 MMSCMD is being 
filled up by RLNG. It may be noted that out of 3 1.5 MMSCMD of domestic gas as 
allocated by CCEA, only 21 MMSCMD of domestic gas is being supplied to urea sector. 
The availability of domestic natural gas is not even sufficient to meet the demand of 
existing gas based urea units. Considering pricing and f irm availability of natural gas 
for existing and new units of fertilizer companies vital to increase their indigenous 
production, the Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to vigorously take 
up this issue with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural  Gas and ensure that the 
existing and new fertilizer plants are supplied domestic gas at least to the extent of 
31.5 MMSCMD as allocated to the urea sector. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 In reply to the aforementioned recommendations of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"Vide D.O letters dated 22 nd June, 2016, and 26 th September, 2016, Secretary 
(Fertilizers) has written to Secretary (MoP&NG) to ensure the supply of domestic gas 
at least to the extent of 31.5 mmsmcd to the urea sector as per EGoM decision dated 
23.08.2013. 
The matter regarding shortfall in supply of domestic gas has been again taken up 
with Ministry of Petroleum and Natural gas vide letter dated 5.7.2017." 
 
  

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 28  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                        ANANDRAO ADSUL 
09 August,  2017                           Chairperson 
18 Shravana, 1939 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on  
                                    Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 
Appendix – I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
The Committee sat on  Wednesday, the 09 August, 2017 from 1500 hrs. to 
1540 hrs. in Room No. 139, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Smt. Veena Devi 
5. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
6. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
7. Shri S. Rajendran 
8. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
9. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
           1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
 3. Shri R. C. Sharma     - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee.   
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following Draft Action Taken 
Reports on :- 
(i) Demands for Grants 2017-18'  of Department of Fertilizers; 
(ii) Demands for Grants 2017-18' of Department of Pharmaceuticals; 
(iii) Demands for Grants 2017 -18'  of Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals; and 
(iv) Implementation of policy on promotion of city compost of Department of 
Fertilizers.  
4. After some deliberations  the Draft Action Taken Reports were adopted by the 
Committee without any changes. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to make 
consequential changes, if any, arising out of the factual verification of the Action Taken 
Reports by the Department of Fertilizers, Department of Pharmaceuticals and Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
5. The Committee thereafter decided to hold its next meeting on  
23rd August, 2017.  
 
The Committee then adjourned.  

Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\36-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers).Docx 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
  
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY FIRST REPORT (16 TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2016-17) ON 'DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
2017-18' OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF  
FERTILIZERS).  
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 10 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 2,3,7 and 9)   
5 
Percentage of Total 50% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation  Nos. NIL)  
 
0 
Percentage of Total 0 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation No. 5 and 10)  
2 
Percentage of Total 20%  
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government are still awaited:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 4,6 and 8) 
 
3 
Percentage of Total 30% 
 
 