  Page 1  
  
 
 
 
24 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
    
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME FOR PHARMA SECTOR 
(CDP-PS) 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
   July, 2016/   Shravana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
 
 
  


  Page 2  
  
CC&F.No.24 
 
 
TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
 
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME FOR PHARMA SECTOR (CDP-PS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28 July 2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28 July 2016 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
   July, 2016/   Shravana, 1938 (Saka) 
  

  Page 3  
  
 
 
CONTENTS 
REPORT 
PAGE 
No. 
       COMPOSITION 4 
       INTRODUCTION 5 
I      INTRODUCTORY 6-8 
II     SCOPE & COVERAGE 9-11 
III    SPV FOR CREATION OF COMMON FACILITY CENTRE 12-14 
IV    UTILISATION OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATION  15-17 
V     PROGRESS/RESPONSE FOR THE PROJECT 18-21 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS 22-25 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the  16th   sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2015-16) held on  23.5.2016 
  
 
26-27 
II Minutes of the   17th     sitting of the Standing Committee    on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2015-16) held on   21.7.2016 
28 
  

  Page 4  
  
 
(iii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Idris Ali 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Innocent 
9. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi 
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle 
13. Shri Rajendran S. 
14. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
15. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
16. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
17. Dr. Uma Saren 
18.  Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
19. Shri Taslimuddin 
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
21. Shri George Baker 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
24. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
25. Shri K. Parasaran 
26.   Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao 
27.  Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
28.  Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
29. Shri Abdul Wahab 
30 #Vacant 
31 $Vacant 
  
# the terms of Dr. MS Gill Member, Rajya Sabha expired w.e.f. 09.04.2016.  
$ Consequent upon his nomination to council of  Ministers  Shri Mansukh Lal Mandaviya ceased to be a member 
of this Committee w.e..f 5.7.2016 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
  Shri A.K.Srivastava  - Director 
  Shri RamPrakash  - Additional Director 
  Shri S.Vijayaraghavan - Senior Committee Assistant 
  

  Page 5  
  
 
(iv) 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2015 -16) 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf present this 
Twenty-Fourth Report on the subject “Cluster Development Programme For Pharma Sector 
(CDP-PS)” of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
2. The Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2015 -16) selected the subject Cluster 
Development Progra mme for Pharma Sector (CDP -PS)  for examination and  report.   The 
Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
in their sitting held on 23 May, 2016. 
3. The Committee (2015-16) considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 
21 July, 2016. 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) for their cooperation in 
furnishing the written replies and other material/ i nformation and for  appearing before the 
Committee to tender their evidence in connection with the examination of the subject. 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of 
the Committee have  been printed in bold letters at the end of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                   Anandrao Adsul 
  21   July, 2016                                                                                     Chairperson 
 30  Ashadha 1938 (Saka)                                                 Standing Committee on 
                                                                                                                   Chemicals and Fertilizers 
                           
  

  Page 6  
  
CHAPTER I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
1.1 Indian Pharmaceutical Industry is one of the most vibrant sectors of Indian Industry.    
It has been growing at the rate of 11 -12%.   It is the 3 rd largest in the world and 13 th in value.   
The total size of the Indian Pharmaceuti cal Industry is about Rs.165202.3  crore out of which 
exports account for Rs.78792.3 crore and the rest is the size of the domestic market.   It is 8% 
of global production and 2% of world pharma market.  
  
1.2 At the time of Independence in 1947, the pharmaceutical market was dominated by 
the Western multinationals. The Indian pharmaceutical market remained import -dependent 
throughout the 1960s until the Government initiated policies stressing self -reliance through 
local production and today India is largely self -sufficient in the case of formulations, though 
some life saving new generation technology barrier formulations continue to be imported.  
 
1.3 In India, there are 12 ,000 Pharma Companies as against about 3000 in United States. 
The Indian Pharma Industry  consists of  S mall and  Medium enterprises (SME).  All the  
pharma industries have certain common requirements and these can be met with by forming 
clusters.  In order to make  available medicines at affordable rates to the  common man, the  
common facilities required by the  Indian Pharma  Industries needs to be addressed.  
1.4 The vision of the Department of Phar maceutical (DoP), Ministry of    Chemicals & 
Fertilizers is to catalyze and encourage quality; productivity and innovation in 
pharmaceutical sector and to enable the Indian pharmaceuti cal industry to play  a leading 
role in a competitive global market. For this, world class quality manufacturing faci lities with 
high level of productiv ity with innovative capabilities are required, However, these are on 
one hand very capital intensive and cannot be established and opened by Pharma  
Manufacturing Units especially the Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) at their own due to 
financial constraints while on the other hand global level  technical expertise is an adverse 
handicap.                                                    
1.5 The Report of the Working Group on Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Industry 12 th Five Year 
Plan (2012 -2017) envisages to make India largest global provider of quality medicines at 
reasonable prices. In this connection, the document has inter -alia also recommended 
establishment and upgradation of 10 Pharma Growth Clusters. Further, the  Report also 
mentions that there is a need of synergy strategies to address infrastructure development 
issues for promoting integrated growth of the Pharma Industries. For this, Cluster based 
approach is an important strategy and is now increasingly being recognized as an effective 
and sustainable strategy for competitive enhancement of MSMEs. 
                                                                    
1.6 Cluster based approach is increasingly being recognized as an effective and 
sustainable strate gy for competitive enhancement of Pharmaceutical Industry. Such an 
approach, which leverages the geographical proximity of the enterprises on 'collaborating 
while competing' principle, is participatory  and cost effective. As it provides critical mass for 
customization of interventions, the DoP seeks to imple ment Cluster Development 
Programme for Pharma Sector (CDP PS) to enhance Quality, Productivity & Innovative 
capabilities of the SME Pharma sector in the country.                                   
 
1.7 The Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) has announced the Scheme for Cluster 
Development Programme for Pharma Sector (CDP -PS) in July 2014.   Hon’ble Minister 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers approved the introduction of Cluster Development 
Programme for P harma Sector (CDP -PS) on 27.10.2014. The said report was released by 
Hon’ble Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers on 17.06.2015. 
 
1.8 The 'Scheme for Development of Pharma Clusters ' is a Central Sector Scheme and 

  Page 7  
  
would cover the remaining years of the 12 th  Plan and also to continue in the next Five Year 
Plan. The total size of the scheme is proposed as Rs. 125 Crores and it would be implemented 
on a Public Private Partner ship (PPP) format through a one time grant -in-aid to be released 
in various phases for creation of identified infrastruc ture and common facilities to Special 
Purpose Vehicles (SPV s) set up for the purpose. The scheme is for setting up of new clusters 
as well as up-gradation of existing clusters. However, the purpose of the grant is fo r creation 
of common facilities.      The various aspects and the out comes of the Scheme will be 
reviewed after three years from the date of its starting.                                                            
 
1.9 The Department of Pharmaceuticals has  engaged Projects & Development India 
Limited (a Government of India Undertaking) as Project Management Consultant (PMC) 
for assisting the Department in the implementation of the scheme. 
 
1.10 Objectives of the Scheme 
 
The main objectives of the CDP-PS are as  follows:- 
(i)   Increase the competitiveness, easy access to standard testing facilities and 
value addition in the domes tic pharma industry especially to SMEs through 
creation of common world class facilities.  
(ii) Strengthening the existing infra structure facilitie s in order to make Indian 
Pharma industry a global leader in pharma exports  
(iii)  Reducing the cost of production by 20% in the clusters leading to better 
availability and affordability medicines in domestic market.   
(iv)  To help industry meet the require ments of standards of environ  ment at a 
reduced cost through innovative methods of common was te management 
system.  
(v)  Exploit the benefits arising due to optimization of resources and economies of 
scale.   
(vi)  To provide inf ormation of latest global developments in the sector related to 
regulations, IPR issues, new products, new markets etc.  
 
1.11 Benefits of the Scheme  
(i) Industry will get easy access to common world class facilities.  
(ii) Industry will meet the requirements of standards of environment at a  reduced 
cost through innovative methods of  common waste management system.  
(iii) Strengthening of infrastructure facilities will make industry a global leader in 
pharma exports.   
(iv) Cost of production will reduce by 20 % in the Cl usters leading to better 
availability and affordability of medicines in the domestic market.   
   
1.12 During the course of evidence, the Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals 
explained the importance of pharma sector as under:- 
 “..the pharmaceutical sector is a very dynamic sector and it is growing at a very fast 
rate in our country. The growth rate is about 14 per cent and the export is 19 per cent. 
Huge exports are going to 200  countries and that is wh y the Planning Commission, at 
the beginning of the 12 th Five Year Plan, have decided to have a new scheme so that 
the clusters will become scientifically developed.    
 
 Over a period of time the pharmaceutical development has happened in many States 
and they have developed on their own without any scientific background. For 
instance, if you see the growth of pharmaceutical sector in the country, Gujarat and 
Maharashtra al one contribute to the extent of about 50 per cent. Similarly, Andhra 
Pradesh and Telangana contribute about 30 per cent and the remaining 20 per cent is 
the contribution made by all other States in the country.   

  Page 8  
  
  
 The growth of this sector is isolated in  certain pockets and some State Governments 
have taken more interest and development has happened more.  The then  Planning 
Commission suggested that we should have a plan of action to see that these clusters 
have all scientific parameters required to function as full-fledged clusters. 
 For instance, a number of units may be there, but common Effluent Treatment Plant 
may not be there. Individual units have to spend a lot of money to make the system 
functional. To reduce the cost of production of drugs by individual units, the clusters 
should have all the common facilities like the Common Testing Facility. If a unit has  to 
test its products, the testing equipment will cost more than Rs. 50 lakh. A small unit 
may not be able to spend that much money. That is why, if the production units go in 
for a Common Testing Facility, the cost will be reduced. 
 So, to reduce the cost  of production of drugs and to introduce new innovative 
procedures, this cluster scheme has been conceptualised and during la st June we 
launched this scheme” 
 
1.13 During the course of evidence, the Committee sought to know whether adequate 
publicity was given about the scheme, the Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals 
explained as under:- 
“Sir, regarding publ icity point of view, before the  concept has been finalized, we had 
several stakeholders discussions.  Almost all the industry associations have been 
consulted and based on their inputs the scheme has been conceptualized.  Then after 
finalizing the scheme, we saw to it that a big program me was organized inviting all 
these people and the  programme was launched by our H on. Minister.  We put the 
scheme details also in the website and in the expression of interest also we clearly 
indicated in the advertisement and we keep on advertising about  this particular 
project.  We continue to discuss with the industry associations.  For instance, there 
are four major industry associations which are available in the country who represent 
almost all the major pharmaceutical companies .  Apart from that, ou r project 
management consultant, they take up tours to all these industrial clusters.  They 
conduct meetings with these industrial cluster members.  They highlight the scheme 
details.” 
  

  Page 9  
  
CHAPTER II 
SCOPE & COVERAGE 
2.1 Projects under CDP -PS would be sanc tioned to upgrade infrastructure in 
industrial estates, parks or industrial areas and green-field projects. The scope will cover 
components that are need based and identified through a diagnostic study under 
Detailed Project Report which will be validated by stakeholders.  
 
2.2 Assistance under the scheme will be admissible for creation of common facili ties 
which will consist of creation of tangible "assets" as Common Facility Centres (CFCs). 
Some of the indicative activities under the common facilities ar e common testing 
facilities; training centre; R&D centres; effluent treatment plant; and common logistics 
centre.  
 
2.3 Project Implementation  
 
 The project will be implemented through a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV), a non -
profit making company registered under Section 25 of the Companies Act. It will have 
the representatives from cluster members, financial institutions, State & Central 
Government and R&D organisa tion. The SPV  shall have full operational autonomy to 
develop, operate and maintain the infrastructure. 
 
 Pharma enterprises shall hold at least 51 %  equity of the SPV and remaining may 
be held by any Government agency, Financial Institution/Bank, strategic partners etc.   
 
 The time frame for implementation of an approved project would be  2 years from 
the date of approval of the project.  
 
2.4 Implementation Framework  
 
 The Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) will be the coordinating depart ment for 
providing overall policy, coordi nation and management support to the Scheme. The 
proposals under the scheme will be considered for approval by the Scheme Steering 
Committee (SSC) of the CDP-PS.  
 
2.5 Project Approval  
 
 The SSC shall approve the projects and also monitor their implementa tion, There 
would be two -stage process for approval of the projects viz. 'In -principle' approval and 
final approval.  
 
2.6 In-Principle Approval 
 
 'In-principle' approval for a project will be accorded by the SSC based on preliminary 
proposal submitted by the PMC/ Industry Association/ groups of entrepreneurs covering the 
major features of the proposed project and availa bility  of land, Such 'in-principle' approval 
will be valid for a period of 6 months from the date of approval. Before that, it is expecte d 
that the project would be ready for final approval. In case final approval is not accorded to 
the project within 6 months, 'in -principle' approval will automatically lapse, unless it is 
specifically extended by the SSC.  
 
2.7 Final Approval 
 
 A project w ill be accorded final approval by the SSC if the follow ing conditions are 
fulfilled:  

  Page 
10 
 
  
(i) Establishment of project specific SPV;  
(ii) Execution of shareholders agreement and other related agreements   
between the SPV and the members:  
(iii) Preparation of DPR by SPV and its appraisal by PMC;  
(iv) Procurement of requisite land by the SPV;  
(v) Establishment of project specific Trust and Retention Account (TRA),with 
Schedule Commercial Banks by the SPV. DoP would credit funds in to this 
account;  
(vi) Tying up of sources of funds for the balance amount.  
 
2.8 During the course of evidence when asked how many meetings was organised by SSC , 
the Department stated  that till date 5 sittings have been held.  When further asked whether 
there  is any criteria fixed for conducting meeting and the places were it was h eld and the 
time of the meeting, one of the officer of the Department stated that till date 5 meetings took 
place in Delhi and  whenever it is felt nec essary the meetings were held ..... He also 
appreciated that if meetings are held at places other than Delhi, the local i ndustry might be 
associated more with the scheme. 
  
2.9 Role of State Governments  
 
 The State Government is envisaged to play  pro-active role in providing the ne cessary 
assistance for external access infrastructure such as roads, power, water supply, flexible and 
conducive environment and consider special facili ties like exemption of sta mp duty etc. for 
the SPV I units, necessary project related clearances to be given expeditiously and 
undertaking equity stake in the SPV , where there is a possibility of develop ment of 
projects together with the SPV.  
 
2.10 When asked to give details abou t whether  any State Government has shown 
enthusiasm to open Cluster Development Scheme in their respective States ,  the Department 
in its written reply stated as under:- 
 “Till date no concrete proposal has been received from any State Governments” 
 On being asked as to how many meetings of the Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) 
have been held so far,  the Department in its written reply stated that till date 5 
meetings of the Scheme Steering Committee has been held. 
 
2.11 Role of PMC 
 
 The CDP -PS will be implemented through a Project Management Consultant (PMC).  
The PMC, a bridge between the DoP and the SPV, will be engaged in providing services in 
developing, financing and executing the cluster development I upgradation projects from the 
stage of conceptualization to commissioning. The PMC will act as a catalyst in expeditious 
implementation of the projects in a  systematic, professional and transparent manner.  
 
 Projects and Development India Limited (PDIL) has been chosen as the Pro ject 
Management Consulting (PMC) for implementing the scheme. They have called for EOI/SPV 
and in the first lot, out of the six EOIs, one was found suitable by the Scheme Selection 
Committee (SSC) to be located in Tamilnadu. SSC has requested PDIL to call fresh EOI which 
they have done and the last date of receipt of the EOIs is 31/12/2015.                                                                       
 
2.12 On being asked the reasons as to why no proposal has been received to open Cluster 
Development Scheme and how the Department of Pharmaceuticals is going to ensure 

  Page 
11 
 
  
participation in the scheme, the Department of Pharmaceuticals in its written reply stated as  
under:- 
 “The scheme is to be implemented on a Public Private Partnership  
(PPP)  format through one time grant -in-aid to be released in various phases for 
creation of identified infrastructure and common facilities to a Special Purpose 
Vehicles (SPVs) se t up for the purpose. The SPV is a clear legal entity (Cooperative 
Society, Registered Society, Trust of a Company) with members located within a 
radius of 10 -15 kms. The State Governments role would mainly arise after the SPV 
and DPR are approved by SSC”. 
   
   

  Page 
12 
 
  
CHAPTER III 
 
SPV FOR CREATION OF COMMON FACILITY CENTRE 
 
3.1 Common Facilities under the CDP -PS will consist of creation of tangible "assets" 
as Common Facility Centers (CFCs). Some of the indicative activities under the Common  
facilities are  (i). Common Testing Facilities,  (ii)Training  Centre, ( iii) R&D Centres,  (iv)  
Effluent Treatment Plant  and (v). Common Logistics Centre.  
 
3.2 The above List of common facili ties is illustrative and each cluster could have its 
own specific requirements  based on the nature of units being set up and the products 
proposed to be manu factured. The Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) shall approve the 
project components and funding thereof depending upon the merits of the proposal.  
 
3.3 The land and building for  CFC shall be provided by SPV /State Government  
concerned as per cost indicated. In case existing land and building is provided by stake -
holders, the cost of land and build ing will be decided on the basis of valuation report 
prepared by an approved agenc y of Central/State Government Departments/ FIs /Public 
Sector Banks and the cost of land and building may be taken towards contribution for the 
project.  
 
3.4 The CFC may be utilized by the SPV members and as also others in the cluster. The 
CFC should be o perationalised within two years from the date of final approval, unless 
extended with the approval of Scheme Steer ing Committee (SSC).   Escalation in the cost of 
project over and above the sanctioned amount, due to any reason, will be borne by the SPV / 
State Government. The Central Government shall not accept any financial liability arising out 
of operation of any CFC.  
 
3.5 User charges for services of CFC shall be on differential rate basis, lower fee for small 
units and higher fee for medium ones. However, the user charges will be graded in such a 
manner that average charges will be close to prevailing market prices. as decided by the 
Governing Council of the SPV.    The SPV mem bers would be given reasonable preference in 
user charges.   A Tripartite Agreement shall be entered into among the GOI, the State 
Government concerned and the SPV for CFC projects.  
 
3.6 Eligibility for Common Facility Centers  
 
 I.  Special Purpose Vehicle  
  
 It is necessary to form an SPV prior to setting up of and  running the proposed CFC An 
SPV is a clear legal entity (Cooperative Society, Registered Society/ Trust or a Company) with 
members located within a radius of 10 -15 km. The SPV should have a provision for 
enrolling new members to enable prospective entrepr eneurs in the cluster to utilize the 
facility should be provided, In addition to the contributing members of the SPV, the 
organizers should obtain writ ten commitments from 'users' of the proposed facilities so 
that its benefits can be further enlarged. There should be a minimum of 10 units serving as 
members of the Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV). There is no ceiling on the maximum number 
of members.   The  scope of the Grant in -aid shall only be for the development of common 
facilities to be held with the  SPV and shall not be available to production units, if any, owned 
by SPV.  
 
 The share of the cluster beneficia ries should be as high as possible but not  less than 
10 per cent of the total cost of CFC. State Govern ment's/ other stakeholders contri bution 
will be considered as gap filling funds. All the participating units should be independent in 
terms of their financial stakes and management. No single u nit will hold more than 10 per 

  Page 
13 
 
  
cent in the equity capital (or equivalent capital contribution) of the SPV. 
 
 Large mother manufacturing firms (whether in the public or private sector), other 
major buyers of the cluster MSE prod ucts, commercial machinery s uppliers, raw material 
suppliers and business development ser vice (BDS) providers can also be members of SPV, 
provided man agement of SPV remains clearly with the intended beneficiary SPV. The SPV 
may also raise loans from banks to take care of any shortf all, expansion, etc. on the condition 
that the plant and machinery in the CFC purchased with Government assistance will not be 
hypothecated and the first right thereto will rest with the Government.  
   
3.7 ii.   Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
 
  A Detailed Project Report has to be prepared by the SPV with 50% contribution from 
the Depart ment (para 5.2.ii) and submitted to the Department as the first and foremost 
activity for assistance under this category. The DPR should have details of all the busi ness 
processes of the cluster units viz. manufacturing process, tech nology, marketing, quality 
control, testing, purchase, out sourcing, etc. to identify impediments and bottle necks; and to 
draw action plan for enhancing competitiveness of the units of the cl uster and to position the 
cluster on a self sustaining trajectory of growth. DPR should focus on enhanced competitive -
ness, technology improvement, adoption of best manufacturing practices, marketing of 
products, employment generation, etc. There has to be  direct linkages between the 
impediments / bottlenecks identified and the measures recommended for improvement in 
the DPR.  
 
3.8 iii. Any proposal prepared under the scheme should meet the following: 
 
 It should necessarily have a testing laboratory.    If there is no proposal for the 
testing laboratory, the reason for not including the same must be spelt out clearly.  User 
charges for services of CFCs shall be on differential rate basis, lower fee for small units and 
higher fee for medium ones. However, the user charges will be graded in such a manner that 
average charges will be close to prevailing market prices, as decided by the Govern ing 
Council of the SPV.  It shall be the responsibility of the SPV to bring in land as its contribu -
tion;  SPVs may dovetail funds from other sources as well for the project, provided there is no 
duplication of funding for the same com ponent/ intervention. However, in cases of such 
dovetailing, it shall be ensured that the contribution of the participating uni ts of SPV is at 
least 10 of the overall project cost.  
 
3.9 Regarding the response of the scheme, the Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals  
during the course of evidence stated as under:- 
 “So, to reduce the cost of production of drugs and to introduce  new innovative 
procedures, this cluster scheme has been conceptualised and during last June we 
launched this scheme. We called for Expression of Interest and only 6 clusters 
participated in the first Expression of Interest. Subsequently, this concept has been 
highlighted in all the States and Pharmaceutical Associations. They have been 
sensitised on this particular scheme. Despite this, only 6 participated in the first 
Expression of Interest and according to our standards prescribed for release of funds, 
only one company qualified. So, for that, in-principle clearance has been given. 
 
 They have been asked to produce the detailed project report.  Once they produce their 
detailed project report, funds will be released for that project.  In the meanwhile, the  
other clusters have explained that certain conditions are very stiff like we should not 
have ten, as prescribed, number of units in a particular SPV.  It should be reduced 
further from 10 to five.  They have also suggested that we should not restrict 
Ayurveda or Unani drugs.  We should include all these components.  For instance, 

  Page 
14 
 
  
cosmetics should also be included as pharmaceutical sector.  All these suggestions 
which are given by the units have been given to PDIL to prescribe and to suggest and 
simplify mechanism so that this particular scheme is taken advantage by these units.  
We are at it.  We will again meet together and simplify the programme.”                                                    
 
3.10 Elaborating on the investments required to be made b y companies for formation  of 
clusters, the  Secretary, Department of  Pharmaceuticals during evidence stated as under:- 
 “Sir, as per the conditions, to form the SPV, ten members have to join together.  They 
have to invest about Rs. 15 to Rs. 20 lakh each  to become member of that SPV.  It is 
the initial contribution to be borne by the SPV.  Remaining 70 per cent is given  as 
grant for that particular project.  These particular industries are finding it difficult to 
spend such a huge money.  That is one of our observations.  We will see to it to some 
extent that this amount is also reduced further.  We will discuss about the 
simplification process.  We can suggest that even if they pay small contribution, as per 
the scheme details, the amount given is 70 per  cent of the project cost.  In backward 
areas, we give 90 per cent.  Probably, if we say that in the entire unit whether small, 
big or backward area or whichever cluster, 90 per cent grant is given then their 
contribution will become only 10 per cent.  It may be Rs. 6 or Rs. 7 lakh per unit.  In 
that way, we should be able to simply that process further down”. 
  

  Page 
15 
 
  
CHAPTER IV 
UTILISATION OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
4.1 The maximum limit for the grant in aid under this category would be Rs. 20 Crore 
per cluster or 70 per cent of the cost of the project, whichever less is. Government grant 
will be 90 per cent for CFCs for difficult and backward regions.   The cost of project 
includes cost of Land, building, pre -operative expenses like preparation of DPR, 
administrative and management support expenses including the salary of CEO, engineers, 
other experts and staff during the project implementation period, prelimi nary expenses, 
machinery & equipment, miscellaneous fixed assets and other support infra structure such as 
water supply, electricity and margin money for working capital.  
 
4.2 As the first step is to submit a DPR, the SPV may approach the Depart ment for 
contribution towards preparation of DPR. The Depart ment will consider the proposal on 
50:50 basis i.e. 50 % by the Govern ment and 50 % by the SPV subject to a maximum 
Government contribu tion of Rs. 5.00 lakhs. 50 of the Government contribution i.e. Rs. 2.50 
lakhs will be released after the approval against indemnity bond and other documentary 
requirements the Rs. 1.50 lakhs (30%) on su bmission of Detailed Project Report and Rs. 
11akh (20 %) balance on acceptance of the Detailed Pro ject Report. If the project is not 
approved, the funding by the Gov ernment (Rs. 2.50 lakhs) will go as a grant out  of the  
Programme.  In  case, the project is approved, the payment released for DPR  will be 
adjusted in the overall Government contribution.   Assistance for Administrative and 
other management support of SPV including the salary of CEO for the project implementa tion 
period shall not exceed 5%  of the Grant in -aid. 
 
4.3 Guidelines for Release of Funds  
 
 Based on the DPR and the nature of the project, detailed guidelines in respect of 
implementation of the project and subsequently release of funds by the Department will be 
prepared by the PMC and approved by the Scheme Steering Committee (SSC).  However, 
broadly following schedule will be adopted for release of share of funds of DoP to the SPV. 
(i)  30% as 1st  instalment as mobiliza tion advance against an Indemnity Bond, on 
Final Approval of the project by SSC;   
(ii)  30% as  2nd , installment against the production of Bills;  
(iii)  30% as  3rd  instalment against the production of Bills;  
(iv)  10% as final installment  
(v)  2nd  Installment would be released after the utilisation of at least 60% of the  
instalment and after the proportionate expenditure has been incurred by the SPV; (v) 
3rd and final installment would be released after 100  utilisation of 1st   instalment 
and at least 60 utilization of 2nd instalments and after the proportionate expenditure 
has been incurred by theSPV;  
 (vi)  Final instalment would be released after SPV has mobilized and spent its 
entire share in proportion to grant. 
(vii)  The SPVs shall submit the Utilisa tion Certificate (UC) for the amounts utilized 
as per the form at in accordance with CFR 19A;  
(viii)  Accounts of SPV shall be subject to audit by the Comptroller & Auditor General 
of lndia.                                     
 
4.4 Contribution by the SPV / State Government or the beneficiaries ’ share should be 
made upfront. Necessary infrastructure like l and, access road, water and power supply, etc. 
must be in place or substantial progress should have been made in this regard before Gol 

  Page 
16 
 
  
assistance is released. Where bank finance is involved, written commitment of the bank 
concerned to release proportionate funds will also be necessary before release of Gol 
assistance.   Funds will be released in installments depending upon the implementation plan, 
requirements of funds and as approved by the Scheme Steering Committee (SSC).         
 
 As per the Annual Report 2015 -16 (page 70) the total size of the scheme is Rs.125 
crore for the Twelfth Five Year Plan. 
 
4.5 On being asked how much expenditure has been incurred so far under the Scheme out 
of the Rs.125 crore and  how the remaining amount is proposed to be utilised in the current 
year i.e. last year of the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the Department of Pharmaceuticals in its 
written reply stated as under:-  
 “Because of the poor response for the EOIs, no expendit ure has  been incurred till 
date”.                                                         
 Budget Allocation (New Schemes of Pharmaceuticals) 
                                                                                       (Rs.in crore) 
BE 
2015-16 
RE 
2015-16 
BE 
2016-17 
Plan Non-Plan Total Plan Non-Plan Total Plan Non-Plan Total 
15.00 - 15.00 2.85 - 2.85 - - - 
 
4.6 When asked to give reasons for no allocation of funds for the new schemes of 
Pharmaceuticals in BE 2016-17, the Department in its written reply stated as under:-   
 “No grant in aid was released under the cluster development scheme during 2015 -16 
as none of the group of companies qualified for grant in spite of two rounds of EOIs. 
Presently, the Project Management Consultant (PMC) has been requested to review 
the whole process and suggest remedial measures. Till 2015 -16, the grants for cluster 
scheme was covered under the head of new schemes but from this budget, the 
allocation has been made for cluster scheme separately. Although, a sum of Rs. 60 
crore was requested f or BE 2016 -17 for the Cluster Development Scheme for 
Pharmaceutical Sector (CDP -PS). However, provision of Rs. 10 crores has been made 
in BE 2016 -17 and supplementary requirements depending on the progress of 
scheme may be made with the approval of Ministry of Finance”.       
 
4.7 On being asked the reasons  as to why the provision of Rs. 10 crore only has been 
made as against the proposed amount of Rs. 60 crore and how the Department propose to 
utilise the same;  and  the plan for the year 2016 -17 as regard to supplementary Grant, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals in its written reply stated as under:- 
 “Seeing the Poor response of the Pharma Sector towards this programme, DoP 
envisaged a very little utilization of grant, hence, DoP kept p rovision of Rs. 10.0 crore 
only”.                        
 
 4.8 Assistance under the Scheme 
 
 The maximum limit for the grant in aid under this category would be Rs. 20 crore per 
cluster or 70 per cent of the cost of the project, whichever is less, Government grant will be  
90 percent for CFCs for difficult and backward regions for creating following common 
facilities:- 
Common Testing Facilities 
Training Centre 
Effluent Treatment Plant 

  Page 
17 
 
  
R&D Centres 
Common Logistics Centre 
 
4.9 When asked w hether the maximum amount of Rs.20 crore would be sufficient for 
creating the aforesai d facilities under the Scheme and  If not,  the arrangement to fill in the 
gap to ensure that all the pharmaceutical companies participate in perfect harmony to m ake 
the programme a big success, the Department of Pharmaceuticals in its written reply stated 
as under:- 
 “The State Governments/Other Stakeholders contribution will be considered as gap 
filling funds. 
 Release of Funds 
 a. 30% as 1 stinstallment as mobilization advance against an Indemnity B ond on 
Final Approval of the project by SSC. 
 b. 30% as 2ndinstallment against the production of bills; 
 c 30% as 3rdinstallment against the production of bills; and 
 d. 10% as final settlement. 
 It is also mentioned in the background material that Special  Purpose Vehicle (SPV) 
may approach the Department for contribution towards preparation of DPR.  The 
Department will consider the proposal on 50:50 basis i.e. 50% of the Government and 
50% by the SPV subject to a maximum contribution of Rs. 5.00 lacs. 50% of the 
Government contribution i.e. Rs.2.50 lacs will be released after the approval against 
Indemnity Bond. If the project is not approved, the funding by the Government will go 
as a grant out of the programme.  In case the project is approved the payment  
released for DPR will be adjusted in the overall Government contribution”. 
 
4.10 On being asked whether the funding by the Government (Rs.2.50 lac)  will lapse  in 
case the project is not approved and  w hat shall happen of this grant and how m any such 
cases have come so far, the Department in its written reply stated as under:- 
 “The Government at present does not visualise that any EOIs which are found eligible 
would not be approved. Till date no such case is there”. 

  Page 
18 
 
  
CHAPTER V 
PROGRESS/RESPONSE FOR THE PROJECT 
 
5.1 On being asked to give details whether PMC (PDIL) has identified any cluster where 
the scheme will be implemented, the Department of Pharmaceuticals in its written reply 
stated as under:- 
 “Apart from the clusters from where SPVs responded to EOI as mentioned above, PMC 
has contacted representatives of the Pharma firms all over India, through telephonic 
discussion and Pharma Associations. In addition to this PMC representatives visited 
many clusters, such as Baddi(H.P.), Deraabassi (near Chandi garh), Maharashtra, 
Tamilnadu, Gujrat, Andhra Pradesh & West Bengal area”. 
 
5.2 When asked to give reasons why no existing cluster has not been identified so far, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals replied as under:- 
 “The CDP-PS does not have any provision  for identifying existing or new clusters. The 
scheme is to be operated based on the eligibility criteria of the EOIs received which 
are approved by SSC”. 
 
5.3 On being asked  the criteria which make an EOI eligible for receiving the grant under 
the Scheme  and state the EOI wise deficiencies in this case, the Department in its written 
reply stated as under:- 
 "Eligibility Criteria for selection of SPV in EOI Stage:- 
 
(i) The SPV member should be a Drug Manufacturer/ Pharma Enterprises, Drug 
Intermediate Manufac turer, State Govt. and Pharma R&D Organization. 
However, major buyer of the Cluster Products, Commercial Machinery 
Suppliers, Raw material Suppliers and Business Development Service can also 
be members of SPV, provided management of SPV remains clearly wit h the 
intended beneficiary SPV. The SPV should have identified land of adequate size 
for the proposed CFC. 
(ii) The cluster member should be located within a radius of about 15 kms from 
the proposed CFC. 
(iii) The cluster member should have not been blacklisted by th e central 
Government / any state government or under a declaration of ineligibility for 
corrupt or fraudulent practices as on the last date of submission of response to 
EOI. In this regard, a declaration to be submitted by all the members of SPV. 
(iv) An undertaking to be submitted by the representative of the SPV that they will 
contribute at least 10 % of the Project Cost as “Equity”. 
(v) SPV shall have a minimum of 10 manufacturer enterprises of Pharma 
Producers as its shareholders. 
 The EOI was issued on 07 -07-2015. By closing date (i.e. 11 -09-2015) only six EOIs 
received. 
 
5.4 When asked to  give reasons for poor response from the Pharma Industry for this 
programme, the Department of Pharmaceuticals in its written reply stated as under:- 
 “A total of six EOIs were received.The Scheme Selection Committee (SSC) found that 
except one EOI, the others did not fulfill the criteria required for receiving the grant 
under the scheme”. 

  Page 
19 
 
  
 
5.5 When asked to give details of 6 EOIs received in the first instance, the Departme nt of 
Pharmaceuticals in its written reply stated as under:- 
 “The details of six EOIs which have been received are as under:- 
 (1)  M/s. PitampurAudhyogikSangthan, Saket Nagar, Indore.  
 (2)  M/s. PshyalamEnvirotech Hyderabad. 
  (3)  M/s. Hyderabad Pharma Infrastructural Hyderabad. 
 (4)  M/s. BionaryBioproducts Pvt. Ltd. Madhgapur, Hyderabad. 
  (5)  M/s. Centre of Excellence, NFDD Complex, Rajkot, Gujrat. 
 (6)  M/s. Chennai Pharma Industrial Infrastructure UpgradationComplexAlathur, 
Distt. Kanchipuram, Tamilnadu”.  
 
5.6 When asked to furnish reasons for not giving approval for the five EOIs, the 
Department in its written reply stated as under:- 
 “The SSC found th at the five EOIs did not fulfill the criteria as required for getting the 
grant through the scheme”. 
 
5.7 When asked to give details  w hether Project Management Consultant (PMC) has 
suggested any remedial measures to the Department of Pharmaceuticals/ grou p of 
companies for making the  companies qualifying for grant ,  the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals in its written reply stated as under:- 
 “Based on the feedback from Pharma representatives, PMC has suggested following:- 
 
(a) To lower the requirement of minimum 10 Pharma Units in the SPV to 5 
Pharma Units.  
(b) To increase the grant from 70 % to 80 % of the project cost”. 
 
5.8 On being asked to give details whether the Department of Pharmaceuticals will be 
considering the suggestions given by PMC, the Department of Pharmaceuticals in its written 
reply stated as under:- 
 “The SSC is considering the suggestions given by the PMC which also includes that the 
10 members of the SPV Pharma Units may include Ayurvedic, Unani & Cosm etics 
Units as well as R&D Organization of these fields. Document requirement and other 
formalities are also being minimized”.       
 
 “Seeing the poor response from SPVs against the 1 st EOI, the SSC decided to call fresh 
EOI vide invitation dated 31-10-2015, but no EOI has been received so far against this 
fresh EOI”. 
 
5.9 When asked to give details how the Department is going to implement the programme 
successfully in a time bound manne r as there is dearth of res ponse from the Pharma 
Companies and whether any meetings were held with the prospective stakeholders , the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals in its written reply stated as under:- 
 “The SSC is revaluating the scheme in consultation with the stakeholders to make it 
more attractive so that the scheme could be successfully implemented in a time bound 
manner. In this connection, SSC met on 06/05/2016 where in the revised scheme was 
discussed. SSC has made certain suggestions which is to be carried out by PMC”. 
 

  Page 
20 
 
  
5.10 On being asked to give details as to how many projects have been given in -principle 
approval and final approval since the launching of the Scheme, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals in its written reply stated as under:- 
 “Only one project has been given in -principle approval. This project is for new 
Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP) at Alathur, Tamilnadu. Its Proposal & Detailed Project 
Report(DPR) are awaited. The SPV name is M/s. Chennai Pharma Industrial 
Infrastructure Upgradation Complex AlathurDistt. Kanchipuram, Tamilnadu”. 
 
5.11 When asked whether any Detailed Project Report has been prepared by the Project 
Management Consultant (PMC) and the same validated by the stake holders, the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals in its written reply stated as under:- 
 “As per para 9(ii)(c) of the Scheme, PMC has the responsibility of appraisal of the 
DPRs indicating financial viability, commercial sustainability and socio -economic 
impact for according final approval to the projects”.     
                                                                   
5.12 During the course of evidence, the Secretary, Department of pharmaceuticals  
elaborated the efforts taken by the Department as under:- 
 “We are continuously taking efforts to see that other parts of the country are reached, 
and they apply for this particular scheme. For instance, we have lot of clusters in 
Himachal Pradesh. We have in Solan  and at Baddi. Similarly, we have clusters in J&K. 
We have clusters in Maharashtra. We have lot of  clusters in Gujarat. We are reaching 
all these clusters. We are activating our activities to publicise this particular project 
details. I am very confident that in the months to come, lot of activities will be there in 
this scheme.” 
 
5.13 Elaborating the steps taken by the Department with the State Government, the 
Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals during the course of evidence stated as under:-  
 “Sir, we are working in close coordination with the State Governments. During the 
past one year we have written to almost all the State Governments giving all details 
about the scheme and the need to take more proactive interest in the pharmaceutical 
development of the country.” 
 In recent years, there has been enhanced activity in various Sta te Governments. 
Telangana Government has come out with a big pharma proposal at an extent of about 
16,000 acres of land. This particular scheme is very small and we are going to give 
only Rs. 20 crore for a particular cluster, but they have taken a very bi g scheme of 
developing a big pharma city to an extent of about 16,000 acres of land for which they 
need about Rs. 1,500 crore to make common facilities. Similarly, Andhra Pradesh 
Governmen has already identified two projects. They have sent two project rep orts, 
each with an extent of about 2,000 acres of land. Gujarat also has sent a proposal. A 
private entrepreneur has sent a proposal for 2,000 acres of land. He says that you take 
2,000 acres of land and develop a big pharmaceutical park. He does not need any 
financial support. He says that if that land becomes a park, he will be very happy. 
Similarly, Tamil Nadu Government has given about 850 acres of land for production of 
bulk drugs. Karnataka Government has set apart 200 acres of land in Mangalore to 
create a Pharmaceutical Park. Likewise, every State is today competing to create 
pharmaceutical parks in the country, but this particular cluster development scheme 
is for the existing clusters as well as new clusters which will come in small scale 
sector to  cater to the demands of small and medium entrepreneurs. But there has 
been an increased activity overall in pharmaceutical development in the country.  

  Page 
21 
 
  
 We are also working out another scheme to produce APIs in the country, taking 
advantage of renewed int erest shown by various State Governments, like Telangana, 
Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Government. They want immediate release of funds. We 
are working out another programme to give Rs. 200 crore for a cluster. We want to 
create three clusters.  That scheme is  in its finality. Probably in another two months, 
we will be launching that scheme. Once it comes, definitely for APIs, we can create 
three important clusters in the country.  
 Similarly, for medical divisions also, we are creating a separate programme. We  give 
Rs. 25 crore to each cluster. We can create eight or nine clusters in various States. For 
this also, there is lot of inquiries and people want to participate. We are working very 
closely with the State Governments and we have really created interst i n them for 
pharmaceutical development. We will further discuss with the State Governrments.  
 Then, the subject of PSUs has been discussed in the same Committee. We have 
discussed several times about rehabilitation of PSUs like IDPL and HAL. Recently, the 
subject was put up to the Cabinet – rehabilitation of HAL. We have simplified the 
rehabilitation process and suggested it to the Cabinet, but the Cabinet has suggested 
some other alternative mechanism. So, we are reworking the scheme. Once these 
particular rehabilitation proposals are approved by the C abinet, I am very confident 
that these two PSUs’ surplus land will also become a big hub of pharmaceutical 
activity. In the meanwhile, we have identified surplus land in IDPL, both in Chennai, 
Hyderabad and Ri shikesh. We want to convert them as Pharma Parks to cater to the 
demands of R&D and small and medium scale sector. 
 These are the activities which we are doing and I am very confident that the schemes 
will be very successful in the next year” 
 
  

  Page 
22 
 
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1 
 CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME FOR PHARMA SECTOR (CDP-PS) 
 The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) has announced the 
Scheme for Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector (CDP-PS) in July 2014  
with a  vision to catalyze and encourage quality, productivity and innovation to enable the 
Indian pharmaceutical industry to play a leading role in a competitive global market.  By this 
programme, the DoP aims to increase the easy a ccess to standard testing facilities and value 
addition especially to SMEs through creation of common world class facilities.  The Committee, 
appreciate the Department for announcing the CDP -PS and  desire that these clusters should 
have all common scienti fic infrastructure facilities so as  to reduce the cost of production of 
drugs by individual units.  Further, the Committee, also feel that more  interaction by the 
Department with Pharma Industry/associations to know the ground realities and practical 
difficulties would accelerate the implementation of the scheme. The Committee, therefore 
recommend that the Department may regularly have interaction with Pharma Industry and 
associations to expeditiously implement the scheme in a systematic, professional and  
transparent manner and ensure that the objectives of the Scheme  are achieved at the earliest.  
RECOMMENDATION NO.2 
 SPECIAL PURPOSE VEHICLE 
 The Committee  note that the Cluster Development Programme will be implemented 
through a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) which will have representatives from cluster 
members, financial institutions, State & Central Governments and R&D organisa tions with 
full operational autonomy to  develop, operate and main tain the infrastructure.   The 
Committee, further note that the programme is to be implemented on a Public Private 
Partnership  (PPP) format through one time grant -in-aid to be released in various phases for 
creation of identified infrastructure and common facilities to the SPVs set up for the purpose. 
The State Governments role would mainly arise after the SPV and DPR are approved by 
Scheme Steering Committee ( SSC).  The Committee observe that till date SSC has held five 
meetings and all the  meetings were held in Delhi only and whenever it was felt necessary.   
During the course of the evidence even the department felt that holding of SSC meeting at 
different places will associate the local  Industry more.  The Committee  are of the opinion that 
the development of Cluster Programme is of paramount importance and fits in realizing the 
Make in India goal of the Government.  The Committee desire that the Department should take 
proactive measures toward developing Cluster Development Scheme.  The Committee, 
therefore recommend that  SSC should hold more meetings at regular interval and also at 
different relevant places where the Pharma companies are concentrated for prop er 
monitoring and early establishment of the scheme.  The Department should also enlist the 
support of  State Governments for making the scheme successful.  The Committee would like 

  Page 
23 
 
  
to know the initiatives taken to expedite the scheme and the progress made  in the matter so 
far.        
RECOMMENDATION NO.3 
 NEED TO REVIEW TERMS  AND CONDITIONS FOR F ORMATION OF SPVS UND ER 
CDP-PS  
 The Committee note that Common Facilities under the CDP -PS will consist of 
creation of tangible "assets" such as  (i) Common Testing  Facilities  (ii)Training  Centre 
(iii) R&D Centres  (iv)  Effluent Treatment Plant  and (v) Common Logistics Centre.  The 
Committee also note that each cluster could have its own specific requirements based on 
the nature of units being set up and the prod ucts proposed to be manu factured. The 
Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) shall approve the project components and funding 
thereof depending upon the merits of the proposal.   
  The Committee note that a minimum of 10 Pharma Companies are required to 
form a S PV under CDP -PS.  Further each company who  joins the SPV as members under 
CDP-PS has to invest about Rs.15 to 20 lakh.  The Committee note that these conditions 
are coming in the way of  successful implementation of the scheme.  There have been 
suggestions to include Ayurvedic, Unani drug manufacturers and cosmetic companies 
also as member in the Cluster Development Programme.    The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that  Department may relook the scheme and review all bottlenecks and 
reduce the number of members required to form SPV and also the amount to be invested.  
Further suggestions for including the cosmetic and ayurveda and all the other drug 
companies may also be considered in formation of clusters.  The Committee, would like 
to know the changes made in the scheme to make it implementable. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.4 
 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION     
 
 The Committee note under the 12 th Five Year Plan, Rs.125 crore has been allotted 
for the CDP -PS Scheme.  The Committee observe that the maximum limit for the grant in 
aid from Government under this category would be Rs. 20 Crore per cluster or 70 per cent 
of the cost of the project, whichever is less.  Government grant will be 90 per cent for 
Common Facility Centres (CFCs) for difficul t and backward regions. Till 2015-16, the grants 
for cluster scheme was covered under the head of new schemes but from this budget, the 
allocation has been made for cluster scheme separately.  The Committee, further note that no 
grant in aid was released u nder the cluster development scheme during 2015 -16 as none 
qualified for grant in spite of two rounds of EOIs.  Although, a sum of Rs. 60 crore was 
requested for BE 2016 -17, only a provision of Rs.10 crore has been made in BE 2016 -17.  The 
Committee  expre ss their displeasure over the fact  that  the Department has not been 
successful in the last two years in implementation of the Scheme  and the funds have remained 

  Page 
24 
 
  
unutilised Presently, the Project Management Consultant (PMC) has been requested to review 
the whole process and suggest remedial measures. The Committee therefore, desire that the 
Department should make the scheme implementable at the earliest and that expedient 
monitoring and timely action may be taken to utilise the funds  allocated for the cur rent year  
to the utmost as it is very vital for the growth of Pharmaceutical companies especially the SME 
Pharma Units. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
 ALTERNATIVE MODEL FOR CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT 
 The Committee observe that Expression of Interest (EoI) for receiving  the grant by 
Pharma Companies under the Cluster Development Programme was issued on 7.7.2015 and 
closed on  11.9.2015 only six EoI’s were received .  The Scheme Selection Committee (SSC) 
found that except one EoI,  others did not fulfill the criteria requir ed for receiving the grant 
under the scheme.  The Committee observe that only one project has been given in -principle 
approval and that its Proposal & Detailed Project Report(DPR) is awaited.  The Committee also 
observe that PMC has contacted representatives of the Pharma firms and Pharma Associations 
all over India , through telephonic discussion and a lso visited many clusters, such as 
Baddi(H.P.), Deraabassi (near Chandigarh), Maharashtra, Tamilnadu, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh 
& West Bengal area. However, the  Committee observe that in  practice not much response has  
been received from SME Pharma companies for this programme.  
    Keeping in view of the poor response the Committee, further note   that the SSC is 
revaluating the scheme in consultation with the st akeholders to make it more feasible so that 
the scheme could be successfully implemented in a time bound manner. The Committee are of 
the opinion that the Department of Pharmaceuticals should identify some existing locations 
which have the potential to eme rge as a  pharmaceutical cluster and in collaboration with the 
concerned State Governments and local pharma companies should set up the basic 
infrastructure facilities envisaged under CDP in a PPP mode which can be utilised by pharma 
units  at reasonable c harges which will also enable the objectives of the programme to be 
achieved.   Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
should explore the possibility of establishment of world class facilities in cities or in States 
where cluster of pharma companies already exist and such  common facilities can be created 
under PPP mode. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
 ALLOWING PSU PHARMA COMPANIES TO ESTABLISH CLUSTERS 
 In order to give thrust to the scheme, the Committee desire that the Department should 
also consider entrusting creation of clusters to PSU pharmaceutical companies like IDPL and 
HAL etc.  These companies have huge vacant land and also infrastructure facil ities that are 
required for pharmaceutical companies. These PSUs pharma companies may be encouraged to 

  Page 
25 
 
  
utilise  land available with them for setting up of clusters along with the  creation of common 
world class facilities in the clusters through SPV or PPP  mode. The Department of 
Pharmaceuticals may also provide suitable grant for creation of such facilities.  The Committee 
are of the opinion that this may benefit as good revenue stream to the PSU pharma companies 
by utilization of their vacant land.  The C ommittee,  therefore, recommend that during the 
review of the scheme, the Department may seriously consider allowing the PSU pharma 
companies to utilise their vacant land for promotion of pharmaceutical clusters.  
 
 
 
       New Delhi;                                                                           Anandrao Adsul 
     21, July, 2016                                                                                     Chairperson 
  30, Ashadha 1938 (Saka)                                            Standing Committee on 
                                                                                                     Chemicals and Fertilizers 
                              
  

  Page 
26 
 
  
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 23 May, 2016 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1615 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Anju Bala 
3. Shri B. N. Chandrappa 
4. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
5. Smt. Veena Devi 
6. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
7. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
8. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
9. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
10. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
11. Shri Tasleem Uddin 
12. Smt Rekha Arun Verma 
13. Shri George Baker 
RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao 
15. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
           1. Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
            2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
 3. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director 
 4. Shri  S. Holkhopao Baite - Additional Director 
 
LIST OF WITNESS 
Department of Pharmaceuticals 
 1. Shri V. K. Subburaj   Secretary 
 2. Shri Sudhansh Pant   Joint Secretary 
 
Representatives from Projects and Development India Ltd. (PDIL) 
 1. Shri. Venkateshwar   CMD 
 2.  Shri P. K. Singh   General Manager 
 3. Shri B. D. Singh   General Manager 
 4. Shri D. K. Sant    DGM (Projects) 
  
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 

  Page 
27 
 
  
and other officials to the sitting. Their attention was invited to the provisions contained in 
Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of the Committee's 
proceedings.  
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, a representative of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals made power point presentation to the Committee. 
4. During the discussion, the Hon'ble Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised 
queries on several issues such as:- 
(i) Reasons for delay in establishment of clusters. 
(ii) The rule process to encourage more pharma units to join this  programme 
and avail its benefits. 
(iii) To publicize the cluster Development programme. 
(iv) To bring micro -units and  other drug  manufacturing units in cluster 
programme. 
(v) Common facilities Area for clusters to be increased. 
(vi) To amend the policy and reduce the numbers of Members required for forming 
a cluster by less than ten, if number of Members is the problem.   
(vii) Contribution for Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) Members to be made  more 
flexible. 
5. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee as well as 
for furnishing valuable information to the Committee.  
6. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 The Committee then adjourned.  
 
 
    
  

  Page 
28 
 
  
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 21 July, 2016 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Anju Bala 
3. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
4. Smt. Veena Devi 
5. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
6. Shri K. Ashok Kumar  
7. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi 
8. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
9. Shri S. Rajendran    
10. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu  
11. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
12. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
13. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
14. Shri George Baker 
RAJYA SABHA 
15. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
16. Shri K. Parasaran 
17. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
SECRETARIAT 
             1. Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
             2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
 3. Shri Nishant Mehra  - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee.  
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration and adoption report on the 
subject, "Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector (CDP-PS)". 
4. After a brief discussion on the contents of the report, the draft Report was adopted by 
the Committee without any amendment.   
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes, if any, 
arising out of the factual verifica tion of the Report by the Department of Pharmaceuticals of 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers and present the same to both the Houses of 
Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 