 
 
1 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
 
28 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS (2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers on the subject "Functioning Of Autonomous Institutions - Central 
Institute Of Plastics Engineering Technology (CIPET) And Institute Of Pesticides 
Formulation Technology (IPFT)"of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
 
 TWENTY EIGHT REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
NOVEMBER, 2016 /AGRAHAYANA, 1938 (SAKA) 
 
  


 
 
2 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
CC&F.No.28 
 
 
TWENTY EIGHT REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained  
in the Twentieth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  on the subject "Functioning Of Autonomous Institutions - Central 
Institute of Plastics Engineering Technology (CIPET) And Institute of Pesticides Formulation 
Technology (IPFT)" of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28 November 2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28 November 2016 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
NOVEMBER, 2016 /AGRAHAYANA, 1938 (SAKA) 
  

 
 
3 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
 
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) 
 
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
Chapter I Report  
 
 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government' s  
replies 
 
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee  
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of  Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2016-17) held on 22.11.2016. 
 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2016 -17) of the Ministry  of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals). 
 
 
  

 
 
4 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
(iii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Innocent 
9. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
11. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle 
12. Shri Rajendran S. 
13. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
14. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
15. Dr. Uma Saren 
16. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
17. Shri Taslimuddin 
18.  Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
21. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27. Shri K Parasaran 
28. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
29. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
30. Shri Abdul Wahab 
31. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
  Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
  Shri A.K.Srivastava  - Director 
  Shri H. RamPrakash  - Additional Director 
  Shri Thangkhanlal Ngaihte - Senior Committee Assistant  

 
 
5 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
(v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2016-2017) having been authorised by the Committee to present the  Report on 
their behalf, present this Twenty Eight Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken 
by the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2016-17) on the  subject "Functioning Of Autonomous Institutions - 
Central Institute Of Plastics Engineering Technology (CIPET) And Institute Of 
Pesticides Formulation Technology (IPFT) " of the Ministr y of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
2. The Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 28.04.2016. The Action 
Taken replies of Government to all observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Report were received  on 26.07.2016. The Standing Committee on  Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2016 -2017) considered and adopted this Report  at their sitting held on 
22.11.2016. 
3. An analysis of t he Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Comments of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                       ANANDRAO ADSUL 
22 November, 2016                                                                                    Chairperson 
 01  Agrahayana 1938 (Saka)                                               Standing Committee on 
                                                                                                                 Chemicals and Fertilizer 
 

 
 
1 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2016-17) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject, "Functioning 
of Autonomous Institutions: CIPET and IPFT"  of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
28.4.2016. In all, the Committee made 15 Observations / Recommendations  in the said 
Report. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish replies to the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in t he Twentieth Report within three months from the date of presentation of the 
Report, i.e. by 28.7.2016. The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 15 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from  the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals  in two 
batches, viz. replies to recommendations relating to IPFT were received on 26.7.2016 and 
those relating to CIPET were received on 26.7.2016 .  Accordingly, the Replies have been 
examined and categorized as follows:-  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government- 
 Rec. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 9, 12, 13 and 15                                          (Total=8) 
            Chapter-II  
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply-  
Rec. Nos. 5 and 7         (Total =2) 
            Chapter-III  
 
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration-  
      Rec. No. Nil                   (Total=0) 
            Chapter-IV  
 
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  final replies of the 
Government are still awaited- 
Rec. Nos. 2, 8, 10, 11 and 14              (Total=5) 
             Chapter-V  
 

 
 
2 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the  Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter  - I of this Report should be furnished 
expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. Release of allocated funds for CIPET  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.2 
5. On the issue of Rs. 215.26 crore which was already allocated for CIPET but still not 
received by CIPET, the Committee had recommended as under:   
 "The Committee note that during the Twelfth Five Year Plan, an allocation of Rs. 
586.45 crore has been made a s Plan support to CIPET out of which Rs. 371.19 crore 
has been received by CIPET and Rs. 318.61 crore has been spent by them so far. This 
shows that more than 85 percent of the received amount has been utilized by CIPET 
so far, which is indicative of good financial performance of the Plan allocation. As Rs. 
215.26 crore is still to be received by CIPET and the current year is the last leg of the 
Twelfth Five Year Plan, the Committee recommend that this amount should be 
released without any further delay to accelerate various activities of CIPET. The 
Committee are of the view that the Ministry of Finance, keeping in view the national 
stature of CIPET, may not withhold their due allocation. The Committee therefore, 
recommend to release the balance amount at th e earliest so that CIPET can carry out 
its unfulfilled task during the Plan period."  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
6. In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
"The plan support allocation of Rs. 586.45 crore for CIPET include original 12 th plan 
outlay of Rs. 280 crore and additional requirement of Rs. 306.45 crore as GoI share for 
mid-term appraisal (MTA) schemes for “Enhancing the Capabilities in Academic 
Activities (skill development training programmes) at CIPET centres” and “Enhancing 
Capabilities in Research activities at R&D centres and Technology Support Services at 
CIPET centres”. After utilization of entire allocated outlay of Rs. 280 crore from 2012 -
13 to 2015 -16, an amount of Rs. 91.19 crore was released in 2015 -16 for MTA 
schemes. The unspent approved balance amount of Rs. 215.26 crore is required in 
2016-17 & 2017 -18.  Against this, an amount of Rs. 57.67 crore has been allotted for 
CIPET in 2016-17 (BE). In view of above, Ministry of Finance have been requested for 
allocation of additional funds in the 1 st Supplementary Demands for Grants for the 
year 2016-17."   
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
7.  In their report, the Committee had  noted that out of the allocated amount of 
Rs. 586.45 crore for the 12th Five Year Plan  to CIPET, Rs. 215.26 crore have not yet 

 
 
3 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
been released and accordingly recommended that the same be released at the 
earliest so that CIPET can carry out its unfulfilled tasks during the Plan period itself.   
 In its Action Taken Reply, the Department stated that while the unspent 
approved balance amount of Rs. 215.26 crore is required in 2016 -17 and 2017 -18 
but only an amount of Rs. 57.67 crore has been allotted for CIPET in 2016 -17. Hence, 
the Departmen t had requested the  Ministry of Finance for allocation of additional 
funds in the 1st Supplementary Demands for Grants for the year 2016-17.   
In view of the above, the Committee desire that the Department  may vigorously  
pursue the matter for release of the balance amount of Rs. 157.59 crore with the 
Ministry of Finance/Niti Aayog and also ensure that the unfinished tasks are finished 
on time as per schedule. The Committee expect the Department to submit a detailed 
report on the matter at the time of furnishing Action Taken Statements.  
B.      Construction of academic and technical infrastructure buildings 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
8.  While expressing concern over the lack of proper buildings for academic and 
infrastructural facilities at some CIPET centres, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 “The Committee observe that CIPET Centres in project stage viz., Vijayawada, Bhopal 
(VTC), Baddi and Valsad do not have academic buildings, Hostel buildings and 
Technical infrastructure except few machineries / equipments.  The Centres are 
functioning in rented sheds.   
 In this regard, the Committee are distressed that the above -mentioned CIPET Centres 
have to function without basic infrastructure like Academic buildings and have to 
function from rented sheds. The Committee, therefore, recommend that top priority 
should be given to the construction of proper academic buildings, hostel buildings and 
technical infrastructure for Vijayawada, Bhopal, Baddi and Valsad centres which are 
presently functioning from rented sheds.  The Department may take up the matter 
with State Governments to provide already constructed buildings such as In dustrial 
Training Institutes (ITIs) which are lying vacant in the States. The Committee would 
like to be informed of measures taken in pursuance of this recommendation at the 
earliest." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
9.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 “The Department shares the concerns of the Committee on non availability of 
requisite infrastructure for the new centres. The Department has taken up the issue 
with the respective State Governments for allotment of constructed buildings such as 
Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) which are lying vacant in the States.  CIPET 
requires constructed building of area of 40,000 -50,000 sq.ft for setting up of 

 
 
4 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
Vocational Training Centre. The present status of allotment of building/land for 
Vijayawada, Bhopal, Baddi and Valsad centres which are presently functioning from 
rented shed is as under:  
 
 Vijayawada:  Government of Andhra Pradesh has allotted a Youth Training Cen tre 
building admeasuring 25000sq.ft. at Elooru for conducting vocational training 
programs. In addition, CIPET has also hired 20000sq.ft. for erection of machinery and 
equipments for imparting Training to the students.  CIPET is also following up with 
the Govt. of Andhra Pradesh for allotment of constructed State Govt. building of about 
10,000 sq.mt.. 
 Bhopal/Gwalior: As requested by the State Government, the centre is now being 
established at  Gwalior, as CIPET centre is already functional at Bhopal.  The State 
government has allotted 15,000sq.ft building to CIPET belonging to Textile 
Technology Department, Govt. of Madhya Pradesh, for conducting training programs. 
CIPET is also following up with the State Government for allotment of vacant 
buildings / ITI / Diploma institute sheds / buildings.  
 Baddi: The State Government has expressed their inability to indentify constructed 
building / vacant ITI/Diploma institute buildings for CIPET Baddi and have allotted 
land for the centre. CIPET has initiated action to construct the buildings through 
CPWD by signing of MoU and the works are in progress.    
  Valsad: CIPET is constantly following up with State Government for allotment of 
constructed building." 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
10.  In their Report, the Committee had recommended that top priority should be 
given to the construction of proper academic buildings, hostel buildings and 
technical infrastructure for CIPET centres at Vijayawada, Bhopal, Baddi and Valsad 
which are presently functioning from rente d sheds. The Committee had also asked 
them to take up the matter with State Governments to provide already constructed 
buildings such as Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) which are lying vacant in the 
States. 
In its ATR, the Department had stated that it had taken up the issue with the 
respective State Governments for allotment of constructed buildings such as 
Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) which are lying vacant in the States.  The 
Department also informed that while appropriate buildings have b een found for 
CIPET centres in Vijayawada and Gwalior, the centres at Baddi and Valsad still 
functions without proper buildings.  
In this regard, the Committee appreciate the steps taken by the Department/CIPET 
for proper infrastructure and buildings at CIPET centres at Vijayawada and Gwalior. 
The Committee note that with regard to the Baddi  centre, the State Government had 
expressed their inability to provide vacant buildings but had allotted land for the 
same and CIPET is in the process of constructing a dedicated building through CPWD. 
As for Valsad centre, the Committee observe that CIPET  is constantly following up 

 
 
5 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
with State Government for allotment of constructed building. The Committee desire  
that a detailed progress report on the Baddi and Valsad centres be furnished as part 
of the Action Taken Statements.  
C.   Shortage of hostel facilities at CIPET centres.  
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
11.  Noting the acute shortage of hostel facilities at CIPET centres and that CIPET is 
presently constructing 10 hostels at various locations,  the Committee had recommended as 
under:-   
 "The Committee note that CIPET Is facing acute shortage of hostel facilities for its 
students. CIPET centres at Bhubaneswar (Campus II) and PWMC, Guwahati and the 
new hostels for 10 of its centres which are at various levels of completion do not have 
hostel facilities. However, CIPET is not keen to utilize its time and energies 
constructing hostel buildings from scratch which will affect its self -sustained funding 
mode and divert it from managing its core courses. CIPET is also presently utilizing 11 
hostels whose management has been outsourced to private operators.  
 
 In this regard, the Committee are of the opinion that the Department and CIPET have 
the right to decide about what is best for the students in particular and the Institute at 
large regarding ho stel accommodation and other facilities. However, the Committee 
would like to state that the interest and welfare of the students should not be 
compromised in any way. There should be proper mechanisms in place to monitor 
and ensure that the private operat ors in case of outsourcing of hostel facilities do not 
take advantage of the students for their profit. Further, the Committee desire that the 
ongoing construction of 10 hostels be expedited and that the Department should 
ensure that adequate funds are provided for their full completion." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
12. In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 "The Department and CIPET agree with the concerns of the committee on interest and 
welfare of the students with regard to outsourcing of hostel facilities. Towards this 
objective, the private contractors to provide these facilities to students, at competit ive 
rates with all amenities, are selected through open tender system.  Similarly, quality, 
healthy and hygiene food is provided at reasonable rates through careful selection of 
mess contractors.  These institutional mechanisms also ensure quality and comf ort of 
the private hostel facilities.  
 
 The construction of hostel buildings at 10 CIPET centres is at various stages of 
completion. The construction of hostel at CIPET Jaipur has been completed and 
hostels at Haldia, Ahmadabad, Murthal, Bhubaneswar – I, Bhubaneswar – II and 
Chennai will be completed by the end of 2016. The construction of hostels at 
Lucknow, Aurangabad and Hyderabad will be completed by June 2017." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 

 
 
6 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
13.  In their recommendation, the Committee had stated that whil e the 
Department/CIPET may decide about what is best and feasible for students in terms 
of hostel and other facilities,  the interest and welfare of the students should not be 
compromised in any way. The Committee also desired that the ongoing construction  
of 10 hostels should be expedited and that the Department should ensure that 
adequate funds are provided for their completion. 
In its Action Taken Report ( ATR), the Department had stated that it agrees with the 
concerns of the Committee on the welfare of the students. The Department also 
informed that the construction of hostel buildings at 10 CIPET centres is at various 
stages of completion. While the hostel for CIPE T centre in Jaipur has been completed, 
those in Haldia, Ahmedabad, Murthal, Bhubaneswar and Chennai will be completed 
by the end of 2016, and those in Lucknow, Aurangabad and Hyderabad will be 
completed by June 2017.  
The Committee, in this regard, reitera te the need to put in place proper mechanisms 
to  monitor and ensure best services of the private operators so that they do not take 
undue advantage of the students.  The Committee also desire that the Department 
and CIPET should ensure that all the 10 hos tels are completed as per schedule. The 
progress made in this regard may be communicated in detail to the Committee 
during the time of furnishing Action Taken Statements.  
D.  Ameliorating pollution and environmental damage caused by plastic 
 products.   
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
14.  Stressing that the Department should play a proactive role in ameliorating the 
pollution and environmental damage caused by plastic products like loose polythene, etc., 
the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
 “The Committee observe that the Plastic Waste Management Centre (PWMC) at 
Guwahati is a model centre and not a full -fledged manufacturing unit. It is an 
academic institute whose basic objective is for training the students on recycling 
technology and other forms of plastic waste management. It is only a kind of concept 
model plant which others are supposed to emulate and follow.  
 
 In this regard, the Committee, in their earlier reports, had emphasized frequently 
about the need for CIPET to play a central ro le in plastic waste management and for 
that purpose, the need for more PWMCs. However, the Department had said that the 
issue relating to PWM falls within the domain of Ministry of Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change (MoEF&CC). Now, the Department has informed that it has acted as 
facilitator and prepared Approach Paper for effective PWM. The Department, after 

 
 
7 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
holding extensive Inter -Ministerial consultations and discussion with industry 
associations, has formulated a draft Paper on Plastic Waste Manage ment. The Paper 
contains effective and specific action points to realize the goals of the ‘Swachh Bharat 
Abhiyaan’. It also discusses the recycling of plastic waste and steps for ameliorating 
the condition of workers involved in this task. The programme pr epared by the 
Department has three components, viz. Entrepreneur Development Programme 
(EDP), Establishment of shredding facility and Technology up -gradation of existing 
plastic recycling units. The Department has further taken up the issue with the 
Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), the nodal Ministry for coordination with 
urban local bodies for Implementation of this initiative. The MoUD had in turn written 
to Municipal Commissioners of the concerned cities advising them, for imparting 
training to Rag pickers under the ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’ in recycling and processing 
of plastic waste and developing entrepreneurship in collaboration with CIPET.  
 
 In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that the Department should play 
a proactive role in ame liorating the pollution and environmental damage caused by 
plastic products like loose polythene, etc. This is an urgent and pressing matter which 
cannot be left only to the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC) or the Ministry of U rban Development (MoUD). The Committee desire 
that the Department should work with all concerned to ensure that the three -point 
programme it has evolved is implemented effectively. The Committee desire to be 
apprised of further action taken in this regard."  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
15.   In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
"The Department has already taken action as per the recommendations of the 
Committee. Plastic Waste Management workshops have been planned to sensitize all 
the stakeholders including Government officers, municipal officers, NGOs, rag pickers, 
general public, etc. in this regard. These workshops are being organized in association 
with the officers  of District Administration and Municipality. In the workshops, both 
technical seminars and training of rag pickers/ waste collection workers will be held. 
The first such workshop was held at Haridwar on 13 -14th July, 2016, wherein all 
issues related to Plastic waste Management were comprehensively covered to create 
awareness. Further, rag pickers/ waste collection workers were also imparted 
training on various aspects of recycling/ disposing of the plastic waste  in a 
responsible manner." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
16.  In their Report, the Committee had noted that the Department is acting as a  
facilitator and had prepared an Approach Paper for effective Plastic Waste 
Management which have three components, viz. Entrepreneur Development 
Programme (EDP), Establishment of shredding facility and Technology up -gradation 
of existing plastic recycling units. The Committee accordingly recommended that the 
Department should work with all concerned to ensure that the three -point 
programme it has evolved is implemented effectively.  The Committee had also 

 
 
8 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
desired that the Department should play a proactive role in ameliorating the 
pollution and environmental damage caused by plastic products like loose polythene, 
etc. and should not leave this pressing matter only to the Ministry of Environment, 
Forests and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) or the Ministry of Urban Development 
(MoUD). 
In its ATR, the Department has informed that  the Plastic Waste Management 
workshops have been  planned to sensitize all the stakeholders including 
Government officers, municipal officers, NGOs, rag pickers, general public, etc.  
In this regard, the Committee note that the Department did not mention anything 
with regard to the Approach Paper it had prepared with the aim to recycling of 
plastic wastes and ameliorate the condition of workers  involved in this task . In view 
of this, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Department 
should play a proactive role in ameliorating the pollution and environmental damage 
caused by plastic products and also desire that the Department should provide 
details of the progress made with regard to the three -point Approach Paper it had 
prepared to address the issue at the time of furnishing Action Taken Statements.  
E.  GLP Certification for IPFT  
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
17.  Emphasizing the need for IPFT to upgrade its facility to Good Laboratory Practice 
(GLP),  the Committee had recommended as under:-   
 “The Committee note that there are 60 State pesticides testing laboratories spread all 
over the country. Besides these, there are two regional laboratories – one at Kanpur 
and another at Chandigarh. These laboratories are under the Ministry of Agriculture. 
These are not well equipped and sometimes, they also send samples to IPFT for 
checking the quality of pesticides. The Committee feel that such type of duality is not 
conducive for the overall quality control of pesticides. The Committee understand 
that qua lity control on pesticides is in the domain of Ministry of Agriculture, 
nevertheless the Committee recommend that there should be proper coordination 
between the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals  and Petrochemicals) so as to streamline the quality of 
pesticides as most of the pesticides are checked by State pesticides laboratories 
whose reports may not be considered authentic as they are ill -equipped and the poor 
quality of such pesticides waste the farmers’ hard earned money and labour.  
 
 In this regard, it is also imperative that IPFT should upgrade its facility to Good 
Laboratory Practice (GLP). The Committee also note that apart from the existing 
physical infrastructure in Gurgaon, the IPFT ha s proposed for another building in the 
same campus for a Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) Certified Lab and also for 
Agriculture Lands in Haryana, Maharashtra and Orissa for conducting Field Trials of 

 
 
9 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
pesticides on various crops in three different climatic c onditions. For these, there are 
set procedures to be completed after which an application for GLP certification will 
be submitted to National GLP Compliance Monitoring Authority (NGCMA), 
Department of Science & Technology (DST) which will conduct a Pre -inspection 
followed by a full inspection before granting GLP Certification. As stated by the 
Director, IPFT that they are yet to apply for GLP and it would take one year to obtain 
the same, the Committee therefore recommend that all out effort should be made to 
obtain GLP certification by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals and 
IPFT at the earliest.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
18.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 “IPFT is working for the GLP Certification and as committed in the committee 
 meeting the  preparation for submitting the application to NGCMA is on and the 
 same will be submitted by October 31, 2016."  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
19.  In their recommendation, the Committee had emphasized the need for 
coordination between the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers so that the quality requirements of pesticides may not be compromised 
and the process of testi ng of pesticides streamlined. The Committee also 
recommended that all out effort should be made to obtain GLP certification for IPFT.  
In its ATR, the Department informed that IPFT is working for the GLP Certification 
and the same will be submitted by October 31, 2016. 
In this regard, the Committee note that the ATR did not mention any steps   taken by 
the Department to ensure better coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture under 
whose domain pesticides testing laboratories function. Proper coordination between 
these two Ministries  is crucial because there is a need to streamline the quality of 
pesticides checked by State pesticides laboratories as they are ill -equipped and of 
poor quality. Therefore, the Department may provide action taken in this regard as 
well as progress made with regard to GLP certification at the t ime of fu rnishing 
Action Taken Statement.  
F.  Expansion of IPFT bio-efficacy testing centres 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 

 
 
10 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
20. Expressing support for the plan to expand IPFT and set up more bio -efficacy testing 
centres all over India, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "According to the IPFT, there have been sharp increase in the demand for bio -efficacy 
studies in India to cater to the equally sharp increase in the pesticides industry. IPFT 
has received more than 150 projects for North location (i.e. North Agro climatic zone) 
alone for testing on bio -efficacy testing. To fulfill the need of increasing number of 
projects in field, IPFT should have additional agriculture land. 
 
 In this regard, the Committee believe  that IPFT should play a pivotal role in 
providing user and environment friendly pesticides formulation technologies and 
the Committee are fully in support of the plan to expand IPFT to set up more bio -
efficacy testing for pesticides. The Committee recomme nd that the projects like bio -
efficacy studies should be pursued vigorously and completed without any delays. 
The Committee desire to be apprised of further progress in the above -mentioned 
projects at the earliest." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
21.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 “IPFT is trying its level best to complete the industrial projects on bio -efficacy studies 
in time and the projects are being compl eted in time. IPFT has entered into 
collaboration with State Agriculture Universities to take up the task in other agro -
climatic zones and provide the results without any delays." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
22.  In their recommendation, the Committee had desired that IPFT should have 
additional land to fulfill the need of increasing number of projects in the field and 
expressed their support to expand IPFT to set up more bio -efficacy testing for 
pesticides.  
 In its ATR, the Department had stated that IPFT is trying its best to complete the 
industrial projects on bio -efficacy studies on time and that it is entering into 
collaboration with State Agriculture Universities for the same.  
 In this regard, the Committee note that the Department did not provide an y 
information or status of the progress made on the plan to acquire additional 
agricultural land so as to enable undertaking more projects in the field. The 
Department also mention ed about collaborations with State Agriculture Universities 
to take up proje cts in other agro -climatic zones but did not provide details on how 
many such collaborations had so far been taken up and the progress made in that 
regard. Hence, the Committee desire that the Department should provide detailed 
information on these two issues at the time of furnishing Action Taken Statements.  
   

 
 
11 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
G.  Course for Pesticide Applicators  
RECOMMENDATION NO. 14 
23.  Observing, inter alia, that there is a need for IPFT to undertake a study on soil health 
and pesticides use,  the Committee had recommended as under:-   
  “The Committee observe that IPFT has been imparting training to farmers on the use 
pesticides and application of technology to the farming process. IPFT has also been in 
the process of designing a course for Pesticide Applicators whose task it is to apply 
pesticides and fertilizers in the field. 
 
 In this regard, the Committee are of the opinion that e ducating the farmers on the 
correct and proportionate use of pesticides and fertilizers is an important task for 
which IPFT should play a major role. This is an urgent issue given that much of the 
agricultural land in the country is lying barren due to exc essive or disproportionate 
use of pesticides and fertilizers. The Committee therefore recommend that a study 
should be made on soil health and pesticides use by IPFT. The Committee further 
recommend that IPFT work on the course it has designed for the Pest icide 
Applicators and farmers on priority and finalize the same at the earliest. The 
Committee understand that training on judicious use of pesticides is the function of 
the Department of Agriculture and State Governments but a synergy is this regard 
with the Department of Agriculture and State Governments is imperative and 
accordingly IPFT/Department should chalk out the programme to ensure synergy on 
the matter with the Department of Agriculture and State Governments concerned."   
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
24.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 “IPFT is interacting with farmers and educating them about the proper usage of 
pesticides through Krishi Vigyan Kendras  (KVKs).  Recently, five villages have been 
chosen in Haryana, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh to educate them about the proper and 
judicious usage of pesticides. Survey and Feedback has been obtained to understand 
the termite pest problem in agriculture or stora ge lands with respect to climate 
change. Further, survey and feedback on latest pests problems has also been obtained 
and solutions pr ovided. Farmers are also being encouraged to go for organic farming 
and indigenous techniques/traditional  knowledge were specifically propagated."  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
25.  In their recommendation, the Committee had recommended that a study 
should be made on soil health and pesticides use by IPFT and  that IPFT should work 
on the course it has designed for the Pestici de Applicators and farmers on priority 
and finalize the same at the earliest. Further, the Committee had desired that the 
IPFT/Department should chalk out the programme to ensure synergy on the matter 

 
 
12 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
relating to training on judicious use of pesticides wit h the Department of Agriculture 
and State Governments concerned.  
In its ATR, the Department had informed that IPFT is interacting with farmers and 
educating them about the prope r usage of pesticides  through Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
(KVKs) and that recently, five villages have been chosen in Haryana, Punjab and Uttar 
Pradesh to educate them about the proper and judicious usage of pesticides. The 
Department is also encouraging farmers to go for organic farming.  
 In this regard, the C ommittee note that the Department did not give any 
further updates on the course it had prepared for the Pesticide Applicators, whose 
job is to apply pesticides and fertilizers in the field. The Committee believe that this 
Course can be a guide to the Pest icide Applicators for judicious use of pesticides and 
fertilizers. Hence, the Committee desire that the Department should give priority to 
this Course and use it for the benefit of the farmers and Indian agriculture at the 
earliest. The updated report on t his may be communicated to the Committee at the 
time of furnishing Action Taken Statement.  
  

 
 
13 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
 
PROPER FUNDING STRUCTURE FOR CIPET 
 
The Committee note that CIPET is operating on self -sustaining mode since 2008 -09 and no 
non-plan allocation has been made to CIPET from the Eleventh Plan onward. CIPET has been 
performing well financially even though the profit margins from its operations are very 
small. During 2012-13, the income from CIPET's 22 centres was Rs. 12218.83 Lakh while its 
expenditure (with depreciation) was Rs. 11976.73 Lakh. For 2013 -14, the income rose to Rs. 
14007.13 Lakh while the expenditure was Rs. 13843.06 Lakh. For 201 4-15, the income and 
expenditure figures were Rs. 17070.44 Lakh and Rs. 15692.05 Lakh respectively. The income 
for the year 2015-16 (up to November 2015) is Rs. 12212.48 Lakhs. The Committee also note 
that CIPET, as a non -profit and self-sustaining institution, has to survive on course fees from 
trainees and also from rendering technical services to the industries. CIPET has been striving 
for better revenue resources by undertaking more training programs, technical services and 
Research & Development activi ties in the field by signing MoUs with various Governmental, 
Public Sectors, NGOs, and international institutions & organizations.  
 
The Committee while lauding the financial performance of CIPET, recommend that CIPET 
should undertake more training program mes, technical services and Research & 
Development activities so as to generate more revenue which will help the organization to 
further expand its activities. The Department must ensure proper funding structure and 
financial management for CIPET so that i t may not suffer any handicaps while carrying out 
its programmes and schemes.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Department welcomes appreciation of performance of CIPET by the Committee. CIPET 
has initiative a number of measures to widen its activities in the  core areas of training, 
technical support services and R&D in the field of polymer science and technology. Pursuant 
to the recommendations of the Committee and in line with the guidelines and norms under 
National Skill Qualification Framework (NSQF) for t raining programs, CIPET has undertaken 
several of academic programs across CIPET Centres. CIPET has also increased the institute -
industry-interface by which more technical services are offered to sustain its growth. 
 
CIPET has been given higher targets for  the year 2016 -17 against the previous year’s 
performance as under: 
Sl. 
No. Activity 2015-16 
(Achieved) 
2016-17 
(Budgeted) 
1 Training (in Nos.) 63,020 80,000 
2 Technical Support Services (in Nos.) 58,837 64,000 
3 Income (Rs. in Crore) 218.50 253.00 
 
CIPET is also augmenting the Research & Development activities by undertaking assignments 
under “Make in India” Mission leading to development of innovative indigenous technologies.  

 
 
14 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
 The Department, on its part, ensure availability of requisite implementa tion linked 
funds to support infrastructure, assets & resources for expansion of ongoing programmes & 
projects of CIPET.   
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 40018/01/2015-PC-IV (FTS:8142) DATED 8.8.2016 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF ACADEMIC AND TECHNICAL INFRASTRUCTURE BUILDINGS 
 
The Committee observe that CIPET Centres in project stage viz., Vijayawada, Bhopal (VTC), 
Baddi and Valsad do not have academic buildings, Hostel buildings and Technic al 
infrastructure except few machineries / equipments.  The Centres are functioning in rented 
sheds.   
 
In this regard, the Committee are distressed that the above-mentioned CIPET Centres have to 
function without basic infrastructure like Academic building s and have to function from 
rented sheds. The Committee, therefore, recommend that top priority should be given to the 
construction of proper academic buildings, hostel buildings and technical infrastructure for 
Vijayawada, Bhopal, Baddi and Valsad centres  which are presently functioning from rented 
sheds.  The Department may take up the matter with State Governments to provide already 
constructed buildings such as Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) which are lying vacant in 
the States. The Committee wou ld like to be informed of measures taken in pursuance of this 
recommendation at the earliest.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Department shares the concerns of the Committee on non availability of requisite 
infrastructure for the new centres . The Department has taken up the issue with the 
respective State Governments for allotment of constructed buildings such as Industrial 
Training Institutes (ITIs) which are lying vacant in the States.  CIPET requires constructed 
building of area of 40,000 -50,000 sq.ft for setting up of Vocational Training Centre. The 
present status of allotment of building/land for Vijayawada, Bhopal, Baddi and Valsad 
centres which are presently functioning from rented shed is as under:  
Vijayawada:  Government of Andhra Pr adesh has allotted a Youth Training Centre building 
admeasuring 25000sq.ft. at Elooru for conducting vocational training programs. In addition, 
CIPET has also hired 20000sq.ft. for erection of machinery and equipments for imparting 
Training to the students .  CIPET is also following up with the Govt. of Andhra Pradesh for 
allotment of constructed State Govt. building of about 10,000 sq.mt.. 
Bhopal/Gwalior: As requested by the State Government, the centre is now being established 
at  Gwalior, as CIPET centre is already functional at Bhopal.  The State government has 
allotted 15,000sq.ft building to CIPET belonging to Textile Technology Department, Govt. of 
Madhya Pradesh, for conducting training programs. CIPET is also following up with the State 
Government for allotment of vacant buildings / ITI / Diploma institute sheds / buildings.  
Baddi: The State Government has expressed their inability to indentify constructed building / 
vacant ITI/Diploma institute buildings for CIPET Baddi and have allotted land for th e centre. 
CIPET has initiated action to construct the buildings through CPWD by signing of MoU and 
the works are in progress.    
 Valsad: CIPET is constantly following up with State Government for allotment of constructed 
building. 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 

 
 
15 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 40018/01/2015-PC-IV (FTS:8142) DATED 8.8.2016 
    
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
SHORTAGE OF HOSTEL FACILITIES AT CIPET CENTRES 
 
The Committee note that CIPET Is facing acute shortage of hostel facilities for its students. 
CIPET centres at Bhubaneswar (Campus II) and PWMC, Guwahati and the new hostels for 10 
of its centres which are at various levels of completion do not ha ve hostel facilities. However, 
CIPET is not keen to utilize its time and energies constructing hostel buildings from scratch 
which will affect its self -sustained funding mode and divert it from managing its core 
courses. CIPET is also presently utilizing 11 hostels whose management has been outsourced 
to private operators.  
 
In this regard, the Committee are of the opinion that the Department and CIPET have the 
right to decide about what is best for the students in particular and the Institute at large 
regarding hostel accommodation and other facilities. However, the Committee would like to 
state that the interest and welfare of the students should not be compromised in any way. 
There should be proper mechanisms in place to monitor and ensure that the privat e 
operators in case of outsourcing of hostel facilities do not take advantage of the students for 
their profit. Further, the Committee desire that the ongoing construction of 10 hostels be 
expedited and that the Department should ensure that adequate funds  are provided for their 
full completion. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Department and CIPET agree with the concerns of the committee on interest and welfare 
of the students with regard to outsourcing of hostel facilities. Towards this objective, the 
private contractors to provide these facilities to students, at competitive rates with all 
amenities, are selected through open tender system.  Similarly, quality, healthy and hygiene 
food is provided at reasonable rates through careful selection of mess contrac tors.  These 
institutional mechanisms also ensure quality and comfort of the private hostel facilities.  
 
The construction of hostel buildings at 10 CIPET centres is at various stages of completion. 
The construction of hostel at CIPET Jaipur has been compl eted and hostels at Haldia, 
Ahmadabad, Murthal, Bhubaneswar – I, Bhubaneswar – II and Chennai will be completed by 
the end of 2016. The construction of hostels at Lucknow, Aurangabad and Hyderabad will be 
completed by June 2017. 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 40018/01/2015-PC-IV (FTS:8142) DATED 8.8.2016 
    
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
VOCATIONAL TRAINING PROGRAMMES 

 
 
16 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
 
The Committee observe that CIPET offers short term Vocational Skill Development 
Programmes (VSTP) for the duration up to 6 months to enhance the employability of 
trainees.  The Committee also note that on the question of setting up a dedicated skills 
training institute for the chemicals sector, the Department is exploring the possibilities of 
engaging Institute of Pesticide Formulations Technology (IPFT) for the same. The focus of 
CIPET’s activities, as per the Department, is to impart skill training to mee t the demand of 
petro-chemical and plastics industry.  The Committee further note that in continuation to the 
observations of the Committee, CIPET has made more efforts and given priority to conduct 
the short-term and vocational skill development training programmes.   As a result, CIPET 
has the target of training 80,000 students for the year 2015 -16 and during the period April - 
December 2015, 42743 candidates were trained.   
 
In this regard, the Committee desire that the Department/CIPET should expedite t he process 
of consultations with IPFT for setting up a dedicated skills training institute to cater to the 
chemicals sector. The Committee feel that short -term and vocational training programmes 
are crucial to engage the unemployed youths of the country fo r the country's industrial 
development and progress. The Committee therefore recommend that the CIPET should give 
priority to the short -term vocational training programmes which will benefit the 
unemployed youths of the country. This will give impetus to e ntrepreneurship and self -
employment opportunities to the youth.  Initiatives taken towards this end may be intimated 
to the Committee at the earliest.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Department agrees with the observations of the Committee. Institute of Pes ticide 
Formulation Technology (IPFT) has prepared detailed Project Report (DPR) for opening up 
four dedicated centres in Northern, Southern, Eastern and Western regions of the country 
with dedicated manpower and infrastructure for imparting training on var ious skills related 
to chemical sector. IPFT has also discussed the Skill Gap Analysis with various industry 
associations such as ICC, PMFAI, CCFI and CLI in chemical sector and has identified 06 
courses. The first such course on “Quality Assurance / Quali ty Control of Pesticides and their 
Formulations” shall start from August 01, 2016. 
CIPET has been giving priority to short -term vocational skill development training programs 
for fetching gainful employment to unemployed youths. New programs in line with N ational 
Skills Qualifications Framework (NSQF) have been introduced. The intake capacity of much 
sought after programs were increased.  CIPET has been given target to train 80,000 students 
through various Long -Term & Short -Term skill development training p rograms as against 
the achievement of 63020 during 2015-16. 
Further, as essential for impetus to skill development efforts and development of new 
technologies for promotion of manufacturing in polymer/plastic sector and in order to 
strengthen the skill dev elopment initiatives, enhance technology support to industries, 
promote entrepreneurs and R&D to develop indigenous technologies, Government of India 
has approved setting up of 11 new centres including 04 Vocational Training Centres (VTCs) 
at Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Agartala (Tripura), and Mumbai (Maharashtra) over a period of three 
years. The Vocational Training Centres will give impetus to entrepreneurship and self -
employment opportunities to the youth. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 40018/01/2015-PC-IV (FTS:8142) DATED 8.8.2016 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 

 
 
17 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
 
AUGMENTING ALLOCATION FOR R&D ACTIVITIES 
 
The Committee note that only about 5 percent of CIPET's revenues have been invested in 
Research &  Development (R&D) purposes. Presently, these meagre resources have been 
utilized through CIPET's R&D centres, viz. Laboratory for Advanced Research in Polymeric 
Materials (LARPM) and Advanced Research School for Technology and Product Simulation 
(ARSTPS) located at Bhubaneswar and Chennai respectively. The research is focused on new 
areas of Polymeric materials and Composites for defence applications, Energy Resources, 
Health Care, Plastic waste management, Adhesive and coating sciences, Designing, 
Simulation and prototyping, 3D printing Technologies and Micro fluidic Devices.  
 
In this regard, the Committee are of the opinion that the proportion of revenue allocated to 
R&D activities by CIPET is simply not enough to produce cutting -edge technology on the 
above-mentioned areas. The Committee are failed to understand the contradictory statement 
of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals and CIPET. While the Department  of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals in its written reply has stated that the budget allocation made 
for specific schemes is sufficient for implementation of the particular schemes, on the 
contrary, the Director General, CIPET had stated during evidence that i nvestment for R&D 
activities which is only to the tune of five percent of CIPET revenues is very insufficient. The 
Committee therefore express their displeasure over such contradictions and are of the 
opinion that R&D is a very essential concept of "Make I n India", and as such allocation for 
R&D activities should be augmented in the budget so as to support CIPET in their R&D 
activities and make CIPET the torch -bearer in high -end research relating to Plastic waste 
management, Designing, Simulation and protot yping, 3D printing Technologies and Micro 
fluidic Devices. Polymeric materials and Composites for defence applications, etc. CIPET 
should aspire to be the top research centre in the above -mentioned fields. The Committee 
desire to be apprised of measures taken in pursuance to this recommendation at the earliest.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Department has been actively supporting CIPET for enriching the technical 
infrastructure and capabilities to meet the industry needs and enhancing the capabilities in 
Research activities. In order to promote R&D activities to compete globally in the sector, 02 
exclusive / dedicated R&D wings – (i) Advanced Research School for Technology & Product 
Simulation (ARSTPS) at CIPET, Chennai and (ii) Laboratory for Advanced Rese arch in 
Polymeric Materials (LARPM) at CIPET, Bhubaneswar were established for undertaking joint 
collaborative research projects with the industries / universities / institutions at national 
and global level. This was followed by exclusive scheme of CIPET for “Research and 
Development in emerging areas” with an outlay of Rs. 8.65 crore in the 12 th Five Year Plan. 
During the mid -term review of 12 th Five Year Plan, another scheme for “Enhancing 
Capabilities in Research activities at R&D centres and Technology  Support Services at CIPET 
centres” has been taken up with an  exclusive allocation of Rs. 33 crore for R&D activities of 
CIPET during the year 2015-16 and 2016-17.  
Recently, an exclusive R&D Campus – the Advanced Polymer Design & Development 
Research Lab oratory (APDDRL) has been approved and being established at IT Park Area, 
Devanahalli, Bengaluru. The total project cost of Rs.87.00 crores is being shared on 50:50 
basis by Govt. of Karnataka and Govt. of India. This R&D Centre mainly focus on applied 
research in Advanced Material Design, Product development in the areas of Conducting 
Polymers, Coatings & Adhesives, Bio -sensors, Renewable energy (Fuel solar cells), E -waste 
recycling, Nanocomposites and Biopolymers. The major functions of the R&D centre are  to 
conduct research, validation & commercialization in the polymer and allied areas to cater to 
the demand of Aerospace, Defence, Marine, Agriculture, Railways and Automobile industries 

 
 
18 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
in line with the “MAKE IN INDIA” initiative of Govt. of India. The proposed laboratory shall be 
a multifunctional “One -stop” facility with broad specialization in product development and 
modification.  
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 40018/01/2015-PC-IV (FTS:8142) DATED 8.8.2016 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 
 
INCREASING REVENUE GENERATION FOR IPFT 
 
The Committee note that unlike CIPET, IPFT has been dependent on the Department for non -
plan funds, apart from funds under Plan head. Further, in terms of utilization of funds, while 
IPFT had more or less fully utilized its allocated funds during 2013 -14 and 2014-15 (i.e. Rs. 
434 Lakh allocated and utilized in 2013 -14 and Rs. 169 Lakh allocated and utilized in 2014 -
15 under Plan Head), its record of utilization during 2012 -13 and 2015-16 (i.e. Rs. 434 Lakh 
allocated and Rs. 19 Lakh utilized in 2012 -13 and Rs. 100 Lakh allocated and Rs. Nil utilized 
in 2015-16) was very disappointing. On the other hand, the Institute has earned more than 
its projected revenue consecutively for three years from 2012 to 2015. While Rs. 70 Lakh 
was the projected revenue in 2012-13, Rs. 111.69 Lakh was earned, and the figures for 2013 -
14 and 2014-15 were Rs. 80 Lakh / 173.55 Lakh and Rs. 90 Lakh / 169.55 Lakh respectively. 
The Committee also note that IPFT has been taking various steps to increase its revenue 
generation in order to reduce its dependence on non-plan funds. 
 
In this regard, the Committee desire that the Department / IPFT should plan its activities 
well in advance so that its allocated funds may be utilized on time. The Committee, however, 
are encouraged by the fact t hat IPFT has been able to exceed its projected revenue earning 
for the last three years and hope that the Institute will be able to continue on the growth path 
for long -term sustenance. The Committee recommend that the Department / IPFT should 
carry out th e measures it has proposed which will help it earn more revenue as well as 
increase its footprint in the area of pesticides formulation in India. The Committee desire to 
be apprised of measures taken in this regard at the earliest.       
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
IPFT is taking a number of steps to increase its revenue in order to become self sustainable. 
Some of the steps being undertaken are as follows : 
 
i) Wide publicity of the capabilities of the Institute through  advertisements in 
leading agricultural magazines. 
ii) Aggressive marketing for getting more and more industry sponsored  projects 
on bio-efficacy studies and pesticide residue analysis. 
iii) Creation of a GLP Certified Lab. 
iv) Interactive meetings with the Pesticide Formulators in order to attract them 
for the technology transfer of the user and environment friendly formulations 
developed by IPFT. 
v) Undertaking exhaustive Training Programmes for various stakeholders in 
India and abroad. 

 
 
19 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
vi) Secretary (C&PC) and Director IPFT have written letters Ambassadors / High 
Commissioners of SAARC and African Countries  to sponsor trainees for 
various training courses offered by IPFT. 
  
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. C.II.18012/78/2015-Ch.II DATED 25.7.2016 
 
  

 
 
20 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 13 
 
ECO-FRIENDLY PESTICIDES FORMULATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
The Committee observe that since its inception, the IPFT had developed more than 50 
environmental and user friendly pesticide formulations and the technology have since been 
transferred to different industries in India and abroad for commercialization. IPFT’s mandate 
also include monitoring of pesticide residues in different commodities like vegetables, fruits, 
rice, wheat, milk and water at the national level. Further, the IPFT has also  been undertaking 
the management of termite by integrated method and using indigenous technologies. 
 
The Committee are of the view that the IPFT’s mandate as stated above are of crucial 
importance to the preservation of the environment and the public healt h in the country. The 
Committee are pleased to note that the IPFT have been doing exemplary work on the 
projects as stated above but testing has been done in specific areas in the country. The 
Committee therefore recommend that IPFT should further expand these projects to cover the 
entire country. The Committee desire that IPFT should emerge as a leader in field of eco -
friendly pesticides formulation and for this purpose, the Department/IPFT should come up 
with a detailed roadmap for the same. The Committee  expect to the apprised of the action 
taken in pursuance of this recommendation.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
IPFT has prepared a roadmap for spreading the information about the usage of safe, user and 
environment friendly pesticide formulation to Farmers all over India. IPFT is conducting two 
days workshop on Sustainable Utilization of Microbial & Botanical Pesti cides through 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development  at various centres for spreading this 
information. The calendar of events is as follows : 
   
Sr. 
No. 
Venue Date 
1. Tea Research Association, Nagarkatta, (WB) May 6-7, 2016 
2. Directorate of Biotechnology, Imphal July, 8-9, 2016 
3. NIF, Guwahati  August, 2016 
4. NIF, Srinagar September, 2016 
5. NIF, Shillong October, 2016 
6. Solan University (HP)  November, 2016  
7. Central University, Hyderabad December, 2016  
8. NIF, Gangtok January, 2017  
9. NIF, Uttaranchal February, 2017  
10. BCKV, Kalyani (WB)  March, 2017 
 
IPFT is also propagating its activities at the following National Events by putting up its stalls 
and distributing the pamphlets/literature related to various activities being undertaken by 
IPFT : 
 
a) India Chem – Gujarat  
b) India Chem – Mumbai 
c) Krishi Mela – Hissar 
d) Krishi Unnati Mela – IARI, PUSA, New Delhi 
e) Interaction with Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) 
   
 

 
 
21 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. C.II.18012/78/2015-Ch.II DATED 25.7.2016  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 15 
 
SKILLS DEVELOPMENT TRAINING  
 
The Committee observe that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has signed an 
MoU with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) where IPFT has 
been given the responsibility for skill development for Chemical Sector. Further, the IPFT has 
already submitted the proposal for skill development under the Corporate Socia l 
Responsibility (CSR) scheme to nine private corporations viz., M/s Tata Chemicals, M/s 
Gharda Chemicals Ltd., M/s UPL India Ltd., M/s RCF Ltd., M/s BASF India Ltd., M/s Rallis 
India Ltd., M/s Crystal Crop Protection, M/s Coromondal Agrico Pvt. Ltd., and M/s Bharat 
Rasayan Ltd. However, most of these corporations were not able to sponsor the courses 
during 2015-16. They are expected to sponsor the courses during 2016-17. 
 
In this regard, the Committee have always emphasized the need to give priority to ski lls 
development training so as to empower the youths of the country in terms of 
entrepreneurship and self -employment. The Committee accordingly recommend that the 
IPFT should proactively carry out its role for skill development for the chemical sector and 
pursue the matter relating to skill development under CSR with the nine corporations 
mentioned above and ensure that the same are carried out this year. The Committee desire 
to be apprised of the progress in this regard.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
IPFT is proactively carrying out the Skill Development initiatives in Chemical Sector and the 
first course is commencing from July 01, 2016 on “Quality Assurance & Quality Control of 
Pesticides and their Formulations”. This course is for a period of one mo nth and is being 
sponsored by M/s Dhanuka Agritech, Gurgaon under the CSR scheme. The course is being 
held at IPFT Gurgaon. 
 
Proposal for more such courses have been submitted under CSR and more such courses are 
expected to be held in future. A roadmap for  skill development in Chemical Sector upto 2025 
has been prepared : 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of the Course Skill Development 
Target up to 2025 
1. Basic Techniques of Pesticide Formulations  4,000 
2. QA/QC of Pesticides and their Formulations  1,500 
3. Field Evaluation of Pesticides  1,200 
4. Evaluation of Household pesticides  500 
5. Pesticide Application Technology  3,000 
6. Pesticide Distributors Training  4,000 
7. Pesticide Residue Analysis  2,000 
    
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 

 
 
22 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
O.M. NO. C.II.18012/78/2015-Ch.II DATED 25.7.2016  
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT WANT TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
 
LOW COMPLETION RATE AT CIPET LONG-TERM COURSES 
 
The Committee observe that CIPET has been offering various long term programmes viz., 
Under Graduate and Post Graduate courses in Science, Engineering and Technology, Diploma 
courses, Post -diploma and Postgraduate Diploma c ourses in plastics and allied field. For 
these different types of programmes, different admission procedures are followed. For high -
end programmes like B. Tech., M. Tech., or PhD, the admission process is as per the 
concerned University guidelines. For dip loma courses, an all -India entrance examination is 
conducted online. However, the Committee note that while 12629 students had enrolled for 
long-term training programmes during 2014 -15, only 2340 student completed it, which is 
only 18.52 percent of the total enrolment.  
 
In this regard, the Committee are concerned about the extremely low completion rate of 
students enrolled in the long -term courses offered by CIPET and recommend that the 
Department/CIPET should study the reasons for the same and make amends  accordingly. 
Measures taken in pursuance of this recommendation may be communicated to the 
Committee at the earliest. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
As per the information received from CIPET, it is clarified that out of 12629 students enrolled 
for long term t raining programmes during 2014 -15, 2340 students were in final year. All 
2340 eligible students, which appeared in final year exams in the year 2014 -15, completed 
the course successfully. Hence, the actual completion rate was 100% for the students in the 
long term courses in 2014-15.  
   
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 40018/01/2015-PC-IV (FTS:8142) DATED 8.8.2016 
  
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
 
UNIFIED STRUCTURE FOR CIPET COURSES AND SYLLABUS 
 
The Committee note that the Department and CIPET management had decided against 
converting CIPET into a kind of university which can award its own degrees. The reasoning is 
that since CIPET centres are spread all over the country and the courses taught are  of 
different categories, viz. diploma courses, vocational training, Under Graduate / Post 
Graduate degrees and PhDs, it will be difficult to manage all of them under a unified structure 
in the form a university. As of now, CIPET centres are attached to th e nearest university 
which takes care of the academic affairs. This means that the degrees are also awarded in the 
name of the host university.  
 
In this regard, the Committee are of the belief that for CIPET to really emerge as a national -
level centre of excellence in the field of plastic engineering, it is imperative to explore ways to 

 
 
23 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
structure the courses of CIPET under a unified head. Since different universities have 
different standards in terms of academic grading and excellence, the present arrangem ent in 
which different CIPET centres comes under the purview of different universities, may result 
in differential standards of excellence and competence for different centres. Hence, the 
Committee recommend that the CIPET management and the Department sho uld review the 
issue and explore ways to enable CIPET to structure its syllabus, course structure and 
teaching standards in a unified manner under one university. The Committee expect to be 
apprised of the measures taken in this regard.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
CIPET awards its own degree for its Diploma, Post Diploma & Post Graduate Diploma and 
Certificate Level Vocational skill development programs. The course curriculum, syllabus 
content & coverage and teaching methodology are streamlined and stand ardized in 
accordance with the prevailing needs of Plastics & allied industries. Only Under Graduate and 
Post Graduate courses are affiliated to the respective Universities.  
During the year 2015 -16, CIPET has trained 63020 students through Long -Term & Sho rt-
Term and skill development training programs.  Out of 63020 students trained by CIPET, 
only 2386 students (3.79 %) from Under Graduate and Post Graduate courses received 
degrees from concerned affiliated universities. Therefore, except  for UG & PG prog rams, the 
other Diploma Post Diploma, Post Graduate Diploma & Vocational training programs, which 
form the major part of training programs of CIPET are streamlined in a unified manner and 
being operated under the umbrella of CIPET. 
    
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 40018/01/2015-PC-IV (FTS:8142) DATED 8.8.2016 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
24 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
  
--Nil— 
  

 
 
25 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
  
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
 
RELEASE OF ALLOCATED FUNDS FOR CIPET 
 
The Committee note that during the Twelfth Five Year Plan, an allocation of Rs. 586.45 crore 
has been made as Plan support to CIPET out of which Rs. 371.19 crore has been received by 
CIPET and Rs. 318.61 crore has been spent by them so far. This shows that  more than 85 
percent of the received amount has been utilized by CIPET so far, which is indicative of good 
financial performance of the Plan allocation. As Rs. 215.26 crore is still to be received by 
CIPET and the current year is the last leg of the Twelf th Five Year Plan, the Committee 
recommend that this amount should be released without any further delay to accelerate 
various activities of CIPET. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry of Finance, 
keeping in view the national stature of CIPET, m ay not withhold their due allocation. The 
Committee therefore, recommend to release the balance amount at the earliest so that CIPET 
can carry out its unfulfilled task during the Plan period.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The plan support allocation of Rs. 58 6.45 crore for CIPET include original 12 th plan outlay of 
Rs. 280 crore and additional requirement of Rs. 306.45 crore as GoI share for mid -term 
appraisal (MTA) schemes for “Enhancing the Capabilities in Academic Activities (skill 
development training prog rammes) at CIPET centres” and “Enhancing Capabilities in 
Research activities at R&D centres and Technology Support Services at CIPET centres”. After 
utilization of entire allocated outlay of Rs. 280 crore from 2012 -13 to 2015-16, an amount of 
Rs. 91.19 cro re was released in 2015 -16 for MTA schemes. The unspent approved balance 
amount of Rs. 215.26 crore is required in 2016 -17 & 2017-18.  Against this, an amount of Rs. 
57.67 crore has been allotted for CIPET in 2016 -17 (BE). In view of above, Ministry of 
Finance have been requested for allocation of additional funds in the 1 st Supplementary 
Demands for Grants for the year 2016-17.   
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 40018/01/2015-PC-IV (FTS:8142) DATED 8.8.2016 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
 
AMERIORATING POLLUTION AND ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE CAUSED BY PLASTIC 
PRODUCTS  
 
The Committee observe that the Plastic Waste Management Centre (PWMC) at Guwahati is a 
model centre and not a full -fledged manufacturing unit. It is an academic institute whose 
basic objective is for training the students on recycling technology and other forms of plastic 
waste management. It is only a kind of concept model plant which others are supposed to 
emulate and follow.  

 
 
26 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
In this regard, the Committee, in their earlier reports, had emphasized frequently about the 
need for CIPET to play a central role  in plastic waste management and for that purpose, the 
need for more PWMCs. However, the Department had said that the issue relating to PWM 
falls within the domain of Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEF&CC). 
Now, the Department has in formed that it has acted as facilitator and prepared Approach 
Paper for effective PWM. The Department, after holding extensive Inter -Ministerial 
consultations and discussion with industry associations, has formulated a draft Paper on 
Plastic Waste Management. The Paper contains effective and specific action points to realize 
the goals of the ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan’. It also discusses the recycling of plastic waste and 
steps for ameliorating the condition of workers involved in this task. The programme 
prepared by the Department has three components, viz. Entrepreneur Development 
Programme (EDP), Establishment of shredding facility and Technology up -gradation of 
existing plastic recycling units. The Department has further taken up the issue with the 
Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), the nodal Ministry for coordination with urban local 
bodies for Implementation of this initiative. The MoUD had in turn written to Municipal 
Commissioners of the concerned cities advising them, for imparting training to Rag pi ckers 
under the ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’ in recycling and processing of plastic waste and 
developing entrepreneurship in collaboration with CIPET.  
In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that the Department should play a 
proactive role in ameliorating the pollution and environmental damage caused by plastic 
products like loose polythene, etc. This is an urgent and pressing matter which cannot be left 
only to the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) or the Ministry 
of Urban Development (MoUD). The Committee desire that the Department should work 
with all concerned to ensure that the three -point programme it has evolved is implemented 
effectively. The Committee desire to be apprised of further action taken in this regard.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
The Department has already taken action as per the recommendations of the Committee. 
Plastic Waste Management workshops have been planned to sensitize all the stakeholders 
including Government officers, municipal officers, NG Os, rag pickers, general public, etc. in 
this regard. These workshops are being organized in association with the officers of District 
Administration and Municipality. In the workshops, both technical seminars and training of 
rag pickers/ waste collection workers will be held. 
The first such workshop was held at Haridwar on 13 -14th July, 2016, wherein all issues 
related to Plastic waste Management were comprehensively covered to create awareness. 
Further, rag pickers/ waste collection workers were also impa rted training on various 
aspects of recycling/ disposing of the plastic waste in a responsible manner. 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 40018/01/2015-PC-IV (FTS:8142) DATED 8.8.2016 
  
   
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
 
GLP CERTIFICATION FOR IPFT  
 

 
 
27 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
The Committee note that there are 60 State pesticides testing laboratories spread all over the 
country. Besides these, there are two regional laboratories – one at Kanpur and another at 
Chandigarh. These laboratories are under the Ministry of Agriculture. These are not well 
equipped and sometimes, they also send samples to IPFT for checking the quality of 
pesticides. The Committee feel that such type of duality is not conducive for the overall 
quality control of pesticides. The Committee understand that qua lity control on pesticides is 
in the domain of Ministry of Agriculture, nevertheless the Committee recommend that there 
should be proper coordination between the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals  and Petrochemicals) so as to streamline 
the quality of pesticides as most of the pesticides are checked by State pesticides laboratories 
whose reports may not be considered authentic as they are ill -equipped and the poor quality 
of such pesticides waste the farmers’ hard earned money and labour.  
 
In this regard, it is also imperative that IPFT should upgrade its facility to Good Laboratory 
Practice (GLP). The Committee also note that apart from the existing physical infrastructure 
in Gurgaon, the IPFT has  proposed for another building in the same campus for a Good 
Laboratory Practice (GLP) Certified Lab and also for Agriculture Lands in Haryana, 
Maharashtra and Orissa for conducting Field Trials of pesticides on various crops in three 
different climatic conditions. For these, there are set procedures to be completed after which 
an application for GLP certification will be submitted to National GLP Compliance Monitoring 
Authority (NGCMA), Department of Science & Technology (DST) which will conduct a Pre -
inspection followed by a full inspection before granting GLP Certification. As stated by the 
Director, IPFT that they are yet to apply for GLP and it would take one year to obtain the 
same, the Committee therefore recommend that all out effort should be made t o obtain GLP 
certification by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals and IPFT at the earliest.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
IPFT is working for the GLP Certification and as committed in the committee meeting the 
preparation for submitting the application to NGCMA is on and the same will be submitted by 
October 31, 2016.  
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. C.II.18012/78/2015-Ch.II DATED 25.7.2016  
   
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
 
EXPANSION OF IPFT BIO-EFFICACY TESTING CENTRES  
 
According to the IPFT, there have been sharp increase in the demand for bio -efficacy studies 
in India to cater to the equally sharp increase in the pesticides industry. IPFT has received 
more than 150 projects for North location (i.e. North Agro climatic zone) alone for testing on 
bio-efficacy testing. To fulfill the need of increasing number of projects in field, IPFT should 
have additional agriculture land. 
 
In this regard, the Committee believe that IPFT should play a pivotal role in providing user 
and environment friendly pesticides formulation technologies and the Committee are fully in 
support of the plan to expand IPFT to set up more bio -efficacy testing for pesticides. The 

 
 
28 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
Committee recommend that the projects like bio -efficacy studies should be pursued 
vigorously and completed without any delays. The Committee desire to be apprised of 
further progress in the above-mentioned projects at the earliest.   

 
 
29 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
IPFT is trying its level best to complete the industrial projects on bio -efficacy studies in time 
and the projects are being completed in time. IPFT has entered into collaboration with State 
Agriculture Universities to take up the task in other agro -climatic zones and provide the 
results without any delays. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. C.II.18012/78/2015-Ch.II DATED 25.7.2016  
    
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 14 
COURSE FOR PESTICIDE APPLICATOR  
 
The Committee observe that IPFT has been imparting training to farmers on the use 
pesticides and application of technology to the farming process. IPFT has also been in the 
process of designing a course for Pesticide Applicators whose task it is to apply pesticides 
and fertilizers in the field. 
In this regard, the Committee are of the opinion that educating the farmers on the correct 
and proportionate use of pesticides and fertilizers is an important task for which IPFT should 
play a major role. This is an urgent issue given that much of the agricultural land in the 
country is lying barren due to excessive or disproportionate use of pesticides and fer tilizers. 
The Committee therefore recommend that a study should be made on soil health and 
pesticides use by IPFT. The Committee further recommend that IPFT work on the course it 
has designed for the Pesticide Applicators and farmers on priority and finali ze the same at 
the earliest. The Committee understand that training on judicious use of pesticides is the 
function of the Department of Agriculture and State Governments but a synergy is this regard 
with the Department of Agriculture and State Governments is imperative and accordingly 
IPFT/Department should chalk out the programme to ensure synergy on the matter with the 
Department of Agriculture and State Governments concerned.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
IPFT is interacting with farmers and educating them about the proper usage of pesticides 
through Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs).  Recently, five villages have been chosen in Haryana, 
Punjab and Uttar Pradesh to educate them about the proper and judicious usa ge of 
pesticides. Survey and Feedback has been obtained to understand the termite pest problem 
in agriculture or storage lands with respect to climate change.  Further, survey and feedback 
on latest pests problems has also been obtained and solutions provid ed. Farmers are also 
being encouraged to go for organic farming and indigenous techniques/traditional 
knowledge were specifically propagated. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. C.II.18012/78/2015-Ch.II DATED 25.7.2016  
  

 
 
30 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
    
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                              ANANDRAO ADSUL 
NOVEMBER  2016                          CHAIRPERSON   
AGRAHAYANA, 1938 (SAKA)                                           STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
31 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
APPENDIX – I 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 22 November, 2016 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room 'C ', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
4. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
5. Shri K. Ashok Kumar  
6. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
7. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
8. Shri Kulamani Samal 
9. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
11. Shri K. Parasaran 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
             1. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
 2. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director  
 3. Shri Nishant Mehra  -  Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee.   
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the Draft Action Taken Report on 
the subject "Functioning of Autonomous Institutions - Central Institute of Plastics 
Engineering Technology (CIPET)' and Institute of Pesticides Formulation and Technology 
(IPFT)"  of the Ministry of Ch emicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals). After some deliberations the Draft Report Action Taken was adopted by the 
Committee without any changes. 
 
4. The Committee authorised  the Chairperson to make consequential changes, if any, 
arising out of the factual verification of the Action Taken Report by the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
5. It was also decided in the meetin g that presentation of 02 Action Taken Reports and 
01 Action Taken Statement shall take place in both the Houses on 28.11.2016.  
 
6. The Committee thereafter decided to hold its next meeting on 6th December, 2016.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

 
 
32 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
  

 
 
33 | P a g e  
E:\Report No.28 (Doc&PC).Docx 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
  
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDA TIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT (1 6TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2015 -16) ON ‘FUNCTIONING OF 
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS: CIPET AND IPFT'  OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS).  
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 15 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1,3,4,6,9,12,13 and 15)   
8 
Percentage of Total 53.33% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation  Nos. 5 and 7)  
 
2 
Percentage of Total 13.33% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil)  
0 
Percentage of Total 0%  
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are still awaited:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 2,8,10,11 and 14) 
 
5 
Percentage of Total 33.34% 
 