 
  
53 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS (2018-19) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF  CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS  / 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 49 TH  REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS (2017-
18) ON THE SUBJECT 'ASSAM GAS CRACKER PROJECT ' PERTAINING T O 
THE DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS OF THE 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS.] 
 
 
 
 FIFTY THIRD REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
JANUARY, 2019 /PAUSHA, 1940 (SAKA) 
 
  


 
  
CC&F.No.53 
 
 
FIFTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2018-19) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS  / RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE 49TH  REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
PETROCHEMICALS (2017-18) ON THE SUBJECT 'ASSAM GAS CRACKER PROJECT ' 
PERTAINING TO THE DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS OF THE 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  07 January, 2019 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07 January 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JANUARY, 2019 /PAUSHA, 1940 (SAKA) 
  

 
  
 
INDEX PAGE 
No. 
CONTENTS (ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2018-19) (iii-iv) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
Chapter I Report  1-17 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
18-26 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
27-27 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the committee  
28-30 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
31-40 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2018-19) held on 02-01-.2019. 
41-41 
II.  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Forty-Ninth Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers on the subject ' Assam Gas Cracker 
Project ' pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
42-42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
  (2018-19)  
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Sarfaraz Alam 
3.  George Baker 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
7. Dr. (Smt.) Ratna De (Nag) 
8. Smt. Veena Devi 
9. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
10. Shri Innocent 
11. Shri K. Ashok Kumar   
12. Dr. (Prof.)  Azmeera Seetaram Naik  
13. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
14. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
15. Sushree Sadhvi Savitri Bai Phoole  
16. Shri S. Rajendran  
17. Dr. Kulamani Samal  
18. Dr. Uma Saren  
19. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh  
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
21.  Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad 
25. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev  
26. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
27. Shri Elamaram Kareem 
28. Dr. Sanjay Singh  
29.  Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar   
30.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
1.     Shri V.K. Tripathi  -                Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri  C. Kalyanasundaram -   Additional Director 
3.              Shri N. Amarathiagan             -               Under Secretary 
 
 
  

 
  
 
(v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2018-
19) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present this Report (16 th Lok Sabha)  on Action Taken by  the Government on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the 49 th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on 
the subject 'Assam Gas Cracker Project' pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
 
2. The 49 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (2017-18) on the subject 'Assam Gas Cracker Project' was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 31 July, 2018.  The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the observations / recommendations  contained in the 
49th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) were furnished by the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals (Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers) on 12-10-2018. 
  
3. This Action Taken Report of the Committee is based on the Action Taken 
Replies of the Government and the Report was considered and adopted by the 
Committee at their sitting held on 02-01-2019. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations / 
recommendations contained in the 49th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
is given Appendix-II. 
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end of 
the Report.  
 
 
                          ANANDRAO ADSUL  
New Delhi         Chairperson  
 03 January, 2019                                  Standing Committee on                   
13  Pausha,  1940  (Saka)                      Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 

1 
 
         CHAPTER  - I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Forty-ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject 'Assam 
Gas Cracker Project' pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 31.07.2018.  The 
Committee had made 15 Observations / Recommendations in the Forty-ninth Report. 
1.2  Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of  Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) was requested to furnish replies to the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the  Forty-ninth Report within three months f rom the 
date of presentation of the Report, i.e., by  31.10.2018.  The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the 15 Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Report have been received from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department  
of  Chemicals and Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. No.  13017/1/2017- PC-1 (V0l.II) 
(FTS:11767) dated 12-10-2018.  These Replies have been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the Governme nt :- 
 Sl. Nos.  1, 3, 4, 5, 11, 13 and 14.                      (Total = 07)                            
 These may be included in Chapter-II of the Report.  
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s reply :- 
 Nil                        (Total =Nil)      
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Governmen t   
have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
 Sl.No. 12 and 15.                     (Total = 02)   
 This may be included in Chapter-IV of the Report. 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which final replies of the  
Government are still awaited:- 
 Sl.No. 2, 6, 7, 8, 9 &10                             (Total = 06) 
         These may be included in Chapter -V of the Draft Report. 
 

2 
 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that  the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and Final Action Taken Replies in 
recpect of the observations / recommendations included in Chapter-V of this 
Report should be furnished expeditiously. 
 
1.4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations which  still require reiteration or merit comments. 
  
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 2) 
Project Cost and Capital Subsidy  
1.5 The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers in their 49 th Report (16 th Lok 
Sabha) had taken note that the delay in release of balance amount o f capital subsidy of 
Rs.449.45 crore to the Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited was affecting  the 
performance of the company and thereofore had recommended as under :-  
 
" The Committee note that the Assam Gas Cracker Project was approved by Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) with a cost of Rs. 5460.61 crore on 
18.04.2006. However, the completion of the project got delayed and CCEA o n 
16.11.2011 approved the Revised Cost Estimate (RCE-I) of Rs. 8920 crore to 
commission it in December, 2013 with revised funding pattern consisting of Capital 
Subsidy of Rs. 4690 crore, Debt Rs.2961 crore and Equity Rs. 1269 crore. Howev er, 
owing to further increase in project cost on account of time and cost overr uns, 
BCPL's Board of Directors recommended Revised Cost Estimate (RCE- II) of 
Rs.9965 crore with revised funding pattern consisting of Capital Subsidy of Rs.  
5239.45 crore, Debt of Rs. 3307.88 crore and Equity of Rs. 1417.67  crore and 
commissioning by December, 2015. The estimated increase of Rs.1045 crore wa s 
proposed to be met by capital subsidy of Rs.549.45 crore, equity of Rs.1 48.67 crore 
and debt of Rs. 346.88 crore. As advised by the Ministry of Finance (Dep artment of 
Expenditure) and Project Appraisal and Management Division of, NITI Aay og, RCE-II 
of the project was appraised by FA and approved by the Minister- in-charge of the 
Administrative Ministry.   
The company as on 31 March, 2016, received the total sanctioned amou nt of 
Capital Subsidy of Rs.4,708.95crore (including net interest earned thereon) from  the 
Government of India. Based on the approval of RCE-II and additional ca pital subsidy 
of Rs. 549.45 crore (RCE-II), Ministry of Finance was approached which has 
allocated Rs. 100 crore under BE 2017-18, which has been released in M ay / June 

3 
 
2017. The balance amount of Rs. 449.45 crore is yet to be released. No b udgetary 
allocation has been made in BE 2018-19 for AGCP. At present, M /o Finance, D/o 
Expenditure has forwarded the matter to Budget Division, D/o Economic Aff airs 
(DEA). Regarding impact of delay in release of balance amount of capital subsidy, 
the Committee were informed inter-alia that BCPL has not been able to  make 
payments to the vendors / suppliers/ consultants etc. not able to purchase critical 
spares in time. Further, the possibility of litigation by the vendors also cannot be ruled 
out. The Committee find that the BCPL is in a very vulnerable situation as far as its 
financial health is concerned and hold the view that early release of balan ce of 
subsidy to BCPL will definitely improve the financial conditions of the plant. They 
therefore, recommend that the matter of release of balance amount of capital subsidy 
be taken up at appropriate level and if necessary approval of the  Cabinet Committee 
on Economic Affairs be obtained so that no further delay in release of the ba lance 
amount of Rs. 449.45 crore is avoided. The Committee desire to know the outc ome 
of the steps taken by the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers to resolve the issue. " 
Action Taken Report 
1.6 In its Action Taken Reply with reference to the above recommendation o f the 
Committee, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, has submitted as under :- 
" The enhanced amount of capital subsidy of Rs. 549.45 crore alrea dy stands 
approved by the Minister (Chemicals and Fertilizers) in July 2016. Out of this an 
amount of Rs. 100 crore was released in the 1 st quarter of 2017-18. After constant 
persuasion and requests by Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals to Ministry 
of Finance, an amount of Rs. 200 crore  has finally been released b y the Ministry of 
Finance in supplementary Demands for Grants for 2018-19, towards balance amo unt 
of subsidy for AGCP.  The same has been disbursed to Brahmaputra Cracke r & 
Polymer Limited (BCPL), Assam in September, 2018. Further action will be taken  
regarding the balance Capital Subsidy of Rs.249.45 crore (Rs.449.45 cr – Rs.200.00 
cr) after the funds released are utilized by BCPL." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
1.7 The Committee are happy to note that the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals pursued the matter of balance amount of capital subsidy due to  
Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited (BCPL) and as a result an amount of 
Rs.200/- crore has been released by the Ministry of Finance  for the purpose and the 
amount has been disbursed to the company in September, 2018.     The Committee 
have been further informed that action for release of remaining balance capital 
subsidy of Rs.249.45 crore will be taken up after utilization of Rs.200/- crore by BCPL.  

4 
 
In this regard, the Committee would like to point out that the outstanding liabilities of 
BCPL as on 31 March, 2018 was stated to be Rs.9,290.66 crore i.e., equal to 
company's assets then.  As such the timely release of balance of capital subsidy w ill 
certainly enable the CPSU to perform better and stabilise its operations.  The 
Committee therefore, strongly recommend that expeditious steps may be taken for 
release of remaining balance amount of capital subsidy of Rs.249.45 crore during the 
current financial year itself. 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 3) 
Capacity Utilization  
1.8 Taking note of lower capacity utilization by BCPL during 2016-17 & 2 017-18, the 
Committee in their Original Report (49th Report / 16 th LS) had made the following 
observations / recommendations :  
" The Committee note the Assam Gas Cracker Project took nearly 8 mon ths for 
stabilization after commissioning on 02.01.2016. Soon after stabilization , the plant 
operation got affected due to issues like inadequate supply of natural gas both in 
terms of quantity and quality by M/s OIL, erratic, unassured and low supply  of 
naphtha by M/s NRL and non-availability of adequate quantity o f Butene- 1. Capacity 
utilization, of BCPL was 37% in 2016-17 and, the plant operated at a verage capacity 
utilization of 78% during the financial year 2017-18. The maximum capacity utilization 
was noticed in the month of March (118%) and the minimum capacity utilization w as 
71% in February during the calendar year. The capacity utilization has remarkab ly 
improved since February, 2017 and the company has been able to boo k cash profits. 
The plant achieved 100% capacity utilization during August 2017 and March, 2018. 
The Committee have also been informed that to achieve optimum capacity u tilization, 
the issues relating to inadequate supply of feed stock has been taken u p with 
concerned oil companies and Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoP&NG) 
through Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC). The Committee do 
hope that all the stakeholder will put in their best efforts to address the issue of 
adequate supply of feedstock. They thus, strongly recommend that the issue must be 
taken up on priority basis to resolve the same within a stipulated timeline. " 
Action Taken Report 
1.9 In its Action Taken Reply with reference to the above recommendation o f the 
Committee, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, has submitted as under :- 
" The recommendation of the Committee have been noted for comp liance. Under the 
framework of the Coordination Committee set up by the Department with all the  

5 
 
stakeholders, efforts will be made to ensure that BCPL achieves its optimum capacity 
utilization. " 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
1.10 The Committee while appreciating the intiatives of Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals in setting up of Coordination Committee of stake holders  to 
improve capacity utilization by BCPL,  would like to know about improvements in 
feedstock supply arrangements and capacity utilization by BCPL after September, 
2017 to till date.  Further, any other specific steps taken towards improving capacity 
utilization and the achievements made by BCPL thereon may also be furnished.  

6 
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 4) 
Financial Performance of BCPL  
1.11 Regarding the financial performance of BCPL, the Committee in their Ori ginal Report 
(49th Report / 16th LS) had observed / recommended as under :-  
 
" The BCPL which has been set up with an investment of more than Rs. 9,900 crore, 
was commissioned on 02.01.2016. This company has earned a revenue of Rs. 1.69 
crore less excise duty in 2015-16 and Rs. 778.49 crore in 2016-17. Accordi ng to the 
company, it is earning profit on its operations. However, as per the overall finan cial 
performance of the company during the period of three months in 2015-16, it incurred 
a loss of Rs. 270.23 crore with a turnover of Rs. 1.69 crore. The BCPL sought  
revenue subsidy of Rs. 26 crore for the initial one year of production to maintain Debt 
Service Coverage Ration (DSCR-1) During the year 2016-17, the company incurr ed 
a net loss of Rs. 547.60 crore with a turnover of 778.49 crore and th e company has 
sought a one time revenue subsidy of Rs. 678.74 crore from the Go vernment of 
India. The Committee are of the strong view that inadequate supply of fee dstock, 
non-release of balance amount of capital subsidy, debt-servicing, low capacity 
utilization during initial phase, etc. might be the critical reasons for dismal fi nancial 
performance of BCPL during 2015-16 and 2016-17. The committ ee do hope that the 
company will put in all out efforts to improve its performance to resolve all  the 
constraints through establishing an integrated and coordinated mechanism.  ' 
Action Taken Report 
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply with reference to the above recommendation of the 
Committee, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, has submitted as under :- 
" The recommendation of the Committee have been noted for compliance. BCPL is 
taking all possible steps to improve its financial performance by taking timely action  
on the feedstock related issues. Besides, the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals is also constantly monitoring the situation. As earlier informed  
through the mechanism of Coordination Committee the feedstock related issues are 
taken with the stakeholders, the release of balance amount of capital subsid y is also 
being pursued with the Ministry of Finance and appropriate is being taken on other 
proposals received from BCPL." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
1.13 The Committee, taking into account the dismal financial performance by the 
BCPL during 2015-16 and 2016-17 had expressed hope that the company would put in 
all out efforts to improve its financial performance.  In this connection,  it  has inter-

7 
 
alia been stated that all possible steps are being taken to improve the financial 
performance of BCPL.  While appreciating the steps taken by the Government in this 
regard, the Committee are of the view that continuous and concerted efforts should 
be made by BCPL and the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers for the strong 
financial performance of this CPSU.  In this regard, the Committee  would like to be 
informed about the financial performance of BCPL in 2017-18 and in the subsequen t 
quarterly periods during the financial year 2018-19 to assess the extent of success 
achieved by BCPL.   
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 6) 
Arrangements for adequate supply Natural Gas to BCPL  
1.14 The Committee having taken note of the fact that inadequate ava ilability of natural 
gas to BCPL during 2016-17 & 2017-18 was affecting the company  severely, had made 
observations / recommendations as under in their 49th Report (16th Lok Sabha) : 
" BCPL requires 7 Million Metric Standard Cubic Meter per Day (MMSCMD)  of rich 
gas daily for the operation of the plants. The company has entered into an agreement 
with M/s Oil India Limited (OIL) and ONGC for getting natural gas supply as approved 
by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). As per agreement made with 
M/s OIL in 2007, the OIL is to supply natural gas of 6 MMSCMD with averag e C2+ 
content of 7.11% to BPCL which is about 85.71% of the total gas requir ed but the 
natural gas supply by M/s OIL constitutes around only 61% of the total f eed for the 
plant. BCPL has a C2+ extraction unit at Lakwa which produces C2+ liquid wh ich is 
then sent to ethylene cracker unit of BCPL at Lepetkata. The feed f rom Lakwa unit 
contributes to around 7% of total feed. Natural gas for the Lakwa plant which was 
commissioned on 04.12.2016 is received from ONGC. BCPL has entered into a long 
term agreement with ONGC in 2007 for the supply of rich natural gas stream by  the 
latter to its C2/C3 Recovery Plant at Lakwa. As per the agreement, BCPL  is to return 
entire lean gas to ONGC after extraction of C2+ and CO2 components. The 
Committee find that the BCPL is getting required quantity of natural gas for its Lakwa 
plant albeit a nagging issue of ONGC imposing penalty @ 1.5 times the pri ce for the 
excess quantity of natural gas used for internal consumption over and ab ove the 
agreed quantity. The imposition of penal-charge has additional impli cation of around 
Rs.13 crore per annum for BCPL and although the matter was taken up by BCPL 
with ONGC and the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas for allotment of requir ed 
additional natural gas to the tune of 0.2 MMSCMD for internal consumption  at the 
Lakwa plant at normal rate, the issue remains unresolved.  
The Committee observe that due to inadequate supply of natural ga s by M/s 
OIL to BCPL for its main complex at Lepetkata has adversely impacted the capacity 

8 
 
utilization of BCPL leading to production loss. The shortfall in supply of natural gas by 
M/s OIL was approximately 41% during 2016-17 and 20% during 201 7-18 than that 
of agreed supply. As a result of which BCPL has suffered production losses of 677 52 
MT and 33050 MT of polymer during 2016-17 and 2017-18 respectively. In the 
current year, the average supply of natural gas by M/s OIL is 5.3 MMSCMD with C2+ 
content of 6.4 % against the contractual supply quantity of 6 MMSCMD with  C2+ 
content of 7.1%. In this regard, M/s OIL has expressed their helplessness stating 
inter-alia that the quantity natural gas extracted from Tinsukia and Dibrugarh f ields 
has gone down and the percentage of its C2+ content the natural gas from 7.11% in 
2007 to 6.4% at present. The Committee also take note that the natural g as 
production by OIL in 2016-17 was 2705 MMSCM from Assam and Arunach al 
Pradesh and the natural gas production by ONGC from the domestic opera ted fields 
in 2016-17 was 22.09 BCM. Moreover, during the year 2017-18, M/s Hi ndustan Oil 
Exploration Company Ltd (HOEC) has added natural gas to OIL's grid to the  tune of 
0.3 MMSCMD to 0.5 MMSCMD. 
Taking into account, the foregoing and the fact that shortage of natural gas is 
severely affecting sustainability and viability of BCPL, the Committee strongly 
recommend that urgent steps be taken for improving the supply of natural gas so as 
to enable BCPL to get stable supply of 6 Million Metric Standard Cubic Meter per Day 
(MMSCMD) with average C2+ content of 7.11% through M/s OIL and / or othe r 
agencies in order to save the Assam Gas Cracker Project from falling into the 
category of loss making Central Public Sector Enterprises. The Committee also 
recommend that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas be convinced of th e need 
for allotment of required additional natural gas to the tune of 0.2 MMSCMD for 
internal consumption at the Lakwa plant at normal rate to enable BCPL to attai n 
financial stability during initial period of operations. Action taken in the ma tter may be 
informed to the Committee. " 
Action Taken Report 
1.15 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochem icals is as 
under :- 
" In the meeting the Coordination Committee noted that there is improvemen t in 
supply of natural gas to BCPL in first quarter of the current financial year a s OIL 
could supply around 5.44 MMSCMD of gas with average C2+ content of 6.7%. It  was 
noted that OIL reduced the throughput to its LPG plant at Duliajan  from 2.2 
MMSCMD to 1.6 MMSCMD over a period of time to facilitate better supply  to BCPL. 
Further, OIL has carried out modification in rich gas line in such a way that 90 % of 
rich gas is diverted to BCPL. In addition, OIL has made sure that entire pro duction of 
around 1.0 MMSCMD of gas by M/s HoEC is diverted to BCPL. The Coordination 
Committee decided that OIL will try to maintain the current level of supply to  BCPL 
subject to production and logistics constraints. 

9 
 
The C2+ Recovery Unit, Lakwa of BCPL was converted from erstwhile LPG 
Recovery Plant of GAIL to produce C2+ liquid which is sent to BCPL Lepetkata a s a 
feed in ethylene cracker unit. For operating the Lakwa unit, gas to the tune of 0.2 
MMSCMD is required for internal consumption as fuel. This requirement is in addition 
to the gas required for shrinkage (for recovery of C2+ liquid) in the plant.  BCPL had 
entered into a long term agreement with ONGC for supply of gas to its C2/C 3 
Recovery Plant, Lakwa. The agreement has provision of shrinkage for produ ction of 
C2/C3 liquid; however, the same does not have provision for internal consum ption 
(fuel). Further, the agreement has penal provision @1.5 times the price applicable for 
excess gas drawn by BCPL over and above the shrinkage. It was obs erved during 
the Coordination Committee meeting that the gas consumed at Lakwa plan t for 
internal consumption is not a new development as the same gas was co nsumed in 
the erstwhile LPG plant of GAIL and the levy of penalty is unjustifi able. Accordingly, 
the Coordination Committee decided that ONGC shall examine the request of BCPL 
for 0.2 MMSCMD lean gas for internal consumption in terms of Government policy 
and guidelines. " 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
1.16 The Committee had inter-alia recommended that urgent steps be taken to 
arrange for stable natural gas supply of 6 Million Metric Standard Cubic Meter per 
Day (MMSCMD) with average C2+ content of 7.11% to Lepetkata plant of BCPL.  
Further, the Committee had also recommended for taking steps to arrange for  
charging of normal rate of cost by ONGC for additional quantity natural gas required 
for internal consumption at the Lakwa plant of BCPL to the tune of 0.2 MMSCMD.   
The Committee while expressing satisfaction on the steps taken by the Government 
in this regard,   would like to know about improvements in natural gas supply to 
BCPL in quantitve and percentage terms from January, 2018 onwards.   Moreover, 
ONGC be persuaded to examine the request of BCPL for 0.2 MMSCMD lean gas for 
internal consumption in a time bound manner and also to give their consent for 
charging of normal rate of cost for additional quantity of natural gas required for 
internal consumption at the Lakwa plant of BCPL. 
 
  

10 
 
 (RECOMMENDATION NO. 7)  
 
Arrangements for adequate supply of Naptha to BCPL  
1.17 The Committee, in their 49 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha), had made the following  
observations / recommendations in regard to functioning of  Naptha supply arrangements 
for BCPL: 
" BCPL requires 1,60,000 MT of naphtha annually to attain full capacity. M/s 
Numaligarh Refinery Limited is the supplier of naptha for BCPL as approved  by the 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). As per project approval, NRL was 
to receive crude supplies of 3 MMT p.a. and it was required to supp ly 160,000 MT of 
Naphtha to BCPL. However, NRL has failed to supply the agreed quantity of naphtha 
to BCPL. The BCPL was commissioned on 02-01-2016 and during the initial phase of 
operations in 2015-16 (January, February and March months), NRL did not s upply 
naptha to BCPL. During the period of from 2016-17 & 2017-18, NRL supplied only 
around 15800 MT of naphtha from their refinery till August, 2017. T he Shortfall in 
supply of naphtha by M/s NRL is around 69% during 2016-17. The reafter, NRL did 
not supply Naphtha from its own refinery in utter disregard and violation of its  
agreement but offered to supply naphtha from external sources on 50:50  freight 
sharing basis to which BCPL had to agree to sustain the plant operations. Even then, 
NRL was not able to supply the required quantity of naphtha. Under the 
circumstances of acute shortage of naphtha, BCPL made arrangement with  M/s 
HPCL and sourced naphtha from their Vizag refinery. The Committee take no te that 
even with the externally sourced naphtha, the shortfall in supply during 2016-17 was 
to the tune of 61 % and that capacity utilization of BCPL was severely affected due to 
inadequate supply of naphtha in 2016-17.  
The Committee also note that, the capacity utilization of NRL was more than 
85% in terms of crude processing since 2015-16 and NRL has been receiving 
average supplies of 2.7 MMT of crude during the last three years an d at this level it 
should have supplied at least upto 120,000 T of Naphtha to BCP L. However, NRL 
failed to supply the required quantity of naptha to BCPL. NRL has state d reasons 
inter-alia that at the timing of signing of the agreement in 2010, N RL was producing 
Naphtha and planned to produce petro chemical grade Naphtha and as such  offered 
to supply Naphtha to BCPL project. However, commissioning of BCPL plant was 
delayed by almost 3 years (original commissioning April 2012) and naphtha available 
at NRL at that time had to be sold outside the region at a substantial freight u nder 
recovery. Moreover, the demand for Motor Spirit (MS), an auto fuel in North Ea st has 
grown substantially and to meet this demand, NRL started producing this auto  fuel, 
which was more essential by converting its Naphtha. NRL has also stated that 
towards its commitment to BCPL, it floated tender for sourcing naphtha from othe r 
sources and ensured transporting the same directly to BCPL. NRL reimbursed BCPL 

11 
 
the differential cost for the Naphtha sourced from 3 rd parties and BCPL was 
compensated for naphtha procured from alternate sources. In March 2018, NR L & 
BCPL has agreed to share the freight cost for sourcing of naphtha in the ratio 60 : 40, 
where NRL will bear the higher share of the cost. NRL has further stated th at supply 
of Naphtha between NRL and BCPL is a commercial agreement and as  such 
concerned parties shall take a commercial decision depending upon techn o-
commercial viability. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural has 
submitted that the agreement between BCPL and NRL has the standard Take-or-Pay 
conditions. Keeping in the spirit of the above and to honour the com mitment, NRL is 
supplying naphtha to BCPL by sourcing from other sources by reimbursing the 
differential cost to BCPL. There is no specific clause in the said agreement on how, 
when and where to source the naphtha from and supplied to BCPL. F urther, the 
present model of sharing of transportation cost has been agreed mutua lly by both 
NRL and BCPL with due consideration of financial impact to both the parties. The 
Committee, having taken a look at the turn of events relating to functioning of 
naphtha supply agreement between BCPL and NRL, are deeply concerned  over the 
lack of commitment on the part of NRL and Ministry of Petroleum and Na tural Gas to 
honour the agreement. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that the 
matter of naphtha-supply-agreement be given a revisit by all the co ncerned parties in 
close consultation and mediation by Cabinet Secretary at the earliest. " 
 
Action Taken Report 
1.18 Action Taken Reply of Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is as under :  
"The inadequate supply of naphtha by NRL  was taken up by the  Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals with the  Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. The 
Coordination Committee noted that NRL is converting its naphtha to MS wh ich brings 
them better realization even after arranging naphtha for BCPL from e lsewhere. 
However, BCPL is made to bear additional transportation cost of around Rs. 1 9 crore 
per annum. In addition, BCPL still has to source 40,000 MTPA of napht ha by its own 
as NRL has agreed to supply only 120,000MTPA against agreement qua ntity of 
160,000 MTPA. 
As per the inputs received from  MoP&NG , NRL has informed that in line with the 
commitment made by NRL towards supply of naphtha to BCPL and as has b een 
stated in the Naphtha Supply Agreement, NRL has been striving to meet  its 
commitment.In the current year, NRL has entered into a contract with M/s HMEL fo r 
purchase of 120 TMTPA naphtha for supply to M/s BCPL. Under the agreemen t NRL 
is arranging 10,000 tonnes of naphtha per month from M/s HMEL to BCPL in line with 
the commitment.Supply of naphtha is taking place smoothly. As agreed between  the 
parties, NRL will also absorb 60% of the freight from HMEL, Bhatinda to BCPL, 
Dibrugarh. 

12 
 
The above arrangement was reviewed at the meeting of the Coordin ation Committee 
held on 16.07.2018, where it was decided that the freight sharing for naphtha may be 
discussed and reviewed at appropriate time with mutual agreement. " 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
1.19  The Committee note that NRL, which is the designated supply agency for 
supplying Naphtha to BCPL, is presently supplying 1,20,000 MTPA against the agreed 
quantity of 1.60,000 MTPA.  BCPL has to source 40,000 MTPA of Naphtha on its own.  
In this regard, the Committee recommend that the coordination Committee should 
review at least once in a quarter the Naphtha supply position to BCPL from NRL and 
it should be ensured that the present quantum of 10,000 tonnes of Naphtha per 
month is arranged by NRL to BCPL without fail. In this regard, the Committee may be 
furnished of the details of actual quantum of Naphtha supplied by NRL to BCPL 
during the last one year.   Moreover, NRL should also assist BCPL in meeting rest of 
agreed quantum of 40,000 MTPA of Naphtha.  The Committee also note that NRL will 
absorb 60% of the cost of freight from HMEL, Bhatinda to BCPL, Dibrugarh.  In this 
regard, the Coordination Committee has decided that freight sharing for Naphtha may 
be discussed and reviewed at appropriate time with mutual agreement.  Since BCPL 
is a relatively new CPSU striving to establish itself, the Committee recommend that 
Coordination Committee should ensure that cost of freight sharing is favourable to 
BCPL.  Coordination Committee also explore the possibilities of obtaining Naphtha 
from a nearer source so as to save the freight  cost. 
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 and No.9) 
Need for Captive Production of Butene-1 and a captive plant for production of 
Hydrogenated Pyrolysis Gasoline 
1.20 The observations / recommendations of the Committee in their 49 th Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) regarding Butene-1 requirement of BCPL  are as under :- 
 
" The Committee have been informed that "Butene-1 is a raw material required as co-
monomer for production of various grades of polymers for 220 KTPA LLDPE  / HDPE 
Swing Unit. Based on the figures of annual consumption as per design, th e total 
requirement of Butene-1 is estimated to be in the range of 8900 MT to 22,800 MT per 

13 
 
annum depending upon the quantum of various kinds of polymers produced by 
BCPL. Currently Butene-1 requirement is catered by sourcing it from GAIL, Pata / 
Reliance / HPL/ OPaL. However, highly erratic supply of Butene-1 in the past put  
BCPL into a precarious situation hampering the operations of the entire complex. In 
order to reduce dependency on external sources and for self-reliability, BCPL has 
proposed setting up of a captive Butene-1 plant of at least 10 K TPA and submitted 
detailed proposal (costing Rs. 243.06 crore) for the approval of the Dep artment of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals (DCPC). The funding of the project is proposed from 
debt and internal accruals and no budgetary support has been reque sted from 
Government. Since the availability of Butene-1 will have a positive imp act on the 
operations of BCPL, the Committee hope that the proposal be conside red 
expeditiously considering the exigency and requirement. The Committee may  be 
informed of the action in the matter. " 
1.21  The observations / recommendations of the Committee in their 49 th Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) regarding the proposal of BCPL for captive production of Hydrogenated Pyrolysis 
Gasoline  are as under :  
" The Committee note that BCPL produces a by-product known as Raw Py rolysis 
Gasoline (RPG), which is partially hydrogenated to form Hydrogenated Pyrolysis 
Gasoline (HPG). The HPG produced at BCPL has high Benzene content due to 
which it cannot be directly used as raw material for Motor Spirit (MS) blending. At  
present BCPL has made interim arrangements with small hydrocarbon processors for 
evacuation of HPG at a lower realization. For sale of HPG, BCPL do not have an y 
institutional customer for bulk evacuation due to high Benzene content of the product. 
For a long term solution for safe and convenient evacuation of HPG along w ith better 
realization, BCPL has proposed setting up of 2nd Stage HPG plant at Lep etkata 
based on a Detailed Feasibility Report (DFR) prepared by M/s Engineers India 
Limited (ElL) at an estimated cost of Rs.116.74 crore. The proposal is presently with 
the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals (DCPC) for its approval. The funding  
of the project is proposed from debt and internal accruals and no budge tary support 
has been requested from Government. Having taken into account the fact that since 
the BCPL is yet to attain physical and financial stability in its operations, the 
Committee strongly feel that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals may 
consider the proposal at the earliest after thoroughly weighing the pros and c ons of 
the project proposal in a time bound manner. Decision taken by the Department in 
the matter may expeditiously be intimated to the Committee at the earliest. " 
Action Taken Report 
1.22 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochem icals is as 
under :- 
" The request for approval of setting up of a Butene-1 and 2 nd stage HPG plant at 
Lepetkata has been received from BCPL. The proposal is being examined. " 

14 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
1.23  The Committee note that these two proposals for setting up of a Butene-i and 
2nd stage HPG plant at Lepetkata are pending with the Department of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers for some time now.  The Committee may be informed of the reasons for 
delay in considering these proposals by the Government.  The Committee are of the 
firm view that development project proposals should be examined in a time bound 
manner.  Any inordinate delay at examination stage may result in cost escalation of 
the Projects.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that pros and cons of these two 
project proposals be examined by the Department expeditiously for decisions in 
these two cases and the action taken reply be furnished within three months. 
 (RECOMMENDATION NO. 12) 
 Technology Upgradation 
1.24 The Committee, in their 49 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had made following 
observations / recommendations on the need for the development of in degenous 
technology for Petrochemicals sector:- 
 
" The plant of the BCPL is designed to process Natural Gas and Naphtha to  produce 
2,20,000 Tons per annum (TPA) of LLDPE / HDPE (Linear Low Density 
Polyethylene/High Density Polyethylene) & 60,000 Tons per annum (TPA) of PP 
(Poly-propylene). Other products of BCPL include Hydrogenated Pyrolysis Gasoline 
and Pyrolysis Fuel Oil. The BCPL has entered into contracts with foreign Licensors 
for import of technology for its different units. Technology for Ethylene Cra cker Unit 
has been imported from LUMMUS TECHNOLOGY, USA at a license fee of $ 
25,25,000/- ; technology for LLDPE /HDPE Swing Unit has been imported fr om 
INEOS, UK at a cost of $ 1,60,60,412/- and the technology for Po lypropylene Unit is 
from LUMMUS NOVOLEN, GERMANY at a cost of € 2,400/ -. According to BCPL the 
technologies used in BCPL are state of the art technologies of international 
standards and the licensors were appointed through International Competitive  
Bidding by considering their efficiency, economy and productivity. In this con text, the 
Committee while expressing the view that the company shall continuously strive to 
attain technology updation to effect maximum efficiency and economy in plant 
operations, would also like to know the reasons for importing of the techn ology. 
Keeping into account the huge cost of imported technology in terms o f rare foreign 
currency, the Committee would impress upon the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to take necessary steps 
for development of indigenous technology needed in petrochemicals sector  

15 
 
particularly in oil / gas processing to produce polymers so that the country be comes 
self-reliant and foreign exchange outgo on this count is minimized. The Committee 
would like to be informed of the action taken in the matter. " 
Action Taken Report 
1.25 Action Taken Reply of Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is as under :  
" Since no indigenous technology for petrochemicals sector is available, the  licensors 
for BCPL’s Ethylene Cracker Unit, LLDPE/HDPE Unit and Polypropylene Unit were 
selected through International Competitive Bidding. However the recommendation  of 
the Committee have been noted."  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.26 The Committee note that licenses of BCPL's Ehtylene Cracker Unit, 
LLDPE/HDPE Unit and Polypropylene Unit wee selected through International 
Competitive Bidding.  In this regard, the Committee recommended that necessary 
steps be taken for development of indigenous technology for Petrochemicals sector.  
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Govt. in this regard.  Merely 
noting this important recommendation is not enough.  The Ministry should flung into 
swift action to set up a very strong Research and Development facility for this sect or 
in the country.  It is very much necessary to go in for indegenous technology for this 
sector as this sector has to cater to the day- to-day needs of huge population of this 
vast country.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate the earlier recommendation and 
hope that the Ministry would initiate effective measures in this regard.    
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 15) 
Viability of Assam Gas Cracker Project  
1.27 Regarding viability of the Assam Gas Cracker Project, the Committee, in th eir 49 th 
Report (16th Lok Sabha) had made the following observations / recommendations :  
" Petrochemicals, comprising of plastic and numerous other chemicals, are  basically 
hydrocarbons derived primarily from crude oil and natural gas as feedstock and 
Petrochemicals constitute a very important segment of world chemicals market. The 
Indian petrochemical industry has witnessed a significant growth and is expe cted to 
grow at a rate of 9% to reach $ 44 Bn by FY 2020. There are presently  five naphtha 
and five gas based cracker complexes in the country with a combined a nnual 
ethylene capacity of 5.1 million MT. There are six aromatic complexes with a 
combined Xylene capacity of 4.45 million MT. Besides, there are six Petro Flui d 

16 
 
Catalytic Cracking Units with a combined propylene capacity of 1.7 million MT. 
However, the per capita polymer consumption in India is as low as 8 kg compare d to 
the global average of 28 kg. The Committee also take note that a large qu antity of 
polymers are imported into the country and in the year 2016-17 the cou ntry imported 
43,93,226 MT of polymers. The import of major Petrochemicals has also increased 
from 21,59,886 MT in 2009-10 to 44,52,258 MT in 2016-17. In value terms, the 
imports have increased from Rs. 11,88,440 lakh in 2009-10 to Rs. 32,67,23 0 lakh in 
2016-17. At present, polymers are certainly high value added products a s compared 
to other usage of hydrocarbon as fuels etc. Moreover, various initiatives are being  
taken towards development of downstream plastic processing units in the North Ea st 
region. The polymer market of North East Region (NER) is in nascent stage and the 
overall demand of polymer is way below the national level demand. At present, there 
are around 187 plastic processing units in NER with major concentration in the state 
of Assam. The plastic processing units are mostly located in and around Guwaha ti. 
Joint efforts are being made by Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department for  
Development of North-Eastern Region (DONER), Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium 
Enterprises (MSME), Government of Assam, GAIL and BCPL for development of the 
downstream industries for overall development of the North East region and judicious 
utilization of the higher fractions of Natural Gas for value addition.  
The Committee have been informed that the product of BCPL has bee n well 
accepted in the market. BCPL uses the established marketing network of GAIL for 
marketing of its products and by-products. However, the cost of feedstock, is 
relatively high for producers in India including BCPL as compared to their competitors 
in the Middle East countries. The Committee have been informed that in th e current 
economic scenario, the plant is viable and is capable of generating value for its 
stakeholders. The plant has already mitigated its operational and stabilization ri sk 
and is now following an upward trajectory as far as production efficiency is  
concerned. As the plant is of sub-optimal capacity, the fixed cost of ope ration is on 
higher side and therefore, the plant shall be able to generate value only when it 
operates at higher capacity utilization. To achieve this objective, the requisite 
feedstock is extremely important to be made available to the plant. Thus  the viability 
of BCPL project which is heavily funded by Government of India depend s on 
adequate and timely feedstock supply. Moreover, the BCPL also has the 
diversification option to produce Hydrogenated Pyro Gasoline (HPG) and Pyrolysis  
Fuel Oil as by-products from its Ethylene Cracker Unit in future subject to availability 
of additional Feed Stock.  
The Committee have been further apprised that the matter regarding transfer 
of BCPL to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas is actively under consideration  
of the government to ensure adequate and regular supply of feedst ock as the 
feedstock suppliers and promoters GAIL, OIL, ONGC and NRL entities are under the 
administrative jurisdiction of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  

17 
 
The Committee after taking into account all factors, are convinced that unl ess 
the issues such as non-release of balance amount of capital subsidy, loan-li abilities, 
low-capacity utilization and most importantly the non-availability of ad equate and 
quality feedstock are resolved, the BCPL project cannot progress well as far as its 
viability is concerned. The Committee are of the strong view that the BCPL which is a 
sacrosanct project in terms of huge and rare national resources invested therein  can 
never be afforded to be unviable. The Committee, therefore, strongly recomm end 
that first priority must be accorded to arrange a more reliable feedstock a rrangement 
for BCPL to save the project in the national interest and simultaneously othe r 
alternatives/options be explored including identification and exploration of new 
gas/naphtha resources, search of foreign markets and setting up North East Gas 
Grid and the transfer of administrative jurisdiction. "  
 
Action Taken Report  
1.28 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochem icals is as 
under :- 
"The recommendation of the Committee have been noted and also forwa rded to 
MoPN&G for taking further action.  " 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.29  The Committee are not satisfied with the reply given by the Ministry.  Merely 
noting the recommendation and forwarding it to the other Ministry cannot constitute 
an action taken reply to the recommendation made by the Committee.  The 
Committee made this recommendation in the interest of BCPL which is a relatively 
new Public Sector Undertaking striving hard to establish itself.  Reliable feed stock 
arrangement, exploration of new gas/naphtha resources, setting up of North East Gas 
Grid, transfer of administrative jurisdiction, etc. would be very much helpful for the 
success of BCPL.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate the earlier recommendation 
and hope that the Ministry would examine these recommendations in consultation 
with the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and  would take concrete steps thereon. 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 1) 
Commissioning of Assam Gas Cracker Project 
2.1 The observations / recommendations of the Committee are as under :-  
" The Assam Gas Cracker Project, which was an outcome of the Assam Accord, ha s 
the objective of overall socio-economic development of the North East Region. The 
committee are happy to note that the Government of lndia have fulfilled  their 
commitment given to the people of Assam in particular and North Eastern Region in 
general as per the Assam Accord signed with All Assam Students Union (AASU) a nd 
AII Assam GanaSangramParishad (AAGP) on 15 th August, 1985. The Committee 
note that due to the risks involved endangering the viability of the project, the 
Government had to face many hurdles and constraints at the initial stage of its  
planning and execution before it was finally commissioned on 02 nd January, 2016. 
The committee take note that the Reliance Assam Petrochemicals Ltd. (RAPL) w hich 
was formed in May 1994 for the implementation of the project, op ted out of the 
venture. The RAPL felt that the project was not viable for a capacity below 200 KT PA 
of Ethylene and they insisted on adequate availability of feedsto ck to undertake the 
project. Later on, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs approved 
implementation of Assam Gas Cracker Project with a cost of Rs.5,460.61 on 18-04-
2006 after almost 21 years the date of the accord i.e. 15 th August 1985. The 
Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited (BCPL), a joint venture company, wa s 
incorporated on 08- 01-2007 as Central Public Sector Enterprise under the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals for the implementation of the projec t. 
The Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) was assigned the role of the main promoter 
of BCPL having 70% equity participation and the remaining 30% equ ally shared by 
Oil lndia Limited (OIL), Numaligarh Refinery Limited (NRL) and Govt. of Assam. The 
revised project cost of BCPL is estimated to be Rs.9,965/- crore as the 
implementation of the project incurred much cost and time overruns and it wa s 
dedicated to the nation by Hon'ble Prime Minister on 05- 02-2016. The Committee 
appreciate that the Government of India fully supported the cause of the  people of 
the North East Region by ensuring implementation of Assam Gas Cracker Project at  
an estimated cost of Rs.9,965/- crore. The Committee hope that the project is ab le to 
fulfill the socio-economic objectives including development of North East Region as 
envisaged in the Assam Accord. This project was finally dedicated to the nation  on 
05.02.2016 with a final estimated cost of Rs. 9965 crore. To ensure the viability of the 
project the Union Government infused a substantial component of capital subsidy of 
Rs. 5239.45 crore which is 52.58 percent of the total cost.   

19 
 
The Committee appreciate the contribution and the support extended by the 
Union Government and finally commissioning the project on 2nd January 2016. 
Keeping into account heavy capital intensiveness of the project and unp redictable 
nature of supply of feedstock both in term of adequate quantity a nd quality and 
moreover, longer gestation period to stabilize, the Committee are of the stro ng view 
that the project in question will have to be accorded top priority for supp orting the 
supply of requisite feedstock, energy and adequate working capital till the  gestation 
period required for optimum utilization and stabilization of operation is over and the 
project finally start making profit. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the Government must accord top priority to ensure timely and easy availab ility of 
feedstock, energy and other requirements needed for the project. They are of the 
considered view that the support extended to this project will go a long way in fulfilling 
the commitments and socio-economic objectives envisaged in the political accord 
signed in 1984 for the development of Assam in particular and N-E region  in 
general." 
Action Taken Report 
2.2 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is as 
under :- 
" In compliance with the recommendations, a Coordination Committee of 
stakeholders has already been constituted to resolve the feedstock and energ y 
related issues faced by BCPL with Secretary, Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals as Chairman and Secretary, MoP&NG as co-chairman. The first 
meeting of the Coordination Committee was held on 16.07.2018. The outcome of the 
Coordination Committee meeting is as detailed under ATR to Recommenda tion no.5. 
" 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 13017/1/2017-PC-I (Vol.II) (FTS: 11767) dated 12.10.2018] 
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 3) 
Capacity Utilization  
2.3 The observations / recommendations of the Committee are as under :-  
" The Committee note the Assam Gas Cracker Project took nearly 8 mon ths for 
stabilization after commissioning on 02.01.2016. Soon after stabilization , the plant 
operation got affected due to issues like inadequate supply of  natural gas both in 
terms of quantity and quality by M/s OIL, erratic, unassured and low supply  of 
naphtha by M/s NRL and non-availability of adequate quantity of  Butene- 1. Capacity 
utilization, of BCPL was 37% in 2016-17 and, the plant operated at a verage capacity 
utilization of 78% during the financial year 2017-18. The maximum capacity utilization 
was noticed in the month of March (118%) and the minimum capacity utilization w as 
71% in February during the calendar year. The capacity utilization has remarka bly 

20 
 
improved since February, 2017 and the company has been able to boo k cash profits. 
The plant achieved 100% capacity utilization during August 2017 and March, 2018. 
The Committee have also been informed that to achieve optimum capacity u tilization, 
the issues relating to inadequate supply of feed stock has been taken u p with 
concerned oil companies and Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoP&NG) 
through Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC). The Committee do 
hope that all the stakeholder will put in their best efforts to address the issue of 
adequate supply of feedstock. They thus, strongly recommend that the issue must be 
taken up on priority basis to resolve the same within a stipulated timeline. " 
Action Taken Report 
2.4 In its Action Taken Reply with reference to the above recommendation o f the 
Committee, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, has submitted as under :- 
" The recommendation of the Committee have been noted for comp liance. Under the 
framework of the Coordination Committee set up by the Department with all the  
stakeholders, efforts will be made to ensure that BCPL achieves its optimum capacity 
utilization. " 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 13017/1/2017-PC-I (Vol.II) (FTS: 11767) dated 12.10.2018] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
(Please see Para No.1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 4) 
Financial Performance of BCPL  
2.5 The observations / recommendations of the Committee are as under :-  
" The BCPL which has been set up with an investment of more than Rs. 9,900 crore, 
was commissioned on 02.01.2016. This company has earned a revenue of Rs. 1.69 
crore less excise duty in 2015-16 and Rs. 778.49 crore in 2016-17. Acco rding to the 
company, it is earning profit on its operations. However, as per the overall financial 
performance of the company during the period of three months in 2015-16, it incurred 
a loss of Rs. 270.23 crore with a turnover of Rs. 1.69 crore. The BCPL sought  
revenue subsidy of Rs. 26 crore for the initial one year of production to maintain Deb t 
Service Coverage Ration (DSCR-1) During the year 2016-17, the company incurr ed 
a net loss of Rs. 547.60 crore with a turnover of 778.49 crore and th e company ha s 
sought a one time revenue subsidy of Rs. 678.74 crore from the Go vernment of 
India. The Committee are of the strong view that inadequate supply of fee dstock, 
non-release of balance amount of capital subsidy, debt-servicing, low capacity 
utilization during initial phase, etc. might be the critical reasons for dismal fi nancial 
performance of BCPL during 2015-16 and 2016-17. The committ ee do hope that the 

21 
 
company will put in all out efforts to improve its performance to resolve all  the 
constraints through establishing an integrated and coordinated mechanism.  ' 
Action Taken Report 
2.6 In its Action Taken Reply with reference to the above recommendation o f the 
Committee, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, has submitted as under :- 
" The recommendation of the Committee have been noted for compliance. BCPL is 
taking all possible steps to improve its financial performance by taking timely action  
on the feedstock related issues. Besides, the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals is also constantly monitoring the situation. As earlier informe d 
through the mechanism of Coordination Committee the feedstock related issues a re 
taken with the stakeholders, the release of balance amount of capital subsid y is also 
being pursued with the Ministry of Finance and appropriate is being taken  on other 
proposals received from BCPL." 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 13017/1/2017-PC-I (Vol.II) (FTS: 11767) dated 12.10.2018] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
(Please see Para No.1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5) 
Feedstock Requirement for BCPL  
2.7 Regarding feedstock arrangement for BCPL, the Committee in their 49 th Report (16th 
Lok Sabha) had made the following observations / recommendations :  
 
" The feedstock for BCPL project is natural gas and naphtha. The plant is designed to 
operate on feedstock which would constitute of 68% gas and 32% naphtha. The plant 
requires 7 MMSCM of rich gas daily and 1,60,000 MT of naphtha an nually to attain 
full capacity. As per agreement, Numaligarh Refinery Limited (NRL) was to supp ly 
1,60,000 Tonnes of naptha to BCPL. As for supply of natural gas, BPCL entered into 
an agreement with M/s Oil India Limited (OIL) as per which M/s OIL is to supply 
natural gas of 6 Million Metric Standard Cubic Meter per Day (MMSCMD) with 
average C2+ content of 7.11% to BPCL. The plant took nearly 8 months for  
stabilization after commissioning on 02- 01-2016. The Committee find that the 
capacity utilization of BCPL in 2016-17 was 37% and it rose to nearly 78% in 2017-
18. However, the plant operation got affected due to inadequate av ailability of natural 
gas, naptha and also Butene-1. The BCPL is presently suffering du e to inadequate 
supply of feedstock especially natural gas and naptha. According to BCPL the  best 
model for its profitability would be to operate the plant at 80:20 ratio of g as and 

22 
 
naphtha as gas is 2.4 times cheaper feed as compared to naphtha. However, due to 
design constraints, the same could be done to some extent only tha t too with 
availability of more quality gas for the plant. Moreover, shortfall in gas supply by M/s 
OIL has resulted in higher rate of naphtha consumption leading to higher co st of 
production. M/s OIL and M/s NRL have expressed their inability to arrange ina bility 
higher quantity of feedstock to BCPL stating inter-alia their commitment to  other 
consumers and techno- commercial viability. The land-locked location of the project  
is also another hurdle for easy availability of arranging feedstock for th e plant. The 
Committee are also given to understand that the BCPL has operative profit an d that 
petrochemical complexes of little above one million tonnes only are considered viable 
nowadays. The Committee are also aware that Reliance Assam Petrochemicals Ltd. 
(RAPL) opted out to implement the Assam Gas Cracker Project reportedly for th e 
reasons of low capacity of the plant and inadequate availability of feedstock. Taking 
into account the facts, the Committee strongly recommend that the issues relating to 
feedstock arrangement for the BCPL be looked into on highest priority b y the 
Government and a workable mechanism be evolved in a time bound manne r to 
enable BCPL to attain full capacity utilization and stabilization with feedstock of 68% 
gas and 32% naphtha so as to ensure sustainability and viability of th e project. The 
Committee would like to be informed of the project to ensure sustainability and  
viability of the project. The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in 
the matter. " 
Action Taken Report 
2.8 Action Taken Reply of Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals is as under :-  
"The matter of inadequate feedstock supply to BCPL was discussed in the sitti ng of 
the Parliamentary Standing Committee during oral evidence of the representatives of  
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) on 24.01.2018. The 
Parliamentary Standing Committee recommended for setting up of Coordination 
Committee of stake-holders to sort out the problems being faced by BCPL. 
Accordingly, a Coordination Committee was constituted under the chairmanship of 
Secretary (CPC) with Secretary (PNG) as co-chairman. The 1 st meeting of the 
Coordination Committee was held on 16.07.2018.  
The Coordination Committee in its meeting noted the following:  
a. There is improvement in supply of natural gas to BCPL in the current financia l 
year as OIL could supply around 5.58 MMSCMD of gas with average C2+ 
content of 6.8 %.  It was noted that OIL reduced the throughput to its L PG 
plant at Duliajan from 2.2 MMSCMD to 1.6 MMSCMD over a period of time to  
facilitate better supply to BCPL. Further, OIL has carried out modification in 
rich gas line in such a way that 90 % of rich gas is diverted to BCPL. In 
addition, OIL has made sure that entire production of around 1.0 MMSCMD of 
gas by M/s HoEC is diverted to BCPL. The Coordination Committee decided 

23 
 
that OIL will try to maintain the current level of supply to BCPL subject t o 
production and logistics constraints. 
 
b. With regard to Naphtha supply, the Coordination Committee noted tha t as per 
advice of MoP&NG, a meeting between GAIL, BCPL, NRL and BPCL was 
convened on 23.03.2018 to discuss on the issue of Naphtha supply to  BCPL 
by NRL. During the meeting, NRL agreed to supply 120,000 Tonnes per 
annum (TPA) of Naphtha henceforth to BCPL on 60:40 (60 by NRL and 4 0 by 
BCPL) freight sharing basis. The above was agreed as an interim 
arrangement. The estimated additional implication to BCPL due to the 
arrangement of freight sharing is to the tune of Rs. 19 crore per annum. The 
Coordination Committee decided that the freight sharing for naphtha may b e 
discussed and reviewed at appropriate time with mutual agreement.   
 
c. Regarding requirement of gas for internal consumption as fuel for Lakwa u nit, 
BCPL had entered into a long term agreement with ONGC for supply of gas to  
its C2/C3 Recovery Plant, Lakwa. The agreement has provision of shrinkage 
for production of C2/C3 liquid.However, the same does not have provision for  
internal consumption (fuel). Further, the agreement has penal provision @1.5 
times the price applicable for excess gas drawn by BCPL over and abov e the 
shrinkage. It was observed that the gas consumed at Lakwa plant f or internal 
consumption is not a new development as the same gas was consumed  in the 
erstwhile LPG plant of GAIL and the levy of penalty is unjustifiable. 
Accordingly, the Coordination Committee decided that ONGC shall examine 
the request of BCPL for 0.2 MMSCMD lean gas for internal consumption in 
terms of Government policy and guidelines. " 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 13017/1/2017-PC-I (Vol.II) (FTS: 11767) dated 12.10.2018] 
  
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 11) 
Transfer of land 
2.9 The observations / recommendations of the Committee are as under :-  
" The Committee take note that transfer of lease deed in the name of Com pany for 
959 bighas of leased hold land and transfer of title deed for 505 bigh as of freehold 
land belonging to GAIL's Lakwa unit remained pending due to non-execu tion of 
Assets Transfer Agreement. Further, issue of land document (pattas) for th e 3581 
bighas of land acquired by the company through Government of Assa m is not 
complete. The Committee would like to emphasize that since one of objectiv es of 
Assam Gas Cracker Project is socio-economic upliftment of people of North East 
Region, thus, the smooth and successful running of the company and its service to  
the public by the way of Corporate Social Responsibility as well, is very essen tial for 
achieving the socio-economic objectives of the project. The Committee therefo re, 
recommend that BCPL, in close coordination with Assam Government should resolve 

24 
 
the issues relating to company's land in a time bound manner and if required the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should take up the issue with the 
Government of Assam at highest echelon. The Committee feel that state Government 
should be forthcoming in this regard as the projects is for development of NE region 
including Assam and accordingly the action taken in the matter may be invariably  be 
informed to the Committee. " 
Action Taken Report 
2.10 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochem icals is as 
under :- 
The matter for transfer of entire land of GAIL ’s erstwhile Lakwa unit, including 
Township at Sivasagar, in the name of BCPL has been taken up with concerned 
District Authorities of Sivasagar and Charaideo. BCPL is in continuous follow up  with 
the concerned Authorities for execution of the same at the earliest. 
 
BCPL has 3653 Bighas of land (including Duliajan unit), out of which 3522 Bighas are 
private land and 131 Bighas are Govt land. BCPL has already obtained  periodic 
pattas for 3522 Bighas of private land. Out of 131 Bighas of Gov t land, 122 Bighas 
has already been settled. For settlement of remaining 9 Bighas of la nd, Deputy 
Commissioner, Dibrugarh has been requested for initiating proposal for approval of 
Revenue Department, Govt. of Assam.. 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 13017/1/2017-PC-I (Vol.II) (FTS: 11767) dated 12.10.2018] 
 
 
 (RECOMMENDATION NO. 13) 
North East Gas Grid  
2.11 The observations / recommendations of the Committee is as under :-  
"During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee learnt fro m the 
representatives of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas that there was a proposal in 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to bring Gas grid upto upper part of 
Assam. The first gas pipeline from Barauni-Bihar to Guwahati-Assam be ing built by 
GAIL is expected to be completed by December, 2020. They were furth er informed 
that GAIL, ONGC, OIL, etc. are trying to form a joint venture to set up North East Gas 
Grid. The Committee, in this regard would express their view that although se tting up 
of North East Gas Grid may require huge investment and the project may  not be 
economically viable at initial stages, yet such Gas-Grid has very high potentia l for 
development and viability of the project based on gas in the long run  considering the 
topography of the North Eastern region. This Gas- grid will give enormous 
advantages to BCPL as far as its viability is concerned by ensuring adequ ate 

25 
 
feedstock. The Committee, therefore, recommend that necessary impetus be given to 
the proposal for setting up of North East Gas Grid and suggest that a special purpose 
vehicle arrangements may be formed for this purpose by GAIL, OIL, ONGC etc. 
preferably in close coordination and support of the Ministry of North East Region for 
planning and execution of the project.  " 
Action Taken Report 
2.12 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochem icals is as 
under :- 
" BCPL has informed that a joint venture company amongst GAIL, ONGC, OIL, NRL& 
IOCL has been formed for development of Natural Gas Pipeline grid in th e North 
Eastern states with equal equity from all participant companies i.e. 20% each. The JV 
Company has been registered in August, 2018 under  the name Indradha nush Gas 
Grid Limited (IGGL). " 
 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 13017/1/2017-PC-I (Vol.II) (FTS: 11767) dated 12.10.2018] 
 
 
 (RECOMMENDATION NO. 14) 
Employment Potential And High Attrition Rate  
2.13 The observations  / recommendations of the Committee are as under :-  
"The Committee have been informed that BCPL has generated direct employment for 
around 627 personnel and 2600 staff/manual workforce on outsourced b asis. The 
demands for employment from Project Affected Persons (PAPs) and locals have  
been addressed effectively in the interest of the project. The total sanc tioned 
manpower in Brahmaputra Crackers and Polymers Limited is 700 including 491 
executives and 209 non-executives and the employee strength of the company as on 
31 March 2017 was 576 including 389 executives and 187 non-e xecutives. 68.8% of 
the employees have been employed from the north-eastern region. Further, 66 
executives were on deputation from the holding company Gas Authority of India 
Limited (GAIL). Apart from this, employment generation is expected to get a bo ost 
through setting up of downstream plastic processing industries & ancillaries in the 
Northeast region. The Committee have also been informed that there is high attritio n 
among employees of BCPL as in the recent past more than 100 trained an d 
experienced employees have left the company primarily due to comparative higher 
pay package in other similar PSUs, and less attractiveness of remote location of the 
project in the North Eastern region, etc. While appreciating that the Company has 
already started the process of taking remedial measures to arrest the high att rition 
rate among its employees and upgraded the pay-scales of executives and approved 
the superannuation benefit scheme for the employees, the Committee a re still eager 

26 
 
to know about the details regarding persons affected by the BCPL proje ct and the 
measures taken for their rehabilitation. The Committee are of the view that successful 
running of the BCPL would depend on the overall performance on a ll fronts and thus 
strongly recommend that let not the huge public investment made be allow ed to go 
waste and as such the conducive work environment with better perks an d amenities 
be created in order to control brain drain and skilled workers and effective 
rehabilitation measures be taken for the persons affected by BCPL project. " 
 
Action Taken Report 
2.14 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochem icals is as 
under :- 
" Persons affected by the BCPL project were paid suitable compensation as decide d 
by the Govt.of Assam. Further, BCPL has engaged members of affected fam ilies 
under various contractual jobs  through its contractors, at different skill categories." 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 13017/1/2017-PC-I (Vol.II) (FTS: 11767) dated 12.10.2018] 
 
 
 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
Nil. 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER  IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 12) 
 Technology Upgradation 
4.1 The Committee, in their 49 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had made following 
observations / recommendations on the need for the development of ind igenous technology 
for Petrochemicals sector:- 
 
" The plant of the BCPL is designed to process Natural Gas and Naphtha to  produce 
2,20,000 Tons per annum (TPA) of LLDPE / HDPE (Linear Low Density 
Polyethylene/High Density Polyethylene) & 60,000 Tons per annum (TPA) of PP 
(Poly-propylene). Other products of BCPL include Hydrogenated Pyrolysis Gasoline 
and Pyrolysis Fuel Oil. The BCPL has entered into contracts with foreign Licensors 
for import of technology for its different units. Technology for Ethylene Cr acker Unit 
has been imported from LUMMUS TECHNOLOGY, USA at a license fee of $ 
25,25,000/- ; technology for LLDPE /HDPE Swing Unit has been imported fr om 
INEOS, UK at a cost of $ 1,60,60,412/- and the technology for Po lypropylene Unit is 
from LUMMUS NOVOLEN, GERMANY at a cost of € 2,400/ -. According to BCPL the 
technologies used in BCPL are state of the art technologies of international 
standards and the licensors were appointed through International Competitive  
Bidding by considering their efficiency, economy and productivity. In this con text, the 
Committee while expressing the view that the company shall continuously strive to 
attain technology updation to effect maximum efficiency and economy in plant 
operations, would also like to know the reasons for importing of the techn ology. 
Keeping into account the huge cost of imported technology in terms o f rare foreign 
currency, the Committee would impress upon the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to take necessary steps 
for development of indigenous technology needed in petrochemicals sector  
particularly in oil / gas processing to produce polymers so that the country be comes 
self-reliant and foreign exchange outgo on this count is minimized. The Co mmittee 
would like to be informed of the action taken in the matter. " 
 
Action Taken Report 
4.2 Action Taken Reply of Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is as under :  
" Since no indigenous technology for petrochemicals sector is available, the  licensors 
for BCPL’s Ethylene Cracker Unit, LLDPE/HDPE Unit and Polypropylene Unit were 

29 
 
selected through International Competitive Bidding. However the recommendation  of 
the Committee have been noted." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
(Please see Para No.1.26 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 15) 
Viability of Assam Gas Cracker Project  
4.3 Regarding viability of the Assam Gas Cracker Project, the Committee, in the ir 49 th 
Report (16th Lok Sabha) had made the following observations / recommendations :  
" Petrochemicals, comprising of plastic and numerous other chemicals, are  basically 
hydrocarbons derived primarily from crude oil and natural gas as feedstock and 
Petrochemicals constitute a very important segment of world chemicals market. The 
Indian petrochemical industry has witnessed a significant growth and is expe cted to 
grow at a rate of 9% to reach $ 44 Bn by FY 2020. There are presently  five naphtha 
and five gas based cracker complexes in the country with a combined a nnual 
ethylene capacity of 5.1 million MT. There are six aromatic complexes with a 
combined Xylene capacity of 4.45 million MT. Besides, there are six Petro Flui d 
Catalytic Cracking Units with a combined propylene capacity of 1.7 million MT. 
However, the per capita polymer consumption in India is as low as 8 kg compare d to 
the global average of 28 kg. The Committee also take note that a large qu antity of 
polymers are imported into the country and in the year 2016-17 the cou ntry imported 
43,93,226 MT of polymers. The import of major Petrochemicals has also increased 
from 21,59,886 MT in 2009-10 to 44,52,258 MT in 2016-17. In value terms, the 
imports have increased from Rs. 11,88,440 lakh in 2009-10 to Rs. 32,67,2 30 lakh in 
2016-17. At present, polymers are certainly high value added products a s compared 
to other usage of hydrocarbon as fuels etc. Moreover, various initiatives are being  
taken towards development of downstream plastic processing units in the North Ea st 
region. The polymer market of North East Region (NER) is in nascent stage and the 
overall demand of polymer is way below the national level demand. At present, there 
are around 187 plastic processing units in NER with major concentration in the state 
of Assam. The plastic processing units are mostly located in and around Guwaha ti. 
Joint efforts are being made by Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department for  
Development of North-Eastern Region (DONER), Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium 
Enterprises (MSME), Government of Assam, GAIL and BCPL for development o f the 
downstream industries for overall development of the North East region and judicious 
utilization of the higher fractions of Natural Gas for value addition.  
The Committee have been informed that the product of BCPL has bee n well 
accepted in the market. BCPL uses the established marketing network of GAIL for 
marketing of its products and by-products. However, the cost of feedstock, is 

30 
 
relatively high for producers in India including BCPL as compared to their competitors 
in the Middle East countries. The Committee have been informed that in th e current 
economic scenario, the plant is viable and is capable of generating value for its 
stakeholders. The plant has already mitigated its operational and stabilization risk 
and is now following an upward trajectory as far as production efficiency is  
concerned. As the plant is of sub-optimal capacity, the fixed cost of ope ration is on 
higher side and therefore, the plant shall be able to generate value only when it 
operates at higher capacity utilization. To achieve this objective, the requisite 
feedstock is extremely important to be made available to the plant. Thus  the viability 
of BCPL project which is heavily funded by Government of India depend s on 
adequate and timely feedstock supply. Moreover, the BCPL also has the 
diversification option to produce Hydrogenated Pyro Gasoline (HPG) and Pyrolysis  
Fuel Oil as by-products from its Ethylene Cracker Unit in future subject to availability 
of additional Feed Stock.  
The Committee have been further apprised that the matter regarding transfer 
of BCPL to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas is actively under consideration  
of the government to ensure adequate and regular supply of feedst ock as the 
feedstock suppliers and promoters GAIL, OIL, ONGC and NRL entities are under the 
administrative jurisdiction of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  
The Committee after taking into account all factors, are convinced that unl ess 
the issues such as non- release of balance amount of capital subsidy, loan-liabilities, 
low-capacity utilization and most importantly the non-availability of ad equate and 
quality feedstock are resolved, the BCPL project cannot progress well as far as its 
viability is concerned. The Committee are of the strong view that the BCPL which is a 
sacrosanct project in terms of huge and rare national resources invested therein  can 
never be afforded to be unviable. The Committee, therefore, strongly recomm end 
that first priority must be accorded to arrange a more reliable feedsto ck arrangement 
for BCPL to save the project in the national interest and simultaneously othe r 
alternatives/options be explored including identification and exploration of new 
gas/naphtha resources, search of foreign markets and setting up North East Gas 
Grid and the transfer of administrative jurisdiction. "  
Action Taken Report  
4.4 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is as 
under :- 
" The recommendation of the Committee have been noted and also forwa rded to 
MoPN&G for taking further action.  " 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
(Please see Para No.1.29 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  

31 
 
 CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE  STILL AWAITED 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 2) 
Project Cost and Capital Subsidy  
5.1` The Committee in their 49 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had made the following 
observations / recommendations in regard to project cost and capital subsidy for BCPL :  
 
" The Committee note that the Assam Gas Cracker Project was approved by Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) with a cost of Rs. 5460.61 crore on 
18.04.2006. However, the completion of the project got delayed and CCEA o n 
16.11.2011 approved the Revised Cost Estimate (RCE-I) of Rs. 8920 crore to 
commission it in December, 2013 with revised funding pattern consisting of Capital 
Subsidy of Rs. 4690 crore, Debt Rs.2961 crore and Equity Rs. 1269 crore. Howeve r, 
owing to further increase in project cost on account of time and cost overr uns, 
BCPL's Board of Directors recommended Revised Cost Estimate (RCE- II) of 
Rs.9965 crore with revised funding pattern consisting of Capital Subsidy of Rs.  
5239.45 crore, Debt of Rs. 3307.88 crore and Equity of Rs. 1417.67  crore and 
commissioning by December, 2015. The estimated increase of Rs.1045 crore w as 
proposed to be met by capital subsidy of Rs.549.45 crore, equity of Rs.1 48.67 crore 
and debt of Rs. 346.88 crore. As advised by the Ministry of Finance (Depa rtment of 
Expenditure) and Project Appraisal and Management Division of, NITI Aa yog, RCE-II 
of the project was appraised by FA and approved by the Minister- in-charge of the 
Administrative Ministry.   
The company as on 31 March, 2016, received the total sanctioned amou nt of 
Capital Subsidy of Rs.4,708.95crore (including net interest earned thereon) from  the 
Government of India. Based on the approval of RCE-II and additional ca pital subsidy 
of Rs. 549.45 crore (RCE-II), Ministry of Finance was approached which has 
allocated Rs. 100 crore under BE 2017-18, which has been released in M ay / June 
2017. The balance amount of Rs. 449.45 crore is yet to be released. No b udgetary 
allocation has been made in BE 20 18-19 for AGCP. At present, M/o Finance, D/o 
Expenditure has forwarded the matter to Budget Division, D/o Economic Aff airs 
(DEA). Regarding impact of delay in release of balance amount of capital subsidy, 
the Committee were informed inter-alia that BCPL has not been able to make 
payments to the vendors / suppliers/ consultants etc. not able to purchase critical 
spares in time. Further, the possibility of litigation by the vendors also cannot be ruled 
out. The Committee find that the BCPL is in a very vulnerable situation as far as its 
financial health is concerned and hold the view that early release of balan ce of 
subsidy to BCPL will definitely improve the financial conditions of the plant. They 

32 
 
therefore, recommend that the matter of release of balance amount of capital subsidy 
be taken up at appropriate level and if necessary approval of the  Cabinet Committee 
on Economic Affairs be obtained so that no further delay in release of the ba lance 
amount of Rs. 449.45 crore is avoided. The Committee desire to know the outc ome 
of the steps taken by the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers to resolve the issue. " 
Action Taken Report 
5.2 In its Action Taken Reply with reference to the above recommendation o f the 
Committee, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, has submitted as under :- 
" The enhanced amount of capital subsidy of Rs. 549.45 crore alrea dy stands 
approved by the Minister (Chemicals and Fertilizers) in July 2016. Out of this an 
amount of Rs. 100 crore was released in the 1 st quarter of 2017-18. After constant 
persuasion and requests by Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals to Ministry 
of Finance, an amount of Rs. 200 crore  has finally been released b y the Ministry of 
Finance in supplementary Demands for Grants for 2018-19, towards balance am ount 
of subsidy for AGCP.  The same has been disbursed to Brahmaputra Cracke r & 
Polymer Limited (BCPL), Assam in September, 2018. Further action will be taken  
regarding the balance Capital Subsidy of Rs.249.45 crore (Rs.449.45 cr – Rs.200.00 
cr) after the funds released are utilized by BCPL." 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 13017/1/2017-PC-I (Vol.II) (FTS: 11767) dated 12.10.2018] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
(Please see Para No.1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 6) 
Arrangements for adequate supply Natural Gas to BCPL  
5.3 The Committee in their 49 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had made the following 
observations / recommendations in regard to natural gas supply arrangements to BCPL : 
 
BCPL requires 7 Million Metric Standard Cubic Meter per Day (MMSCMD) of rich gas 
daily for the operation of the plants. The company has entered in to an agreement 
with M/s Oil India Limited (OIL) and ONGC for getting natural gas supply as approved 
by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). As per agreement made with 
M/s OIL in 2007, the OIL is to supply natural gas of 6 MMSCMD with averag e C2+ 
content of 7.11% to BPCL which is about 85.71% of the total gas requir ed but the 

33 
 
natural gas supply by M/s OIL constitutes around only 61% of the total feed for the 
plant. BCPL has a C2+ extraction unit at Lakwa which produces C2+ liquid which is 
then sent to ethylene cracker unit of BCPL at Lepetkata. The feed f rom Lakwa unit 
contributes to around 7% of total feed. Natural gas for the Lakwa plant  which was 
commissioned on 04.12.2016 is received from ONGC. BCPL has entered into a lon g 
term agreement with ONGC in 2007 for the supply of rich natural gas stream by  the 
latter to its C2/C3 Recovery Plant at Lakwa. As per the agreement, BCPL  is to return 
entire lean gas to ONGC after extraction of C2+ and CO2 components. The 
Committee find that the BCPL is getting required quantity of natural gas for its Lakwa 
plant albeit a nagging issue of ONGC imposing penalty @ 1.5 times the p rice for the 
excess quantity of natural gas used for internal consumption over and abo ve the 
agreed quantity. The imposition of penal-charge has additional impli cation of around 
Rs.13 crore per annum for BCPL and although the matter was taken up by BCPL 
with ONGC and the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas for allotment of requir ed 
additional natural gas to the tune of 0.2 MMSCMD for internal consumption  at the 
Lakwa plant at normal rate, the issue remains unresolved.  
The Committee observe that due to inadequate supply of natural g as by M/s 
OIL to BCPL for its main complex at Lepetkata has adversely impacted the ca pacity 
utilization of BCPL leading to production loss. The shortfall in supply of natural gas by 
M/s OIL was approximately 41% during 2016-17 and 20% during 2017 -18 than that 
of agreed supply. As a result of which BCPL has suffered production losses of 677 52 
MT and 33050 MT of polymer during 2016-17 and 2017-18 respectively. In the 
current year, the average supply of natural gas by M/s OIL is 5.3 MMSCMD with C2+ 
content of 6.4 % against the contractual supply quantity of 6 MMSCMD with  C2+ 
content of 7.1%. In this regard, M/s OIL has expressed their helplessness stating 
inter-alia that the quantity natural gas extracted from Tinsukia and Dibrugarh f ields 
has gone down and the percentage of its C2+ content the natural gas from 7.11% in 
2007 to 6.4% at present. The Committee also take note that the natural g as 
production by OIL in 2016-17 was 2705 MMSCM from Assam and Arunach al 
Pradesh and the natural gas production by ONGC from the domestic opera ted fields 
in 2016-17 was 22.09 BCM. Moreover, during the year 2017-18, M/s Hi ndustan Oil 
Exploration Company Ltd (HOEC) has added natural gas to OIL's grid to the  tune of 
0.3 MMSCMD to 0.5 MMSCMD. 
Taking into account, the foregoing and the fact that shortage of natural gas is 
severely affecting sustainability and viability of BCPL, the Committee strongly 
recommend that urgent steps be taken for improving the supply of natural gas so as 
to enable BCPL to get stable supply of 6 Million Metric Standard Cubic Meter per Day 
(MMSCMD) with average C2+ content of 7.11% through M/s OIL and / or othe r 
agencies in order to save the Assam Gas Cracker Project from falling into the 
category of loss making Central Public Sector Enterprises. The Committee also 
recommend that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas be convinced of th e need 
for allotment of required additional natural gas to the tune of 0.2 MMSCMD for 

34 
 
internal consumption at the Lakwa plant at normal rate to enable BCPL to attai n 
financial stability during initial period of operations. Action taken in the ma tter may be 
informed to the Committee.  
Action Taken Report 
5.4 In its Action Taken Reply with reference to the above recommendation o f the 
Committee, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, has submitted as under 
In the meeting the Coordination Committee noted that there is improvement in supply 
of natural gas to BCPL in first quarter of the current financial year as  OIL could 
supply around 5.44 MMSCMD of gas with average C2+ content of 6.7%. It was noted 
that OIL reduced the throughput to its LPG plant at Duliajan from 2.2 MMSCMD to 
1.6 MMSCMD over a period of time to facilitate better supply to BCPL. Furthe r, OIL 
has carried out modification in rich gas line in such a way that 90 % o f rich gas is 
diverted to BCPL. In addition, OIL has made sure that entire production of around 1.0 
MMSCMD of gas by M/s HoEC is diverted to BCPL. The Coordination Committee 
decided that OIL will try to maintain the current level of supply to BCPL subj ect to 
production and logistics constraints. 
The C2+ Recovery Unit, Lakwa of BCPL was converted from erstwhile LPG 
Recovery Plant of GAIL to produce C2+ liquid which is sent to BCPL Lepetkata a s a 
feed in ethylene cracker unit. For operating the Lakwa unit, gas to the tune of 0.2 
MMSCMD is required for internal consumption as fuel. This requirement is in addition 
to the gas required for shrinkage (for recovery of C2+ liquid) in the plant.  BCPL had 
entered into a long term agreement with ONGC for supply of gas to its C2/C 3 
Recovery Plant, Lakwa. The agreement has provision of shrinkage for produ ction of 
C2/C3 liquid; however, the same does not have provision for internal consum ption 
(fuel). Further, the agreement has penal provision @1.5 times the price applicable for 
excess gas drawn by BCPL over and above the shrinkage. It was obs erved during 
the Coordination Committee meeting that the gas consumed at Lakwa plan t for 
internal consumption is not a new development as the same gas was co nsumed in 
the erstwhile LPG plant of GAIL and the levy of penalty is unjustifi able. Accordingly, 
the Coordination Committee decided that ONGC shall examine the request of BCPL 
for 0.2 MMSCMD lean gas for internal consumption in terms of Government policy 
and guidelines. 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 13017/1/2017-PC-I (Vol.II) (FTS: 11767) dated 12.10.2018] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
(Please see Para No.1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

35 
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 7) 
Arrangements for adequate supply of Naptha to BCPL  
5.5 The Committee in their 49 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had made the following 
observations / recommendations in regard to Naphtha supply arrangements to BCPL : 
 
" BCPL requires 1,60,000 MT of naphtha annually to attain full capacity. M/s 
Numaligarh Refinery Limited is the supplier of naptha for BCPL as approved  by the 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). As per project approval, NRL was 
to receive crude supplies of 3 MMT p.a. and it was required to supp ly 160,000 MT of 
Naphtha to BCPL. However, NRL has failed to supply the agreed quantity of naphtha 
to BCPL. The BCPL was commissioned on 02-01-2016 and during the initial phase of 
operations in 2015-16 (January, February and March months), NRL did not s upply 
naphtha to BCPL. During the period of from 2016-17 & 2017-18, NRL supplied only 
around 15800 MT of naphtha from their refinery till August, 2017. T he Shortfall in 
supply of naphtha by M/s NRL is around 69% during 2016-17. Therea fter, NRL did 
not supply Naphtha from its own refinery in utter disregard and violation of its  
agreement but offered to supply naphtha from external sources on 50:50  freight 
sharing basis to which BCPL had to agree to sustain the plant operations.  Even then, 
NRL was not able to supply the required quantity of naphtha. Under the 
circumstances of acute shortage of naphtha, BCPL made arrangement with  M/s 
HPCL and sourced naphtha from their Vizag refinery. The Committee take no te that 
even with the externally sourced naphtha, the shortfall in supply during 20 16-17 was 
to the tune of 61 % and that capacity utilization of BCPL was severely affected due to 
inadequate supply of naphtha in 2016-17.  
The Committee also note that, the capacity utilization of NRL was more t han 
85% in terms of crude processing since 2015-16 and NRL has been receiving 
average supplies of 2.7 MMT of crude during the last three years an d at this level it 
should have supplied at least upto 120,000 T of Naphtha to BCP L. However, NRL 
failed to supply the required quantity of naphtha to BCPL. NRL ha s stated reasons 
inter-alia that at the timing of signing of the agreement in 2010, N RL was producing 
Naphtha and planned to produce petro chemical grade Naphtha and as such  offered 
to supply Naphtha to BCPL project. However, commissioning of BCPL plant was 
delayed by almost 3 years (original commissioning April 2012) and naphtha available 
at NRL at that time had to be sold outside the region at a substantial freight u nder 
recovery. Moreover, the demand for Motor Spirit (MS), an auto fuel in North Ea st has 
grown substantially and to meet this demand, NRL started producing this auto  fuel, 
which was more essential by converting its Naphtha. NRL has also stated that 
towards its commitment to BCPL, it floated tender for sourcing naphtha from oth er 
sources and ensured transporting the same directly to BCPL. NRL reimbursed BCPL 
the differential cost for the Naphtha sourced from 3 rd parties and BCPL was 
compensated for naphtha procured from alternate sources. In March 2018, NRL & 

36 
 
BCPL has agreed to share the freight cost for sourcing of naphtha in the ratio 60 : 40, 
where NRL will bear the higher share of the cost. NRL has further stated th at supply 
of Naphtha between NRL and BCPL is a commercial agreement and as  such 
concerned parties shall take a commercial decision depending upon techn o-
commercial viability. In this regard, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural has 
submitted that the agreement between BCPL and NRL has the standard Take-or-Pay 
conditions. Keeping in the spirit of the above and to honour the com mitment, NRL is 
supplying naphtha to BCPL by sourcing from other sources by reimbursing the 
differential cost to BCPL. There is no specific clause in the said agreement on how, 
when and where to source the naphtha from and supplied to BCPL. F urther, the 
present model of sharing of transportation cost has been agreed mutua lly by both 
NRL and BCPL with due consideration of financial impact to both the parties. The 
Committee, having taken a look at the turn of events relating to functioning of 
naphtha supply agreement between BCPL and NRL, are deeply concerned  over the 
lack of commitment on the part of NRL and Ministry of Petroleum and Na tural Gas to 
honour the agreement. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend t hat the 
matter of naphtha-supply-agreement be given a revisit by all the co ncerned parties in 
close consultation and mediation by Cabinet Secretary at the earliest. " 
Action Taken Report 
5.6 In its Action Taken Reply with reference to the above recommendation  of the 
Committee, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, has submitted as under : 
 
"The inadequate supply of naphtha by NRL  was taken up by the  Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals with the  Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. The 
Coordination Committee noted that NRL is converting its naphtha to MS which brings 
them better realization even after arranging naphtha for BCPL from e lsewhere. 
However, BCPL is made to bear additional transportation cost of around Rs. 1 9 crore 
per annum. In addition, BCPL still has to source 40,000 MTPA of napht ha by its own 
as NRL has agreed to supply only 120,000MTPA against agreement qua ntity of 
160,000 MTPA. 
As per the inputs received from  MoP&NG , NRL has informed that in line with the 
commitment made by NRL towards supply of naphtha to BCPL and as has b een 
stated in the Naphtha Supply Agreement, NRL has been striving to meet  its 
commitment. In the current year, NRL has entered into a contract with M/s HMEL f or 
purchase of 120 TMTPA naphtha for supply to M/s BCPL. Under the agreemen t NRL 
is arranging 10,000 tonnes of naphtha per month from M/s HMEL to BCPL in line with 
the commitment.Supply of naphtha is taking place smoothly. As agreed between  the 
parties, NRL will also absorb 60% of the freight from HMEL, Bhatinda to BCPL , 
Dibrugarh. 

37 
 
The above arrangement was reviewed at the meeting of the Coordin ation Committee 
held on 16.07.2018, where it was decided that the freight sharing for naphtha may be 
discussed and reviewed at appropriate time with mutual agreement. " 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 13017/1/2017-PC-I (Vol.II) (FTS: 11767) dated 12.10.2018] 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
(Please see Para No.1.19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 8) 
Need for Captive Production of Butene-1 
5.7 The Committee in their 49 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had made the following 
observations / recommendations regarding the proposal of BCPL for captive prod uction of 
Butene-1 :  
" The Committee have been informed that "Butene-1 is a raw material required as co-
monomer for production of various grades of polymers for 220 KTPA LLDPE  / HDPE 
Swing Unit. Based on the figures of annual consumption as per design, th e total 
requirement of Butene-1 is estimated to be in the range of 8900 MT to 22,800 MT per 
annum depending upon the quantum of various kinds of polymers produced by 
BCPL. Currently Butene-1 requirement is catered by sourcing it from GAIL, Pata / 
Reliance / HPL/ OPaL. However, highly erratic supply of Butene-1 in the past put  
BCPL into a precarious situation hampering the operations of the entire complex. In 
order to reduce dependency on external sources and for self-reliability, BCPL has 
proposed setting up of a captive Butene-1 plant of at least 10 K TPA and submitted 
detailed proposal (costing Rs. 243.06 crore) for the approval of the Dep artment of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals (DCPC). The funding of the project is proposed from 
debt and internal accruals and no budgetary support has been reque sted from 
Government. Since the availability of Butene-1 will have a positive imp act on the 
operations of BCPL, the Committee hope that the proposal be conside red 
expeditiously considering the exigency and requirement. The Committee may  be 
informed of the action in the matter. " 
Action Taken Report 
5.8 In its Action Taken Reply with reference to the above recommendation o f the 
Committee, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, has submitted as under : 

38 
 
" The request for approval of setting up of a Butene-1 and 2 nd stage HPG plant at 
Lepetkata has been received from BCPL. The proposal is being examined. " 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 13017/1/2017-PC-I (Vol.II) (FTS: 11767) dated 12.10.2018] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
(Please see Para No.1.23 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 9) 
Need for Captive Plant for Production of Hydrogenated Pyrolysis Gasoline  
5.9 The Committee in their 49 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had made the following 
observations / recommendations regard their proposal of BCPL for captive produ ction of 
Hydrogenated Pyrolysis Gasoline  :  
" The Committee note that BCPL produces a by-product known as Raw Py rolysis 
Gasoline (RPG), which is partially hydrogenated to form Hydrogenated Pyrolysis 
Gasoline (HPG). The HPG produced at BCPL has high Benzene content due to 
which it cannot be directly used as raw material for Motor Spirit (MS) blending. At  
present BCPL has made interim arrangements with small hydrocarbon processors for 
evacuation of HPG at a lower realization. For sale of HPG, BCPL do not have an y 
institutional customer for bulk evacuation due to high Benzene content of the product. 
For a long term solution for safe and convenient evacuation of HPG along w ith better 
realization, BCPL has proposed setting up of 2nd Stage HPG plant at Lep etkata 
based on a Detailed Feasibility Report (DFR) prepared by M/s Engineers India 
Limited (ElL) at an estimated cost of Rs.116.74 crore. The proposal is presently with 
the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals (DCPC) for its approval. The funding  
of the project is proposed from debt and internal accruals and no budge tary support 
has been requested from Government. Having taken into account the fact that since 
the BCPL is yet to attain physical and financial stability in its operations, the 
Committee strongly feel that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals may 
consider the proposal at the earliest after thoroughly weighing the pros and c ons of 
the project proposal in a time bound manner. Decision taken by the Department in 
the matter may expeditiously be intimated to the Committee at the earliest. " 
Action Taken Report 
5.10 In its Action Taken Reply with reference to the above recommendation of the 
Committee, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, has submitted as under  : 

39 
 
 "The request for approval of setting up of a Butene-1 and 2 nd stage HPG plant at   
Lepetkata has been received from BCPL. The proposal is being examined. " 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 13017/1/2017-PC-I (Vol.II) (FTS: 11767) dated 12.10.2018] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 10) 
Corporate Governance of BCPL 
5.11 The Committee in their 49 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had made the following 
observations / recommendations in regard to corporate governance of BCPL : 
" The Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited (BCPL) is an unlisted Governme nt 
owned joint venture company formed for the implementation of Assam Gas Cracker 
Project. Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers is the administrative Ministry of the 
Central Public Sector Undertaking. Promoters of the company are Gail (India) Limited 
with 70% equity and the remaining 30% is equally shared by Oil India Limite d (OIL), 
Numaligarh Refinery Limited (NRL) and Govt. of Assam. The Board of Directors o f 
the Company as on 31 March, 2017 consisted of nine Directors including the 
Chairman and Managing Director of GAIL being the ex-officio Chairman of  the 
Company, two functional Directors, five promoter Directors and one Independ ent 
Director. The Committee are concerned to note that as per the Corporate 
Governance Compliance Certificate furnished by the Company Secretary of BCPL i n 
June, 2017, the Composition of the Company's Board did not have the req uired 
number of Independent Directors. The number of nominee directors in th e Board of 
Company exceeded the maximum number of Directors permitted under DP E 
guidelines. Further, the Composition of the Audit Committee did not have  two-third of 
members as Independent Directors. The Committee having noted all these points  
express their displeasure over the imbalanced composition of Board of Directors  and 
recommend that company should fulfill the requisite number of independent Directors 
in the company's Board and limit the number of nominee Directors in order to bring 
transparency in the corporate governance. " 
Action Taken Report 
5.12  In its Action Taken Reply with reference to the above recommendation  of the 
Committee, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, has submitted as under  : 
" BCPL has been asked to place the matter before its Board and provide  view of the 
Board of Directors keeping in view of the present status of the project, DPE ’s 

40 
 
guidelines on Corporate Governance 2010 and the Companies Act, 2013. Further 
progress will be informed in due course. " 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
OM No. 13017/1/2017-PC-I (Vol.II) (FTS: 11767) dated 12.10.2018] 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                 ( ANANDRAO ADSUL) 
                                         Chairperson  
                             Standing Committee on Chemicals
   03 January, 2019                                               and Fertilizers  
      13 Pausha, 1940  
  

41 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2018-19) 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 02 January, 2019 from 1500 hrs. to 1800 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri B. N. Chandrappa 
3. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
4. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
5. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
6. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
RAJYA SABHA 
7. Shri Elamaram Kareem 
8. Shri Abdul Wahab 
9. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
10. Shri B. K. Hariprasad 
11. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
SECRETARIAT 
            1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
        2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram -           Additional Director 
  3. Shri N. Amarathiagan -          Under Secretary 
2. At the outset, the Hon ’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee.   
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the draft A ction Taken 
Report on subject ‘Assam Gas Cracker Project ’ pertaining to Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals. 
4. After deliberations the Draft Report was adopted by the Committee unanimousl y without any 
changes/amendments. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to finalize and present the report 
to the Parliament. 
x. xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx   xxxxx 
The Committee then adjourned. 

42 
 
 
Appendix –__  
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY NINTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
PETROCHEMICALS (2017-18) ON THE SUBJECT 'ASSAM GAS CRACKER 
PROJECT' PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS).’ 
I Total No. of Recommendations 15 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 3, 4, 11, 12, 14 & 15)   
 
 
 
07 
Percentage of Total  46.66% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
 
Nil 
Nil 
Percentage of Total   -- 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-   
  
(Vide Recommendation No. 12 & 15)   
2 
Percentage of Total  13.33% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 2, 6, 7, 8, 9 & 10) 
6 
 
Percentage of Total  40% 
 
 