P a g e  | 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
37 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Thirty Second Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  "Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
 
 REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
   August, 2017/   Shravana, 1939 (Saka) 
  


P a g e  | 2 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
 
 
 
CC&F No.37 
 
THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Thirty Seventh Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  "Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2017 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2017 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
   August, 2017/   Shravana, 1939 (Saka)  


P a g e  | 3 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
 
(i) 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) ………………………………...  
Introduction. …………………………………………………..…………………………  
Chapter I Report ……………….…………………………………………………..  
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2016-17) held on  09 August, 2017. 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Seventh Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (201 6-17) of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals).  
 
 
  

P a g e  | 4 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
 
(ii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(2016-17) 
 
  Shri Anandrao Adsul - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N Chandrappa 
5. ShriSankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Innocent 
9. Shri K Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
11. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
12. Shri S. Rajendran  
13. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
14. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
15. Dr. Uma Saren 
16. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
17. Shri Taslimuddin 
18. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
19.  Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
20. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
21.  Dr. (Smt.) Ratna De (Nag) 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27. Shri K Parasaran 
28. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
29. Shri Abdul Wahab 
30. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
31.* Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava    - Director  
3. Shri R.C. Sharma    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri S. Vijayaraghavan   - Sr. Committee Assistant 
 
 
* Demise of Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy, MP (RS) on 09.06.2017. 
 
 
 
 

P a g e  | 5 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
 
(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(2016-2017) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on 
their behalf, present this Thirty Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action 
Taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Thirty Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (201 6-2017) on Demands for Grants (201 7-2018) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
 
2. The Thirty Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 20.03.2017. The Action 
Taken replies of Government to all observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 04.07.2016.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (201 6-2017) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
09.08.2017.  
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/  
recommendations contained in the Thirty Second Report (Sixteenth Lok S abha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                        ANANDRAO ADSUL 
09 August,  2017                           Chairperson 
18 Shravana, 1939 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on  
                                    Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 

P a g e  | 1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER  I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the  
Thirty-Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the Demands for Grants 
2017-18 of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) which 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 20.3.2017.  In all, the Committee made  7 Observations / 
Recommendations in the Report. 
2.  Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) were requested 
to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained in the  Thirty-Second 
Report within three months from the date of presenta tion of the Report, i.e., by  20.7.2017. 
The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 7 Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceutic als) vide their O.M. No. 
23003/1/2017-IFD dated 4.7.2017. These Replies  have been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations  that have been accepted by the 
Government :- 
 Sl.Nos.  6 and  7                                          (Total =2 )  
 This may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply :- 
 Sl.No. Nil                                     (Total = Nil) 
 This may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report. 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
 Sl.No.   5                             (Total = 1 )  
 This may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 
 Sl.Nos. 1,2, 3 and 4                              (Total =4)  
These may be included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and V of this Report should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations which  still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 A. Need for scheme for financing common facility centre at API Parks 
Recommendation Sl. No.1 
5. While stressing that dependence on imports for its bulk drugs is not good for the 
country  the Committee had recommended as under:- 

P a g e  | 2 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
 “The committee note that the vision of the department of pharmaceutical (dop), 
ministry of chemicals & fertilizers is to catalyze and encourage quality, productivity 
and innovation in bulk drug sector and to enable the Indian Bulk Drug Industry to 
reduce the dependency on import of bulk drugs. For this, world class quality 
manufacturing facilities with high level of productivity with innovative capabilities 
are required. However, these are on one hand very capital intensive and cannot be 
established and opened by bulk drug manufacturing units on their own due to 
financial constraints. The committee also note that the department proposes in the 
first instance to start a scheme for financing Common Facility Ce ntres (CFCS) at 3 
Bulk Drug/API parks in the country at a total cost of rs. 450 crores. Some of the 
indicative activities under this common facilities are effluent treatment plants, 
captive power plant, steam and cooling and water systems, incubation facil ities, 
common logistic facilities, advance common testing centre, regulatory awareness 
facility centre.  
 The committee are of the view that industry’s dependence on imports for bulk drugs 
is not good for the country. The committee, feel that the new scheme will help the 
pharma industry to concentrate on the core issue of manufacturing of bulk drugs as 
the common facilities will be available in the pharma bulk drug parks.  The 
committee, therefore, recommend that the scheme for financing Common Facilit y 
Centres (cfcs) at 3 Bulk Drugs/API parks may be started immediately and completed 
in a fixed time frame as in -principle approval of the department of expenditure has 
been received for implementing the scheme. 
 The committee also recommend that the depart ment may explore to start the Bulk 
Drug parks in the campus of Pharma PSUs where the benefit of infrastructure and 
expertise of the Pharma  PSUs can be harnessed and the resources available this can 
be utilised to the maximum in order to make Indian Bulk D rug Industry a global 
leader in bulk drug production.  The committee would like to be informed of the 
action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
6. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:-  
 “with reference to para 2 of the recommendations, it may be noted that before the 
scheme for financing common facilities at 3 bulk dr ug parks could be appraised and 
approved for implementation, ministry of finance’s new instructions were received 
on 5.8.2016. As per the new instructions, a new scheme for development of pharma 
industry consisting of the following two existing schemes nam ely (i) cluster 
development programme for pharma sector (cdp -ps) and  (ii) pharmaceutical 
promotion development scheme and the following three new schemes namely (i) 
assistance to bulk drug industry for common facilitation centre (ii) assistance to 
medical device industry for common facilitation centre and (iii) pharmaceutical 
technology upgradation assistance scheme (PTUAS)were sent to d/o expenditure for 
in-principle approval.  Department of expenditure have suggested certain changes 
vide their om dated 5 .4.2017.   Action for evaluation of two existing schemes and in 
principle approval for new schemes is being taken accordingly.  
 With reference to suggestion for starting bulk drug park in the campus of pharma 
psus, it may be noted that the government has decided on 28.12.2016 to sell the  
surplus land of Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals limited (IDPL), Hindustan 
Antibiotics Ltd (HAL), and Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) to 
government agencies as would be required to clear their outstandi ng liabilities, 

P a g e  | 3 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
implement Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS)/ Voluntary Separation Scheme (VSS) 
to pave way for their closure, manage the remaining land in accordance with the 
guidelines of department of investment pubic assets management (DIPAM) and if 
need be, vest it in a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV). The government has decided that 
after liabilities have been met, balance sheet cleansed and VRS/VSS effected, IDPL 
and RDPL be closed and HAL &BCPL sold strategically. After this decision, the 
department ca nnot proceed with setting up of bulk drug parks in the campus of 
pharma PSUs.  
Comments of the Committee 
7. The Committee noted that the Department proposes to start a scheme for 
Financing  Common Facility Centres (CFCs) at 3 Bulk Drug/API Parks in the 
country and the scheme may be started immediately and completed in a fixed 
time frame as in -principle approval of the Department has been received for 
implementation of the scheme.   In their Action Taken Reply the Department 
has stated that Department of Expenditure have suggested certain changes vide 
their OM dated 5.4.2017.  Action for evaluation of the existing schemes and in -
principle  approval for new schemes is being taken accordingly.   The 
Committee therefore recommend that evaluation of two existing schemes and 
in-principle approval for new sc hemes may be taken at the earliest in a time 
bound manner.   The Committee are of the view that in the absence of any 
existing schemes viz Cluster Development Scheme for Pharma Sector and 
Pharmaceutical promotion Development Scheme, the growth of 
Pharmaceutical Industry is hampering.   It is therefore expedient that these  
two schemes may be evaluated and implemented along with  the three new 
schemes without any delay. 
  The Committee, reiterate their early recommendation that the imports may be 
resorted by companies when the same is absolutely necessary for the Industry 
and the Pharmaceutical companies may be encouraged to produce Bulk Drugs 
in the country in order to make available  cheap and quality drugs to the 
consumers in India.   
 The Committee are pa ined to note that IDPL and RDPL will be closed and HAL 
and BCPL would be  sold strategically and as such the Department cannot 
proceed with setting of Bulk Drugs Park in the campus of Pharma PSUs.   The 
Committee, therefore  recommend  that the Government should revisit their 
plan for closure  of IDPL and RDPL.   The  Committee would like to be apprised 
in this regard at the earliest. 
B. Need for allocation of funds as per the Demands and requirements of  the 
Department.  
Recommendation Sl. No.2 
8. While ex pressing  the view that the severe cut in outlays schemes would have an 
adverse impact on the implementation of projects and schemes of the Department, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that for the Annual Plan 2017 -18, the Depa rtment of 
Pharmaceuticals proposed an outlay of Rs.1373.35 crore but only Rs.195.71 crore 
was approved by the Ministry of Finance for BE 2017 -18. Hence there is very meagre 
allocation to NIPERs.  NIPERs have been allocated an amount of Rs.100 crore only 
against the proposed amount of Rs.1171.36 crore.  

P a g e  | 4 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
 The Committee are of the view thatthemeagre allocation of funds to NIPERs will 
hamper the construction activities of NIPER Guwahati and NIPER Ahmedabad and it 
will also affect the operationalization of new NIPERS. Besides this allocations for 
NPPA and assistance to PSUs is also less.  The Committee, feel that severe cut in 
outlay schemes would have an adverse impact on the implementation of projects and 
scheme. The Committee are dismayed to note that approve d allocation falls far short 
of the urgent fund requirements projected by the Department for carrying out its laid 
down mandate and its vision for development of Indian Pharmaceutical Industry.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department shoul d take up the issue 
of fund allocation with the Ministry of Finance and impress upon them to allocate 
funds as per the Demands and requirements of the Department of Pharmaceuticals so 
that the project like NIPER are completed timely. The Committee, would l ike to be 
informed of the action taken in this regard”. 
Reply of the Government 
9. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 “NIPER Division sought fund of Rs. 1171 crore (approx.) for the scheme for the BE 
2017-18 and Rs. 67.56 crore fund for BE 2017 -18 for Salary and Grant in Aid to 
NIPER Mohali.  However, the Ministry of Finance has allocated only Rs. 127.73 crore.  
The meagre  allocation made by Ministry of Finance will affect the construction 
activity of NIPER, Guwahati and NIPER Ahmedabadas well as the operationalization 
of new NIPERs.  Ministry of Finance has requested NITI Ayog to carry out an 
evaluation of functioning of N IPERs.  Based on evaluation report, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals would take up the matter with Ministry of Finance for allocation of 
additional funds for construction activities etc., by way of EFC proposal in respect of 
NIPERs Guwahati, Ahmedabad and Madurai.  
Comments of the Committee 
10. The Committee note that only an amount of Rs.127.73 crore has been 
sanctioned against the proposed amount of Rs.1171.36 crore to  NIPER.   The 
Department in their Action Taken Reply have stated that meagre allocation 
made by the Ministry of Finance will affect the construction activities of NIPER 
Guwahati, Ahmedabad as well as the operationalization of new NIPERs.   
Ministry of Finance has requested NITI  Aayog to carry out an evaluation of  
functioning of NIPERs. Based on evaluation report Department of 
Pharmaceuticals would take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance. 
 While noting the above points, the Committee express their displeasure over 
the facts that till now neither the construction activities of NIPER Guwa hati and 
Ahmedabad have been completed nor the operationalization of NEW  NIPERs 
taken place for want of adequate funds.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Finance to get adequate alloca tion after the evaluation of study done by Niti 
Ayog.  In this regard it is also expedient that Niti Ayog complete their study at 
the earliest so that  the establishment of all NIPERs in their own campus  may 
take place in a time bound manner and they coul d achieve their avowed 
objectives to establish its links with  Pharmaceutical Industry, nurture and 
promote quality and excellence in Pharmaceutical Education and Research.   
The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the 
Department in this regard.  
  

P a g e  | 5 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
C Need to Allocate funds commensurate to the outlays proposed by the 
Department. 
Recommendation Sl. No.3 
11. While expressing that the Department should take up the matter for sanction of 
additional funds with the Ministry of Finance and impress upon them to allocate adequate 
funds as per the demand of the Department for implementation of various important 
projects, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that RE 2016 -17 was Rs.211.40 crore and BE 2017 -18 is 
Rs.247.74 crore.  The Committee also observe that Rs.74.62 crore has been allocated 
for Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) and the same will be 
used in the effective implementation of PMBJP and opening of more Pradhan Mantri 
Bhartiya Janaushadhi Kendra (PMBJK) across the country. The Committee also note 
that The Department has prepared an umbrella Scheme for Development of Pharma 
Industry wherein schemes like Schemes for Assistance to Bulk Drugs Industry for 
Common Facilitation Centre, Assist ance to Medical Device for Common Facilitation 
Centre, Cluster Development are proposed to be taken up for promoting the growth 
of Pharma & Medical device industry. Besides, the Pharmaceuticals Technology Up 
gradation Assistance Scheme(PTUAS) and Pharmaceu ticals Promotion Development 
Scheme (PPDS) are also proposed to be continued to facilitate growth of the industry. 
The proposal is presently under consideration with Ministry of Finance and after its 
appraisal and approval, the Department will seek additional funds. 
 The Committee, therefore, desires the Department to strongly take up the matter 
with the Ministry of Finance and to impress upon them for sanction of additional 
funds for the projects as these projects will help the Pharma Industries to achieve  the 
goal of ‘Make In India’ and will also lead to reduction in imports and increase in 
Exports of the Pharma products and generate more employment and foreign 
exchange and also help the pharma sector to play a leading role in the global market”. 
Reply of the Government 
12. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 “In BE 2017-18, Department of Pharmaceuticals proposed Rs. 75.00 crore for PMBJP 
while Rs. 74.62 crore has been all ocated for the scheme.  The allocated funds of Rs. 
74.62 crore will be used by Bureau of Pharma PSUs of India (BPPI), the implementing 
agency of PMBJP, in the smooth functioning of BPPI and its scheme PMBJP.  Opening 
of more PMBJKs in the country would be attempted as project by BPPI.  
 Further, the Department had prepared an umbrella scheme for Development of 
Pharma Industry under which five sub schemes viz., Schemes for Assistance to Bulk 
Drugs Industry for Common Facilitation Centre, Assistance to Medica l Device for 
Common Facilitation Centre, Schemes for Cluster Development, Pharmaceuticals 
Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS) and Pharmaceutical Promotion 
Development Scheme (PPDS) for which Department of Expenditure were requested 
for giving their In- Principle approval to the proposal.  The reply from Department of 
Expenditure has been received on 5.4.2017 .Their  suggestions in terms of MoF OM 
No. 24(35)/PF-II/2012 dated 5.8.2016, EFC proposal for the umbrella scheme would 
be circulated to concerned Ministries would be circulated shortly”. 
  

P a g e  | 6 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
Comments of the Committee 
13. The Committee observed that  the Department has prepared an Umbrella 
Scheme for the Development of Pharma Industry and the proposal is under 
consideration with Ministry of Finance and after its apprisal and approval the 
Department will seek additional funds.   
 In their Action Taken Reply the Department stated that Rs.74.62 crore has been 
allocated to PMBJP which would be utilised by Bureau of Pharma PSUs in India 
(BPPI)  the implementing agency of PMBJP,  in the smooth functioning of BPPI 
and its scheme PMBJP. Further, the Department of Expenditure were requested 
for giving in -principle approval to the five sub -schemes viz (i) Schemes for 
Assistance to Bulk Drugs Industry for Common Facilitation Centre (ii)  
Assistance to Medical Device for Common Facilitati on Centre, (iii) Schemes for 
Cluster Development (iv) Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Assistance 
Scheme (PTUAS) and (v) Pharmaceutical Promotion Development Scheme 
(PPDS)  and the reply in this regard has been received from Department of 
Expenditure on 5.4.2017. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department  of Pharmaceuticals should spell out  its action plan the action 
proposed to be taken in respect of all the five schemes and remove bottlenecks , 
if any in order to implement all its five  sub-schemes.  The Committee, would 
like to be apprised of the action plan formulated by the Department for 
implementing the five schemes. 
D Need for Promotion of Medical Devices Industry. 
Recommendation Sl. No.4 
14. While expressing  concern for  Development of  Indigenous Medical Devices Industry     
the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that Medical device industry is a multi -product industry, 
producing wide range of products. India is growin g as a key market for Medical 
Devices and Diagnostics. Indian Medical Device industry depends on imports up to an 
extent of almost 70%. Most hi -tech innovative products and technology originate 
from a well-developed eco-system and innovation cycle which ne eds to be developed 
in India to promote indigenous industry and to reduce our dependence on imports. 
The Committee also note that the Department has a proposal for Scheme for 
Development of Common Facilitation Centres under the Umbrella Scheme for 
Development of Pharmaceuticals Industry. This sub -scheme proposes for Financing 
Common Facility Centres (CFCs) at Medical Device Parks in the country at a total cost 
of Rs.250 crores. 
 The Committee, are of the view that Developing Indigenous Medical Device Indust ry 
is of paramount importance and fits in realizing the ‘Make in India’ goal of the 
Government and it will also reduce the dependence on import of medical devices. For 
this world class quality manufacturing facilities with high level of productivity with 
innovative capabilities cannot be established and opened by medical devices 
manufacturing units on their own due to financial constraints. The Committee been 
informed that Government of India does not establish pharma parks but is only 
providing common facilities at Medical Device Parks thus it is imperative that it may 
be impressed upon State Governments/ Union Territories to set up Pharma Parks in 
their States/Union Territories so that the money allocated under the scheme of 
Common Facilities is optimally utilised.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the proposal of development of common facility centres at medical device park in the 
country may be planned and initiated and the matter of early allocation of funds for 
implementation of this important s cheme may please be taken up with the Ministry 

P a g e  | 7 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
of Finance at the earliest.  The Committee, would like to be informed of the action 
taken by the Department in this regard”. 
Reply of the Government 
15. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Co mmittee, the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 “To promote Medical Device Sector, a sub -scheme namely “Assistance to Medical 
Device Industry for Common Facility Centers” has been proposed under umbrella 
scheme for “Development of Pharmac euticals Industry”. In Principle approval of 
Department of Expenditure  has been sought for the umbrella scheme, which is still 
awaited”. 
Comments of the Committee 
16. The Committee noted that Medical Device Industry in India is growing as a key 
market for  medical devices and diagnostics  and the Industry depends on 
imports upto an extent of 70 per cent.   The Committee, feel that need of the 
hour is Developing Indigenous Medical Devices Industry as it fits in realising 
the objectives of ‘Make in India’ goal of the Government. 
 In their Action Taken Reply the Department has stated that to promote Medical 
Device Industry a sub -scheme namely ‘Assistance to  Medical Device Industry 
for Common Facility Centres’  has been proposed under  ‘Umbrella Scheme for 
Development of Pharmaceutical Industry and in -principle approval of 
Department  of Expenditure is still awaited. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should  impress 
upon the Department of Expenditure to give in -principle approval to the 
scheme of  Medical Device Industry on priority basis as it  is not only vital for 
meeting the needs of the huge  requirement of medical devices in the country  
but it will also save much needed foreign exchequer by way of reduction in 
imports of these device s.   The Committee would like  to be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard. 
E Need for Revival of Pharma Public Sector Undertakings 
Recommendation Sl. No.5 
17. While observing that the main objective of setting up of Pharma PSUs, not the earn 
profits the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that Regarding disinvestment, closure etc., a Committee under 
Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog after careful scrutiny and analysis of 74 loss making/ 
sick/ non -performing CPSEs, whose operations are of non -strategic nature, advised 
for revival/  sale/ closure/ management contract/ strategic disinvestment, as 
applicable in each case. The Committee also note that Minister of Finance, Minister of 
Road Transport & Highways and Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers comprehensively 
examined the status of  all Pharmaceutical Companies in the public sector and noted 
that a ll PSUs except KAPL are sick or incipient sick. IDPL, BCPL and HAL were 
declared sick and formally referred to BIFR since 1992, 1993 and 1997 respectively. 
The earlier revival/rehabilitatio n packages of IDPL, HAL & BCPL have failed to 
achieve desired results. The production activities in RDPL too have stopped after fire 
in the plant in October, 2016. HAL and RDPL are not in a position to even pay the 
salaries to their employees. All these co mpanies possess substantial land assets. The 
Government has decided on 28.12.2016 to sell that much of surplus land of Indian 

P a g e  | 8 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals 
Limited (RDPL) Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) and B engal Chemicals & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) to Government agencies as would be required to 
clear their outstanding liabilities, implement Voluntary Retirement 
Scheme(VRS)/Voluntary Separation Scheme (VSS) to pave way for their closure, 
manage the rema ining land in accordance with guidelines of Department of 
Investment and Public Assets Management/ Department of Public Enterprises and if 
need be, vest it in a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV). The Government has decided that 
after liabilities have been met,  balance sheet cleansed and VRS/VSS effected, IDPL 
and RDPL be closed & HAL and BCPL sold strategically. 
 The Committee are deeply pained to note that the Government has decided to sell 
surplus land of IDPL, RDPL, HAL and BCPL that after liabilities have b een met, 
balance sheet cleansed and VRS/VSS effected IDPL and RDPL be closed and HAL and 
BCPL be sold strategically.  The Committee, feel that the main objective of setting up 
Pharma PSUs were not to earn profits but to encourage indigenous production of 
bulk drugs and life saving drugs and formulations and to support various health 
programmes of the Government. The Committee observe that Pharma PSUs supply 
generic medicines all over the country. It is also observed that BCPL has made a 
stellar performance during the last two years.  While in the year 2014 -15 its MOU 
Assessment was good and Corporate Governance was fair, it became excellent both in 
respect of MOU Assessment and Corporate Governance during the year 2015 -16. The 
Committee also observe that BCP L is planning to start Anti -Snake Venom Project 
(ASVS) project as the product is not available in the country at the moment in 
required quantity as both Government sector units namely BCPL and Central 
Research Institute (CRI), Kasuali have stopped producti on of ASVS for the last 10 
years. Due to non availability of fund and also due to project cost escalation the 
project could not be commissioned. The Committee feel that the Department is not 
taking the matter seriously inspite of the fact that 2 lakh peopl e are suffering from 
snake bite every year. The Committee, therefore recommend that BCPL may not be 
closed by strategically selling and instead be supported in its special cause especially 
when it is on the path of regaining its old glory. The Committee, f urther observe that 
funds to be allocated to Pharma PSUs had been consistently delayed due to the 
lackadaisical approach of the Department to impress upon the Ministry of Finance of 
the urgent need for funds to complete the projects resulting in untimely c losure of 
IDPL and RDPL plants and strategic sale of BCPL and HAL.  The Committee therefore 
recommend that even if there is any little scope for running the PSUs in PPP mode or 
other mode the Department should consider this and instead of closing the IDPL and 
RDPL and option of strategic sales of BCPL and HAL, all may be fully revived.  The 
Committee, would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard”.  
Reply of the Government 
18. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“It is submitted that during last three years, the total sale of all the five PSUs were 
around Rs. 500 -550 crore out of total turnover of about Rs. 2.00 lakh crore Indian 
Pharma Industry, which is not even 0.5% of total Indian Pharma Industry. 
Total contribution of the PSUs in supply of generic medicines under PMBJP is also 
less than 5%.Pharma CPSUs have not been identified as priority sector by NITI 
Aayog’s Committee on sick/ loss making/ non-performing  PSUs. 

P a g e  | 9 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
 The Pharma PSUs except KAPL, are incurring huge losses continuously for the past 
several years. Net Worth of the PSUs is in negative. As such the Government has 
decided to close IDPL and RDPL and strategically sell BCPL and HAL. 
As regards reviv al of BCPL, it is submitted that although during recent year has 
achieved net profit but its net worth is in negative only. The Cabinet has decided not 
to close the company but put on strategic sale. Thus, the company will remain 
operational, only its management would be changed. Anti SnakeVenum Serum, can be 
manufactured by the company but from its own funds. Department had sought Rs. 
28.10 crore under Budget Estimates (BE) for 2017 -18. However, Ministry of Finance 
has not allocated any amount for the project”. 
 Comments of the Committee  
19. The Committee were deeply pained to note that the Government has decided to 
sell surplus land of IDPL, RDPL, HAL  and BCPL  and  after liabilities have been 
met, balance sheet cleansed and VRS/VSS effected, IDPL and RDPL shall be 
closed and HAL and BCPL sh all be sold strategically.    The Committee had 
recommended that BCPL may not be closed by strategically selling and instead 
be supported in its special causes especially when it is on the path of regaining 
its old glory.   The Committee, therefore recomme nded that even if there is  any 
little scope for running the PSUs in PPP mode or other mode the Department 
should consider this and instead of closing the IDPL and RDPL and option of 
strategic sales of BCPL  and HAL.  
  In their Action Taken replies  the C ommittee find that Government is adamant 
to close IDPL and RDPL and strategically sell BCPL and HAL  and the company 
will remain operational, only its management would be changed. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the  Department should try to sell  
IDPL and RDPL  by strategic sales as it will make the company operational  and 
be a morale booster to the employees of these companies and try to revive 
BCPL  and  HAL. The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken 
by the Government in this regard.  
F PRADHAN MANTRI BHARTIYA JANAUSHADI PARIYOJANA 
Recommendation Sl. No.6 
20. While expressing the need for quick implementation of the Scheme,  the Committee 
had recommended as under:- 
 “The committee note that for effective implementation of Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya 
Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) key areas of significance were identified and major 
changes in PMBJP were made by waiving application fee.  An amount of Rs. 2.5 lakhs 
shall be extended to NGOs/agencies/individuals for establishing PM BJK in 
government premises like hospitals/ medical colleges/Railways/Sate Transport/ Co -
operation/ Municipalities/ Post offices etc. where space is provided free of cost by 
Government to operating agency. Trade margins have been revised from 16% to 20% 
for Retailers and from 8% to 10% for Distributors. 
 The Committee also note that 802 JAS have been opened till 22.2.2017.  The 
Committee also note that attainment of target of opening 3000 JAS appears to be 
difficult as on date and that the success of this in itiative largely dependents on other 
agencies such as Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, different State Governments, 
active co -operation of Hon. Members of Parliament, Hon. Members of different 

P a g e  | 10 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
Legislative Assemblies, IMA, Hospitals run by Private Group s and Charitable 
Institutions, NGOs, Practicing Doctors, etc. State Governments are having their own 
schemes like free distribution of medicines. Non-prescription of Generic Medicines by 
the doctors is another critical factor. 
 The Committee are perturbed to note that inspite of Committee’s repeated 
recommendations for quick implementation of the scheme initiated in 2008, the 
scheme has not been fully implemented throughout the country. In view of this 
Committee once again recommend that the Department shou ld take up the issue on 
war footing level to overcome the hurdles by involving other agencies such as 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, different State Governments, IMA, Hospitals run 
by Private Groups and Charitable Institutions, NGOs, Practicing Docto rs, etc. for 
compulsory prescription of generic medicines by doctors and also keeping the supply 
chain in preparedness so that the requirements are met fully without any delay and 
also to overcome the requirement of Pharmacists to man the PMBJK and try to 
achieve the targets of opening 3000 number of PMBJK within the specified time.  The 
Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard”. 
Reply of the Government 
21. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the De partment 
of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 “For effective implementation of ‘Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana’ 
(PMBJP) and opening of more ‘Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Kendras’ 
(PMBJKs) across the country, following actions have been taken by the Government: 
(i)  Application fee for opening of PMBJKs was waived off so that more people 
can apply under the scheme. 
(ii)  In order to expedite the opening of more PMBJKs by March 2017, BPPI had 
released advertisements in various newspapers in the country during 
December 2016 and applications have been invited from private 
individuals. The response has been overwhelmingly encouraging and as on 
10.04.2017, 28486 applications have been received out of which in -
principle approval has been given in 24770 applications.  
(iii)  As on 10.04.2017, 1136 PMBJKs have been opened in the different parts of 
the country. Out of 1136 PMBJKs in the country, 286 PMBJKs have been 
opened by the Central/State Government or by 
Pharmacists/NGOs/Agencies/Charitable Organis ations in Government 
building premises.  
(iv)  On increasing trade margins of Retailers and Distributors, people have 
shown the interest from across the country for doing the business under 
the scheme. As a result of which 1136 PMBJKs have been opened in the 
country and 44 Distributors have been appointed while 6 more 
distributors have been considered to be appointed. Besides this, 8 Carrying 
& Forwarding (C&F) agents have been appointed while 6 more C&F agents 
have been considered to be appointed.  
(v)  In order to encourage doctors to prescribe generic medicines, the Medical 
Council of India has amended the Indian Medical Council (Professional 
Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002 on 08.10.2016 to provide 
a new para 1.5 regarding use of generic names of drugs which provides as 
under: 
  “Every physician should prescribe drugs with generic names legibly and 
preferably in capital letters and he/she shall ensure that there is a rational 
prescription and use of drugs.” 

P a g e  | 11 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
(vi) Rule 65 of Drugs & Cosmetics Rule, 1945 does not permit Pharmacist to 
substitute the brand prescribed by the Doctor by a generic drug. In order 
to allow Pharmacists to substitute generic drugs against the branded drugs 
in doctor prescriptions, Secretary (Pharma) wrote to Secretary (H&FW) 
vide D. O. No. 31026/87/2015 -PI-II dated 08.06.2016 for making 
appropriate amendments in Rule 65 of D&C Rules, 1945. Department is 
periodically pursuing the matter with Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. 
(vii) For directing the Doctors working in the Government hospit als for 
mandatory prescription in generic names of the drugs, Secretary (Pharma) 
has written to Secretary (H&FW)”. 
Comments of the Committee 
22. The Committee were perturbed to note that  inspite of  Committee’s repeated 
recommendations for quick implement ation of the Jan Aushadhi scheme 
initiated in 2008, the scheme had not been   fully implemented throughout the 
country.   The Committee had therefore recommended that the Department 
should  take up the issue on  war footing level by involving other agencies .   The 
Department in their Action Taken Reply  stated that as on 10.4.2017  1130 
PMBJK have been opened in different parts of the country and 44 distributors 
have been appointed.   To encourage doctors to prescribe generic medicines 
Medical Council of Ind ia has amended Indian Medical Council Regulations 
2002. While appreciating the various efforts made by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals the Committee hope that  the all out efforts shall be made  to 
make Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMB JP)  successful.   
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
G National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority. 
Recommendation Sl. No. 7 
23. While expressing that  the Department should strongly take up  the issue of One Time 
Settlement of the recovery of overcharged amount,  the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
“The Committee note that National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA), an 
independent body of experts in the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers was formed 
by the Govt. of India vide Resolution published in the Gazette of India No. 159 dated 
29.08.97. The functions of NPPA, inter -alia include fixation and revision of prices of 
scheduled formulations under the Drugs (Prices Control) Order (DPCO), as well as 
monitoring and enforcement of prices. NPPA also provides inputs to Government on 
pharmaceutical policy and issues related to affordability, availability and accessibility 
of medicines. 
 The Committee also note that NPPA has initiated about 1493 cases of overcharging as 
on 31 st December, 2016 (1285 cases under DPCO 1995 and 208 cases under DPCO 
2013), where demand notices have been issued to pharmaceuticals companies. The 
demanded amount works out to Rs. 5037.64 crore (Rs.4956.48 crore under DPCO 
1995 and Rs.81.16 crore under DPCO 2013) for sale of medicine at prices higher than 
that fixed by NPPA /Government. However only an amount of Rs. 640.16 crore (Rs 
536.81 crore under DPCO 1995 and Rs.103.35 crore under DPCO 2013) has been 
recovered on 31 st December, 2016 from pharmaceutical companies. This includes an 
amount of Rs. 215 crore deposited by pharmaceutical companies in response to the 
verdict of the Supreme Court delivered on 20 th July, 2016. Out of the balance 
outstanding amount of Rs. 4359.93 crore, Rs. 3460 .32 crore is still locked up in 
litigation. The Committee, feel that time and money are wasted in legal disputes and 

P a g e  | 12 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
every year the outstanding amount locked in litigation increases causing great loss to 
the exchequer, The Committee feel that had the One T ime Settlement proposal been 
approved, by the Ministry of Finance  almost all the outstanding amount would have 
been recovered and there would have been no litigation charges also. The Committee, 
therefore recommend that the Department should strongly take up the issue with the 
Ministry of Finance about the advantages of One Time Settlement as it will not only 
help in the early settlement of the outstanding amount but also save the expenditure 
incurred on the litigation.  The Committee desire to be apprised  of the detailed action 
taken in this regards”.  
Reply of the Government 
24. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 “The proposal for having a Scheme for One Time Settlement  for overcharging cases of 
DPCO- 1979 DPCO -1987 and DPCO -1995 is being suggested for inclusion in the 
proposed National Pharmaceuticals Policy, 2017 being contemplated by the 
Department”. 
Comments of the Committee 
25. The Committee noted that NPPA had initiated about 1493 cases of overcharging 
as on 31 st  December 2016 for sale of medicines at higher prices that that fixed 
by NPPA/Government.   The Committee felt that  a lot of time and money were 
wasted in legal dispute and every year the outstanding a mount locked in  
litigation increases causing great loss to the exchequer.   The Committee felt 
that had the One Time Settlement Proposal been approved by the  Ministry of 
Finance, almost all the outstanding amount would have been recovered and 
there would  be no litigation charges pending.  The Department in its action 
taken replies  has stated that the proposal for having a scheme for One Time 
Settlement for recovery of overcharging cases of DPCO 1979, DPCO 1987 and 
DPCO 1995 is being suggested for inclusi on in the proposed National 
Pharmaceuticals Policy, 2017 and being  contemplated by the Department. 
 While appreciating the initiative taken by the Department to include One -Time 
Settlement Scheme for  Overcharging cases in the proposed National 
Pharmaceutical Policy, 2017, the Committee hope that the National 
Pharmaceutical Policy, 2017 should be finalised in this calendar year at the 
earliest which would solve the long pending issues of litigation of overcharging 
at the earliest and thus augment the reven ue of the Department.  The 
Committee would like to  be apprised in this regard at the earliest.   
 
  

P a g e  | 13 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation Sl. No.6 
 The committee note that for effective implementation of Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya 
Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) key areas of significance were identified and major changes 
in PMBJP were made by waiving application fee.  An amount of Rs. 2.5 lakhs shall be 
extended to NGOs/agencies/individuals for establishing PMBJK in government premises like 
hospitals/ medical colleges/Railways/Sate Transport/ Co -operation/ Municipalities/ Post 
offices etc. where space is provided free of cost by Government to operating agency. Trade 
margins have been revised f rom 16% to 20% for Retailers and from 8% to 10% for 
Distributors. 
 The Committee also note that 802 JAS have been opened till 22.2.2017.  The 
Committee also note that attainment of target of opening 3000 JAS appears to be difficult as 
on date and that the success of this initiative largely dependents on other agencies such as 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, different State Governments, active co -operation of 
Hon. Members of Parliament, Hon. Members of different Legislative Assemblies, IMA, 
Hospitals ru n by Private Groups and Charitable Institutions, NGOs, Practicing Doctors, etc. 
State Governments are having their own schemes like free distribution of medicines. Non -
prescription of Generic Medicines by the doctors is another critical factor. 
  The Commi ttee are perturbed to note that inspite of Committee’s repeated 
recommendations for quick implementation of the scheme initiated in 2008, the scheme 
has not been fully implemented throughout the country. In view of this Committee once 
again recommend that the Department should take up the issue on war footing level to 
overcome the hurdles by involving other agencies such as Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare, different State Governments, IMA, Hospitals run by Private Groups and Charitable 
Institutions, NGO s, Practicing Doctors, etc. for compulsory prescription of generic 
medicines by doctors and also keeping the supply chain in preparedness so that the 
requirements are met fully without any delay and also to overcome the requirement of 
Pharmacists to man th e PMBJK and try to achieve the targets of opening 3000 number of 
PMBJK within the specified time.  The Committee would like to be informed of the action 
taken in this regard”. 
Reply of the Government 
 For effective implementation of ‘Pradhan Mantri Bhartiy a Janaushadhi 
Pariyojana’(PMBJP) and opening of more ‘Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Kendras’ 
(PMBJKs) across the country, following actions have been taken by the Government: 
(i) Application fee for opening of PMBJKs was waived off so that more people ca n 
apply under the scheme. 
(ii) In order to expedite the opening of more PMBJKs by March 2017, BPPI had 
released advertisements in various newspapers in the country during December 
2016 and applications have been invited from private individuals. The response 
has been overwhelmingly encouraging and as on 10.04.2017, 28486 applications 
have been received out of which in -principle approval has been given in 24770 
applications.  
(iii) As on 10.04.2017, 1136 PMBJKs have been opened in the different parts of the 
country. Ou t of 1136 PMBJKs in the country, 286 PMBJKs have been opened by 

P a g e  | 14 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
the Central/State Government or by Pharmacists/NGOs/  Agencies/ Charitable 
Organisations in Government building premises.  
(iv) On increasing trade margins of Retailers and Distributors, people have  shown the 
interest from across the country for doing the business under the scheme. As a 
result of which 1136 PMBJKs have been opened in the country and 44 
Distributors have been appointed while 6 more distributors have been 
considered to be appointed. Be sides this, 8 Carrying & Forwarding (C&F) agents 
have been appointed while 6 more C&F agents have been considered to be 
appointed.  
(v) In order to encourage doctors to prescribe generic medicines, the Medical Council 
of India has amended the Indian Medical Co uncil (Professional Conduct, Etiquette 
and Ethics) Regulations, 2002 on 08.10.2016 to provide a new para 1.5 regarding 
use of generic names of drugs which provides as under:  Every physician should 
prescribe drugs with generic names legibly and preferably in capital letters and 
he/she shall ensure that there is a rational prescription and use of drugs. 
(vi) Rule 65 of Drugs & Cosmetics Rule, 1945 does not permit Pharmacist to 
substitute the brand prescribed by the Doctor by a generic drug. In order to allow 
Pharmacists to substitute generic drugs against the branded drugs in doctor 
prescriptions, Secretary (Pharma) wrote to Secretary (H&FW) vide D.O. 
No.31026/87/2015-PI-II dated 08.06.2016 for making appropriate amendments 
in Rule 65 of D&C Rules, 1945. Departmen t is periodically pursuing the matter 
with Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. 
(vii) For directing the Doctors working in the Government hospitals for mandatory 
prescription in generic names of the drugs, Secretary (Pharma) has written to 
Secretary (H&FW). 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.22 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation Sl. No. 7 
 The Committee note that National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA), an 
independent body of experts in the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers was formed by the 
Govt. of India vide Resolution published in the Gazette of India No. 159 dated 29.08.97. The 
functions of NPPA, inter -alia include fixation and revision of prices of scheduled 
formulations under the Drugs (Prices Control) Order (DPCO), as wel l as monitoring and 
enforcement of prices. NPPA also provides inputs to Government on pharmaceutical policy 
and issues related to affordability, availability and accessibility of medicines. 
 The Committee also note that NPPA has initiated about 1493 cases of overcharging as 
on 31 st December, 2016 (1285 cases under DPCO 1995 and 208 cases under DPCO 2013), 
where demand notices have been issued to pharmaceuticals companies. The demanded 
amount works out to Rs. 5037.64 crore (Rs.4956.48 crore under DPCO 1995 a nd Rs.81.16 
crore under DPCO 2013) for sale of medicine at prices higher than that fixed by NPPA 
/Government. However only an amount of Rs. 640.16 crore (Rs 536.81 crore under DPCO 
1995 and Rs.103.35 crore under DPCO 2013) has been recovered on 31 st December, 2016 
from pharmaceutical companies. This includes an amount of Rs. 215 crore deposited by 
pharmaceutical companies in response to the verdict of the Supreme Court delivered on 
20th July, 2016. Out of the balance outstanding amount of Rs. 4359.93 crore,  Rs. 3460.32 
crore is still locked up in litigation. The Committee, feel that time and money are wasted in 
legal disputes and every year the outstanding amount locked in litigation increases causing 
great loss to the exchequer, The Committee feel that had the One Time Settlement proposal 
been approved, by the Ministry of Finance  almost all the outstanding amount would have 
been recovered and there would have been no litigation charges also. The Committee, 

P a g e  | 15 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
therefore recommend that the Department should stro ngly take up the issue with the 
Ministry of Finance about the advantages of One Time Settlement as it will not only help in 
the early settlement of the outstanding amount but also save the expenditure incurred on 
the litigation.  The Committee desire to be  apprised of the detailed action taken in this 
regards.  
Reply of the Government 
 The proposal for having a Scheme for One Time Settlement for overcharging cases of 
DPCO- 1979 DPCO -1987 and DPCO -1995 is being suggested for inclusion in the proposed 
National Pharmaceuticals Policy, 2017 being contemplated by the Department. 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.25 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

P a g e  | 16 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

P a g e  | 17 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
Recommendation Sl. No.5 
 The Committee note that Regarding disinvestment, closure etc., a Committee under 
Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog after careful scrutiny and analysis of 74 loss making/ sick/ non -
performing CPSEs, whose operations are of non -strategic nature, advised for revival/  sale/ 
closure/ management contract/ strategic disinvestment, as applicable in each case. The 
Committee also note that Minister of Finance, Minister of Road Transport & Highways and 
Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers comprehensively examined the status of  all 
Pharmaceutical Companies in the public sector and noted that all PSUs except KAPL are sick 
or incipient sick. IDPL, BCPL and HAL were declared sick and formally referred to BIFR since 
1992, 1993 and 1997 respectively. The earlier revival/rehabilitatio n packages of IDPL, HAL 
& BCPL have failed to achieve desired results. The production activities in RDPL too have 
stopped after fire in the plant in October, 2016. HAL and RDPL are not in a position to even 
pay the salaries to their employees. All these co mpanies possess substantial land assets. The 
Government has decided on 28.12.2016 to sell that much of surplus land of Indian Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL) 
Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) and B engal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals Limited 
(BCPL) to Government agencies as would be required to clear their outstanding liabilities, 
implement Voluntary Retirement Scheme(VRS)/Voluntary Separation Scheme (VSS) to pave 
way for their closure, manage the rema ining land in accordance with guidelines of 
Department of Investment and Public Assets Management/ Department of Public 
Enterprises and if need be, vest it in a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV). The Government has 
decided that after liabilities have been met,  balance sheet cleansed and VRS/VSS effected, 
IDPL and RDPL be closed & HAL and BCPL sold strategically. 
 The Committee are deeply pained to note that the Government has decided to sell 
surplus land of IDPL, RDPL, HAL and BCPL that after liabilities have b een met, balance sheet 
cleansed and VRS/VSS effected IDPL and RDPL be closed and HAL and BCPL be sold 
strategically.  The Committee, feel that the main objective of setting up Pharma PSUs were 
not to earn profits but to encourage indigenous production of b ulk drugs and life saving 
drugs and formulations and to support various health programmes of the Government. The 
Committee observe that Pharma PSUs supply generic medicines all over the country. It is 
also observed that BCPL has made a stellar performance during the last two years.  While in 
the year 2014 -15 its MOU Assessment was good and Corporate Governance was fair, it 
became excellent both in respect of MOU Assessment and Corporate Governance during the 
year 2015-16. The Committee also observe that BCP L is planning to start Anti -Snake Venom 
Project (ASVS) project as the product is not available in the country at the moment in 
required quantity as both Government sector units namely BCPL and Central Research 
Institute (CRI), Kasuali have stopped producti on of ASVS for the last 10 years. Due to non 
availability of fund and also due to project cost escalation the project could not be 
commissioned. The Committee feel that the Department is not taking the matter seriously 
inspite of the fact that 2 lakh peopl e are suffering from snake bite every year. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that BCPL may not be closed by strategically selling and 
instead be supported in its special cause especially when it is on the path of regaining its old 
glory. The Committee, f urther observe that funds to be allocated to Pharma PSUs had been 
consistently delayed due to the lackadaisical approach of the Department to impress upon 
the Ministry of Finance of the urgent need for funds to complete the projects resulting in 
untimely c losure of IDPL and RDPL plants and strategic sale of BCPL and HAL.  The 

P a g e  | 18 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
Committee therefore recommend that even if there is any little scope for running the PSUs in 
PPP mode or other mode the Department should consider this and instead of closing the 
IDPL and RDPL and option of strategic sales of BCPL and HAL, all may be fully revived.  The 
Committee, would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard”. 
Reply of the Government 
 It is submitted that during last three years, the total sale of all th e five PSUs were 
around Rs. 500 -550 crore out of total turnover of about Rs. 2.00 lakh crore Indian Pharma 
Industry, which is not even 0.5% of total Indian Pharma Industry. 
 Total contribution of the PSUs in supply of generic medicines under PMBJP is also 
less than 5%.Pharma CPSUs have not been identified as priority sector by NITI Aayog’s 
Committee on sick/ loss making/ non-performing  PSUs. 
 The Pharma PSUs except KAPL, are incurring huge losses continuously for the past 
several years. Net Worth of the PS Us is in negative. As such the Government has decided to 
close IDPL and RDPL and strategically sell BCPL and HAL. 
 As regards revival of BCPL, it is submitted that although during recent year has 
achieved net profit but its net worth is in negative only. T he Cabinet has decided not to close 
the company but put on strategic sale. Thus, the company will remain operational, only its 
management would be changed. Anti SnakeVenum Serum, can be manufactured by the 
company but from its own funds. Department had sou ght Rs. 28.10 crore under Budget 
Estimates (BE) for 2017 -18. However, Ministry of Finance has not allocated any amount for 
the project. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.19  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

P a g e  | 19 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE  STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation Sl. No.1 
 The committee note that the vision of the department of pharmaceutical (dop), 
ministry of chemicals &  fertilizers is to catalyze and encourage quality, productivity and 
innovation in bulk drug sector and to enable the indian bulk drug industry to reduce the 
dependency on import of bulk drugs. For this, world class quality manufacturing facilities 
with high level of productivity with innovative capabilities are required. However, these are 
on one hand very capital intensive and cannot be established and opened by bulk drug 
manufacturing units on their own due to financial constraints. The committee also note that 
the department proposes in the first instance to start a scheme for financing common facility 
centres (cfcs) at 3 bulk drug/api parks in the country at a total cost of rs. 450 crores. Some of 
the indicative activities under this common facilities ar e effluent treatment plants, captive 
power plant, steam and cooling and water systems, incubation facilities, common logistic 
facilities, advance common testing centre, regulatory awareness facility centre.  
 The committee are of the view that industry’s d ependence on imports for bulk drugs 
is not good for the country. The committee, feel that the new scheme will help the pharma 
industry to concentrate on the core issue of manufacturing of bulk drugs as the common 
facilities will be available in the pharma bulk drug parks.  The committee, therefore, 
recommend that the scheme for financing common facility centres (cfcs) at 3 Bulk 
Drugs/API parks may be started immediately and completed in a fixed time frame as in -
principle approval of the department of expenditure has been received for implementing the 
scheme. 
 The committee also recommend that the department may explore to start the bulk 
drug parks in the campus of Pharma PSUs where the benefit of infrastructure and expertise 
of the Pharma  PSUs can be harnessed and the resources available this can be utilised to the 
maximum in order to make indian bulk drug industry a global leader in bulk drug 
production.  The committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government  
 With reference to para 2 of the recommendations, it may be noted that before the 
scheme for financing common facilities at 3 bulk drug parks could be appraised and 
approved for implementation, ministry of finance’s new instructions were received on 
5.8.2016. As per the new instructions, a new scheme for development of pharma industry 
consisting of the following two existing schemes namely (i) cluster development programme 
for pharma sector (cdp-ps) and  (ii) pharmaceutical promotion development scheme and the 
following three new schemes namely (i) assistance to bulk drug industry for common 
facilitation centre (ii) assistance to medical device industry for common facilitation centre 
and (iii) pharmaceutical technology upgradation assistance scheme (PTUA S)were sent to 
d/o expenditure for in -principle approval.  Department of expenditure have suggested 
certain changes vide their om dated 5.4.2017.   Action for evaluation of two existing schemes 
and in principle approval for new schemes is being taken accordingly.  
 With reference to suggestion for starting bulk drug park in the campus of pharma 
psus, it may be noted that the government has decided on 28.12.2016 to sell the  surplus 
land of Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals limited (IDPL), Hindustan Antibioti cs Ltd (HAL), 
and Bengal Chemical and Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) to government agencies as would 

P a g e  | 20 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
be required to clear their outstanding liabilities, implement Voluntary Retirement Scheme 
(VRS)/ Voluntary Separation Scheme (VSS) to pave way for their cl osure, manage the 
remaining land in accordance with the guidelines of department of investment pubic assets 
management (DIPAM) and if need be, vest it in a special purpose vehicle (spv). The 
government has decided that after liabilities have been met, bala nce sheet cleansed and 
vrs/vss effected, IDPL and RDPL be closed and HAL &BCPL sold strategically. After this 
decision, the department cannot proceed with setting up of bulk drug parks in the campus of 
pharma PSUs.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.7  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation Sl. No.2 
 The Committee note that for the Annual Plan 2017 -18, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals proposed an outlay of Rs.1373.35 crore but only Rs.195.71 crore was 
approved by the Ministry of Finance for BE 2017 -18. Hence there is very meagre allocation 
to NIPERs.  NIPERs have been allocated an amount of Rs.100 crore only against the 
proposed amount of Rs.1171.36 crore.  
 The Committee are of the view thatthemeagre allocation of funds to NIPERs will 
hamper the construction activities of NIPER Guwahati and NIPER Ahmedabad and it will 
also affect the operationalization of new NIPERS. Besides this allocations for NPPA and 
assistance to PSUs is also less.  The Committee, feel that severe cut in outlay schem es would 
have an adverse impact on the implementation of projects and scheme. The Committee are 
dismayed to note that approved allocation falls far short of the urgent fund requirements 
projected by the Department for carrying out its laid down mandate and  its vision for 
development of Indian Pharmaceutical Industry.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department should take up the issue of fund allocation with the Ministry of Finance 
and impress upon them to allocate funds as per the Demands and requirements of the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals so that the project like NIPER are completed timely. The 
Committee, would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 NIPER Division sought fund of Rs. 1171 crore (appr ox.) for the scheme for the BE 
2017-18 and Rs. 67.56 crore fund for BE 2017 -18 for Salary and Grant in Aid to NIPER 
Mohali.  However, the Ministry of Finance has allocated only Rs. 127.73 crore.  The meagre 
allocation made by Ministry of Finance will affec t the construction activity of NIPER, 
Guwahati and NIPER Ahmedabadas well as the operationalization of new NIPERs.  Ministry 
of Finance has requested NITI Ayog to carry out an evaluation of functioning of NIPERs.  
Based on evaluation report, Department of Pharmaceuticals would take up the matter with 
Ministry of Finance for allocation of additional funds for construction activities etc., by way 
of EFC proposal in respect of NIPERs Guwahati, Ahmedabad and Madurai.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.10  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation Sl. No.3 
 The Committee note that RE 2016 -17 was Rs.211.40 crore and BE 2017 -18 is 
Rs.247.74 crore.  The Committee also observe that Rs.74.62 crore has been allocated for 
Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadh i Pariyojana (PMBJP) and the same will be used in the 
effective implementation of PMBJP and opening of more Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya 

P a g e  | 21 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
Janaushadhi Kendra (PMBJK) across the country. The Committee also note that The 
Department has prepared an umbrella Scheme f or Development of Pharma Industry 
wherein schemes like Schemes for Assistance to Bulk Drugs Industry for Common 
Facilitation Centre, Assistance to Medical Device for Common Facilitation Centre, Cluster 
Development are proposed to be taken up for promoting the growth of Pharma & Medical 
device industry. Besides, the Pharmaceuticals Technology Up gradation Assistance 
Scheme(PTUAS) and Pharmaceuticals Promotion Development Scheme (PPDS) are also 
proposed to be continued to facilitate growth of the industry. Th e proposal is presently 
under consideration with Ministry of Finance and after its appraisal and approval, the 
Department will seek additional funds. 
 The Committee, therefore, desires the Department to strongly take up the matter 
with the Ministry of Fina nce and to impress upon them for sanction of additional funds for 
the projects as these projects will help the Pharma Industries to achieve the goal of ‘Make In 
India’ and will also lead to reduction in imports and increase in Exports of the Pharma 
products and generate more employment and foreign exchange and also help the pharma 
sector to play a leading role in the global market ”. 
Reply of the Government 
 In BE 2017 -18, Department of Pharmaceuticals proposed Rs. 75.00 crore for PMBJP 
while Rs. 74.62 crore has been allocated for the scheme.  The allocated funds of Rs. 74.62 
crore will be used by Bureau of Pharma PSUs of India (BPPI), the implementing agency of 
PMBJP, in the smooth functioning of BPPI and its scheme PMBJP.  Opening of more PMBJKs 
in the country would be attempted as project by BPPI.  
 Further, the Department had prepared an umbrella scheme for Development of 
Pharma Industry under which five su b schemes viz., Schemes for Assistance to Bulk Drugs 
Industry for Common Facilitation Centre, Assistance to Medical Device for Common 
Facilitation Centre, Schemes for Cluster Development, Pharmaceuticals Technology 
Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS) and  Pharmaceutical Promotion Development 
Scheme (PPDS) for which Department of Expenditure were requested for giving their In - 
Principle approval to the proposal.  The reply from Department of Expenditure has been 
received on 5.4.2017 .Their  suggestions in t erms of MoF OM No. 24(35)/PF -II/2012 dated 
5.8.2016, EFC proposal for the umbrella scheme would be circulated to concerned Ministries 
would be circulated shortly”. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.13  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation Sl. No.4 
 The Committee note that Medical device industry is a multi -product industry, 
producing wide range of products. India is growing as a key market for Medical Devices and 
Diagnostics. Indian Medical Device industry depends on imports up to an extent of almost 
70%. Most hi-tech innovative products and technology originate from a well-developed eco-
system and innovation cycle which needs to be developed in India to promote indigenous 
industry and to reduce our dependence on imports. The Committee also note that the 
Department has a proposal for Scheme for Development of Common Facilitation Centres 
under the Umbrella Scheme for Development of Pharmaceuticals Industry. This sub -scheme 
proposes for Financing Common Facility Centres (CFCs) at  Medical Device Parks in the 
country at a total cost of Rs.250 crores. 
 The Committee, are of the view that Developing Indigenous Medical Device Industry 
is of paramount importance and fits in realizing the ‘Make in India’ goal of the Government 

P a g e  | 22 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
and it wil l also reduce the dependence on import of medical devices. For this world class 
quality manufacturing facilities with high level of productivity with innovative capabilities 
cannot be established and opened by medical devices manufacturing units on their o wn due 
to financial constraints. The Committee been informed that Government of India does not 
establish pharma parks but is only providing common facilities at Medical Device Parks thus 
it is imperative that it may be impressed upon State Governments/ Uni on Territories to set 
up Pharma Parks in their States/Union Territories so that the money allocated under the 
scheme of Common Facilities is optimally utilised.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the proposal of development of common facility centre s at medical device park in the 
country may be planned and initiated and the matter of early allocation of funds for 
implementation of this important scheme may please be taken up with the Ministry of 
Finance at the earliest.  The Committee, would like to be informed of the action taken by the 
Department in this regard”. 
Reply of the Government 
 To promote Medical Device Sector, a sub -scheme namely “Assistance to Medical 
Device Industry for Common Facility Centers” has been proposed under umbrella scheme 
for “Development of Pharmaceuticals Industry”. In Principle approval of Department of 
Expenditure  has been sought for the umbrella scheme, which is still awaited”. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.16  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                        ANANDRAO ADSUL 
09 August,  2017                           Chairperson 
18 Shravana, 1939 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on  
                                    Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

P a g e  | 23 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
Appendix – II 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 09 August, 2017 from 1500 hrs. to 
1540 hrs. in Room No. 139, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Smt. Veena Devi 
5. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
6. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
7. Shri S. Rajendran 
8. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
9. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
            1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
 3. Shri R. C. Sharma     - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee.   
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following Draft Action Taken 
Reports on :- 
(i) Demands for Grants 2017-18'  of Department of Fertilizers; 
(ii) Demands for Grants 2017-18' of Department of Pharmaceuticals; 
(iii) Demands for Grants 2017 -18' of Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals; and 
(iv) Implementation of policy on promotion of city compost of Department of 
Fertilizers.  
4. After some deliberations  the Draft Action T aken Reports were adopted by the 
Committee without any changes. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to make 
consequential changes, if any, arising out of the factual verification of the Action Taken 
Reports by the Department of Fertilizers, Department  of Pharmaceuticals and Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
5. The Committee thereafter decided to hold its next meeting on  
23rd August, 2017.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

P a g e  | 24 
 
Z:\Committee 2015-2016\Front Page DFG 2017-18\37-Front Page 16th (Pharma).Docx 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE THI RTY-SECOND REPORT (SIXTE ENTH LOK SABHA) OF T HE 
STANDING COMMITTEE O N CHEMICALS AND FERT ILIZERS (201 6-17) ON 
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2017-18)’ OF  THE MINISTRY OF CHEM ICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS  (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 7 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 6 and 7 )   
2 
 
Percentage of Total 29% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
NIL 
 
 
0 
 
Percentage of Total    0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:-   
 (Vide Recommendation No.  5 )   
1 
Percentage of Total 14 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos  1,2,3 and 4) 
4 
 
Percentage of Total 57% 
 
 
 