1 
 
G:\Cover Pages.Docx 
 
42 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS (2017-18) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Thirty fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  on the subject 'Revival of Sick PSUs in Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Sector' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
 
 FORTY SECOND REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2017 /AGRAHAYANA, 1939 (SAKA) 
 
  


2 
 
G:\Cover Pages.Docx 
CC&F.No.42 
 
 
FORTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2017-18) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained  
in the Thirty fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  on the subject 'Revival of Sick PSUs in Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
Sector' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21 December 2017 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21 December 2017 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2017 /AGRAHAYANA, 1939 (SAKA) 
  

3 
 
G:\Cover Pages.Docx 
 
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18) 
 
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
Chapter I Report  
 
1-13 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
14-20 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government' s  
replies 
 
21 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee  
22 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
23-24 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2017-18) held on 19.12.2017. 
 
25-26 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty Fifth Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers on the subject "Revival of Sick PSUs in 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals Sector, pertaining to the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
 
27 
  

4 
 
G:\Cover Pages.Docx 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2017-18) 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
7. Dr. Ratna De Nag 
8. Smt. Veena Devi 
9. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
10. Shri Innocent 
11. Prof. A Seetaram Naik # 
12. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
13. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
14. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
15. Shri Rajendran S. 
16. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
17. Dr. Uma Saren 
18. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
19. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
21.  Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad 
25. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
26. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
27. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
28. Shri K. Parasaran 
29.  Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
30.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi                          Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Srivastava                                  Director 
3. Shri U. C. Bharadwaj                                 Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri N. Amarathiagan                                 Committee Officer 
# Prof. A. Seetaram Naik  MP, (LS)  has been nominated as a Member of the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f.  3.11.2017               
vice  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy MP, (LS) who ceased to be a Member of the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 3.11.2017 
 
  

5 
 
G:\Cover Pages.Docx 
(v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 (2017-2018) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on 
their behalf, present this Forty Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken 
by the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Thi rty 
fifth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2017- 18) on the subject 'Revival of Sick PSUs in Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Sector' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
 
 
2. The Thirty fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 
19.05.2017. The Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 19.07.2017 . The Action 
Taken replies of Government to all observations / recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 25. 10.2017. The Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2017- 2018) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
19.12.2017. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty Fifth Report  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Comments of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                    ANANDRAO ADSUL 
19 December, 2017                                                                                   Chairperson 
28 Agrahayana 1939 (Saka)                                               Standing Committee on 
                                                                                                                   Chemicals and Fertilizers 

 
 
1 
 
   REPORT 
CHAPTER  I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  contained 
in the  Thirty-Fifth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject 'Revival of 
Sick PSUs in Chemicals and Petrochemicals Sector.    The Thirty Fifth Report of the 
Committee was presented to Hon'ble Speaker on 19 May, 2017 and subseque ntly 
presented to Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on 19 July, 2017.  In all, the Committee made  
6 (six)  Observations / Recommendations in the Report. 
2  Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish replies to the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty- Fifth Report within three months from the 
date of presentation of the Report.  The Action Taken Replies of the Go vernment in 
respect of all the six (06) Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report 
have been received from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals ) vide their O16017/06/2016- Ch.III dated 24 October, 
2017. These Replies  have been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government :- 
 Sl.Nos. 1, 3, 4 and  6                                          (Total =4 )                         
 These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply :- 
 Sl.No. Nil                                     (Total = Nil) 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which replies of the 
Government   have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
 Sl.No.  2                               (Total = 1 )  
 This may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 
 Sl.No . 5                          (Total =1) This may 
be included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 

 
 
2 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and V of this Report should be furnishe d 
expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations which  still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
 A. Revival Plan Efforts  
 
Recommendation Sl. No.1 
 
5. The Committee in their 35 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had expressed their deep 
concern over dire financial straits and poor functional status of Hindustan Organic 
Chemicals Limited (HOCL) and recommended as under:- 
  
" The Committee while examining HOCL note with a deep concern that this 
company which was once declared a mini ratna company and which made 
regular profits for 31 years up to 1996-97 has tragically come at a 
crossroads where the Government is actually considering its restructuring 
by closing down its nine out of twelve plants at Rasayani.  
The Committee also note that earlier efforts to revive HOCL by the 
Government have failed miserably. The Committee are of strong view that 
these efforts failed due to the fact that revival plan lacked focus and 
expertise. Even the current Draft Cabinet Note (DCN) of April 2016 is not 
supported by the Department of Expenditure and Department of Public 
Enterprise, as the proposal for revival of HOCL in its current form does no t 
appear to have adequate focus on long term commercial 
viability/sustainability and lacks actual business plan to increase revenue, 
control cost or overcome the reasons of failure of revival of earlier 
package. Further, the current revival plan does not include business 
restructuring proposals so as to make the company profitable on a 
sustainable basis. The Committee regret to note that the Department has 
not been able to learn from its past mistakes and has failed to come out 
with a comprehensive proposal for revival of HOCL which could convince 
the Government. As a reason of which, the Government has decided to 
restructure HOCL by closing down the operation of nine plants and 
operating only 3 plants (including the strategically important N2O4 plant) at 

 
 
3 
 
Rasayani and 2 plants at Kochi. The Committee, therefore recommend that 
the Department to devise a revival package with greater diligence which 
pay adequate focus on long term commercial viability and sustainability of 
HOCL. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
6. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department  of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals vide O.M. No.16017/06/2016-Ch.III  dated  24.1 0.2017 
has stated as under:- 
" After HOCL started making losses from 1997-98, several efforts have 
been made by the Government over the years to support and revive  the 
operations of the company, as given below: 
 
(i) HOCL was provided Government of India guarantee for Rs.100 crore in 
2001 for raising resources from the capital market by way of term loans / bonds. 
(ii)  A rehabilitation package for HOCL was approved by the Government on 
09.03.2006 consisting of (a) Fund infusion of  Rs.250 crore in the form of 8% 
redeemable non-cumulative preference shares to be redeemed @ 20% each 
year from the 4th year onwards) to be utilized for repayment of hig h cost overdue 
Bonds, repayment of VRS loan, introduction of fresh VRS etc., and (b) Non-cash 
transaction involving continuation of the Government of India guarantee of Rs.  
100 crore for a full term of ten years (issue date 19.12.2001) an d waiver of penal 
interest and interest up to 31.03.2005. 
 
(iii) The Government on 08.02.2007 also approved an investment of Rs. 20 
crore in HOCL in the form of redeemable, non-cumulative preference shares for 
restarting the caustic soda / chlorine plant at Rasayani.  
 
(iv) As the financial position of HOCL again became precarious in 2012-13, the 
Government on 01.08.2013 approved the revision of the terms and con ditions of 
the rehabilitation package of 2006 comprising of (a) Postponement of the 
redemption of Rs.270 crore preference shares issued to the Government of Ind ia 
(date of allotment 24.01.2008) from the originally approved FY 2 011-12 onwards 
to FY 2015-16 onwards, and (b) Extension of the Government guarantee  of 
Rs.100 crore for a further period of 5 years i.e. up to 28.08.2017 ,  to enable the 
company to tide over its liquidity problems and for smooth running of the 
company.  
 

 
 
4 
 
(v)  Another Government guarantee of Rs.150 crore was provided to HOCL in 
July, 2014 for issue of bonds by the company for meeting its working  capital 
requirement and repayment of liabilities towards raw material suppliers, ban k 
loan, employee dues etc.  
 
(vi) Because of the deteriorating financial condition, HOCL was not in a 
position to pay the annual interest of Rs.24.61 crore on the Rs.100 crore a nd 
Rs.150 crore Govt. guaranteed bonds during 2015-16 and 2016-17 . Financial 
assistance in the form of Non-Plan loan was provided to the company b y the 
Government for meeting the above interest liability. 
 
 Despite the above efforts of the Government, HOCL has been making 
continuous cash losses since 2011-12. As on 31.3.2017, it had accumulated 
losses of Rs.1357.22 crore and negative net worth of (-) Rs.970.12 crore. The 
erstwhile Board for Industrial and Financial Construction (BIFR) had registered 
HOCL as a sick company under the provisions of the Sick Industrial Companies 
Act (SICA), 1985. Due to stoppage of continuous operation caused by no n-
availability of working capital, the company was not in a position to pay the 
interest on Government guaranteed bonds, dues to the raw material suppliers,  
the statutory dues of the employees to the various authorities, etc. Excep t for 
some ad hoc advances paid from time to time, the company has not p aid salary 
regularly to its employees since February, 2015 and does not have working 
capital to run the plants. Because of working capital shortage, most of the plants 
are shut down and the workers / employees sitting idle while the unpaid salary 
bill continues to mount. The N2O4 plant, which is the only plant presently 
operational and supplies N2O4 for ISRO ’s space programme, has to be retained 
to continue its operation because of its strategic importance for ISRO. Hence, it 
is necessary to insulate its operations from HOCL so as not to allow the 
precarious financial position of HOCL to affect future operations of the N2O4 
plant. In view of the above, in addition to others, it is important to restructure the 
operations of the company at the earliest so that the production of N2O4 for 
ISRO continues and at least part of the fund requirements towards meeting  
various liabilities can be generated by the company. Further, there is severe 
competition forthcoming in the sector with a private sector company setting up a  
2 lakh MT per annum capacity Phenol plant which will meet majority of the 2.75 
lakh MT domestic demand in the country. HOCL was unable to compete with 
imports in the absence of anti-dumping duties and struggles to compete  even 
with the levying of anti-dumping duties. Hence, the issue of restructuring of the 
company needed to be considered urgently. 
 

 
 
5 
 
In the above background, the Government/Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 17.05.2017 has approved a restructuring plan fo r 
HOCL. The restructuring plan involves closing down the operations of all the 
non-viable plants at Rasayani unit of HOCL except N2O4 plant which is to be 
transferred to ISRO on ‘as is where is ’ basis, with about 20 acres of land and 
employees associated with the plant. While Kochi unit will continue its 
operations, 'in principle' approval has also been accorded for HOCL to be put up 
for strategic disinvestment through DIPAM after the process of disposing land 
and other unencumbered assets at Rasayani is completed.   
 
Financial implication of the restructuring plan is Rs.1008.67 crore (cash) 
which is to be met partly from sale of 442 acres HOCL land at Rasayani to  
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (Rs.618.80 crore) and the balance 
(Rs.365.26 crore) through bridge loan from the Govt. The funds will be u sed to 
liquidate the various liabilities of the company, including payment of outst anding 
salary and statutory dues of employees and repayment of Govt. guarante ed 
bonds of Rs.250 crore. The bridge loan amount, along with other Govt.  liabilities 
of the company, is proposed to be repaid to the Govt. from the disposal of 
remaining unencumbered land and other assets of Rasayani unit. 
 
Necessary action has been initiated by the Department and HOCL to 
implement the above restructuring plan for HOCL".  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. The Committee had taken note that HOCL was a profit making till 1996-97 
and the company began to incur losses from 1997-98 onwards and both HOCL 
and Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals miserably failed to devise and 
execute any long-term revival plan for it despite many rehabilitation packages 
from the Government from time to time.   The Committee also observed that the 
Department was not able to learn from its past mistakes and failed to come out 
with a comprehensive and convincing proposal for the revival of HOCL and as a 
result, the Government decided to restructure HOCL by closing down the 
operation of nine plants and operating only 3 plants (including the strategically 
important N2O4 plant) at Rasayani and 2 plants at Kochi.   Nevertheless, the 

 
 
6 
 
Committee in their 35th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had recommended to the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals  that they should devise a revival 
package with greater diligence which pa id adequate focus on long term 
commercial viability and sustainability of HOCL.    However, in the action taken 
reply, the Committee have been informed inter-alia that despite many 
rehabilitation measures and revival efforts, HOCL has been making continuous 
cash losses since 2011-12.  Further, there is severe competition forthcoming in 
the sector with a private sector company setting up a 2 lakh MT per annum 
capacity Phenol plant which will meet majority of the 2.75 lakh MT domestic 
demand in the country.   HOCL was unable to compete with imports in the 
absence of anti-dumping duties and struggles to compete even with the levying 
of anti-dumping duties. In the above background, the Government/Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 17.05.2017 has approved a 
restructuring plan for HOCL which involves closing down the operations of all the 
non-viable plants at Rasayani unit of HOCL except N2O4 plant which is to be 
transferred to ISRO on ‘as is where is ’ basis, with about 20 acres of land and 
employees associated with the plant. While Kochi unit will continue its 
operations, 'in principle' approval has also been accorded for HOCL to be put up 
for strategic disinvestment through DIPAM after the process of disposing land 
and other unencumbered assets at Rasayani is completed. The Committee are 
dismayed to note that HOCL incurred losses for the first time in the year 1997- 98 
and it could not come out from the financial problems faced by the company 
since then.  Also, the company was not successful in devising and executing any 
long term revival plan in the past despite many rehabilitation packages provided 

 
 
7 
 
by the Union Government from time to time.  Under these circumstances, while 
appreciating the initiatives of the Government for the restructuring of HOCL by 
closing down the operation of nine plants and operating only 3 plants (including 
the strategically important N2O4 plant at Rasayani and 2 plants at Kochi), the 
Committee also recommend that the restructuring exercise be carried out in a 
time bound manner and all out efforts be made to run other plants of HOCL 
profitably, which do not face closure under restructuring exercise.     
B. Execution and Monitoring of Revival Plan 
  
Recommendation Sl. No.2 
8. While expressing  concern at the inability of HOCL to adapt to the changing 
business environment and emphasizing on effective implementation of reviv al / 
restructuring plan of HOCL, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
  
 " The Committee note that the present situation of the company is 
largely claimed to be due to post 1990's liberalized and globalised 
economic scenario. However, the Committee after examining HOCL comes 
to the conclusion that it is the inability of the management of the company 
to adapt to the changing scenario which is responsible for the current 
situation. The factors like cumulative adverse impact of the uneconomic 
capacity of its plants, high manpower cost, high finance cost, severe 
international competition, low technology, etc., are only partly responsible 
for the poor financial conditions of HOCL, a very strong reason for the 
losses incurred by the company is poor management on the part of HOCL. 
The Committee therefore, recommend the Department to form a expert 
management team for the effective implementation of the current 
revival/restructuring plan of HOCL. The Committee, however at the same 
time emphasize that constant monitoring must be maintained to ensure 
long term revival of the company. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the action taken in this regard. " 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
9. In its action taken reply with reference to the above recommendation of th e 
Committee, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has submitted as under:- 

 
 
8 
 
"As mentioned in the reply to Recommendation No.1, the 
Government/Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 17.05.2017 
has approved a restructuring plan for HOCL. To ensure proper, expeditiou s 
implementation of the restructuring plan, the same is being monitored an d 
regularly reviewed by the Department at the level of Secretary (C&PC)." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10. The Department in their Action Taken Reply has intimated that the 
implementation of restructuring plan for HOCL which was approved by the 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 17.05.2017, is being 
monitored and regularly reviewed by the Department of at the level of Secretary 
(C&PC) to ensure proper and expeditious implementation.   The Committee, after 
taking into account all the factors relating to HOCL, express their unanimity over 
the restructuring of HOCL and the monitoring mechanism at the level of Secretary 
(C&PC) to ensure expeditious implementation of restructuring of HOCL.  The 
Committee, however, would also like to express their concerns about the closure 
of nine plants of HOCL at Rasayni and its effects on employees of the plants.   
The Committee, therefore, reiterate that all possible avenues be explored for 
redeployment and resettlement of eligible employees of these plants in other 
PSUs under nodal Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers including HIL, RCF, NFL 
etc. and payment of due pay-arrears be paid to them without further delay.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
11. In regard to the issue of proposed disinvestment of the shares of HFL held by 
HOCL, the Committee in their 35 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had recommended as 
under:- 

 
 
9 
 
"The Committee note that the Government on 27.10.2016 has given 
'in principle' approval for the parent company of HFL to exit the firm 
completely. The Committee also note that the Board of Directors of HOCL 
has conveyed its agreement with the government's proposal for strategic 
disinvestment of HFL Final decision on the actual mode of strategic 
disinvestment viz. outright sale or block sale of shares is yet to be taken by 
the HOCL Board. The Committee observe that for processing the strategic 
disinvestment of HFL, Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) and Evaluation 
Committee (EC) are to be constituted as per the guidelines issued by the 
Department of Investment & Public Asset Management (DIPAM) in this 
regard. IMG under chairmanship of Secretary (C&PC) has been constituted 
on 27.01.2017. First meeting of the IMG was held on 31.01.2017 and 
01.02.2017 following which RFP for appointment of Transaction Adviser 
(TA) and Legal Adviser (LA) for the strategic disinvestment of HFL have 
been published in 3 national newspapers and also uploaded on the website 
of the Department, HOCL and HFL. Since appointment of Asset Valuer is to 
be done by the parent company, HOCL has been instructed to take 
necessary action for the same. Constitution of EC would be done shortly. 
The Committee, therefore recommend the strategic disinvestment of HFL 
should be gainfully done and the sale should not cause loss to State 
exchequer. Besides this the Government should have stand by plan or 
alternative plan in case the strategic sale could not be arrived to its logical 
conclusion. The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken by 
the Government in this regard. " 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
12. In its action taken reply, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, h as 
stated as under:- 
 
" The strategic disinvestment of HFL is being processed by the Department in 
accordance with the guidelines / instructions issued by the Department of 
Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) on disinvestment of CP SEs 
and their subsidiaries / units from time to time. To ensure that the strategic 
disinvestment of HFL is gainfully done, an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) under th e 
chairmanship of Secretary (C&PC) has been constituted for the selection  of 
Transaction Adviser (TA) and Legal Adviser (LA), deciding qualification criteria, 
preparing PIM and EoI, etc. An Evaluation Committee under the chairpersonship of 
AS &FA, M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers, has also been constituted for fixing reserve 
price and making recommendations for approval of strategic partner and th e bid 

 
 
10 
 
amounts. Based on the recommendations of the IMG and after approval of the 
competent authority, TA and LA has been appointed for providing a dvisory 
services and managing the strategic disinvestment process of HFL.  
 
Preliminary Information Memorandum (PIM) and Expression of Interest (EoI) for 
disinvestment of HFL are being finalized by the TA in accordance with the rece ntly 
issued guidelines of DIPAM. It may be noted that presently ‘in principle’ approval of 
CCEA has been accorded for disinvestment of HFL. Once the procedures 
underway relating to issue of PIM & EoI, shortlisting of bidders, submission of b ids, 
etc. are completed, requisite proposal for HFL ’s disinvestment will be resubmitted 
for final decision of the CCEA. Necessary action will be taken by the Gove rnment / 
Department in case the strategic sale cannot be taken to its logical conclusion. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13. In regard to the recommendation of the Committee that the strategic 
disinvestment of HFL should be gainfully done and the sale should not cause loss 
to State exchequer and the Government should have stand by plan or alternative 
plan in case the strategic sale could not be arrived to its logical conclusion, it has 
been informed inter-alia that Preliminary Information Memorandum (PIM) and 
Expression of Interest (EoI) for disinvestment of HFL are being finalized by the TA 
(Transaction Adviser) in accordance with the recently issued guidelines of DIPAM.  
Once the procedures underway relating to issue of PIM & EoI, shortlisting of 
bidders, submission of bids, etc. are completed, requisite proposal for HFL ’s 
disinvestment will be resubmitted for final decision of the CCEA. Necessary action 
will be taken by the Government / Department in case the strategic sale cannot be 
taken to its logical conclusion.   As final outcome is yet to come, the Committee 
would like to emphasize that expeditious action be taken in this regard and they be 
apprised accordingly.  Here the Committee are apprehensive that the disinvestment 
of HFL shares held by HOCL at this juncture may not fetch viable price for these 
shares and hence, the Government may also consider to purchase the shares as i s 

 
 
11 
 
where is basis in case the strategic sale is not feasible and the disinvestment 
process may be pursued by the Government after the restructure of HOCL.   The 
Committee may be apprised of outcomes of action taken in the matter. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
14. On the issue of proposed disinvestment  / strategic sale of HFL, the Committee 
had recommended as under:- 
 
" The Committee observe that as a result of final infusion to the tune 
of Rs.270 crore and continuation of Government of India guarantee of Rs. 
100 crore for a full term of ten years during the years 2006-2007, HOCL 
made a profit of Rs. 17.09 crore during the year 2006-07 and Rs. 13.01 crore 
in 2007-08 and came out of the purview of BIFR in 2008. Similarly in the 
case of HFL, the Committee note that they have envisaged some 
diversification plan to make the company financially viable and profitable 
especially by developing Modified Poly Tetra Fluoro Ethylene(MPTFE) and 
the company expects income of Rs. 3 crore per year from MPTTEF. HFL 
has also developed TFE-Ether and Telomeres and started commercial 
facility of partial conversion of Telomeres. It has also developed 
Benzotrifluoride (BTF) on lab scale and sample has been accepted by the 
customer. The Committee also note that during 2016-17 (Prov), the 
company achieved a turnover of Rs. 33.78 crore. The Committee are pained 
to note that inspite of the efforts made by the company by diversifying its 
various activities and also achieving a turnover of Rs.33.78 crore (Prov) in 
2016-17, the Government has decided for strategic disinvestment of HFL. In 
view of the foregoing the Committee feel that the strength of both the 
companies viz., HOCL and HFL should be reviewed and that restructuring 
may be planned and executed in view of the objectives the companies. The 
Committee therefore recommend that Government should revisit their 
decision for disinvestment/strategic sale. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
15. The action taken reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals in the 
matter is as under:- 
 

 
 
12 
 
" The detailed background in which restructuring plan for HOCL has been 
approved by the Government/CCEA on 17.05.2017 has been explained in the 
reply to Recommendation No.1. 
 
As regards HFL, despite the efforts made by the company to come out of losses by 
diversifying its activities, the company has been making continuous losses since 
2013-14. For 2016-17, the company suffered net loss of Rs.4.89 crore on  a 
turnover of Rs.33.83 crore. As on 31.03.2017, the company has accumu lated 
losses of Rs.88.17 crore and negative net worth of Rs.68.55 crore. Due to 
inadequate working capital, HFL is not paying 20% salary to its officers/ employees 
since January, 2015. Statutory dues of around Rs.15.92 crore remain outstanding  
as the company does not have sufficient funds to clear these due s. Wage revision 
arrears of approx. Rs.15.05 crore pertaining to 1997 and 2007 wage re visions 
have also not been paid due to shortage of funds. It is pertinent to m ention here 
that the company is not in a position to generate the financial resources re quired to 
clear the above liabilities and to address the various factors like uneconom ical 
plant capacity, old technology, high manpower cost, high interest cost due to 
outstanding loans, etc. that have been adversely affecting the company ’s 
performance over the years. Also, HFL does not manufacture any produc t of 
strategic interest for the country and can be categorised as a ‘non priority’ CPSE 
as per DPE guidelines dated 29.10.2015. 
 
The ‘in principle’ approval for strategic disinvestment of HFL has been accorded by 
the Government/Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) based on due 
examination of the matter by and on the recommendations of the NITI Aayog and 
the Core Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment (CGD). As the decision for 
strategic disinvestment of HFL has been taken by the competent authority in the 
Government of India, further necessary action is being taken by the Department for 
implementing the said decision, in accordance with the guidelines / instructions 
issued by the Department of Investment and Public Asset Management (D IPAM) 
on disinvestment of CPSEs and their subsidiaries / units. " 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
16. The Committee had recommended for the review of the financial strength 
of both HOCL and HFL , their restructuring and revisit the decision for 
disinvestment / strategic sale.   In this regard, the Committee have been informed 
that restructuring plan for HOCL has been already approved by the Government / 

 
 
13 
 
CCEA on 17.05.2017.  As regards HFL, it has been intimated inter-alia that the 
company is not in a position to generate the financial resources required to clear 
its liabilities and to address the various factors like uneconomical plant capacity, 
old technology, high manpower cost, high interest cost due to outstanding loans, 
etc. Also, HFL does not manufacture any product of strategic interest for the 
country and can be categorised as a ‘non priority’ CPSE as per DPE guidelines 
dated 29.10.2015.  The ‘in principle ’ approval for strategic disinvestment of HFL 
has been accorded by the Government/Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) based on due examination of the matter by and on the recommendations 
of the NITI Aayog and the Core Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment (CGD). As 
the decision for strategic disinvestment of HFL has been taken by the competent 
authority in the Government of India, further necessary action is being taken by 
the Department for implementing the said decision, in accordance with the 
guidelines / instructions issued by the Department of Investment and Public 
Asset Manageent (DIPAM) on disinvestment of CPSEs and their subsidiaries / 
units.  In this regard, the Committee, while expressing their agreement with 
restructuring of HOCL,  would like to record their unhappiness over the 
disinvestment / strategic sale of HFL.   The Committee are apprehensive that the 
present time is not favorable for for disinvestment / strategic sale of HFL hence, 
the Government should defer the same till completion the exercise of 
restructuring of HOCL which is already in the pipeline.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that strategic disinvestment of HIL should be relooked in view of its 
diversification plan to make the company financially viable and profitable 
especially by developing MPTFE, BTF, TFE either and Telomeres. 

 
 
14 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation Sl. No.1 
 
   " The Committee while examining HOCL note with a deep concern that this 
company which was once declared a mini ratna company and which made regular 
profits for 31 years up to 1996-97 has tragically come at a crossroads where the  
Government is actually considering its restructuring by closing down its nine out 
of twelve plants at Rasayani.  
The Committee also note that earlier efforts to revive HOCL by the 
Government have failed miserably. The Committee are of strong view that these 
efforts failed due to the fact that revival plan lacked focus and expertise. E ven the 
current Draft Cabinet Note (DCN) of April 2016 is not supported by the 
Department of Expenditure and Department of Public Enterprise, as the proposal 
for revival of HOCL in its current form does not appear to have adequate focus on 
long term commercial viability/sustainability and lacks actual business plan to 
increase revenue, control cost or overcome the reasons of failure of revival of 
earlier package. Further, the current revival plan does not include business 
restructuring proposals so as to make the company profitable on a sustainable 
basis. The Committee regret to note that the Department has not been able to 
learn from its past mistakes and has failed to come out with a comprehensive 
proposal for revival of HOCL which could convince the Government. As a reason 
of which, the Government has decided to restructure HOCL by closing down the 
operation of nine plants and operating only 3 plants (including the strategically 
important N2O4 plant) at Rasayani and 2 plants at Kochi. The Committee, 
therefore recommend that the Department to devise a revival package with 
greater diligence which pay adequate focus on long term commercial viability and 
sustainability of HOCL. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard. " 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 After HOCL started making losses from 1997-98, several efforts have been  made 
by the Government over the years to support and revive the operations of  the company, 
as given below: 
 
(i) HOCL was provided Government of India guarantee for Rs.100 crore in 2001  for 
raising resources from the capital market by way of term loans / bonds. 

 
 
15 
 
(ii)  A rehabilitation package for HOCL was approved by the Government on 
09.03.2006 consisting of (a) Fund infusion of  Rs.250 crore in the form of 8% 
redeemable non-cumulative preference shares to be redeemed @ 20% each year from 
the 4th year onwards) to be utilized for repayment of high cost overdue Bonds, 
repayment of VRS loan, introduction of fresh VRS etc., and (b) Non-cash transactio n 
involving continuation of the Government of India guarantee of Rs. 100 cr ore for a full 
term of ten years (issue date 19.12.2001) and waiver of penal interest  and interest up to 
31.03.2005. 
 
(iii) The Government on 08.02.2007 also approved an investment of Rs. 20 crore in 
HOCL in the form of redeemable, non-cumulative preference shares for restarting th e 
caustic soda / chlorine plant at Rasayani.  
 
(iv) As the financial position of HOCL again became precarious in 2012-1 3, th e 
Government on 01.08.2013 approved the revision of the terms and co nditions of the 
rehabilitation package of 2006 comprising of (a) Postponement of the  redemption of 
Rs.270 crore preference shares issued to the Government of India (date of allotme nt 
24.01.2008) from the originally approved FY 2011-12 onwards to FY 2015-16 onwards, 
and (b) Extension of the Government guarantee of Rs.100 crore for a furthe r period of 5 
years i.e. up to 28.08.2017,  to enable the company to tide over its liquidity problems 
and for smooth running of the company.  
 
(v)  Another Government guarantee of Rs.150 crore was provided to HOCL in July , 
2014 for issue of bonds by the company for meeting its working capital requirement and 
repayment of liabilities towards raw material suppliers, bank loan, employee dues etc.  
 
(vi) Because of the deteriorating financial condition, HOCL was not in a position t o 
pay the annual interest of Rs.24.61 crore on the Rs.100 crore and Rs.150 cro re Govt. 
guaranteed bonds during 2015-16 and 2016-17. Financial assistance in the form of Non-
Plan loan was provided to the company by the Government for meeting the a bove 
interest liability. 
 
 Despite the above efforts of the Government, HOCL has been making 
continuous cash losses since 2011-12. As on 31.3.2017, it had accumulate d losses of 
Rs.1357.22 crore and negative net worth of (-) Rs.970.12 crore. The erstwhile Board for 
Industrial and Financial Construction (BIFR) had registered HOCL as a sick company 
under the provisions of the Sick Industrial Companies Act (SICA), 1985. Due to 
stoppage of continuous operation caused by non-availability of wo rking capital, the 
company was not in a position to pay the interest on Government guaranteed bonds, 

 
 
16 
 
dues to the raw material suppliers, the statutory dues of the employees to the various 
authorities, etc. Except for some ad hoc advances paid from time to time,  the company 
has not paid salary regularly to its employees since February, 2015 and doe s not have 
working capital to run the plants. Because of working capital shortage, mo st of the 
plants are shut down and the workers / employees sitting idle while the unpaid salary bill 
continues to mount. The N2O4 plant, which is the only plant presently operational a nd 
supplies N2O4 for ISRO ’s space programme, has to be retained to continue its 
operation because of its strategic importance for ISRO. Hence, it is necessary to 
insulate its operations from HOCL so as not to allow the precarious financial position of 
HOCL to affect future operations of the N2O4 plant. In view of the above, in addition to 
others, it is important to restructure the operations of the company at the earl iest so that 
the production of N2O4 for ISRO continues and at least part of the f und requirements 
towards meeting various liabilities can be generated by the company. Further, th ere is 
severe competition forthcoming in the sector with a private sector company se tting up a 
2 lakh MT per annum capacity Phenol plant which will meet majority of the 2.75 lakh MT 
domestic demand in the country. HOCL was unable to compete with imports in the  
absence of anti-dumping duties and struggles to compete even with th e levying of anti-
dumping duties. Hence, the issue of restructuring of the company needed to be 
considered urgently. 
 
In the above background, the Government/Cabinet Committee on Econo mic 
Affairs (CCEA) on 17.05.2017 has approved a restructuring plan for HOCL. The  
restructuring plan involves closing down the operations of all the non-viable plants at 
Rasayani unit of HOCL except N2O4 plant which is to be transferred to ISRO on ‘as is 
where is’ basis, with about 20 acres of land and employees associated with the  plant. 
While Kochi unit will continue its operations, 'in principle' approval has also been  
accorded for HOCL to be put up for strategic disinvestment through DIPAM after the  
process of disposing land and other unencumbered assets at Rasayani is completed.   
 
Financial implication of the restructuring plan is Rs.1008.67 crore (cash) which 
is to be met partly from sale of 442 acres HOCL land at Rasayani to Bhara t Petroleum 
Corporation Ltd. (Rs.618.80 crore) and the balance (Rs.365.26 crore) through brid ge 
loan from the Govt. The funds will be used to liquidate the various liab ilities of the 
company, including payment of outstanding salary and statutory dues of  employees 
and repayment of Govt. guaranteed bonds of Rs.250 crore. The bridge loa n amount, 
along with other Govt. liabilities of the company, is proposed to be repaid to the Govt. 
from the disposal of remaining unencumbered land and other assets of Rasayani unit. 
 
Necessary action has been initiated by the Department and HOCL to implement 
the above restructuring plan for HOCL.  
 

 
 
17 
 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers O.M. 
No.16017/06/2016-Ch.III  dated  24.10.2017) 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.3 
 
 "The Committee note that based on discussions held at various levels in 
the Government, HOCL had devised a plan for restructuring its operations by 
closing down the operations of 9 non-viable plants and operating only 3 plants 
(including the strategically important N2O4 plant) at Rasayani and 2 viable plants 
at Kochi unit with the restructuring cost to be met partially from monetization of 
surplus land assets of the company and partially through Government financial 
assistance (cash and non-cash). With regard to the monetization of land assets, 
the Department is in consultation with Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited 
(BPCL) and BPCL has agreed to take over around 440 acres of land. An amount of 
only Rs.403.66 crore is expected to be generated from the above monetization of 
HOCL land assets whereas the total cash fund requirement for clearing all the 
liabilities of the company and preparing long term commercial viability and 
business plan was much higher. In view of the fund generation / availability 
constraints, the proposal / DCN addressed liquidating only the urgent liabilities of 
HOCL (of Rs.376.45 crore), thereby shoring up the working capital position, and 
restoring the plant operations at both Rasayani and Kochi units at the earliest so 
that at least part of the fund requirements towards operations and salary cost 
could be generated by the company. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Department must ensure proper financial management of the sale proceeds of 
excess land so that it may not suffer any handicap while carrying out its 
programmes and restructuring. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard. " 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 " The CCEA approved restructuring plan for HOCL (mentioned in the reply to 
Recommendation No.1 above) includes sale of 442 acres HOCL land at Rasayani to 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. at a total sale price of Rs.618.80 crore a nd grant of 
bridge loan of Rs.365.26 crore to HOCL for liquidating the various outstan ding liabilities 
of the company other than HOCL ’s liabilities to the Govt. of India. The latter are to be 
settled from the proceeds of disposal of the remaining unencumbered land and other 
assets at Rasayani. For facilitating disposal of unencumbered, surplus land of HOCL at  
Rasayani (other than the approx. 20 acres land to be transferred to ISRO a long with 

 
 
18 
 
N2O4 plant and 442 acres to be sold to BPCL as approved by the CCE A), M/s NBCC 
(India) Ltd., a PSU under the Ministry of Urban Development, has been appoint ed as 
the Land Management Agency (LMA) as per the CCEA approval. NBCC as LMA  will 
manage, maintain and protect the land assets of HOCL till it is disposed of. NBCC is 
among the CPSEs nominated by the DPE as LMA for disposal of land assets o f sick 
CPSEs which are for closure. DPE guidelines dated 07.09.2016 for time bound closur e 
of sick/loss making CPSEs and disposal of movable and immovable assets will be 
adopted for final disposal of surplus land. " 
 
 (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers O.M. 
No.16017/06/2016-Ch.III  dated  24.10.2017) 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 4 
"The Committee are pained to note that HOCL has become a chronically 
sick company and has been making cash losses since 2011-12 which has 
resulted in erosion of net worth of the company, lack of working capital and 
deterioration in the operations of the company leading to severe cash crunch. As 
a reason of which, the company has not been able to pay salary/wages and 
statutory dues of its employees for the past several months. In this regard Draft 
CCEA Note on revival/restructuring plan for HOCL was prepared by the 
Department which inter-alia includes provision of payment of outstanding 
salary/wages and statutory dues of employees to be met from monitoring of the 
surplus lands of HOCL. However, DCN was not supported by Department of 
Expenditure and Department of Public Enterprises. The Committee also observe 
there is surplus manpower in HOCL as on date. To pay salary to all the officials 
and employees of HOCL especially when it is reeling under severe financial 
crunches is onerous task. The Committee have been apprised by the Department 
that high manpower cost is one of the reasons for continuous loss of the 
company and the Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) earlier introduced for 
surplus manpower reduction was not attractive as such the targeted reduction 
could not be achieved. 
The Committee have empathy with the hardships of the workers who have 
been deprived of salary for the past so many months and therefore, recommend 
that the Department to come out with an effective proposal to ensure payment of 
salaries and statutory dues of the employees. The Committee would also like the 
Department to prepare such VRS which may meet the purpose. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard." 
 
 
 
 

 
 
19 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
" The CCEA approved restructuring plan for HOCL includes provision for payment of 
outstanding salary and statutory dues of the employees of both Rasayani an d Kochi 
units, except the manpower associated with the N2O4 plant to be transferred  to ISRO 
whose dues will be settled by ISRO. Similarly, provision has also been ma de in the 
restructuring plan for giving VRS / VSS as per DPE guidelines to the employees that will 
be rendered surplus after shutting down of the plants at Rasayani exce pt for the 
employees associated with the N2O4 plant. After funds are received from BPCL out of 
the sale of land, the employees will be relieved by payment of the ir VRS/VSS and other 
statutory and terminal dues." 
 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers O.M. 
No.16017/06/2016-Ch.III  dated  24.10.2017) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
 "The Committee observe that as a result of final infusion to the tune of 
Rs.270 crore and continuation of Government of India guarantee of Rs. 100 crore 
for a full term of ten years during the year 2006-2007, HOCL made a profit of Rs. 
17.09 crore during the year 2006-07 and Rs. 13.01 crore in 2007-08 and ca me out 
of the purview of BIFR in 2008. Similarly in the case of HFL, the Committee note  
that they have envisaged some diversification plan to make the company 
financially viable and profitable especially by developing Modified Poly Tetra 
Fluoro Ethylene (MPTFE) and the company expects income of Rs. 3 crore per 
year from MPTTEE. HFL has also developed TFE-Ether and Telomeres and started 
commercial facility of partial conversion of Telomeres. It has also developed 
Benzotrifluoride (BTF) on lab scale and sample has been accepted by the 
customer. The Committee also note that during 2016-17 (Prov), the company 
achieved a turnover of Rs. 33.78 crore. The Committee are pained to note that 
inspite of the efforts made by the company by diversifying its various activities 
and also achieving a turnover of Rs.33.78 crore (Prov) in 2016-17, the Government 
has decided for strategic disinvestment of HFL. In view of the foregoing the 
Committee feel that the strength of both the companies viz., HOCL and HFL 
should be reviewed and that restructuring may be planned and executed in view 
of the objectives the companies. The Committee therefore recommend that 
Government should revisit their decision for disinvestment/strategic sale. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard." 
 
 
 

 
 
20 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 "The detailed background in which restructuring plan for HOCL has been approve d 
by the Government/CCEA on 17.05.2017 has been explained in the re ply to 
Recommendation No.1. 
 
As regards HFL, despite the efforts made by the company to come out of losse s by 
diversifying its activities, the company has been making continuous losses since 20 13-
14. For 2016-17, the company suffered net loss of Rs.4.89 crore on a tu rnover of 
Rs.33.83 crore. As on 31.03.2017, the company has accumulated losses o f Rs.88.17 
crore and negative net worth of Rs.68.55 crore. Due to inadequate working capital, HFL 
is not paying 20% salary to its officers/ employees since January, 2015. Statu tory dues 
of around Rs.15.92 crore remain outstanding as the company does not ha ve sufficient 
funds to clear these dues. Wage revision arrears of approx. Rs.15.05 crore pe rtaining 
to 1997 and 2007 wage revisions have also not been paid due to shortage of funds. It is 
pertinent to mention here that the company is not in a position to generat e the financial 
resources required to clear the above liabilities and to address the various fa ctors like 
uneconomical plant capacity, old technology, high manpower cost, high inte rest cost 
due to outstanding loans, etc. that have been adversely affecting the co mpany’s 
performance over the years. Also, HFL does not manufacture any p roduct of strategic 
interest for the country and can be categorised as a ‘non priority ’ CPSE as per DPE 
guidelines dated 29.10.2015. 
 
The ‘in principle’ approval for strategic disinvestment of HFL has been accorded by the 
Government/Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) based on due 
examination of the matter by and on the recommendations of the NITI Aayog and the 
Core Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment (CGD). As the decision for strategic 
disinvestment of HFL has been taken by the competent authority in the Government of 
India, further necessary action is being taken by the Department for impleme nting the 
said decision, in accordance with the guidelines / instructions issued by the Department 
of Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) on disinvestment of CPSEs and 
their subsidiaries / units. 
 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers O.M. 
No.16017/06/2016-Ch.III  dated 24.10.2017) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.16 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 

 
 
21 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
22 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.2 
 "The Committee note that the present situation of the company is largely 
claimed to be due to post 1990's liberalized and globalised economic scenario. 
However, the Committee after examining HOCL comes to the conclusion that it is 
the inability of the management of the company to adapt to the changing scenario 
which is responsible for the current situation. The factors like cumulative adverse 
impact of the uneconomic capacity of its plants, high manpower cost, high 
finance cost, severe international competition, low technology, etc., are only 
partly responsible for the poor financial conditions of HOCL, a very strong reason 
for the losses incurred by the company is poor management on the part of HOCL. 
The Committee therefore, recommend the Department to form a expert 
management team for the effective implementation of the current 
revival/restructuring plan of HOCL. The Committee, however at the same time 
emphasize that constant monitoring must be maintained to ensure long term 
revival of the company. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
"As mentioned in the reply to Recommendation No.1, the Government/Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 17.05.2017 has approved a rest ructuring 
plan for HOCL. To ensure proper, expeditious implementation of the restructuring plan , 
the same is being monitored and regularly reviewed by the Department a t the level of 
Secretary (C&PC)." 
 
 (Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers O.M. 
No.16017/06/2016-Ch.III  dated  24.10.2017) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.10 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
  

 
 
23 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
RECOMMENDATION NO 5 
"The Committee note that the Government on 27.10.2016 has given 'in 
principle' approval for the parent company of HFL to exit the firm completely. The 
Committee also note that the Board of Directors of HOCL has conveyed its 
agreement with the government's proposal for strategic disinvestment of HFL 
Final decision on the actual mode of strategic disinvestment viz. outright sale or 
block sale of shares is yet to be taken by the HOCL Board. The Committee 
observe that For processing the strategic disinvestment of HFL, Inter-Ministerial 
Group (IMG) and Evaluation Committee (EC) are to be constituted as per the 
guidelines issued by the Department of Investment & Public Asset Management 
(DIPAM) in this regard. IMG under chairmanship of Secretary (C&PC) has been 
constituted on 27.01.2017. First meeting of the IMG was held on 31.01.2017 and 
01.02.2017 following which RFP for appointment of Transaction Adviser (TA) and 
Legal Adviser (LA) for the strategic disinvestment of HFL have been published in 
3 national newspapers and also uploaded on the website of the Department, 
HOCL and HFL. Since appointment of Asset Valuer is to be done by the parent 
company, HOCL has been instructed to take necessary action for the same. 
Constitution of EC would be done shortly. The Committee, therefore recommend 
the strategic disinvestment of HFL should be gainfully done and the sale should 
not cause loss to State exchequer. Besides this the Government should have 
stand by plan or alternative plan in case the strategic sale could not be arrived to 
its logical conclusion. The Committee would like to be informed of the action 
taken by the Government in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
"The strategic disinvestment of HFL is being processed by the Department in 
accordance with the guidelines / instructions issued by the Department of Invest ment 
and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) on disinvestment of CPSEs and their 
subsidiaries / units from time to time. To ensure that the strategic disinvestment of HFL  
is gainfully done, an Inter-Ministerial Group (IMG) under the chairmanship o f Secretary 
(C&PC) has been constituted for the selection of Transaction Adviser (TA) and Legal 
Adviser (LA), deciding qualification criteria, preparing PIM and EoI, etc. An E valuation 
Committee under the chairpersonship of AS &FA, M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers, has also  
been constituted for fixing reserve price and making recommendations for ap proval of 

 
 
24 
 
strategic partner and the bid amounts. Based on the recommendations of t he IMG and 
after approval of the competent authority, TA and LA has been appointed for providing 
advisory services and managing the strategic disinvestment process of HFL.  
 
Preliminary Information Memorandum (PIM) and Expression of Interest (EoI) for 
disinvestment of HFL are being finalized by the TA in accordance with the recently 
issued guidelines of DIPAM. It may be noted that presently ‘in principle ’ approval of 
CCEA has been accorded for disinvestment of HFL. Once the procedures unde rway 
relating to issue of PIM & EoI, shortlisting of bidders, submission of bids, etc. are  
completed, requisite proposal for HFL ’s disinvestment will be resubmitted for final 
decision of the CCEA. Necessary action will be taken by the Government / Department 
in case the strategic sale cannot be taken to its logical conclusion." 
 
(Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers O.M. 
No.16017/06/2016-Ch.III  dated  24.10.2017) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.13 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                              ANANDRAO ADSUL 
 19 December,  2017                      Chairperson 
  28  1939 (Saka)                                              Standing Committee on  
                                        Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

 
 
25 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2017-18) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19 December, 2017 from 1630 hrs. to  
1700 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B. N. Chandrappa 
5. Smt. Veena Devi 
6. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
7. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
8. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
9. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
10. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
11. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Dr. Bhusan Lal Jangde 
13. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
14. Shri Abdul Wahab 
SECRETARIAT 
            1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
        2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
            3. Shri U. C. Bharadawaj            -          Deputy Secretary  

 
 
26 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon ’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee.   
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the  following 
draft Reports : 
(i) Draft report on the subject 'Freight Subsidy Policy' (Department of 
Fertilizers) and;  
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth  Report (16 th Lok Sabha) on 
the subject 'Revival of Sick PSUs in Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
Sector'  pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
 
4. After deliberations the Draft Reports were adopted by the Committee withou t any 
changes/amendments. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to finaliz e and 
present the reports to the House during the current winter session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

 
 
27 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS 
AND FERTILIZERS ON THE SUBJECT ‘REVIVAL OF SICK PSU s IN 
CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICAL SECTOR ’ OF THE MINISTRY OF 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND 
PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 6 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. - and -  )   
4 
 
Percentage of Total 66.8% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
NIL 
 
 
0 
 
Percentage of Total    0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-   
 (Vide Recommendation No. 2 )   
1 
Percentage of Total 16.6% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
(Vide Recommendation No.5) 
1 
Percentage of Total 16.6% 
 
 