 
46 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2017-18) 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
    
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
PROMOTION AND COORDINATION OF BASIC, APPLIED AND OTHER 
RESEARCH IN AREAS RELATED TO THE PHARMACEUTICAL SECTOR  
 
 
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  July, 2018/   Ashadha, 1940 (Saka) 
 
   
  


 
 
CC&F.No.46 
 
 
 
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2017-18) 
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
PROMOTION AND COORDINATION OF BASIC, APPLIED AND OTHER RESEARCH IN 
AREAS RELATED TO THE PHARMACEUTICAL SECTOR 
 
 
 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 July 2018 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19  July 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
   July, 2018/   Ashadha, 1940 (Saka) 
 
  

 
 
CONTENTS 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18) …………………………. (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………….. (v) 
PART-I  
CHAPTER-I  Introduction 
 
 1 
CHAPTER-II  Role and Mandate of the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
 
 4 
CHAPTER-III Promotion of Research & Development Activities 
 
 
10 
CHAPTER-IV Status of Pharmaceutical Research in NIPERs and their   
Commercialization 
 
 
14 
CHAPTER-V Challenges & Constraints Being Faced by the Department 24 
PART-II 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
28-39 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of the sitting of the standing committee on chemicals and fertiliz ers  
(2017-18) held on 11.04.2018 
41 
II. Minutes of the sitting of the standing committee on chemicals and fertilize rs  
(2017-18) held on. 13.07.2018 
43 
 
 
  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
  (2017-18)  
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
7. Dr. Ratna De Nag 
8. Smt. Veena Devi 
9. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
10. Shri Innocent 
11. Prof. A Seetaram Naik # 
12. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
13. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
14. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
15. Shri Rajendran S. 
16. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
17. Dr. Uma Saren 
18. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
19. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
21.  Shri Sarfaraz Alam* 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad 
25. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
26. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
27. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
28. Shri Abdul Wahab 
29.  Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar @ 
30.  Vacant^ 
31. Vacant^ 
SECRETARIAT 
1.     Shri V.K. Tripathi  -              Joint Secretary 
2.     Shri A.K. Srivastava  -              Director  
3.     Shri U.C. Bharadwaj  -   Deputy Secretary  
4.              Ms. Sonia Sankhla                 -            Executive  Assistant 
# Prof. A. Seetaram Naik MP, (LS) has been nominated as a Member of the Committe e on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f.  3.11.2017   
vice  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy MP, (LS) who ceased to be a Member of the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 3.11.2017 
*Shri Sarfaraz Alam has been nominated as a Member of the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 27.04.2018 
@ Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar has been nominated as a Member of the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 02.06.2018 
^Vacant vice Dr. Bhusan Lal Jangade due to his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 02.04.2018. 
^Vacant vice Shri K. Parasaran due to his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 28.06.2018. 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2017-18)  
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Forty-sixth Report  'Promotion and Coordination of basic, applied and other research in areas 
related to the Pharmaceutical Sector' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of Pharmaceuticals).  
2.  The subject 'Promotion and Coordination of basic, applied and other research in areas 
related to the Pharmaceutical Sector' had been taken up by the erstwhile Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (2016- 17) for examination and report. The Committee visited 
NIPER-Mohali and NIPER-Hyderabad on 15 June and 13 July 2017 respectively for the 
purpose of examination of the subject.   The Committee also had informal discussion with the 
representatives of cluster of pharmaceutical units located at Baddi, Himachal Pradesh on 15 
June, 2017.  As the examination of the subject could not be completed due to paucity of time 
during the term of the Committee (2016- 17), the subject was again selected for examination 
and reporting by the Committee (2017-18).  The Committee took oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
and NIPERs on the subject at their sitting held on 11 April 2018. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on  
13 July, 2018. 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) for furnishing the written replies and other 
material/ information and for placing their views on the subject before the Committee.  
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
6.  For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi;  
 18  July, 2018                                                       Anandrao Adsul 
27 Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)                                                                         Chairperson 
                       Standing Committee on  
                    Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 

1 
 
 
PART-I 
CHAPTER – I 
INTRODUCTION 
 India enjoys global leadership in Pharmaceutical s ector in Generic medicines. 
India celebrates the achievements of both Public and Private Pharma Ind ustry for their 
contribution in India's self-reliance on medicines. Exports  are being made to most of the 
Countries of the world with a major share in regulated market s. Much of the credit goes to 
policy initiative in terms of Patent Act, 1970 which  allowed process patents, enabling in 
transformation of India from medicine importing cou ntry to exporting country and to the 
entrepreneurship of pharmaceuticals industry. Curren tly the pharmaceuticals sector is 
contributing Rs.2 lakh crores annually to the Indian economy, with 50% from exports. 
1.2 Pharmaceuticals sector is a multi-disciplinary and the r esearch is spread across a large 
number of ministries / Departments viz., Department  of Biotechnology, Department of 
Science and Technology, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, Indian Council for 
Medical Research, Department of Health and Family W elfare, Ministry of Human Resource 
Development, Ministry of AYUSH, and others. 
1.3 In 2008, a separate Department for Pharmaceutic als has been created with a 
mandate of policy, planning, development and regula tion of Pharmaceuticals Industries 
excluding those specifically allotted to other departments. Th e items include the subject of 
examination (2nditem)-promotion and coordination of basic, applied and other research in areas 
related to the Pharmaceutical Sector. Thus assumes the importance of Promotion and Co-
ordination of basic, applied and other research in areas related t o the Pharmaceuticals Sector. 
1.4 Pharmaceuticals sector is a knowledge intensive  industry. India being signatory of WTO 
and TRIPS agreement, it moved from process patent regime to product pate nt regime. Thus 
the options before the nation are very limited rather only two, either  to wait for 20 years for 
becoming patent medicines 
of the west to become off patent to manufacture by Indian 
companies or start drugs discovery especially for the diseases of c urrent and future priority, 
in the country. 
1.5 The patented medicines are very costly and not affordable to common population. 
Analysis of Indian domestic market suggests that pa tent medicines constitute less than 1% 
share, illustrating poor accessibility/ availabilit y of latest innovative medicines in  the face 
of growing non-communicable / life-style diseases like cance r because of affordability. This 
issue reiterates the urgency for India to have paradigm shift  in its strategy to expand its 
leadership in Drug Discovery and Innovation after p ost-WTO, TRIPS regime. Any 

2 
 
investment in Drug discovery will also help in making India an Innovatio n based economy. It is 
with this vision that Government has set up NIPERs under NIPER Act, 1998. 
(Ref: Pg No-1 of Background note) 
1.6 The Department in its background note stated that they have c ommissioned a Detailed 
Project Report for Developing India as a Drug Discovery and Pharmaceutical Inn ovation Hub by 
Ernst & Young.  The Ernst & Young  has submitted its report. The report has been finalized in 
consultation with all the stakeholders.  Second Phase of the Impl ementation Report is under 
consideration in the Department. 
(Ref: Pg No-2 of Background Note) 
1.7  The Committee desired the Department to furnish the major highlight s of this report 
related to achievements, challenges and the way forward for Indian Pharmaceuti cal Sector in 
the field of drug discovery and pharmaceutical innovation hub as reco mmended by the Ernst 
&Young consultancy firm, the Department in its written note submitted as under:- 
 "DPR submitted by Ernst & Young has highlighted that India has one of the fastest-
growing pharmaceutical sectors in the world. India ranks 3 rd in terms of volume 
productivity with 10% share of the global pharmaceutical market. It occu pies 14 th 
position by value accounting for 1.5% of the total pharmaceutical  production by value 
across the globe. India Pharmaceutical Sector directly employs around 500,000 p eople. 
However, to achieve the desired goal, India has to overcome long hurdles. In sh ort, it 
has been observed that India has emerged as a potent drug development service 
provider but not a key player in innovative product research. Indian bio -pharmaceutical 
companies͛ early stage/biology research and translational research capabilities and R&D 
funding are weak compared to global bio-pharmaceutical companies. Cont ribution of 
India academia to new drug research is not substantive; patents and publishing have not 
translated into licenses as alignment with private sector has been weak. H ence, DPR has 
recommended that the Department should revisit its vision and revise the targets set in 
terms of percentage share in the global R&D pipeline. The key enablers to ach ieve the 
target includes:-  
 
(A)  Human Resources : 
i. Attract top scientific Indian talent residing abroad through tale nt acquisition and talent 
attraction programs. 
ii. Incentivize the role of private sector in attracting and creating jobs in t he research and 
development domain  
iii. Tie up with select/Top Global Life Science Technology institutions for various research 
fellowship and exchange programs (Promote initiatives such as the rec ent Global 
initiative for Academic Network (GIAN) announced between India and US  
iv. Improve the quality of pharmacy and biotech courses offered at both UG, PG and 
Doctorate level to upgrade the skill set for drug discovery and clinical development 
v. Make PhDs in science disciplines and research & Development a more attractive career  
option in India  
 

3 
 
 
(B)  Infrastructure: 
vi. Create a model integrated national facility dedicated to drug discovery and 
development in PPP mode, in one of the key life sciences hubs  
vii. Give industry access to advanced instrumentation and specialized facilities in public R&D 
labs, which may not be economically viable for individual companies to purchase.  
viii. Create infrastructure for storing and importing essential drugs, reagen ts and biological 
samples  
ix. Enable industry to undertake animal studies in a hassle free manner 
(C)  Funding Availability:  
x. Promote venture capital/angel funds and incubators for funding inno vative life sciences 
start – ups and companies  
(D)  Industry-Academia linkage: 
xi. Create targeted programmes and funding mechanisms to promote linkages and mobility 
between industry and academia  
xii. Promote commercialisation potential of research in public R&D labs  
(E)  Regulatory scenario: 
xiii. Establish a robust institutional mechanism for inter-ministerial coordination   
xiv. Introduce a zero tolerance policy for quality assurance of clinical trials  
xv. Reduce regulatory complexity for new drug application and approval 
xvi. Incentivise innovative R&D through tax credits "  
 (Ref: Reply to Q No-28) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
CHAPTER – II 
ROLE AND MANDATE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS 
 While stating the role and mandate accorded with particular referenc e to basic/applied 
and other research activities in Pharmaceutical Sector, the Department of P harmaceuticals 
stated that as per the Business Allocation of the Department of Pharmaceutic als, following 
activities are inter-alia mandated to be undertaken by the Department of Pharmaceuticals:-  
- Promotion and co-ordination of basic, applied and other research in areas related to 
the Pharmaceutical sector. 
- Medical Devices - Industry issues relating to promotion, production and  
manufacture; excluding those specifically allotted to other Departments. 
- Education and training including high end research and grant of f ellowships in India 
and abroad, exchange of information and technical guidance on all ma tters relating 
to pharmaceutical sector. 
- International co-operation in pharmaceutical research, including w ork related to 
international conferences in related areas in India and abroad. 
- Inter-sectoral coordination including coordination between organiza tions and 
Institutes under the Central and State Governments in areas related to the subjects 
entrusted to the Department. 
 
2.2 The Department further furnished that the mandate bestowed on the  Department does 
not incorporate research activities in developing biomedical/medical devices i ncluding 
biomedical material for medical equipment. There is no allocation o f budget for research 
activity in developing biomedical devices. 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-1) 
 
2.3  While furnishing a brief note on the status of Indian Pharma Industry with special 
reference to contribution of domestic pharma industry in meeting th e requirements of drugs in 
the country and the level of dependency on imported drugs and f irms producing patented 
drugs and the steps being taken for import substitution through domestic production, the 
Department stated as under :- 
 " The Indian Pharmaceutical Industry, driven by knowledge, skills, low produ ction costs 
and international quality products, has witnessed a robust growth from the production 
turnover of about Rs. 5000 crores in 1990 is estimated to be about Rs. 2,19,0755.00 Crores 
during the year 2016-17.  Out of this, the share of exports are around  50%. Pharma Exports 
from the country have shown rapid growth during the past three years as dep icted in the table 
below:- 
     (Source: DGCIS Kolkata) 
Commodity Group 
2014-15 
Value 
(RsCrores) 
2015-16 
Value(RsCrores) 
2016-17 
Value(RsCrores) 
Bulk Drugs, Drug Intermediates 1791.99 23515.55 22683.30 
Drug Formulations, Biologicals 68557.74 82760.25 84934.88 
Grand Total 90349.74 106275.80 107618.19 

5 
 
 
In comparison to the exports, the imports have been far less. The details of India ͛s 
imports of Bulk Drugs, Drug intermediates and Drug formulations, Bi ologicals during last three 
years is as under: 
 
Years Total import(Rs. cr) 
2014-15 29394.09 
2015-16 31585.59 
2016-17 29516.49 
  (Source: DGCIS Kolkata) 
 
India is globally, the 3rd largest producer of medicines by volume and 14t h in terms of 
value.  The lower value is due to the fact that Indian medicines are amongst the lowest priced in 
the world.  India exports to more than 200 countries in the world i ncluding highly regulated 
markets like U.S.A.   
          The success story in the pharmaceuticals sector is characterized by our strengths in: 
(i)      Low cost manufacturing; 
(ii)     Developed chemistry with proven track record in advanced chemistry capabilities; and 
(iii)    Low cost, qualified, English-speaking manpower. 
 
The Indian Pharmaceuticals Industry is producing various therapeutic equivalents of  many 
patented drugs. The country is however, importing some Active Pharmaceuticals In gredients 
(API) used in the manufacture of some essential medicines. These imports are mo stly done 
because of economic consideration. 
 
The Government is committed to make India sufficiently self-reliant in  end to end 
indigenous drug manufacturing by reducing the import dependence  on drugs and to make 
Indian Pharma Industry globally competitive. The policies formulated by Govern ment from time 
to time are made so that the country ͛s dependence from imports are minimized and to give 
fillip to indigenous manufacturing. In this direction, the Government had on 28.01.2016 notified 
the withdrawal of exemption in customs duties which were earlier given to certain categories of 
drugs and bulk drugs to provide a boost to the domestic manufactu rers. Besides, the 
government has removed bottlenecks in environment clearance etc. which th e manufacturers 
are facing, in order to give a boost to domestic manufacturing of bulk drugs. 
 
Further, the Department is operating a scheme viz. Cluster Development Scheme  for 
Pharma Sector (CDP-PS) for financing common facilities in pharma clust er with the objective to 
enhance quality, productivity and innovative capabilities of the SME  pharma sector in the 
country. Further, Department has prepared an umbrella scheme namely ͚Scheme for 
Development of Pharmaceutical Industry ͛ which has been approved by the Standing Finance 
Committee (SFC) in its meeting on 7.2.2018. The said umbrella scheme comprises o f the 
following sub schemes :- 
 
i. Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common Facility Centre; 
ii. Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility Centre; 
iii. Assistance to Cluster Development; 

6 
 
iv. Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS); 
v. Pharmaceutical Promotion and Development Scheme (PPDS). 
 
It is expected that this scheme would help the Pharmaceutical industry including Bulk 
Drug and Medical Device Industry to cut down their production co st and also to upgrade their 
plants to WHO-GMP standards. This would help the patients to  get quality medicines at 
affordable price." 
(Ref: Reply to QNo-2) 
 
2.4  On being asked about the details of imported generic medicine, the Department in its 
written note stated as under :- 
 
 "Pharmaceuticals products available in the market are sometimes referred  to as generic, 
branded-generic and branded products etc. while no such distinction is made under 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules, 1945. Branded and generic may be referred as 
under: 
1. Branded medicines:  A branded medicine is internationally referred to as the drug 
product of the originator under a brand name that was first authori zed for marketing 
worldwide (normally as a patented product). The branded medicines are authorized for 
marketing on the basis of detailed documentation of its safety, ef ficacy and quality 
according to the requirement at the time of authorization.  
 
2. Generic medicines:  Generic medicines are those which contain same amount of same 
active ingredient(s) in same dosage form, and are intended to be administere d by the 
same route of administration as that of branded medicine. 
 
As and when application for import/ registration for import of fini shed 
formulations is received, the same is processed in accordance with the provisions of 
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules and import licence and registration certificate are issued. 
Since, January 2016 to till date more than 350 import licenses have been  issued for 
import of various finished formulation of medicines into India." 
(Ref: Reply to QNo-3) 
 
2.5  While furnishing the steps that have been taken for the promoti on and coordination of 
basic applied research in areas related to pharmaceutical sector and details of schemes 
implemented, the Department of Pharmaceuticals stated in a written note  as under:- 
 
 " The Department has established seven NIPERs at Mohali, Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, 
Guwahati, Kolkata, Raebareli and Hajipur to promote basic and applied r esearch 
catering to the needs of pharma industry. The Institutes impart post graduate and 
doctorate education in pharmaceutical sector. The Institutes are provided wi th financial 
resources for construction, equipping of laboratories and payment of salaries, stipend to 
the students and recurring expenses."   
(Ref: Reply to QNo-4) 
 

7 
 
2.6.  With regard to details of focus areas for pharmaceutical industry an d broad guidelines 
that are issued to stakeholder including NIPER for undertaking drugs re search in the country 
and diseases for which at present there does not exist standardizat ion and reliable drugs for 
treatment, the Department in its written note stated as under :- 
 
 "NIPERs carry out research in the area of New Drug Discovery & Drug developme nt in 
various therapeutic areas. The Institutes have linkages with industry an d other research 
organizations to assist in this regard. NIPER Mohali is doing research in Tuberculosis, 
Kala Azar and various other diseases. NIPER Hyderabad is carrying out research in the 
areas of cancer, inflammation, diabetes and infectious diseases and is involved  in 
Rational Drug Design and Synthesis of New Chemical Entities (NCEs), Bulk Drugs and 
Intermediates, Development of Analytical Methods, Solid state charact erization and 
Novel Drug Delivery Systems viz., Conventional, Nano & Micro emulsion t echnologies. 
NIPER Ahmedabad is carrying out research in the areas of Diabetes, Cancer, 
Neurodegenerative Disease, Infectious diseases, Tissue repair, regeneration and Medical 
Implants. NIPER Raebareli is carrying out drug research in the areas of 
neurodegenerative disorders, Tuberculosis, and environmental toxins. NIPER Guwahati 
is involved in development of Biopharmaceuticals using Biomolecular 
Engineering/Synthetic Biology, investigation on Genomics and Proteomics to  study 
various diseases and  studies on the mitigation of drug induced to xicities through 
natural products derived from Northeast India, etc. NIPER Hajipur is involved in 
development of novel drugs against Kala azar (Leishmaniasis), development of non-
invasive tool for early detection of breast cancer, development of Novel t herapeutic 
strategies against HIV, etc. NIPER Kolkata is carrying out research in the areas of 
synthetic and plant based drug discovery, immunology and immune diagnost ics, cellular 
and molecular biology,recombinant DNA technology and monoclonal antibod y 
technology, novel drug delivery systems, chemical and biochemical process techno logy, 
etc." 
 
(Ref: Reply to QNo-5) 
 
2.7 Regarding periodical review of performance analysis of research institutio ns and the 
challenges ahead,  the Department of Pharmaceuticals stated as under:- 
 
 " Department reviews the progress of the research made by NIPERs in its period ical 
Steering Committee Meetings. The Institutes are peer reviewed. Further, NITI Aayog 
has recently evaluated the performance of existing NIPERs." 
(Ref: Reply to QNo-6) 
 
2.8  Further elaborating on the plan of action the Department is con templating to provide 
enabling ecosystem for drugs Discovery and Innovation in pharma sector afte r post World 
Trade Organization (WTO) and Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) and 
the details of promotional efforts made and the budget allocated in this regard on annual basis, 
the Department in their written note stated as under:- 
 
 

8 
 
 "The Government of India has made several efforts so that patent legislation i n India on 
the one hand utilizes the TRIPS flexibilities to ensure that access t o healthcare does not 
suffer and on the other hand provides an IP framework conducive to protection of bona-
fide innovators. Subsequent to India becoming signatory to the TRIPS Agreemen t in 
1995, Indian patent laws were amended to comply with TRIPS. The Paten ts Act, 1970 
was amended in 2005, whereby provisions were brought in for bringing pharmaceuticals 
or medicines under the product patent regime with effect from 1 st January, 2005. After 
the amendment in 2005, Indian companies have been filing for pro duct and / or process 
patents. 
 
The Department is implementing a Scheme for financing common facilities in pharma 
cluster to catalyse and encourage quality, productivity and innovati on in Pharmaceutical sector 
and to enable the Indian Pharmaceutical industry to play a leading role in a competitive global 
market post World Trade Organization (WTO) and Trade related aspects of int ellectual property 
rights (TRIPS)." 
(Ref: Reply to QNo-7) 
 
2.9 While elaborating on the possible fallout and consequences particul arly with reference 
to affordability of medicines and export earning, in case, there i s any policy paralysis or vacuum 
to take mandatory steps to honor WTO and TRIPS guidelines, the Department of  
Pharmaceuticals in their written note stated as under:- 
 
 " TRIPS establish minimum levels of protection that each government has to  give to the 
intellectual property of fellow WTO members. In doing so, society benefits in the long 
term when intellectual property protection encourages creation and inve ntion, 
especially when the period of protection expires and the creations and i nventions enter 
the public domain. Under the TRIPS Agreement, WTO members have to provide  patent 
protection for any invention, whether a product or process for at least 20 years from the 
date on which the patent application was filed. The same has been  guaranteed under 
Section 48 read with Section 53 of the Patents Act, 1970. TRIPS Agreemen t allows policy 
space to countries to evolve a regime that best suits its condition. T his policy space is a 
sine qua non for sustainable development of the country. India is a p arty to Doha 
Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health which clarifies th at TRIPS 
agreement does not and should not prevent members from taking measures to protect 
public health." 
(Ref: Reply to QNo-8) 
 
2.10  On being asked about the details of patents that have been fil led by NIPERs so 
far, NIPER-wise and the role of IPR Cell of NIPER, the Department of Pharmaceuti cals gave the 
following detail:- 
 
NIPER No. of patents filed 
Mohali 186 
Hyderabad 44 
Ahmedabad 03 
Guwahati Nil 

9 
 
Hajipur Nil 
Raebareli Nil 
Kolkata Nil 
 
 As on date, only NIPER Mohali has IPR Cell. It maintains database of pat ents and 
also helps inventors in drafting, filing and prosecution of patents. Sci entists at 
IPR Cell are also involved in teaching of IPR related courses to increase 
awareness towards use and promotion of IPRs through seminars, quiz and othe r 
events." 
(Ref: Reply to QNo-9) 
 
2.11  The Committee further sought to know about the impact of Pat ent Amendment Act 
2005 on R&D by drug industries.  The Department in their written note stated that  Indian 
companies need to take necessary approvals and licenses from the innovator companies for the 
manufacture and marketing of the patented drugs. However, post expiry of the patents the 
companies can produce the generic version of the same. The Indian Paten t Act contains 
provisions for grant of compulsory licenses for the patented product  to be produced and sold 
by the Indian Drug companies in case of emergency situation. 
 
(Ref: Reply to QNo-10) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
CHAPTER – III 
PROMOTION OF RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES 
 The Department of Pharmaceuticals has undertaken t he following activities for 
Promotion and Co-ordination of Basic Research:- 
(i) Budgetary allocation for research in the Department is very limited. T he Department is 
supporting only 2 research projects viz., A Scheme of Rs.4.88 Crores on Target  specific 
New Drug Discovery for Anti-Tubercular Agents projects and a Scheme of Rs.4.88 Crores 
on Target specific New Drug Discovery against Kala Azar. In the FY 2016-17, a 
budgetary allocation of Rs.2.44 Crores was made for each project. However, no fund was 
released during FY 2016-17 to NIPER Mohali as they did not utilize earlier fund already 
allocated. Therefore, no budgetary allocation has b een made in current financial year. 
Moreover, the continuance of both schemes for a fur ther period of two years with no 
additional fund is under consideration in the Department.  
(ii) The Department has commissioned a Detailed Project Report for Developi ng India as a 
Drug Discovery and Pharma Innovation Hub by Ernst &  Young. The E&Y has 
submitted its report. The report has been finalized  in consultation with all the 
stakeholders. Second Phase of the Implementation Re port is under consideration 
in the Department.  
(iii) The Department has entrusted National Institute of Public Finance and Policy 
(NIPFP)to formulate a scheme on Venture Capital Scheme- to support  startups in Drug 
Discovery and Innovation. The NIPFP is yet to submit the final report. 
(iv) The Department is actively involved in the project approval under  Dept.of Science and 
Technology Scheme: Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research (DPR). 
(v) NIPERs have undertaken 21Academia —Industry Linkage MOUs with leading pharma 
industries which include one each with 4 Pharma CPSEs i.e. Rajasthan D rugs and 
Pharmaceuticals Ltd(RDPL), Indian Drugs &Pharmaceuticals Limited(IDPL), Karnataka 
Antibiotics &Pharmaceuticals Limited(KAPL) and Hindustan Anti-biotic Limited(HAL) and 
2 with Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited(BCPL) and 15 leading Private 
Pharma Companies like Dr. Reddy's Labs, Bharat Biotech, NATCO, Cadila 
Pharmaceuticals, Cadila Healthcare (Zydus), Sahjanand T echnologies, Johnson & 
Johnson, Sun Pharma, Wockahardt, Panacea Biotech and Medley Pharma ceuticals 
Ltd , Dow Chemical International Pvt. Ltd., Tirupat i Medicare Ltd, Kwality 
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. and Celeste Life Science Pvt. Ltd. This is Pharma initiative to 
build Innovation Ecosystem in India. 
(Ref: Pg No-2 of Background note) 
3.2 In view of the above the Committee asked about the strategy of Departmen t of 
Pharmaceuticals to facilitate Small and Medium Enterprises and other organ ization to promote 
their R&D activities which they are unable to do due to pauci ty of funds as well as lack of 
infrastructure and risk involved in research process, the Department in i ts written note stated 

11 
 
that in order to facilitate various Pharma & Medical Devices compani es in the Private Sector to 
pursue collaborative research, NIPERs have signed MOUs with Industries, including SME to 
conduct collaborative research on specific topics. 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-12) 
 
  Research and Development Activities by Small and Medium Enterpr ises 
3.3 During a study visit of the Committee to NIPER Mohali in month of J une 2017, NIPER 
Mohali submitted the following views regarding promotion and co-ordinat ion of basic applied 
research in areas relating to Pharmaceutical sector.   
 "The  economics of the drug discovery process prevents many small-scale 
entrepreneurs, who may have practical, innovative ideas, from participating in it.  A 
platform, containing the common facilities, needs  to be provided to  scientists within 
the country where the entire chain of drug discovery and developmen t process can be 
carried out without the need for initial investment of capital bud get.  Further, a 
molecule moves along the drug development process before it falls off the pipeline, the 
higher is the investment that goes waste.  It is an increasingly commo n practice among  
pharmaceutical giants to adopt translational research/medicine as a rout e to identify 
those novel molecules that are likely to survive this intensive process.  This is especially 
important in predicting whether a drug molecule is likely to have  low toxicity and 
survive clinical trials, right in the early stages of development.  This wil l bridge the gap 
between pre-clinical and clinical stages, addressing the ͚Phase II attrition͛ problem, thus 
reducing the cost of the process.  To this end, multinational compa nies are increasingly 
turning eastwards to exploit the highly skilled manpower that is avai lable here.   Most 
of these efforts are concentrated in China and parts of East Asia.  In ord er to become 
R&D hub in the drug discovery and development programme, India has to grab the 
opportunity in establishing itself as a centre of excellence via p ublic-private 
partnership." 
(Ref: Pg No-6 of LOP for interaction with DOP and NIPER Mohali) 
  Research and Development Activities By Pharmaceutical PSUs 
 
3.4 When asked about the steps that are involved before a pharma R&D 
companies/institution gets approval for its new drug formulatio n and starts commercial 
production of the same and the constraints phased by Indian pharma Compan ies/institution in 
bringing new drug formulations, the Department in their written note stated as under:-  
 
 " Once a Pharma company develops a new formulation or dosage form through its R&D 
efforts, approval under the Drugs & Cosmetic Act is mandatory to be obtained from the 
CDSCO as new drug. Such approval is accorded by the office of the Drug Cont roller 
General (India) DCG(I) after examining the relevant data provided by the co mpany 
regarding safety and efficacy of the new formulation." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-13) 
 

12 
 
3.5 Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) was producing Anti Snake Venom 
Serum earlier however, due to paucity of fund, the company has not been  producing the same 
for the last 10 years and there are very limited suppliers like Biological E Ltd. & Vins Bioproducts 
Ltd., Hyderabad and  Bharat Serum & Vaccines Ltd., Mumbai.  But the supply made by them is 
insufficient as around 50,000 poor people are dying every year due to snak e bite and about 2.5 
lakh people snake bites are being reported every year. 
(Ref:- Pg No-12 BCPL) 
 
3.6 The Committee asked about the reasons of not providing funds to BCPL for the 
prestigious and precious Anti Snake Venom Project, the Department in its written note stated 
as under:- 
 "Government of India had sanctioned a Revival Package to BCPL in the year 2006 f or 
modernization of its plants and machineries. After receipt of the f unds, BCPL started 
construction activities for the Anti Snake Venom Serum (ASVS) Project.   However due to 
pending court case relating to the land, work could not pro ceed. The court case was 
vacated only in May, 2013. In the meanwhile, the Company had mismanaged the project 
and failed to achieve the targets given while sanctioning the Revival Package.  Hence the 
Board of BCPL decided not to pursue further for the ASVS project an d waste the 
Government funds.   
 
Ref: Reply to Q No-14) 
3.7 While giving details about the R&D activities carried out by the BCPL, the Company 
stated as following:- 
 
 Company presently is not undertaking any R&D activities to improve its pro ducts.  
However, small activities are being done like signing  of MoU with NIPER, Kol kata for 
developing/manufacture of ASVS (Anti Snake Venom Serum) products at Ma niktala and 
another MoU with NIPER, Hajipur for development of Pantoprazole Tablet and 
Diclophecan Sodium Tablet.  In this direction, Company is working with t he research 
associates like NIPER to undertake some studies and suggest some measures to improve 
the efficiency and performance of the marketing team of BCPL.  T he measurable results 
will come only the future days after the Company becomes a turnaround company. 
 However, the following major R&D activities have been taken in last thre e years:- 
(i)  Labeling & Packing of Cantharidine hair oil 100 ml was changed to mak e it more 
attractive in market in competition with the leading brands in the market. 
(ii) Lamitube packing was introduced for newly launched pain relieving gel 
(Diclofenuc Gel, Trade name – Benflam) which is at par with the leading brands 
in the market.  This lamitube is user friendly and aesthetically lo oks better than 
the convention aluminum tubes. 
(iii) Introduction of aqueous coating in film coated tablets in place of using non 
aqueous coating with organic solvent for last several years.  This aqueous coating 
is cost affective, environmental friendly and less hazardous. 
 
(Ref:- BCPL) 
 

13 
 
3.8 On being asked about the progress in respect of R&D activities of BCPL and how the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals is going cooperate them in view of its  financial turnaround 
recently, the Department in its written note stated that the Ca binet has already decided in 
December, 2016 to strategically sell the company. Further steps are being taken to implement 
the Cabinet decision. The Company has since turned around and achieved net  profit during the 
last two years. The Board of the Company can take a decision at its level to  undertake R& D 
activities.  
(Ref: Reply to Q No-15) 
 COORDINATION AMONG VARIOUS DEPARTMENTS AND LABORATORIES 
3.9 R&D activities in Pharma sector is carried out by various governmental organiz ations like 
CSIR, ICMR, IIB, IICT, AIIMS, CDRI, IITs and pharmaceutical companies in public and  private 
sector. Ministry of Defense, Department Of Atomic Energy also carry out R&D activit ies in the 
field of pharmaceutical & medical devices etc.  NIPERs are major educatio nal & research 
institutes who have collaboration with various organizations as well as public & private sector 
companies.  For example, NIPER Kolkata has collaboration with BCPL for Anti Snake Ven om 
Serum (ASVS).  Similarly, NIPER Mohali have collaboration with various lead ing pharma 
companies like Cadila, Sun Pharma, Panacea Biotech, etc. 
(Ref: Dictation by Dir) 
3.10 The Department of Pharmaceuticals while furnishing the way it keeps tab on all the 
research carried out by the aforesaid organizations & companies and on mech anism developed 
to prevent overlapping of research work and coordinate R&D activities stated as under:-  
 
 " The Department is regularly in contact with the Scientific Departm ents like DBT, DSIR, 
DST and other agencies/ Institutes engaged in the decision making processes about their 
scientific programs. Apart from this, NIPERs are interacting with various NIPERs and  
other Scientific Institutions of Central and State Government to have update about the 
research work being carried out at such laboratories in academia as well as  the 
Industry." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-16) 
 
3.11  On being asked about details on whether the Government is contempl ating to integrate 
all the public Department/Organizations/Institutions already engaged in  pharmaceutical 
activities including R&D to ensure requisite synergy to boost the  R&D activities at one place for 
better administrative and financial management, the Department in its w ritten note stated as 
under:- 
 " Even though integration of various Departments/Organizations /Institut ions already 
engaged in Pharmaceutical activities including R&D, is a Policy matter, the Depar tment 
would like to at least have a mechanism in place to facilitate creatio n of a depository of 
R&D activities in the field of basic drugs, drug intermediates, Pharmaceut ical 
formulation including Novel Drug Delivery Systems (NDDS), Medical Devi ces etc. so that 
duplication of research work could be avoided to the extent possible." 
                                                                        (Ref: Reply to Q No-17) 

14 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
STATUS OF PHARMACEUTICAL RESEARCH IN NIPERs AND THEIR COMMERCIALIZATION 
 The Department in its background note stated that the premier higher institutions of 
education and research on Pharmaceuticals Sciences- National Institutes of Pharmac eutical 
Education and Research (NIPERs), though 7 NIPERs are operating, only one i.e. N IPER, Mohali is 
full-fledged with its own campus and sanctioned faculty, while all  other NIPERs are running 
from temporary accommodation/mentor institutions for the last 8 years.  Thus undertaking of 
research by contractual and adhoc faculty cannot be expected.  Even at Moh ali, the faculty is 
not at full sanctioned strength because of inadequate budgetary allocations. 
(Ref: Pg No -3 of Background Note) 
 
4.2  While submitting during oral evidence before the Committee on 11.04. 2018 the 
Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals clarified the role of NIPERs as under: 
 
 "....Like IIMs and IITs which offer Master of Technology courses and  also do research 
work similarly NIPERs are educational institutes and not research la bs. For pure research 
there are CSIR labs, National Physical Laboratory, National Chemical Laboratory, Bhabha 
Atomic Research Centre, NIPERs cannot be compared with these institutes because their 
job is to prepare students for post graduation courses in pharmacy and  post graduation 
in research, so we cannot expect original research work from these institutes, that would 
be unfair and their work is to prepare the ground." 
(Ref: Verbatim Proceedings Pg No-29) 
 
(A)  INFRASRUCTURE, GOVERNANCE AND HUMAN RESOURCE STATUS 
 
4.3 While furnishing the details of main recommendations of the NITI Aayog on NIPERs and 
the steps the Department has taken or proposed to take to implement these  
recommendations, the Department in its written note stated as under:- 
"The major recommendations of NITI Aayog include: 
(i) Strengthening of existing NIPERs 
(ii) Starting Undergraduate and other courses.  
(iii) Filling up the post of Director. 
(iv) Increasing the revenue generation. 
(v) Vertical construction of building. 
(vi) Putting in place facilities for drug discovery. 
 The recommendations of the Aayog were duly incorporated in the Expe nditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) Memorandum and approval of Ministry of Finance obtained.  
Department has initiated action to implement the same." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-47) 
 
4.4 Responding to a query of the Committee about the efforts taken/being tak en by the 
Department to build independent campus for all NIPERs and en sure permanent faculty for 

15 
 
imparting quality research education to students, the Department in its  written note stated as 
under:-  
 "A meeting of EFC held under the chairmanship of Secretary, Expenditure, Mi nistry of 
Finance on 26.3.2018 has given its recommendations for providing infrast ructure 
support, creation/ filling up of posts etc.  Subsequent to ap proval of the EFC of NIPERs, 
construction of regular campuses of NIPER Ahmedabad/Guwahati will co mmence soon 
and action initiated for purchase of equipment and creation/ filling up of permanent 
jobs in NIPERs." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-38) 
4.5 The Committee in their 18th Report (16th Lok Sabha) had observed that mo st of the 
NIPER Institutes lack state- of-the-art infrastructure for undertaking research work.  Research 
infrastructure in NIPER, Mohali has become obsolete and needs comprehensiv e 
overhauling/innovation.  In NIPER, Ahmedabad infrastructure i.e. laboratory, eq uipment etc., 
require augmentation and the same is the case in NIPER, Kolkata and  NIPER, Raebareli where 
no research activity is being carried out. 
4.6 While responding to the steps that are proposed to be taken by Dep artment of 
Pharmaceuticals to contain the above infrastructure problems which ar e affecting Research & 
Development of NIPERs, the Department in its post evidence written note stated as under:- 
 "EFC under the chairmanship of Secretary, Expenditure, Ministry of Fina nce has 
recommended that emphasis be given for setting up state-of-the-art-laboratory facilities 
at various NIPERs.  Sufficient funds for the purpose have been proposed. Furth er 
creation of number of academic and non-academic posts at various NIPERs has bee n 
proposed.  
(Ref: Reply to Q No-20) 
4.7 Responding further about the efforts being taken by the Department t o bridge the 
administrative deficiency since most of the NIPERs are functioni ng without their own Board of 
Governors and post of Directors are also vacant impacting the functioning of  these institutes, 
the Department in its written note stated as under:- 
 " Action is being taken to constitute the Board of Governors ( BOG) of NIPERs ( Mohali 
has its own BOG).  In absence of BoG, a Steering Committee under chairmanship o f 
Secretary, Pharmaceuticals look after administrative/financial matter of NIPERs.  The 
posts of Directors in NIPERs Mohali, Kolkata, Guwahati, Gandhi Nagar and Raebareli 
have already been filled up.  The posts of Directors, NIPERs Hajipur and Hyderabad are 
at final stages of filling up." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-46) 
 
4.8 Further responding to the constraints that are being faced by NIPERs to acc omplish the 
targets set under these MOUs, the Department in its written note stated as under:- 

16 
 
 "Lack of permanent campuses, well equipped laboratories, permanent faculty and staff 
and insufficient funding are some of the constraints being faced by NIPERs to 
accomplish the set targets." 
 (Ref: Reply to Q No-32) 
4.9 To a specific query regarding the steps that are being taken to sto p attrition/brain drain 
due to lack of job security in NIPERs and to create permanent jobs f or faculty as well as 
subject/technical experts in the NIPERs, the Department in its written note stated as under:- 
 " A meeting of EFC held under the chairmanship of Secretary, Expendit ure, Ministry of 
Finance on 26.3.2018 has given its recommendations for providing infrast ructure 
support, creation/ filling up of posts etc.  Subsequent to ap proval of the EFC of NIPERs, 
action is being initiated for creation of academic and non-academic po sts. Regular 
faculty will reduce the attrition/ brain drain." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-33) 
4.10 During oral Evidence before the Committee on  11.04.2018, the Director NIPER-
Hyderabad gave following views on problem of brain drain:- 
 "If people who work in NIPER can be absorbed in NIPER, the brain drain taking place in 
our country can be stopped. As on date the biggest problem we are fa cing in NIPER is 
good talent has left us...problem is we do have jobs for them but that is contractual..." 
(Ref: Verbatim Proceeding Pg No-20) 
 (B) FUND STATUS FOR RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES  
 
4.11 The Department has entrusted National Institute of Public Financ e and Policy (NIPFP) to 
formulate a scheme on Venture Capital Scheme- to support startup s in Drug Discovery and 
Innovation.  The NIPFP is yet to submit the final report. 
(Ref: Pg No-2 of Background Note) 
4.12 The Committee further asked about the steps taken for smooth i mplementation of 
venture capital scheme which will support startups in drug disco very and innovation and 
preparedness the Department has done in this regard to provide a trusted handholding to 
pharmaceutical start ups in India, the Department in its written note stated as under:- 
 "Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure vide their OM No. 24( 35)/PF-II/2012 
dated 5.08.2015 had instructed for rationalization of the schemes whic h are/to be 
implemented by various Ministries. Subsequent to these instructions, th e Department 
has prepared an umbrella Scheme for Development of Pharmaceutical Indu stry wherein 
schemes including setting up of Venture Capital Fund for financi ng drug design, 
discovery & innovation in Pharmaceutical Sector have been dropped and Schem es for 
Assistance to Bulk drugs industry for Common Facilitation Centre, Assistan ce to Medical 
device Industry for Common Facilitation Centre, Cluster Development, Pharmaceutical s 

17 
 
Technology Up-gradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS) and Pharmaceuticals  Promotion 
Development Scheme (PPDS)  are proposed to be taken up for promoting the growth of 
Pharmaceutical and Medical Device Industry." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-29) 
4.13 The  Department while furnishing NIPER-wise details of expenditure incurred, submitted 
following data as under:- 
Funds released to NIPERs from 2012-13 to 2017-18 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Ahmedabad Guwahati Hajipur Mohali 
Gen Cap. Gen Cap Gen Cap Gen + 
Salary 
CCA 
2012-13 4.13 2.57 2.00 3.22 0.45 0.00 22.82 0.00 
2013-14 3.85 2.94 2.23 0.65 2.85 0.65 19.20 0.00 
2014-15 4.00 0.50 2.91 1.00 3.30 0.70 20.87 0.00 
2015-16 9.00 10.76 4.50 16.50 4.00 2.00 27.48 9.79 
2016-17 9.00 10.48 4.00 22.27 4.00 1.00 27.48 0.00 
2017-18 10.00 17.96 6.00 46.00 5.00 0.00 28.31 14.00 
Total  39.98 45.21 21.64 89.64 19.60 4.35 146.16 23.79 
 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Year Hyderabad Kolkata Raebareli 
Gen  Cap Gen Cap Gen Cap 
2012-13 15.29 5.00 1.75 - 2.00 1.00 
2013-14 15.99 7.00 4.00 0.40 3.00 1.50 
2014-15 9.66 4.50 4.00 0.37 4.45 0.00 
2015-16 25.00 10.00 5.00 1.30 5.50 0.00 
2016-17 25.00 10.00 5.00 3.00 5.50 0.75 
2017-18 25.00 5.00 8.00 3.50 8.50 2.00 
Total 115.94 41.50 27.75 8.57 28.95 5.25 
 
 
Total GIA General (incl. GIA Salary for NIPER Mohali) from 2012-13 to 2017-18   
        = Rs. 400.02 cr.  
Total GIA Capital from 2012-13 to 2017-18   = Rs. 218.31 cr. 
 
Funds under General head are provided for recurring expenditure like  salary, stipend. Office 
expenses etc.  
Funds under Capital head are provided for creation of capital assets – construction of campus, 
purchase of equipment & machinery 
(Ref: Reply to Q No39) 

18 
 
4.14 During study visit of the Committee in 2017, NIPER Mohali in their written replies has 
raised the issue of paucity of fund which is hampering their R&D activity.  According to them as 
per recommendation of the Standing Committee on Finance (SFC), a fund of Rs. 249.455 crores 
were sanctioned for the institute during the 12 th Five Year Plan period.   But they had received 
only Rs. 9.79 crores.  As a result the following activities NIPER Mohali have been held up:- 
 
(i) A need for R&D facility to carry out research and to undertake high end 
specialized research in future is a necessity. 
(ii) Construction of additional lecture halls to meet the increased requir ements of 
students. 
(iii) To make the Dosage Plant functional, main core pharma machinery needs t o be 
procured and  finishing touches to the building provided to suit their installation 
and functioning. 
(iv) There is a huge demand of refrigerated water supply and cold storage fo r 
research purpose.  
 It was also stated by the NIPER in their reply two research projects  i .e. (i)Tuberculosis 
(TB) and (ii) Leishmaniasis (kala Azar), were sanctioned for funding by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals.  The total cost of the projects was Rs. 9.76 crores ( Rs. 4.88 crores each).  Till 
date, Rs. 4.88 crores (Rs. 2.44 crores each)  has been received by the Institute.  The Institute has 
requested for extension of the project tenure by two years and release of the sanctioned 
amount for completion of the project objectives.  
(Ref: NIPER written Replies Pg No-3 and 4) 
 
4.15 On the above issue the Committee sought the comments of Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, the latter in its written reply stated as under:- 
 
 "After evaluation of TB and Kala Azar projects by an expert committee consi sting of 
external experts, the duration of the projects has been extended by one yea r up to 31 st 
March, 2019 and additional Rs.2.50 cr. released during the financial year 2017-2018.
 
 Standing Committee on Finance (SFC) had approved Rs. 249.455 crores for t he institute 
during the 12 th Five Year Plan period. Out of which, Rs. 9.79 cr. was released to NIPER 
Mohali during FY 2015-16 for various schemes. However, an amount of Rs. 5.4 0 cr. 
remained unspent with them. On request of NIPER, Mohali, the Department has re-
appropriated the funds so that it can utilize the same. Further, th e Department released 
additional funds to the tune of Rs. 14.00 crore, as per the priority in dicated by the 
Institute." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-22) 
4.16  Further the Committee asked about details of R&D on  Kala Azar  and Anti TB Agents  
along with details of BE, RE and actual expenditure on this scheme sinc e its inception and 
physical targets achieved under this scheme, the Department in its writte n note stated as 
under:- 
 "An amount of Rs. 7.38 crore has been released  for Kala Azar and Anti T B Agents since 
inception of the both projects. The physical targets achieved are  as under: 
 

19 
 
 
(i) Anti TB 
 Molecular docking studies for ICL 
 Synthesis of 260 ICL inhibitors 
 Synthesis of 164 Malate Synthase Inhibitors 
 Biological evaluation of some ICL and MS inhibitors carried out/in progress 
 162 compounds tested by enzyme assays for ICL (90) and MS (72) 
 Homology model developed for ATP Synthase 
 Synthesis of 170 ATP Synthase Inhibitors 
 ATP Synthase inhibitor screening in progress 
 Cell based (macrophage) assay initiated 
(ii) Kala Azar 
 
Till date approximately 400 compounds have been screened for the antip romastigote activity 
and the ones which showed better or similar activity to standard drug  miltefosine were 
subjected to cytotoxicity assay. The two targets proposed (Ribose 5-phosp hate 
isomerase B and trypanothionereductase) were cloned from Leishmaniadonovani and  
expressed to make recombinant protein. Independent enzyme assays were set up fo r 
the two targets. Till date compounds have been designed and synthes ized based on 
trypanothionereductase (TR) enzyme." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-23) 
4.17  The Committee also asked about the constraints faced during implement ation of this 
scheme and effective steps that are being taken to address these constraints, the Department 
in its written note stated as under:- 
 " After evaluation of both the projects by an expert committee consisting of external 
experts, the duration of the projects has been extended up to 31 st March, 2019 and 
Rs.2.50 cr. released during the financial year 2017-2018." 
 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-24) 
4.18 The Department of Pharmaceuticals in their background material has stated t hat NIPER 
Mohali had not been allocated any fund for the financial year 201 6-17 as they did not utilize 
earlier funds already allocated.  Hence no budgetary allocation has been made in   2017-18. 
 
4.19 The same issue was highlighted during oral evidence of the Depa rtment before the 
Committee and the Secretary Department of Pharmaceuticals clarified on this i ssue of 
underutilization by NIPERs which is as under: 
 
 "...Till the time the NIPERs do not submit their utilization cert ificates, we cannot release 
new installment of funds to them"  
(Ref: Proceedings Pg No-17) 
 
 

20 
 
4.20  On being asked about the reasons for under utilization of f unds which was released 
prior to 2016-17, the Department in its written note stated as under:- 
 
 "NIPER Mohali could not utilize the funds released in 2015-2016 d ue to lack of regular 
Director and absence of re-appropriation.  A regular Director has since been  appointed 
and the funds re-appropriated, which would soon be utilized." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-34) 
4.21 When the Committee asked whether other NIPERs also showed under utiliz ation of 
funds, the Department in its written note stated that during recen t time, funds released to 
other NIPERs have been fully utilized. 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-35) 
4.22 While deposing before the Committee during oral evidence on 11.04.2018 th e 
Adviser/Scientist G from Department of Biotechnology informed abou t Pharma Mission as 
under: 
 "We do not have per se any division on pharmaceuticals. But we are working on 
pharmaceuticals in different areas across DBT. We have launched a major  mission which 
is a pharma mission. Apart from that, I am sure in all these NIPER research, some p art 
will be funded by Department of Bio Technology. So, most of the f unding of these 
projects will be from Department of Bio Technology. We do not ca tegorise that we have 
to fund only DBT institutes. We fund DBT, DST, CSIR, NIPER and even industry and 
academi.  Wherever good research is required, we fund that. In 2017 there was a 
Cabinet approval for a major pharma mission which has been launch ed in 2017. It is a 
R.1,500 crore Pharma Mission which is headed by the Biotechnology Industry Research 
Assistance Council ( BIRAC) along with World Bank. Rs.750 crore would be funded by 
BIRAC and return would be given by World Bank later on. It has fou r phases. For R&D, 
Infrastructure Development Staff and Technical Expertise, Skill Development  and 
creation of enhancing technology transfer. In the first phase we have started R&D 
proposal; 125 proposals have been received by BIRAC; and 16 have been shortlisted. This 
is another Mission which will work. We also have a Bio Design Prog ramme because bio-
design and bio-devices is an area in which we require expertise of  medical doctors and 
engineer and basic scientists. So, we started a programme about a few years ba ck in 
collaboration with AIIMS Delhi and IIT Delhi. That programme was very successful.... " 
(Ref: Verbatim Proceedings Pg No-7 & 8) 
 
(C)  ACADEMIA- INDUSTRY LINKAGE STATUS 
4.23 NIPERs have undertaken 21 Academia - Industry Linkage MOUs with leading pharma  
industries which include one each with 4 Pharma CPSEs i.e. Rajasthan Dru gs and 

21 
 
Pharmaceuticals Ltd (RDPL), Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL), K arnataka 
Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL) and Hindustan Antibiot ics Limited (HAL) and 2 
with Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) and 15 leading Pr ivate Pharma 
Companies like Dr. Reddy's Labs, Bharat Biotech, NATCO, Cadila Pharmaceuticals, Cadila 
Healthcare (Zydus), Sahjanand Technologies, Johnson & Johnson, Sun Pharma, Wockahard t, 
Panacea Biotech and Medley Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Dow Chemical's International Pvt. Ltd., 
Tirupati Medicate Ltd, Kwality Pharmaceuticals Ltd. and Celeste Life Science Pvt.  Ltd.  This is 
Pharma initiative to build Innovation Ecosystem in India. 
4.24 While furnishing the outcome of Academia - Industry Linkage MOUs wit h leading public 
sector undertakings and private pharma companies, the Department in its writ ten note stated 
as under:- 
 "NIPERs have signed MoUs with various PSUs and private pharmaceutical companies  
relating to collaborative research programmes in the areas of novel drug deliver y, new 
drug discovery, pharmaceutical product development etc. Along with the research 
activities, several knowledge-sharing sessions such as workshops and conferen ces are 
organized.  
 
 In case of NIPER Mohali,  zinc sulphate dispersible tablets have been  marketed by IDPL; 
two formulations were commercialized by Promed Exports (now called - SentissPharma) 
and two formulations were marketed by Montajat Veterinary, Saudi Arabia. Promed and 
Montajat had sponsored projects at the Institute. NIPERs have over all licen sed seven 
technologies/patents to various Industry partners. Two formulations based on  
NanoCrySP technology are under commercialization. NIPER Kolkata is undertakin g 
collaborative research activities in identified areas such as Repurposing of existing 
pharmaceuticals, Novel small molecules for anti-diabetics and drug resis tant 
tuberculosis, API by synthetic biology/ cell factory, phyto-pharmaceuticals, rare diseases 
of public health importance etc. Academia-Industry MoUs of NIPERs have  led to 
collaborative research, student training, joint publications, joint patents, joint 
conferences and symposiums. Technology has been transferred in many cases." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-30) 
4.25 On being asked about the details of feasibility of constituti ng a consortium of pharma 
companies both public and private to pool their resources to i nvest for R&D activities, the 
Department in its written note stated as under:- 
 "  In principle, it is feasible to constitute a consortium of pharma i ndustries for investing 
in R&D. However, the Government has already decided to either close or strategically 
sell all the pharma CPSUs." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-31) 
4.26 During same oral  evidence before the Committee, the Secretary Department of  
Pharmaceutical gave following views on Academia -Industry link:- 

22 
 
 " ...Quarterly conferences where coordination can be done, that we hav e done these 
many researches, now for commercial conversion we have to work with industry and find 
a link with research. We have to address concerns of industry and research.. .interaction 
with industry is not continuous, researchers are scientific people they ca n work in labs 
but they cannot sell like marketing agents...we need to convin ce industry about the 
worth of these research works but there is no platform to link both of these" 
(Ref: verbatim Proceeding Pg No-6 & 7)    
 (D)   COMMERCIALIZATION OF RESEARCH STATUS 
4.27 While submitting before the Committee during oral evidence on the Sub ject on 
11.04.2018 the Secretary Department of Pharmaceuticals gave following views on 
commercialization of research in NIPERs: 
 " Every NIPER is doing something or other research. Similarly various CSIR l abs might be 
doing something new. ICMR projects are doing their new research. But they  do not get 
converted into commercial activity........its not that companies are not coming, but we 
are not able to reach to the company's " 
(Ref: Verbatim Proceeding Pg No-5) 
4.28  Elaborating on the mechanism available and efforts made by the Govern ment to 
convince and incentivize private/public/joint venture pharmaceutical  companies to undertake 
commercial production of new drug formulations discovered by various  R&D Institutions 
including NIPERs, the Department in its written note stated as under:- 
 "There is no specific mechanism to incentivize the Pharma companies t o undertake 
commercial production of new drug formulations discovered by various R&D Institutions 
including NIPERs. However, the Department of Pharmaceuticals is in the process of 
facilitating the Pharma Industry to undertake commercial manufacture of bu lk drugs 
including those based upon the discoveries/technologies developed by R& D Institutions 
including NIPERs." 
 
(Ref: Reply To Q No-41) 
4.29  On being asked about the steps being taken/proposed to be t aken for 
commercialization of research done by NIPERs under the administrative control  of Ministry, the 
Department in its written note stated as under:- 
 "NIPERs are at the initial stage of research, except NIPER Mohali. The Institut e is under 
process to collaborate with National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) to 
facilitate the commercialization of existing patents of NIPER." 
(Ref: Reply To Q No-40) 

23 
 
4.30 Further, on being asked about the reasons for not being able to make any significant 
molecular achievement/discovery indigenously, the Department in its writ ten note stated as 
under:- 
 "NIPERs are under initial phases of establishing research infrastructure, ow n regular 
campus and laboratories, regular faculty and scientific staff. These ar e some of the 
crucial aspects which need to be addressed for success in drug discovery process." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-26) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER-V 
CHALLENGES & CONSTRAINTS BEING FACED BY THE DEPARTMENT 
  The Department enumerated the main Challenges & Constrains as under:- 
1. Though the Department is dealing with the high technical aspects of research, the R&D 
division of the Department does not have any technical experts, as foun d in Department 
of Health and Family Welfare, MHRD, DST, SBT, CSIR, ICMR and like others.  
2. The premier higher of education and research institutions on Pharmaceut icals Sciences- 
National Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPERs), though 7 NIPERs 
are operating, only one i.e , NIPER, Mohali is full-fledged with its own campus  and 
sanctioned faculty, while all other NIPERs are running from temporary 
accommodation/mentor institutions for the last 8 years. Thus undertak ing of research 
by contractual and adhoc faculty can be expected. Even at Mohali, the  faculty is not at 
full sanctioned strength because of inadequate budgetary allocations. 
3. No/poor budgetary allocation for Department of Pharmaceuticals, especially  for the 
research. 
4. Pharmaceutical Sciences is a multi-disciplinary science and is spread over a large 
number of Ministries and Departments viz., Department of Biotechnology,  Department 
of Science and Technology, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, Ind ian Council 
for Medical Research, Department of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Human 
Resource Development, Department of AYUSH, and others. The 
Coordination/Convergence require adequate and competent manpower, which  are not 
available with the Department of Pharmaceuticals. 
5. Drug Discovery/Pharma research and development involves high investment involving  
high risk. 
6. Private Sector should also be actively engaged in the exercise of making In dia a global 
hub for Drugs Discovery while pursuing all components viz., investment,  regulatory 
practices, intellectual property rights, quality manpower etc., requi red for achieving the 
same. 
(Ref: Pg No-1 and 3 of Background Note) 
A Coordination and Cooperation with Pharma Companies 
5.2  The Committee asked the Department the way they are  going to address th e challenges 
of drug discovery and pharma innovation hub with this limited bu dgetary allocation, the 
Department in its written note stated as under:-  
 "Through partnership with pharma companies and by joining the core c ompetencies of 
NIPERs and initiating funding schemes specific to local pharmaceutical need s, the 
Department hopes to overcome drug discovery challenges." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-25) 

25 
 
5.3 On being asked what prevents the Department to appoint technical experts in R&D 
Division of the Department of Pharmaceuticals, the Department in its written note stated that 
there is no separate R& D Department. NIPERs act as research arm of the Department. 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-36) 
 
5.4 Further the Committee also asked about the role and functions of R an d D Division of 
the Department and steps the Department is taking to address the sh ortage of technical 
experts, the Department in its written note stated as under:- 
 
 " The role & functions include promotion and coordination of basic, applied and other 
research in areas related to Pharmaceuticals sector.  It also includes education and 
training including high end research and inter-sectoral coordination including 
coordination between organizations and institutes under the Centr al and State 
Governments in areas related to the subjects entrusted to the Department .Inadequate 
budget allocation for all the NIPERs is main reason for lack of academ ic and non-
academic personnel and world class equipment." 
 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-37) 
5.5 During oral evidence of the Department on the subject on 11.04.2018, the Secretary 
Department of Pharmaceuticals submitted following views on challenges faced b y the 
Department: 
 "Presently Drug Discovery job is being done at different places. You c an say the 
coordination is in books, but the fact is that there is no specific coordination mechanism 
for example  we do not know what is being done in NIPERs is being done in CSIR l ab, isn't 
it duplication, though there is no harm in it because whic h hits first is better.  But still 
there is no common platform where we can share information with each other.  Group of 
Secretaries suggested that his must be but could not be taken forward.  I sugges t, in 
case, this committee direct, I am ready to take lead, one inter-departmen tal Committee 
may be constituted to at least organize and direct research work.  
(Ref: Verbatim Proceeding Pg No-5) 
(B)  Public/Consumer Awareness 
5.6 While furnishing before the Committee about the initiatives the  department has taken 
to disseminate the new drug discoveries/innovations/formulations  fo r the awareness and 
education of industry, the Department in its written note stated as under:- 
 "DoP regularly funds conferences, symposia and workshops to publiciz e research 
findings. NIPERs also encourage their faculty to publish their scientif ic reports in high 
impact journals for dissemination to broader audiences." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-42) 

26 
 
5.7  The Committee further asked about the details of mechanism the government have or 
proposed to have to bring wide publicity and transparency regarding t he expiry of important 
drugs/medicines to the pharmaceutical industry and other stakeholders, th e Department in its 
written note stated as under:- 
  " The Department is implementing a scheme Pharmaceutical Promotion Devel opment 
Scheme (PPDS) through which it is partly financing conferences/ semi nars for updating 
the industry/stakeholders of the requirements of the country and global  
opportunity/need." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-43) 
5.8 Further the Committee also asked about the government proposing any legislation to 
make generic medicine prescription mandatory for government doctors, the Depart ment in its 
written note stated asunder:- 
 "Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Directorate General of Health Se rvices) have 
vide their Order No. S-11025/45/10- MH-I dated 26/05/2010 instructed Central 
Government Hospitals to provide only good quality generic medicines and  whenever 
any branded drug is prescribed, it shall invariably also be mentioned  that any other 
equivalent generic drug could also be provided." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-44) 
(C)  FUTURE PHARMACEUTICAL RESEARCH 
5.9 The Committee also asked about the strategy that is being adopted by the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals and NIPERs for producing biological drugs instead of chemical drugs, 
benefits of biological drugs over chemicals drugs, the Department in  their written note stated 
as under:- 
 "Biologics, also called biopharmaceuticals, have revolutionized vaccination  programs, 
treatment in chronic and serious illnesses like rheumatoid arthritis, cancers, diabetes, 
etc., and nudged traditional drugs out of the top slots, with sales i ncreasing year after 
year. Chemically, biologics are complex protein molecules manufactured using 
recombinant DNA methods and live organisms.  Biologic drugs have been playing 
significant role in meeting the unmet medical needs particularly in the field of non-
communicable diseases including diabetes, autoimmune and various types of cancer 
diseases etc. 
  Biologic drugs are basically protein in nature which differs from  the conventional 
chemical drugs in many aspects. The biologic drugs are produced using li ving organisms 
or cells in combination with recombinant DNA technology. These bio logic include 
therapeutic monoclonal antibodies, Insulin, Filgrastim, Erythropoietin, Interferon, fusion 
proteins, hormones and subunit  vaccines, human blood products inc luding albumin, 
intramuscular and intravenous immunoglobulin, coagulation factor VII I and IX etc.  In 
general, the cost of setting a manufacturing facility of r-DNA derived biosimilar varies 
from US$ 100 to 250 million and takes 7-8 years to develop the drug whereas the cost of 
setting up a generic chemical drug facility varies from US$ 2-3 million and takes ~2- 3 
years for the development of the drug. 
 The Government of India is committed to provide affordable health care to al l and 
recognizes the prospects of biologics and biosimilars in disease  treatment. The Government 

27 
 
has taken several steps in widening the range of biologic drugs production th rough 
encouraging cooperation between academics, industries and regulators.  However, 
considering the cost- efficacy, Indian biopharma industry is in vesting mainly in similar 
biologics/biosimilar product development which would be benefici al to a large number of 
patients in India due to its affordability and accessibility. Accor ding to Central Drugs 
Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) and the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) a 
Similar Biologic product is that which is similar in terms of quality, safety and efficacy to an 
approved Reference Biological Product based on comparability. 
 The Indian biosimilar market is poised for big growth, augured by the launch of new 
products, growing acceptance of biosimilars and the entry of new players. Develop ment 
of biosimilars is dependent on significant investments, not only in  terms of high costs 
associated with long term and unpredictable research and also the time con suming 
series of trials followed by regulatory approvals.   
 India has an efficient and well-coordinated regulatory approval and mark eting system 
duly synchronized with global guidelines available on biosimilars. The Review 
Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM), Department of Biotechnology authori zes 
the conduct of research and development, exchange of genetically engineered cell 
banks for the R & D and review of data up to preclinical evaluation i n the country. Once 
recommended by the RCGM, the proposal of biologic drug is sent to Drug Con troller 
General (India) (DCGI) for appropriate clinical trials and market autho rization. Further, 
DBT and CDSCO have revised the Guidelines of 2012 to ͞ Guidelines on Similar Biologics: 
Regulatory Requirements for Marketing Authorization in India in year 2016 ͟  for the 
harmonization with other global guidelines available on Biosimilars. 
 Accordingly, RCGM has assessed and recommended 64 biosimilar biological molecu les 
on average 9 products / year to DGCI for clinical trials.   As per Generic and Biosimilar 
Initiative (GaBI) journal 2017, India has produced 27-28 similar biologic/ biosimilar 
version of branded/reference biologic drug at reasonable cost and these are accessible 
to the patients suffering from various cancers and autoimmune diseases etc. 
 Recognizing the prospects of biological drugs, under Pharmaceuticals Pr omotion and 
Development Scheme (PPDS) of Department of Pharmaceuticals a series of seminars are 
planned on various aspects of the subject ͞ Promoting growth of Biological Sector in 
India͟  for the year 2018-19." 
(Ref: Reply to Q No-45)  
5.10 While submitting before the Committee during oral evidence on th e subject on 
11.04.2018, the Secretary Department of Pharmaceuticals gave following views on upc oming 
research in Pharmaceuticals: 
 "... now our focus is going on biologics... in which not c hemical medicine but gene based 
or microbe base biological medicines are inserted inside the body for treatment. It is 
estimated that after five to seven years fifty percent of medicines wil l be biologics 
based...we have to take this knowledge to industry because those in dustries which are 
making chemical based medicines we have to incentivize them to go  towards biologics 
based medicine, will have to change their mindset. This is going  at slow pace but now 
there is need to accelerate its pace." 
(Ref: Verbatim Proceedings Pg No 19) 

28 
 
PART II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
Post -WTO AND TRIPS - Challenges before Pharmaceutical Research and 
Development Indian Industry 
 India is globally considered the third largest producer of medici nes by 
volume and the fourteenth in terms of value because of the fact that In dian 
medicines are among the lowest price in the world. India exports medic ines to 
more than 200 countries and earns revenue more than Rs. 1,00,000 cror e.  Out of 
the total, production 50% medicines are consumed in the country itself and rest 
50% are exported.  This export of medicines is reckoned with third la rgest export 
sector in the country after gems & jewellery and textile se ctors.  The Committee 
note that this robust growth has taken place due to low cost m anufacturing and 
skilled manpower. However, the Committee note that India had to m ake a 
paradigm shift in their pharmaceutical policy in th e backdrop of post-WTO and 
TRIPS agreement in the mid nineties.  The country had to move from process 
patent regime to product patent regime by amending the Patent Act 1970 in 2005.  
 Under the TRIPS Agreement, WTO Members have to provide patent 
protection for any invention, whether a product or process for atleast 20 years 
from the date on which the patent application was filed.  This issue reiterated the 
urgency for India to have paradigm shift in its strategy to  expand its leadership 
in Drug Discovery and Innovation. The Committee als o note that the global 
pharmaceutical industry is shifting from chemical b ased medicines to 
biologics based medicines.  

29 
 
 The Committee note that the Department of pharmaceuticals in their 
pursuit to strengthen pharmaceutical invention and discovery, commissioned a 
Detailed Project Report for Developing India as a Drug Discovery and 
Pharmaceutical Innovation Hub presented by the firm -   Ernst & Young, which 
highlights that India has emerged as a potent drug development service provider 
but not a key player in innovative product research. Indian bio-pharmaceutical 
companies are in early stage/biological research and translational research 
capabilities and R&D funding are weak compared to global bio-pharmaceutical 
companies. The Committee note that the contribution of Indian academia to new 
drug research is not substantive and as a result patents and publishing have not 
translated into licenses due to poor and inadequate alignment with private 
sector. 
 The Committee further note that pharmaceuticals sector in India is a multi-
disciplinary and the research is spread across a large numb er of 
Ministries/Departments viz., Department of Biotechn ology, Department of 
Science and Technology, Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, 
Indian Council for Medical Research, Department of Health and Family 
Welfare, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Ministry of AYUSH, and 
others. 
 In view of the aforesaid challenges both from internal and external 
environment, the Indian pharmaceutical Industry faces an uphill task to sustain 
their growth momentum in the backdrop of WTO and TRIPS regime.  The 
Committee are of the considered view that to manufacture medicines at 
affordable prices for poor people in the country, it becomes quite imperative to 

30 
 
revisit and explore the pharmaceutical regime by way of readjusting the 
existing policy and frame work of rules and regulation in the backdrop of 
requirements/commitments of WTO and TRIPS on priority to neutralize would 
be negative impact on the Indian Pharma industry. The Committee also desire 
that the action taken on the report submitted by the firm - Ernst & Young be 
expedited and the former be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
  

31 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
Need for Institutionalized Inter-Departmental Coordination Mechanism 
 The Committee note that  to give boost to the pharma education and 
research, the Government created a separate Department i.e. Pharmaceuticals 
under the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers in 2008 with the mandate to 
formulate pharma policy, planning, development and regulation of 
pharmaceuticals industries excluding those falling under the administrative 
control of other Ministries/Departments. The Department was also allocated to 
look after Inter-sectoral coordination including coordination between 
organizations and institutes under the Central and State Governments in areas 
related to the subjects entrusted to the Department.  The Committee are unhappy 
to note that there has been no inter-sectoral or inter-departmental coordination 
strong enough to put the mandate in proper perspective. 
 The Committee further note that pharmaceutical research is spread over a 
large number of Ministries/Department like Department of Biotechnology, 
Department of Science and Technology, Council for Scientific and Industrial 
Research, Indian Council for Medical Research, Department of Health and Family 
Welfare, Ministry of Human Resource Development, Ministry of AYUSH and 
others. This scattered pharmaceutical research involves lot of overlapping and 
duplication of research projects ultimately leading to wastage of rare national 
resources allocated to different stakeholders.  The Department also shared and 
endorsed the view of the Committee in this regard during their deposition before 
the Committee.  The Department agreed with the proposal of the Committee for a 
separate inter-departmental Committee to be headed by the Secretary, 

32 
 
Department of Pharmaceuticals to ensure no overlapping and duplication of 
efforts and resources and to conduct research in a  collaborative, synchronized 
and synergized way for optimum utilization of funds allocated in this regard.  
 In view of the above, the Committee after having examined the subject in 
its entirety are of the strong view that there is an emergent need to 
institutionalized a robust mechanism of inter-departmental coordination in the 
Government to ensure economy, efficiency, effectiveness and transparency in the 
arena of Pharmaceutical research.  The Committee further suggest that the 
budget allocation and any umbrella/National flagship scheme(s) to the pharma 
education and research be finalised by the Government only after consulting with 
this proposed inter-departmental mechanism. 
 The Committee also note that Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure vide their OM. No. 24(35)/PF-II/2012 dated 05.08.2015 had instructed 
for rationsalisation of schemes which are to be implemented by various 
Ministries.  
 Subsequent to this instruction, the Department of Pharmaceuticals had 
proposed an umbrella Scheme for Development of Pharmaceuticals industry. 
While expressing their satisfaction over such instruction of Ministry of Finance, 
the Committee are of the view that much is need ed to be done to  streamline and 
consolidate, the R&D activities by different organizations/institutions. 
 
  

33 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
Linkage between Academia and Pharmaceuticals Industry 
 The Committee note that a separate Department for pharmaceuticals was 
created in 2008 under the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers with the mandate 
of policy, planning, development and regulation of pharmaceuticals industries 
excluding those specifically allotted to other departments.  The subject - 
promotion and coordination of basic, applied and other research in areas related 
to the pharmaceutical  sector was  allocated to the newly created Department of 
Pharmaceuticals.   
 The Committee notice that the Department of pharmaceuticals set up 07 
NIPERs under NIPER Act 1998 to boost pharma education and research other 
than the mandate of policy, planning, development and regulation of 
pharmaceuticals industries.  The Committee have been apprised that these 
NIPERs  have undertaken 21 Academia - Industry Linkage MOUs with leading 
pharma industries which include one each with 4 Pharma CPSEs i.e. Rajasthan 
Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd (RDPL), Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited 
(IDPL), Karnataka Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL) and Hindustan 
Anti-biotic Limited (HAL) and 2 with Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals 
Limited (BCPL) and 15 leading Private Pharma Companies in a bid to build 
Innovation Ecosystem in India. Other than this, NIPERs have signed MoUs with 
various PSUs and private pharmaceutical companies relating to collaborative 
research programmes in the areas of novel drug delivery, new drug discovery, 
pharmaceutical product development etc. along with the research activities, 
several knowledge-sharing sessions such as workshops and conferences.  

34 
 
 The Committee were informed that a consortium of pharma industries for 
investing in R&D is a feasible option but the Government has already decided to 
either close or strategically sell all the pharma CPSUs. There is no specific 
mechanism to incentivize the Pharma companies to undertake commercial 
production of new drug formulations discovered by various R&D Institutions 
including NIPERs in the country. The Committee notice that however, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals is in the process of facilitating the Pharma 
Industry to undertake commercial manufacture of bulk drugs including those 
based upon the discoveries/technologies developed by R&D Institutions 
including NIPERs but  the inadequate link between industry and academia has 
been a stumbling block in commercialization of the research work done in 
pharma academic institutes  i.e. NIPERs.  
 The Committee strongly feel that there is an urgent need to convince the 
pharma industry about the efficacy, safety and effectiveness of research by way 
of reaching out to the pharma industry. Therefore, taking a holistic view of the 
subject, the Committee strongly recommend to create a common platform for 
exchange of ideas on present and future pharma research needs of country and 
the necessary mutual corporation between pharma industry and academia to 
jointly look at feasibility of converting research into commercial products. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

35 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
  
Need to boost Infrastructure for Pharmaceutical Research and Development 
under NIPERs 
 The Committee note that the government has set up National Institutes of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPERs) under NIPER Act 1998  as 
the higher premier institutions of education and research on Pharmaceuticals 
Sciences.  Among these 7 functional NIPERs, at Mohali, Gandhinagar, 
Guwahati, Hajipur, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Rae Bareilly only one NIPER, Mohali 
is full-fledged with its own campus and sanctioned faculty, while all other 06 
NIPERs are running from temporary accommodation/mentor institutions for the 
last 8 years.  Apart from this, the Committee find that these NIPERs are  run  by 
contractual and adhoc faculty.  Even at Mohali, the faculty is not at full 
sanctioned strength because of inadequate budgetary allocations. 
 Further, the Committee also note that in absence of Board of Governors, 
Steering Committee under chairmanship of Secretary, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals looks after administrative/financial matter of NIPERs on adhoc 
basis and the posts of Directors, NIPERs Hajipur and Hyderabad are still to 
filled up.  Lack of permanent campuses, well-equipped-laboratories, permanent 
faculty and staff and insufficient funding are some of the critical constraints 
which are considered a stumbling block to accomplish the academic and 
research agreed upon under MOUs with pharma industry.  
 The Committee were informed that a meeting of Expenditure Finance 
commission (EFC) held under the chairmanship of Secretary, Expenditure, 

36 
 
Ministry of finance on 26.03.2018 has given its recommendations for providing 
infrastructure support, creation/filling up of posts etc. for existing NIPERs.  
Subsequent to the approval of the EFC action is being initiated for creation of 
academic and non-academic posts and appointment of regular faculty will 
rescue the attrition brain drain from these NIPERs. 
 The Committee having taken the requisite infrastructure like, building, 
state of the art labs and regular talented faculty into account as sacrosanct for 
pharmaceutical academics and research, strongly recommend to holistically 
address constraints concerning infrastructure, governance and human 
resource and make comprehensive strategy to boost pharmaceuticals research 
and development base of the existing NIPERs.  The Committee also recommend 
the Department to pursue the cause of adequate budget with Ministry of 
Finance and to coordinate with the allied Ministries/Department like  
DBT/CSIR/ICMR etc to get funds for NIPERs research projects.  
 Further, the Committee also suggest that Department to look into 
feasibility of creating two separate Departments i.e. academics and research 
with respective Head of Department under the Director of the Institute so that 
both the disciplines may be given due priority.  
  

37 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
 Need to enhance budget allocation for Pharma Research and Development  
  The Committee note that new Schemes for Assistance to Bulk drugs 
industry for Common Facilitation Centre, Assistance to Medical device Industry 
for Common Facilitation Centre, Cluster Development, Pharmaceuticals 
Technology Up-gradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS) and 
Pharmaceuticals  Promotion Development Scheme (PPDS)  are proposed to be 
taken up for promoting the growth of Pharmaceutical and Medical Device Industry 
which came to fore after the instruction of Ministry of Finance on 5 August, 2018.  
But the Committee observe with dismay that no allocation for all these heads has 
actually been made by the Department of Pharmaceuticals.  As such the 
Committee strongly recommend to allocate specific amount for all the schemes 
for the promotion of R&D as well as for the growth of Medical Device industry.  
 The Committee further noticed that there is no centralised mechanism to 
ensure no overlapping of research efforts takes place, which is prevailing at 
present.  The Committee desire that pharmaceutical research be conducted in a 
synchronised and synergised way.  
 The Committee note that the expenditure incurred by NIPERs has been  Rs. 
400.02 crores under Grant- in-Aid-General provided for recurring expenditure like 
salary, stipend, office expenses etc from 2012-13 to 2017- 18.   The Grant-in-Aid-
Capital has been Rs. 218.31 crores provided for creation of capital assets – 
construction of campus, purchase of equipment & machinery during the period 
2012-13 to 2017- 18.  The Committee also note that Standing Committee on 
Finance (SFC) recommended a fund of Rs. 249.455 crores for NIPER Mohali alone 

38 
 
during the 12 th Five Year Plan period but they had received only Rs. 9.79 crores. 
The Department submitted the reason before the committee that till the Institutes 
do not submit their utilization certificate they cannot release new funds. 
 The Committee have noticed that one of the major challenges is that the 
Budget allocations made for Research and Development are thinly spread over 
many Ministries/departments/schemes and therefore the high capital needs of 
the pharmaceutical Research and Development  are not adequately addressed 
to and as result, no tangible output is achieved. The Committee, therefore 
strongly recommend that there is need to develop innovation and research 
base of pharmaceuticals sector in India and for that robust budgetary support 
to Research and Development in pharmaceutical sector by making a separate 
head for Research and Development under budgetary allocation be made to 
Department of pharmaceuticals. 
  

39 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
Future Pharmaceutical Research 
 The Committee were apprised by the Department of Pharmaceuticals that 
Biologics also called Biopharmaceuticals have revolutionized vaccination 
programmes, treatment of chronic and serious illness like Rheumatoid arthritis, 
cancers, diabetes etc. and nudged traditional drugs out of top slots.  Biologic drugs 
have been playing significant role in drugs have been playing significant role in 
meeting the unmet medical needs particularly in the field of non-communicable 
diseases including diabetes, auto-immune and various types of cancer disease etc.  
 The Committee are given to understand that a lot of deliberation has been 
made for the promotion and growth of R&D in Biologics, but still no headway has 
been made in the country. In India where people are badly affected by diabetes and 
cancer patients are increasing day by day with no much effective treatment, the 
Biologics is the need of hour.  As such the Government should earmark a separate 
fund for the promotion and growth of Biologics.  As submitted by the Secretary, 
Department of Pharmaceuticals, before the Committee that after five to seven years 
fifty percent medicines will be Biologics based, it is imperative that attention to R&D 
activities on Biologics be made in coordination with all the research organizations 
and industries.  
 
                                                                                
New Delhi;                                                        ANANDRAO ADSUL 
    July,  2018                                      Chairperson 
   Ashadha, 1940 (Saka)                                     Standing Committee on 
                                       Chemicals and Fertili zers 
 

40 
 
APPENDIX 1 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2017-18) 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 11th April, 2018 from 1500 hrs. to 1700  hrs. in 
Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
1. Shri Anandrao Adsul, Chairperson 
2. Smt. Anju Bala 
3. Shri B. N. Chandrappa 
4. Smt. Veena Devi 
5. Shri Innocent 
6. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
7. Shri S. Rajendran 
8.  Dr. (Prof.) Azmeera Setaram Naik 
9. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
10 Dr. Uma Saren 
11. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
12. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
13. Shri B. K. Hariprasad 
 
SECRETARIAT 
             1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi - Joint Secretary 
            2. Shri A. K. Srivastava - Director 
 3. Shri U. C. Bharadwaj - Deputy Secretary 

41 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
1.  Shri Jai Priye Prakash Secretary 
2.  Smt. Meenakshi Gupta AS & FA 
3.  Shri Rajneesh Tingal Joint Secretary 
 
II. REPRESENTATIVES OF NIPERs 
1.  Prof. Kiran Kalia Director NIPER, Ahmadabad 
2.  Dr. Pradeep Das Project Director NIPER, Hajipur 
3.  Dr. V. Ravichandiran Director NIPER, Kolkata 
4.  Dr. U. S. N. Murty Director NIPER, Guwahati 
 
III REPRESENTATIVES FROM OTHER MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS 
1 Dr. Ekta Kapoor Scientist E, Department of Science and 
Technology 
2. Shri Raj Durai Scientist D, Department of Science and 
Technology 
3. Shri Sandeep Sarin Adviser/Scientist G, Department of 
Biotechnology 
4. Ms. Rajni Kaul Scientist G, ICMR, Department of Health 
Research 
 
2. At the outset, Hon ’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department o f Pharmaceuticals) and 
other officials to the sitting. Their attention was invited to the prov isions contained in Direction 
55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of the Committee's proceedings.  
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, Directors NIPER Guwahati, NIPER 
Ahmadabad, NIPER Kolkata and NIPER Hajipur respectively made Power Poi nt Presentation 
one by one to the Committee on their mandate and activities undertaken by the ir respective 

42 
 
institutes in respect of education and research in pharmaceutical domain.   They also apprise d 
the Committee about various constraints faced by them in R&D activities. 
4. Thereafter, Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals briefed on the subject "Pr omotion 
and Coordination of basic, applied and other research in areas related to the Pharmaceuticals 
Sector". He also solicited representatives of other departments viz. Council of Scientific & 
Industrial Research (Department of Science & Technology), Department of Bi otechnology and 
Indian Council of Medical Research (Department of Health & Research) to apprise  the 
Committee on the subject. 
5. During the discussion, the Hon'ble Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised  
the following points :- 
 (i) Ineffective interdepartmental coordination mechanism   resulting in duplication of 
 research activities; 
 (ii) Shortage of funds allocated for NIPERs; 
 (iii) Absence of  industry linkages in research work of NIPERs  in parti cular; 
 (iv) Absence of common platform to intimate industry about mature resear ch work 
 due to which commercialization of research is getting hampered; 
 (v) Incentives for private sector to invest in Research & Development; 
 (vi) Problems related to  contractual jobs specially for faculty in NIPERs and Creation 
 of  permanent posts of  faculty members  in NIPERs to check their at trition; 
 (vii)  Review of existing Recruitment Rules for NIPERs, if any, otherwise 
 formulate new Recruitment rules to contain  talents; 
 (viii)  Institutional collaboration and an effective mechanism of regular na ture needed 
 to promote R& D in pharma sector. 
 6.  The aforesaid concerns/issues raised by the Committee were duly responded by t he 
Secretary Department of Pharmaceuticals and other officials including representativ es of 
NIPERs. 
7. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee as well as 
for furnishing valuable information to the Committee. They were also asked to provi de required 
information not readily available at the earliest.    
8. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  

43 
 
APPENDIX II  
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2017-18) 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 13 July, 2018 from 1515 hrs. to 1545 hrs.  in Committee 
Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Anju Bala 
3. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
4. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
5. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
6. Dr. Uma Saren 
7. Dr. (Smt.) Ratna De (Nag) 
8. Shri Sarfaraz Alam 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
10. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
11. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
            1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
        2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
            3. Shri U. C. Bharadawaj -           Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Hon ’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee.   
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the following  draft 
 Reports: 
(i)  Draft Report on the subject 'Promotion and Coordination of basic,  applied and other 
research in areas related to the Pharmaceutical Sector' of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)  

44 
 
  
(ii) Draft Report on Action taken Replies by the Government on the Obse rvations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Fortieth Report of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (16 Lok Sabha) on the subject  'Implementation of New Urea 
Policy - 2015' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers); and 
(iii) Draft Report on Action taken replies by the Government on the  Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty third Report of the Standing Commit tee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demand for Grants (2018- 19)' of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
 
4. After deliberations the Draft Reports were adopted by the Committee. wit hout any 
changes/amendments.  
5. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to make consequential changes,  if any, 
arising out of the factual verification of the Reports by the Department o f Pharmaceuticals and 
Department of Fertilizers. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 