E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
    
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Thirty Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on " Implementation of Policy on Promotion of City 
Compost "of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
 
 
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRET ARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
   August, 2017/   Shravana, 1939 (Saka) 
 
  
 
 


E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 2 
 
CC&F.No.39 
 
 
 
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Thirty Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on " Implementation of Policy on Promotion of City 
Compost "of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2017 
 Laid in Rajya Sabha on  10.08..2017 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
   August, 2017/   Shravana, 1939 (Saka) 
 
  


E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) ………………………………... iii 
Introduction. …………………………………………………..………………………… iv 
Chapter I Report ……………….…………………………………………………..  
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies  of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of  the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2016-17) held on  09 August, 2017. 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Ninth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (201 6-17) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
 
 
  

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 4 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(2016-17) 
 
  Shri Anandrao Adsul - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N Chandrappa 
5. ShriSankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Innocent 
9. Shri K Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
11. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
12. Shri S. Rajendran  
13. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
14. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
15. Dr. Uma Saren 
16. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
17. Shri Taslimuddin 
18. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
19.  Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
20. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
21.  Dr. (Smt.) Ratna De (Nag) 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27. Shri K Parasaran 
28. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
29. Shri Abdul Wahab 
30. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
31.* Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava    - Director  
3. Shri R.C. Sharma    - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri S. Vijayaraghavan   - Senior Committee Assistant 
 
* Demise of Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy, MP (RS) on 09.06.2017. 
 
 
  

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 5 
 
(iv) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2016 -17) 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present 
this Thirty Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty Fo urth Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2016 -17) on  the subject 
'Implementation of Policy on Promotion of City Compost ' of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
 
2. The Thirty Fo urth Report  (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on  10.04.2017.  The Action Taken 
replies of Government to all observations/recom mendations contained in the Report were 
received on 25.07.2017.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2016 -
2017) considered and adopted this Report on Action Taken Replies at their sitting held on  
09.08.2017. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty Fo urth Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the  comments of the Committee have  
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                        ANANDRAO ADSUL 
09 August,  2017                           Chairperson 
18 Shravana, 1939 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on 
                                   Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 6 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2016 -17) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Fourth (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 'Implementation 
of Polic y on Promotion of City Compost' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers)’ which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
10.04.2017.  In all, the Committee made 12 Observations / Recommendations in the 
Report. 
1.2 The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were requested 
to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Thirty Fourth 
within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e., by 11.07.20 17.  The 
Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 12 Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) vide their O.M. 
No.F.No.11015/15/2016-M&E (Vol.II), dated 25.07.2017. These Replies have examined 
and categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government:- 
Rec. Nos.1, 5, 6, 8, 10 ,11 and 12      (Total= 07) 
This may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply:- 
Rec. No.4           (Total=01) 
This may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report. 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
Rec. Nos.  2 and 7        (Total=02) 
This may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations  in respe ct of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 
Rec. Nos. 3 and 9                (Total=02) 
These may be included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 7 
 
1.3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and Chapter -V of this Report should be 
furnished expeditiously. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments. 
A. NEED TO TAKE MEASURES TO POPULARISE CITY COMPOST 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 2) 
1.5 While waiting for the response of the farmers regarding new guidelines for selling 
compost in loose, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note that for the peri od 2016-17, a provision of Rs. 15 Crore has 
been made for providing a subsidy of Rs. 1500/ - per MT as Marketing Development 
Assistance to the marketing entities on sale of the City Compost which would be 
passed on to the farmers in terms of reduced MRP. Ho wever, at present, no direct 
incentive/subsidy on compost is being provided to the farmers. The Committee also 
note that, at the present price, farmers are not very keen to purchase compost, as by 
paying Rs. 50/ - to Rs. 60/ - extra farmers can purchase a ba g of urea which has an 
immediate impact on the soil. Moreover, compost is considered as a soil conditioner 
and its impact on the soil would only be visible after continuous use for 2 to3 years. 
The Committee were further informed that in order to make city  compost cost 
effective some of the States like Andhra Pradesh are also providing subsidy of Rs. 
1000/-. However, not many States are providing the Subsidy on city compost. There 
is also the problem of storage and in case it is not sold after some time it starts 
emitting foul smell. To overcome this problem and make the compost economical, 
the Committee note that the Department has issued the guidelines on 09.01.2017 
for release of Marketing Development Assistance (MDA) on direct sale of city 
compost by com post manufacturers to farmers under the policy on promotion of 
city compost. This will allow compost manufacturers for direct sale to farmers 
which will bring down the cost of city compost.  
 The Committee would like to wait for the response of the farmers  with regards to 
new guidelines for selling compost in loose. The Committee are however of the 
strong view that the city compost is quite overpriced as a reason of which farmers 
are reluctant to purchase it. Noting the action taken by the Department, the 
Committee recommend that the Department may vigorously take up matter with 
the State Governments and try to convince them to subsidise city compost as part of 
waste management scheme. The Department should also explore different ways 
and means of providing exemption from Central or State taxes/ levies on 
production and sale of city compost. Besides this, the Committee also recommend 
the Department of Fertilizers, to provide extra subsidy in hilly and difficult terrain 
like North eastern regions of the scheme . The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the action taken in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.6 In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 8 
 
 "At present, there is no such proposal to give exemption from Central or State 
taxes/levies on production of sale of City Compost. To lower the MRP, the 
Department of Fertilizers has been granting Market Development Assistance (MDA) 
of Rs. 1500 per MT for scaling up production and sale of City Compost. " 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
1.7 The Committee noted that at present price, farmers are not very keen to 
purchase compost as by paying   Rs.50 to Rs. 60 extra farmers can purchase bag of 
urea which had an imme diate impact on soil.  The Committee also noted that the 
Department had issued guidelines on 9.1.2017 for release of Marketing 
Development Assistance (MDA) on direct sale of city compost by compost 
manufacturers to farmers under the policy.  
In their Actio n Taken reply the Department has Stated that at present there was no 
proposal to give exemption from central or State taxes/levels on production of sale 
of city compost. 
The Committee are disturbed to note that inspite of their recommendation to 
subsidise compost which is overpriced and that is why a strong reason for 
reluctance of farmers to purchase the same, the Department of Fertilizers has done 
nothing in this regard.  The Committee would therefore like to reiterate its earlier 
recommendation that the Department should vigorously take up the matter with 
state Government in this regard.  The Committee would also like the Department to 
devise a policy of subsidy of compost in consultation with State Governments.  The 
Committee would like to know the modalities made in this regard. 
B. NEED FOR CENTRAL STATE CO-ORDINATION MECHANISM 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 3) 
1.8 For overall success of the policy constitution of State Level Steering Committee is 
required, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note that the Policy on Promotion of City Compost was notified on 
10.02.2016 by the Department which has clearly defined roles of various 
Departments/agencies. The Department of Fertilizers will provide Market 
Development Assistance of Rs. 1500/MT to Marke ter of City Compost. The 
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare will carry out 
Information, Education & Communication (IEC) campaigns to educate farmers on 
the benefits of city compost. The Agricultural Extension Machineries including 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 9 
 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) of ICAR will also make special efforts in this regard. 
The Ministry of Urban Development will take steps to increase setting up of 
compost plants across all States. The Committee also note that a Committee 
consisting of Joint Se cretaries of Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Urban 
Development and Department of Agriculture has been set up to monitor and 
facilitate availability of adequate compost and to resolve any co -ordination relate 
issue. Considering the requirement of eff ective co -ordination for the successful 
implementation of the policy the Committee recommend that the Joint Committee 
should be upgraded to the level of Secretaries of the concerned Departments. As per 
the notification, State level Steering Committee for p romotion of the scheme has 
also been provided but the Committee are dismayed to note that as on 06.01.2017, 
only seven states/UTs in the country have constituted these Steering Committee. 
The Committee during its study tour to Gangtok and Kozhikode also no ted that the 
States of Sikkim and Kerala are yet to constitute the Steering Committees. The 
Committee are of the strong view that constitution of State Level Steering 
Committee is imperative for overall success of the policy and therefore, recommend 
the De partment to pursue vigorously and convene regular meetings with those 
States who have not so far constituted the State level Committees. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.9 In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "The Department of Fertilizers has issued an O.M. dated 11.05.2016 for Constitution 
of State Level Steering Committee ( Annexure I ). Subsequently, two reminders 
dated 24.10.2016 (Annexure II) and 01.02.2017 ( Annexure III). As per the letters 
received from States/UT, only in 11 States/UT viz. Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Chhattisgarh, Jammu & 
Kashmir and Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Steering Committee for the promotion of 
City Compost policy have been constituted. However, a meeting at Secretary 
(Fertilizers) level has also been convened on 18.04.2017 with the representatives of 
Ministry of Urban Develop ment (MoUD), Department of Agriculture, Cooperation 
and Farmers Welfare (DoAC&FW), Waste Management Association (WMA), ICAR 
and FAI in which she advised MoUD to expedite the matter." 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.10 Considering the requirement of effective c oordination, the Committee 
recommended for upgrading the Committee of Joint Secretaries of concerned 
Ministries/ Departments to the level of Secretaries.  Further, the Committee noted 
that many of the states had not constituted  State level Steering Committee  so far . 
The Committee, therefore, recommended the Department to pursue vigorously for 
constitution of Steering Committee in left out States.   
The Department in their Action Taken Replies informed that they had been pursuing 
with the States for setting up of State level Steering Committee vigorously by 
reminding them regularly.  As a result, 11 States had constituted Steering Committee 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 10 
 
in their respective States.   However, a meeting at Secretary (Fertilizers) level has 
also b een convened on 18.04.2017 with the representatives of Ministry of Urban 
Development (MoUD), Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare 
(DoAC&FW), Waste Management Association (WMA), ICAR and FAI in which she 
advised MoUD to expedite the matter. 
The Committee express their displeasure over the fact that only 11 states/UT s have 
constituted state level steering Committee so far despite the efforts made by the 
Department of Fertilizers.  The Committee further observe that efforts are being 
made in consultation with other stake holders and Ministry of Urban Development 
has been advised to expedite the matter by Secretary (Fertilizers).  While 
appreciating this , the Committee would therefore like to be apprised regularly 
about the outcome of the i nitiative taken by the Department of Fertilizers in this 
regard. 
C. NEED TO INCLUDE CIPET TO RECYCLE PLASTIC WASTE 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 6) 
1.11 Having expressed its opinion for utilizing the services and infrastructure of CIPET  
for recycling of plastic waste, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note that at present, the Department of Fertilizers is implementing 
the policy of promotion of City compost, with the active participation of various 
agencies like fertilizer companies, ICAR, Krishi Vigyan Kendra etc. However, during 
the Study Visit of the Committee to Gangtok and Kozhikode, Central Institute of 
Plastic Engineering & Technology (CIPET) apprised the Committee about its 
contribution towards Swachh Bharat  Abhiyan and technology and laboratories 
which are being effectively utilized for management of plastic waste. The 
Committee are of the view that utilizing the services and infrastructure of the CIPET 
would be beneficial in reduction of City garbage and re cycling of Plastic Waste. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department of Fertilizers should come out 
with a proposal in coordination with the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals and request the Ministry of Urban Development to take up the 
matter with CIPET for recycling of Plastic Waste. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.12 In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "MoHUA promotes the use of plastics in road construction. The Ministry of Road 
Transports and Highways has released an order approving the use of plastic waste 
in road construction after having carried out studies that revealed the use of wa ste 
plastics improved the desirable properties of bituminous mixes leading to 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 11 
 
improved longevity and pavement performance. This has been implemented 
successfully in Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and a few other states. It has also been 
included as one of the parameters by which ULBs are evaluated in the Swachh 
Survekshan.  
 MoHUA had initiated talks with CIPET on the recycling of plastic waste using their 
technology, a prototype of which is available at CIPET, Guwahati. MoHUA has also 
been in talks with the De partment of Chemicals and Petrochemicals f or a pilot 
project at Guwahati." 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.13 The Committee noted that the technology developed by Central Institute of 
Plastics Engineering & Technology (CIPET ) could be effectively utilized for 
management of plastic waste.  The Committee, therefore, recommended the 
Department of Fertilizers to come out with a proposal in coordination with the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals and request the Ministry o f Urban 
Development to take up the matter with CIPET for recycling of plastic waste. 
The Department in their Action Taken Replies informed that MoHUA promotes use 
of plastics in road construction and such projects have been successfully 
implemented in some  states.  Further, MoHUA had initiated taken with the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals for a pilot project at Guwahati using 
the technology of CIPET on the recycling of plastic waste. 
While appreciating the efforts being made by MoHUA for using t he technology 
developed by Control Institute of Plastic Engineering & Technology (CIPET) on the 
recycling of plastic waste , t he Committee, recommend that the work on the pilot 
project-using the technology on the recycling of plastic waste should be initiat ed 
early and project may be completed in a time bound manner for  its widespread use.  
The Committee also recommend that CIPET should proactively come forward in this 
regard. 
D. STATUS OF CITY COMPOST PLANTS  
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 7) 
1.14 While emphasizing the need for opening of new compost plants as per the size of 
the state and population, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note that the Ministry of Urban Development has been assigned 
the role of setting up of compost plants across a ll States. At present, 93 compost 
plants are functional and 283 plants are under construction/revival stage. The 
Committee observe that all the States do not have compost plants and also the 
number of compost plants are not as per the population and size o f the State. It was 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 12 
 
also informed to the Committee, that the Department is making efforts to open city 
compost manufacturing plants across the country and Rs. 7000 crore projects have 
been approved since the notification of the policy. By 2nd October 2019 one such 
plant shall be established in each city. Apart from this, Ministry of Urban 
Development is also facilitating the signing of agreement between compost 
manufacturers, fertilizer companies and Municipal Corporations for sale of compost 
under the policy. The Ministry is pursuing with various State Governments to revive 
defunct/ under utilised compost plants by providing subsidy under Swachh Bharat 
Mission.  
 The Committee during its study visit to Gangtok noted that Sikkim is yet to be 
tagged with BVFC L as there is no bulk generation of compost. This will be done as 
soon as the new compost plant is ready which is expected to be functional by March 
2017. Further, by March 2017, 1 -MT compost plant at the vegetable market to 
convert vegetable waste to comp ost under pilot project sponsored by ICLEI would 
be set up. However, the Committee were apprehensive about achieving the target 
by March, 2017, as no work has taken place at the ground level. The Committee 
during its study visit to Kozhikode (Kerala) also noted that its Kochi plant was not 
functional and Kozhikode plant which was functional with annual capacity of 6000 
MTs only. The Committee are unhappy to note the sluggish approach in 
reviving/operationalizing the closed compost plants. The Committee ther efore 
recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should vigorously take up this issue 
with the Ministry of Urban Development and State Governments and assure that 
opening of new compost plants as per the size of the State and population are 
accelerated a nd effective measures are taken up to make dysfunctional compost 
plants fully operational at the earliest in a time bound manner. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.15 In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "MoHUA provides 35% Viability Gap Funding for setting up new compost 
plants/reviving defunct plants. Compost plants dysfunctional due to lack of demand 
have b een tagged with fertilizer companies to ensure assured market for the 
compost produced by these plants. MoHUA carries out periodic reviews with the 
states on the setting up of new plants and the revival of dysfunctional plants." 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.16 The Committee noted that Ministry of Urban Development had envisioned 
establishment of Compost plant s in each city by 2nd October, 2017.  The Committee 
had also observed that all the States d id not ha d compost plants and also the 
number of compost plan ts were not as per the population and size of the State s.  
Further, during their study visit to Gangtok (Sikkim) and Kozhikode (Kerala), the 
Committee also noted the sluggish approach in reviving/operationalizing the closed 
compost plants.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Department of 
Fertilizers should vigorously take up the issue with the Ministry of Urban 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 13 
 
Development and State Governments and assure that opening of new compost 
plants as per size of the State and population are accelerated  and effective measures 
are taken up to make dysfunctional compost plants fully operational. 
The Department in its Action Taken Replies informed that Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs (MOHUA) provides 35% viability Gap Funding for setting up new 
compost plants/ reviving dysfunctional plants.  The Plants which were dysfunctional 
due to lack of demand had been tagged with Fertilizers Companies to ensure 
assured market for the compost produced by these plants.  Periodic review in 
respect of setting up new plants and the revival of dysfunctional plants was done by 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MOHUA). 
The Committee are unhappy to note that the Department in its Action Taken Replies 
has only stated the existing position in regard to operationalizatio n of the scheme 
but reply lacks detailing the concrete action taken by Department of fertilizers in 
regard to tagging of dysfunctional compost plants with fertilizer companies and 
outcome of various periodic reviews made by Ministry of Housing and Urban Af fairs 
(MOHUA).  The Committee, expect the Department to make some coordinating 
arrangement with the Ministry of Urban Development to make scheme successful in 
a  time bound manner.  The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard. 
E. NEED TO MAKE CITY COMPOST NUTRIENT RICH 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 9) 
1.17 While expressing the Department to explore making city compost more valuable by 
adding primary and micro nutrient to city compost , the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
 " The Committee are of the s trong view that excessive use of Chemical Fertilizers 
are leading to various life threatening diseases. Thus it is imperative that the 
Department should promote balanced use of enriched organic fertilizers. In this 
regard, the Committee were given to under stand that the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare has notified Phosphate Rich Organic Manure (PROM) as 
Organic Fertilizer, which is an enriched organic fertilizer. The Committee would like 
the Department to explore making city compost more valuabl e by adding primary 
and micronutrients to city compost. The Committee would like to be apprised 
regarding the action taken in this regard. "  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.18 In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 14 
 
 "In this regard, the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare 
(DoAC&FW) has referred to the Technical Committee to provide the specification 
for enriched City Compost for notification under FCO." 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.19 The Committee noted that excess ive use of Chemical Fertilizer  were causing 
various life threatening diseases.  So there was an urgent need to promote balanced 
usage of enriched organic fertilizers.  The Committee, therefore, asked the  
Department to explore mixing of primary and micronutrients to city compost to 
make it more valuable.  In this Action taken Reply the Department informed that the 
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare had referred the matter 
to the Technical Committee.   
The Committee of Fertilizers in their Action Taken Replies informed that 
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare has referred to the 
Technical Committee to provide specification for enrich city compost. 
The Committee, n oted that the issue of making compost more valuable by adding 
primary and micronutrients have been referred to Technical Committee for taking 
appropriate action.  The Committee recommend that efforts be made to comp lete 
the process expeditiously by the end  of August, 2017.  The Committee would like to 
be informed in this regard. 
F. NEED TO CONNECT MASSES THROUGH MULTI MEDIA CAMPAIGN 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 10) 
1.20 While recommending the Department to use simple language in the advertisements 
which can be understood by the farmers, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note that an advertisement on promotion of use of City Compost in 
the daily local newspapers has been published by the Ministry of Urban 
Development (MoUD). The information, Education and Communication (IEC) 
campaign material is also being provided for publicity through audio spot in Kissan 
Vani on FM Radio Network of AIR, publicity through video spot in Krishi Darshan & 
DD Kisan and print advertisement in newspap ers. The MoUD has launched multi -
media campaign i.e. 6 such short films of 30 seconds each targeted at various 
segments of the society including farmers, students, housewives, etc with a view to 
increase in the demand for compost in the market. In this reg ard, the Committee 
desire the Department to use simple language in the advertisements which is easily 
comprehensible by the farmers so as to connect them with the product. The 
Committee would also recommend the Department to come out with a promotional 
campaign/advertisement demonstrating significance of city compost in front of the 
Gram Sabha at the village level. Such an advertisement should also focus as to how 
the unemployed youth can be gainfully employed by venturing into the business of 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 15 
 
producing cit y compost. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.21 In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 " Ministry of Housing & Urban affairs has launched a new multi -media campaign on 
waste to compost, titled “Compost Banao, Compost Apnao”. The national campaign 
is currently running on TV and Radio. The Ministry has produced creatives and 
disseminated it to Departmen t of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare 
(DAC&FW) for dissemination through their field machinery, Kissan channels, etc." 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.22 The Committee noted that the Government through various means of 
communication advertise for pro motion and use of city compost.  The Committee 
recommended that the Department to ensure that simple language was used in 
advertisement and come out with the promotional campaign demonstrating 
significance of city compost in front of the Gram Sabha at the village level. Such an 
advertisement should also focus as to how the unemployed youth can be gainfully 
employed by venturing into the business of producing city compost.   
The Department in its Action Taken Replies informed that MoHRUA have launched a 
new multi-media campaign on waste to compost, titled “Compost Banao, Compost 
Apnao” which was being run on TV and Radio. Further, certain other creative are 
discriminated through field machinery and Kissan Channels and Department of 
Fertilizers, Cooperation and Farmers Welfares.   
While appreciating the various steps taken by the Government for promotion and 
use of city compost by print and electronic media, the Committee find  that the 
Department has not made any comments regarding the gainful employment of 
unemployed youth at village level.  The Committee would therefore,  like to know 
from the Department how they are going to devise the action plan to gainfully utilise 
unemployed youth in garbage collection and compost making. 
G. MEASURES TO IMPROVE MARKETING OF CITY COMPOST 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 11) 
1.23 There is urgent need for popularizing the use of City Compost amongst farmers , the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 16 
 
 "The Committee note that Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has taken 
up various steps for the promotion of City Compost among farmers. ICAR is 
carrying out field demonstrations. Advisory has been issued to the State 
Governments to promote the use of City Compost and to take quality control 
measures under FCO, 1985 to ensure the supply of good quality city compost to the 
farmers. However, the Committee during its study visit to Gangtok and Kozhikode 
observe that there is lack of awareness amongst the f armers and they were 
reluctant to use city compost in their fields. The Committee are of the view that the 
Department has to do more to popularize the use of city compost among the 
farmers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should com e 
out with some innovative promotional schemes like one bag of compost free on 
purchase of urea, etc. for popularizing the use of city compost. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by them in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.24 In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "For popularizing city compost, Fertilizer companies are adopting villages for use of 
city compost to prove its efficacy in improving crop yield which will encourage 
farmers to adopt its use along with chemical fertilizers. Department of Agriculture, 
Cooperation & Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) is carrying out field demonstrations to 
show effectiveness of the usage of city compost. The departments are also coming 
up with multi media campaigns to increase awareness about compost amongst 
famers." 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.25 The Committee during their study visit to Gangtok (Sikkim) and Kozhikode 
(Kerala) noted that there was lack of awareness amongst the farmers in regard to 
compost fertilizer and it s efficacy in their fields.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommended the Department to come out with innovative promotional 
scheme/strategy for popularizing the use of city compost. 
In this regard, the Department had informed that use of multimedia was being taken 
to popularize use of city compost fertilizer.  Further, f ertilizer companies were 
adopting villages for use of City Compost to prove its efficiency in crop yield, 
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers welfare was also conducting 
field demonstrations to show effectiveness of the usage of City Compost.  
While noting the efforts made by the fertilizer companies by adopting villages for 
use of city compost and its promotion through multi media campaigns, the 
Committee observe that the reply of the Government is silent on the 
recommendation of the Committee  to promote one bag of free compost on purchase 
of urea.  The Committee would therefore reiterate this recommendation to provide 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 17 
 
one free bag of compost on purchase of urea.   The Committee would like to have a 
reply from the Government in this regard at the earliest. 
H. NEED TO EDUCATE FARMERS FOR CITY COMPOST  
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 12) 
1.26 Setting up of City Compost Plants in big cities for the success of the scheme , the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note  that the fertilizer companies have adopted 100 villages for 
carrying out activities for promotion/demonstration and use of City Compost. 
These activities include arranging farmers’ seminars, visit of local agricultural 
Officials to create awareness among farmers with active participation of 
Department of Agriculture, etc. The Committee, however, are disappointed to note 
that most of the villages adopted by the companies are concentrated in 12 states 
only i.e. Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nad u, Kerala, Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, Assam, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Gujarat and Chhattisgarh. There 
are 22 companies involved in marketing of city compost, whereas, out of these 22 
companies, only 10 companies have adopted the villages for promotion of the use of 
city compost. The Committee during its study visit to Gangtok also noted that 
BVFCL has not adopted any village in Sikkim for promotion/demonstration of the 
usage of City Compost. Moreover, at Kozhikode the Committee observe that FACT is 
tagged to c ities of Kozhikode and Kochi and is carrying out demonstration in 25 
acres of land free of cost in the farmers’ fields and explaining the benefits of using of 
compost.  
 Noting the importance of promotion and demonstration of use of city compost, the 
Committee recommend the Department to issue strict instructions to all the 
fertilizer companies who have not adopted villages, to adopt villages immediately 
and that efforts made by the fertilizer companies in carrying out field 
demonstrations are accelerated.  
 The Committee note that Department of Fertilizers has requested Department of 
Public Enterprises to take appropriate action regarding the use of city compost in 
PSUs and Central/State Government Departments and agencies. The Committee, 
therefore, hope that promotion of city compost by setting up compost plants in big 
township of PSUs and residential complexes of Central and State Government shall 
be taken up at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised regarding the 
progress made in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.27 In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "So far, 22 Fertilizer marketing companies have adopted about 372 villages during 
2016-17 and 2017 -18 for carrying out activities for promotion/demonstration and 
use of City Compost covering 17 States viz. Punjab, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Kerala, Assam, 
Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, West Bengal, Odisha and Goa." 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 18 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.28 The Committee had noted that most of the villages adopted by the companies 
were concentrated in 12 States only and out of 22 fertilizer marketing companies, 
only 10 had adopted villages for promotion/demonstration of city compost.  
Therefore, the Committee recommended the Department to issue instructions to 
those companies who had not adopted villages, to adopt immediately and efforts in 
carrying out field demonstrations are accelerated.  The Committee also hoped for 
setting up compost plants in big township of PSUs and res idential complexes of 
Central and State Governments for promotion of city compost. 
The Department in their Action Taken Replies informed that 22 fertilizer marketing 
companies have adopted about 372 villages for the years 2016 -17 and 2017 -18 for 
promotion/demonstration and use of city compost covering 17 States in the country.  
The Commi ttee have noted that the Department has enhanced its capacity for 
reaching out to 17 States for adopting villages for promotion of city compost.  
However, covering of all the States in the country for adoption of villages could not 
be achieved.  Further, t he Department is silent on the recommendation of the 
Committee regarding efforts made for setting up compost plants in big township of 
PSUs and residential complexes of Central & State Governments. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that all out efforts a re made by Department 
to ensure that Fertilizer Marketing Companies adopt villages pan India for 
promotion/demonstration of city compost in a time bound manner.  
The Committee also hope that the Department makes concerted effort in reaching 
out and coordin ating with the concerned Authorities for setting up compost plants 
in big township of PSUs and residential complexes of Central and State 
Governments.  The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard. 
 
  

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 19 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
POLICY ON PROMOTION OF CITY COMPOST 
The Committee note that Municipal Solid Waste (MSW ) is a big challenge being faced by 
the Government as it degrades the environment. According to the Report of Task Force on 
Wastes to Energy, published by erstwhile Planning Commission in May 2014, the total 
quantity of waste currently (2014) handled in th e urban areas in the country is estimated 
to be 169,650 metric tonne each day i.e. about 62 million tonne per year out of which 
merely 19% of the total waste generated is currently treated. The remaining unprocessed 
waste finds its way to landfills, dumpsi tes, drains etc., causing environmental problems 
like production of greenhouse gases and toxic waste. Thus, in order to process and use city 
waste as compost, the Government of India has notified the policy on promotion on city 
compost as a component of “S wachh Bharat Abhiyan”. The Committee also note that 
composting will not only reduce the volume of waste to landfill/ dumpsite by converting 
the waste into useful by -products but also prevents production of harmful greenhouse 
gases (especially methane) and toxic material that pollutes groundwater apart from 
polluting the environment. This policy aims to incentivize the processing of waste into 
compost and it is targeted that 100% of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) will be processed by 
the end of mission period i n October, 2019, which will reduce significantly the 
environmental problems. Compost would also be useful in improving the carbon content in 
the soil and the policy envisages selling of compost to farmers through the PSU’s fertilizer 
companies. It has also  been observed by the Committee that the installed capacity to 
process waste into compost is 10 LMT whereas the compost production at present is 
around 16000 MT per annum.  
Noting the above, the Committee appreciate the Government for bringing out the poli cy on 
promotion of City Compost to overcome the challenge of waste management. The 
Committee are of the view, that if the policy is implemented in an effective manner, it can 
achieve twin benefits, namely management of waste as well as improving the carbon  
content in the soil. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should review 
the progress of the policy on City Compost at regular intervals so as to remove hurdles 
being faced by concerned agencies and effectively implement the scheme and ach ieve the 
targets set on the policy. The Committee would like to know the time bound action being 
taken by the Department regarding the scheme. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department of Fertilizers regularly reviews the progress in City Compost policy by 
organising meetings at regular intervals with the representatives of all Fertilizers 
marketing companies, compost manufacturers, Fertilizers Association of India (FAI), 
Waste Management Association (WMA), Ministry of Urban Development, Department of 
Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare (DoAC&FW) and ICAR. The Department of 
Fertilizers is continuously working for the effective implementation of the City Compost 
policy. A joint Committee of Joint Secretaries of Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of 
Urban Development and Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare has 
also been set up to monitor and facilitate availability of adequate quantity of City Compost 
at terms mutually agreeable between compost manufacturers and Fertilizer Marketing 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 20 
 
companies. The Committee will also be authorised to resolve any co -ordination related 
issue that may arise. Presently, 7 meetings of Joint Committee have also been convened.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
SEGREGATION OF WASTE 
The Committee note that segregation of waste at the household level is very crucial for 
effective implementation of the policy on city compost as the quality of compost depends 
on quality of segregation by individual household. The Committee, however, are of the 
view that at present, urban households are not very much aware about the segregation of 
waste. There is a pressing need for training and awareness generation of the households. 
In this regard, the Committee note that the Hyderabad Municipal Corporat ion has 
launched a two-bin system, wherein, tow colored bins have been distributed to households 
in all wards to encourage the segregation of wet and dry waste. Further, the same is being 
propagated in public areas as well. The vehicles collecting garbage have also been 
segregated in the same way. The Committee desire that the Department of Fertilizers along 
with Ministry of Urban Development should study the effectiveness of two -bin scheme for 
segregation of waste as implemented by Hyderabad Municipal Corp oration and see the 
feasibility of replicating it with or without modification in other States as well.  
Further, the Committee are of the view that the involvement of the Informal sector waste 
collectors / rag pickers/ kabariwala (scrap dealer) etc., woul d improve waste collection 
and segregation activities and this in turn will give them employment. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department of Fertilizers to impress upon the State 
Government/ ULBs/ Municipalities to utilize the services of unempl oyed youth in garbage 
collection which will not only improve garbage collection and segregation but keep the city 
clean besides providing them employment.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
MoHUA recently has launched a campaign in all cities for the segregation of waste. Apart 
from this segregation has also been given weightage as a part of the City Ranking Survey 
(Swachh Survekshan) whenerin ULBs are ranked on various parameters related to 
sanitation and solid waste management. MoHUA has through DGS&D’s GeM portal 
facilitated the procurement of 2 bins and compartmentalised vehicles for the segregation 
of waste for all ULBs thereby helping in the segregartion initiatives at the City level.  
MoHUA has also been encouraging ULBs to mainstream rag pickers into the forma l system 
on the lines of the Pune model through various capacity building workshops held at the 
State and City level. Mainstreaming of rag pickers is also one of the parameters by which 
ULBs are evaluated in the Swachh Survekshan.  
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
NEED TO INCLUDE CIPET TO RECYCLE PLASTIC WASTE 
The Committee note that at present, the Department of Fertilizers is implementing the 
policy of promotion of City compost, with the active participation of various agencies like 
fertilizer companies, ICAR, Krishi Vigyan Kendra etc. However, during the Study Visit of the 
Committee to Gangtok and Kozhikode, Central Institute of Plastic Engineering & 
Technology (CIPET) apprised the Committee about its contribution towards Swachh 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 21 
 
Bharat Abhiyan and technology and la boratories which are being effectively utilized for 
management of plastic waste. The Committee are of the view that utilizing the services and 
infrastructure of the CIPET would be beneficial in reduction of City garbage and recycling 
of Plastic Waste. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Department of Fertilizers 
should come out with a proposal in coordination with the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals and request the Ministry of Urban Development to take up the matter with 
CIPET for recycling of Plastic Waste. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
MoHUA promotes the use of plastics in road construction. The Ministry of Road Transports 
and Highways has released an order approving the use of plastic waste in road 
construction after having carried out studies that revealed the use of waste plastics 
improved the desirable properties of bituminous mixes leading to improved longevity and 
pavement performance. This has been implemented succe ssfully in Tamil Nadu, Madhya 
Pradesh and a few other states. It has also been included as one of the parameters by 
which ULBs are evaluated in the Swachh Survekshan.  
MoHUA had initiated talks with CIPET  on the recycling of plastic waste using their 
technology, a prototype of which is available at CIPET, Guwahati. MoHUA has also been in 
talks with the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals for a pilot project at Guwahati.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.13  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
MARKETING OF CITY COMPOST BY FERTILIZER COMPANIES 
The Committee note that marketing and promotion of city compost is to be done through 
the existing fertilizer companies through the ir dealer’s network. The mechanism, extent 
and mode of implementation of such co -marketing depend on levels of compost 
production, demand generation and other relevant factors as decided by the Department 
of Fertilizers. For co -marketing of City Compost, t he tagging of Cities with fertilizer 
marketing companies for the purpose of proper utilisation of City Compost produced in the 
cities has been completed.  
As per the data regarding the production and marketing of City Compost obtained from the 
City Compost  manufacturers and marketing companies, most of the fertilizer marketing 
companies have failed to achieve their marketing target during the period April to August 
in year 2016 -17. Some of the companies i.e. Shriram Fertilizers, Indogulf, MCFL, 
Greenstar/SPIC, IPL, PPL, KFCL, MFL, NFL, RCF etc., have done nil marketing of city 
compost in last few months. The Committee further note that only 14 States have been 
tagged with Fertilizers companies for the implementation of schemes. Even in these States, 
most of the fertilizer companies have no marketing presence. The Committee during its 
study visit to Gangtok also observed that BVFCL has no marketing office or presence in the 
State of Sikkim and the Company is finding it difficult to implement the policy on 
promotion of city compost in the region. Similarly, the Committee are dismayed to note 
that in only four North Eastern States viz. Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura, and 
Meghalaya marketing of compost is done that too through their own channel, while other 
North Eastern States are yet to start the city compost unit. As a reason, of which, there is a 
lack of availability of city compost in the region.  

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 22 
 
The Committee are of the view that proper marketing of the city compost is vital for 
effective implementation o f the schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department may take proactive measures and ensure that tagging of Fertilizers companies 
with States should be meaningful and companies which do not have marketing network in 
the State be advised t o market the City Compost produced in the State by developing the 
marketing network. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken 
by them in this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In marketing of City Compost, 22 Fertilizers marketing companies are involved. During 
2016-17, the sales of City Compost by Fertilizers marketing companies was about 96584 
MT. During April, 2017 to June, 2017, Fertilizers marketing companies have co -marketed 
about 29102 MT of City Compost. The Department of Fertilizers has issued an O.M. dated 
20th April, 2017 to all 22 Fertilizers marketing companies of City Compost stated that the 
existing marketing arrangement adopted by the fertilizer marketing companie s for 2016 -
17 for co -marketing of City Compost will continue further and Fertilizer companies have 
been requested to take up co -marketing of City Compost along with chemical fertilizers 
more vigorously this year (2017 -18). As per tagging orders dated 04.04 .2016 and 
24.05.2016, all States/UTs have been tagged with Fertilizers companies for the 
implementation of City Compost policy.  
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
NEED TO CONNECT MASSES THROUGH MULTI MEDIA CAMPAIGN 
The Committee note  that an advertisement on promotion of use of City Compost in the 
daily local newspapers has been published by the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD). 
The information, Education and Communication (IEC) campaign material is also being 
provided for publici ty through audio spot in Kissan Vani on FM Radio Network of AIR, 
publicity through video spot in Krishi Darshan & DD Kisan and print advertisement in 
newspapers. The MoUD has launched multi -media campaign i.e. 6 such short films of 30 
seconds each targeted  at various segments of the society including farmers, students, 
housewives, etc with a view to increase in the demand for compost in the market. In this 
regard, the Committee desire the Department to use simple language in the 
advertisements which is easi ly comprehensible by the farmers so as to connect them with 
the product. The Committee would also recommend the Department to come out with a 
promotional campaign/advertisement demonstrating significance of city compost in front 
of the Gram Sabha at the vi llage level. Such an advertisement should also focus as to how 
the unemployed youth can be gainfully employed by venturing into the business of 
producing city compost. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in 
this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Ministry of Housing & Urban affairs has launched a new multi-media campaign on waste to 
compost, titled “Compost Banao, Compost Apnao”. The national campaign is currently 
running on TV and Radio. The Ministry has produced creatives and dissemi nated it to 
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) for dissemination 
through their field machinery, Kissan channels, etc.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.22  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 23 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
MEASURES TO IMPROVE MARKETING OF CITY COMPOST 
The Committee note that Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has taken up 
various steps for the promotion of City Compost among farmers. ICAR is carrying out field 
demonstrations. Advisory has been issued  to the State Governments to promote the use of 
City Compost and to take quality control measures under FCO, 1985 to ensure the supply 
of good quality city compost to the farmers. However, the Committee during its study visit 
to Gangtok and Kozhikode obser ve that there is lack of awareness amongst the farmers 
and they were reluctant to use city compost in their fields. The Committee are of the view 
that the Department has to do more to popularize the use of city compost among the 
farmers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should come out with 
some innovative promotional schemes like one bag of compost free on purchase of urea, 
etc. for popularizing the use of city compost. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the initiatives undertaken by them in this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
For popularizing city compost, Fertilizer companies are adopting villages for use of city 
compost to prove its efficacy in improving crop yield which will encourage farmers to 
adopt its use along with chemical fertilisers. Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & 
Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) is carrying out field demonstrations to show effectiveness of 
the usage of city compost. The departments are also coming up with multi media 
campaigns to increase awareness about compost amongst famers.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.25  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 
NEED TO EDUCATE FARMERS FOR CITY COMPOST 
The Committee note  that the fertilizer companies have adopted 100 villages for carrying 
out activities for promotion/demonstration and use of City Compost. These activities 
include arranging farmers’ seminars, visit of local agricultural Officials to create awareness 
among farmers with active participation of Department of Agriculture, etc. The Committee, 
however, are disappointed to note that most of the villages adopted by the companies are 
concentrated in 12 states only i.e. Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nad u, 
Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Assam, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Gujarat and 
Chhattisgarh. There are 22 companies involved in marketing of city compost, whereas, out 
of these 22 companies, only 10 companies have adopted the villages for promotion of the 
use of city compost. The Committee during its study visit to Gangtok also noted that BVFCL 
has not adopted any village in Sikkim for promotion/demonstration of the usage of City 
Compost. Moreover, at Kozhikode the Committee observe that FACT is tagged to c ities of 
Kozhikode and Kochi and is carrying out demonstration in 25 acres of land free of cost in 
the farmers’ fields and explaining the benefits of using of compost.  
Noting the importance of promotion and demonstration of use of city compost, the 
Committee recommend the Department to issue strict instructions to all the fertilizer 
companies who have not adopted villages, to adopt villages immediately and that efforts 
made by the fertilizer companies in carrying out field demonstrations are accelerated.  

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 24 
 
The Committee note that Department of Fertilizers has requested Department of Public 
Enterprises to take appropriate action regarding the use of city compost in PSUs and 
Central/State Government Departments and agencies. The Committee, therefore, hope that 
promotion of city compost by setting up compost plants in big township of PSUs and 
residential complexes of Central and State Government shall be taken up at the earliest. 
The Committee would like to be apprised regarding the progress made in this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
So far, 22 Fertilizer marketing companies have adopted about 372 villages during 2016 -17 
and 2017 -18 for carrying out activities for promotion/demonstration and use of City 
Compost covering 17 States viz. Punjab, Haryana, Madhya P radesh, Maharashtra, Tamil 
Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Kerala, Assam, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, 
Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, West Bengal, Odisha and Goa. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.28  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
  

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 25 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
NEED TO DEVELOP A MODEL STATE FOR PROMOTION OF POLICY ON CITY COMPOST 
The Committee, further note that after the n otification of the policy, the Department has 
set a target of opening up of at least one compost plant in each city by 2nd October, 2019. 
The Committee strongly feel that a concerted and coordinated efforts is required to 
implement the policy in a large co untry like India which has 4000 towns with 500 towns 
having population of more than 1 lakh. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department, as a pilot project should at least try to develop one State as a model State 
quickly, so that it is emulate d by the other States. The Committee desire to be fully 
apprised of the progress in this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
A number of States such as Karnataka, Maharashtra, etc. have initiated their own schemes 
for the promotion of city compost. The best p ractices from various states will be 
documented and disseminated for replication.  
 
 
 
 
  

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 26 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
NEED TO TAKE MEASURES TO POPULARISE CITY COMPOST 
The Committee note that for the period 2016 -17, a provision of Rs. 15 Crore has been 
made for providing a subsidy of Rs. 1500/ - per MT as Marketing Development Assistance 
to the marketin g entities on sale of the City Compost which would be passed on to the 
farmers in terms of reduced MRP. However, at present, no direct incentive/subsidy on 
compost is being provided to the farmers. The Committee also note that, at the present 
price, farmer s are not very keen to purchase compost, as by paying Rs. 50/ - to Rs. 60/ - 
extra farmers can purchase a bag of urea which has an immediate impact on the soil. 
Moreover, compost is considered as a soil conditioner and its impact on the soil would 
only be visible after continuous use for 2 to3 years. The Committee were further informed 
that in order to make city compost cost effective some of the States like Andhra Pradesh 
are also providing subsidy of Rs. 1000/ -. However, not many States are providing the 
Subsidy on city compost. There is also the problem of storage and in case it is not sold after 
some time it starts emitting foul smell. To overcome this problem and make the compost 
economical, the Committee note that the Department has issued the guidelines  on 
09.01.2017 for release of Marketing Development Assistance (MDA) on direct sale of city 
compost by compost manufacturers to farmers under the policy on promotion of city 
compost. This will allow compost manufacturers for direct sale to farmers which wi ll bring 
down the cost of city compost.  
The Committee would like to wait for the response of the farmers with regards to new 
guidelines for selling compost in loose. The Committee are however of the strong view that 
the city compost is quite overpriced as a reason of which farmers are reluctant to purchase 
it. Noting the action taken by the Department, the Committee recommend that the 
Department may vigorously take up matter with the State Governments and try to 
convince them to subsidise city compost as p art of waste management scheme. The 
Department should also explore different ways and means of providing exemption from 
Central or State taxes/ levies on production and sale of city compost. Besides this, the 
Committee also recommend the Department of Fert ilizers, to provide extra subsidy in hilly 
and difficult terrain like North eastern regions of the scheme. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
At present, there is no such proposal to give ex emption from Central or State taxes/levies 
on production of sale of City Compost. To lower the MRP, the Department of Fertilizers has 
been granting Market Development Assistance (MDA) of Rs. 1500 per MT for scaling up 
production and sale of City Compost.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.7  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
  

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 27 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
STATUS OF CITY COMPOST PLANTS 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Urban Development has been assigned the role of 
setting up of compost plants across all States. At present, 93 compost plants are functional 
and 283 plants are under construction/revival stage. The Committee observe that all the 
States do not have compost plants and also the number of compost plants are not as per 
the population and size of the State. It was also informed to the Committee, that the 
Department is making efforts to open city compost manufacturing plants across the 
country and Rs. 7000 crore projects have been approved since the notification of the 
policy. By 2nd October 2019 one such plant shall be established in each city. Apart from 
this, Ministry of Urban Development is also facilitating the signing of agreement betwee n 
compost manufacturers, fertilizer companies and Municipal Corporations for sale of 
compost under the policy. The Ministry is pursuing with various State Governments to 
revive defunct/ under utilised compost plants by providing subsidy under Swachh Bharat  
Mission.  
The Committee during its study visit to Gangtok noted that Sikkim is yet to be tagged with 
BVFCL as there is no bulk generation of compost. This will be done as soon as the new 
compost plant is ready which is expected to be functional by March 2 017. Further, by 
March 2017, 1 -MT compost plant at the vegetable market to convert vegetable waste to 
compost under pilot project sponsored by ICLEI would be set up. However, the Committee 
were apprehensive about achieving the target by March, 2017, as no work has taken place 
at the ground level. The Committee during its study visit to Kozhikode (Kerala) also noted 
that its Kochi plant was not functional and Kozhikode plant which was functional with 
annual capacity of 6000 MTs only. The Committee are unhapp y to note the sluggish 
approach in reviving/operationalizing the closed compost plants. The Committee 
therefore recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should vigorously take up this 
issue with the Ministry of Urban Development and State Governments a nd assure that 
opening of new compost plants as per the size of the State and population are accelerated 
and effective measures are taken up to make dysfunctional compost plants fully 
operational at the earliest in a time bound manner. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
MoHUA provides 35% Viability Gap Funding for setting up new compost plants/reviving 
defunct plants. Compost plants dysfunctional due to lack of demand have been tagged with 
fertilizer companies to ensure assured market for the compost produced by these plants. 
MoHUA carries out periodic reviews with the states on the setting up of new plants and the 
revival of dysfunctional plants.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.16  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
  

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 28 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE  STILL AWAITED 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
NEED FOR CENTRAL STATE CO-ORDINATION MECHANISM 
The Committee note  that the Policy on Promotion of City Compost was notified on 
10.02.2016 by the Department which has clearly defined roles of various 
Departments/agencies. The Department of Fertilizers will provide Market Development 
Assistance of Rs. 1500/MT to Marketer of City Compost. The Department of Agriculture, 
Cooperation and Farmers Welfare will carry out Information, Education & Communication 
(IEC) campaigns to educate farmers on the benefits of city compost. The Agricultural 
Extension Machineries including Krish i Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) of ICAR will also make 
special efforts in this regard. The Ministry of Urban Development will take steps to 
increase setting up of compost plants across all States. The Committee also note that a 
Committee consisting of Joint Secret aries of Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Urban 
Development and Department of Agriculture has been set up to monitor and facilitate 
availability of adequate compost and to resolve any co -ordination relate issue. Considering 
the requirement of effecti ve co-ordination for the successful implementation of the policy 
the Committee recommend that the Joint Committee should be upgraded to the level of 
Secretaries of the concerned Departments. As per the notification, State level Steering 
Committee for promo tion of the scheme has also been provided but the Committee are 
dismayed to note that as on 06.01.2017, only seven states/UTs in the country have 
constituted these Steering Committee. The Committee during its study tour to Gangtok and 
Kozhikode also noted that the States of Sikkim and Kerala are yet to constitute the Steering 
Committees. The Committee are of the strong view that constitution of State Level Steering 
Committee is imperative for overall success of the policy and therefore, recommend the 
Department to pursue vigorously and convene regular meetings with those States who 
have not so far constituted the State level Committees. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department of Fert ilizers has issued an O.M. dated 11.05.2016 for Constitution of 
State Level Steering Committee ( Annexure I ). Subsequently, two reminders dated 
24.10.2016 ( Annexure II ) and 01.02.2017 ( Annexure III ). As per the letters received 
from States/UT, only in 11 St ates/UT viz. Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Odisha, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Chhattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir and Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands, Steering Committee for the promotion of City Compost policy have been 
constituted. However, a meet ing at Secretary (Fertilizers) level has also been convened on 
18.04.2017 with the representatives of Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), 
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DoAC&FW), Waste 
Management Association (WMA), ICAR and FAI in which she advised MoUD to expedite the 
matter.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.10  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
  

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 29 
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 9) 
NEED TO MAKE CITY COMPOST NUTRIENT RICH 
The Committee are of the strong view that excessive use of Chemical Fertilizers are leading 
to various life threatening diseases. Thus it is imperative that the Department should 
promote balanced use of enriched organic fertilizers. In this regard, the Committee were 
given to understand that the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare has notified 
Phosphate Rich Organic Manure (PROM) as Organic Fertilizer, which is an enriched 
organic fertilizer. The Committee would like the Department to explore making city 
compost mor e valuable by adding primary and micronutrients to city compost. The 
Committee would like to be apprised regarding the action taken in this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In this regard, the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare (DoAC& FW) 
has referred to the Technical Committee to provide the specification for enriched City 
Compost for notification under FCO.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.19  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                        ANANDRAO ADSUL 
09 August,  2017                           Chairperson 
18 Shravana, 1939 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on 
                                   Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 30 
 
Appendix – I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 09 August, 2017 from 1500 hrs. to 1540 
hrs. in Room No. 139, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Smt. Veena Devi 
5. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
6. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
7. Shri S. Rajendran 
8. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
9. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
            1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
 3. Shri R. C. Sharma    - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee.   
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following Draft Action 
Taken Reports on :- 
(i) Demands for Grants 2017-18'  of Department of Fertilizers; 
(ii) Demands for Grants 2017-18' of Department of Pharmaceuticals; 
(iii) Demands for Grants 2017 -18'  of Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals; and 
(iv) Implementation of policy on promotion of city compost of Department of 
Fertilizers.  
4. After some deliberations  the Draft Action Taken Reports were adopted by the 
Committee without any changes. The Committee  authorised the Chairperson to make 
consequential changes, if any, arising out of the factual verification of the Action Taken 
Reports by the Department of Fertilizers, Department of Pharmaceuticals and Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
5. The Committee thereafter decided to hold its next meeting on  
23rd August, 2017.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

E:\39-Front Page 16th (Fertilizers) Subject.Docx Page 31 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION T AKEN BY THE GOVERNME NT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONT AINED IN THE THIRTY -FOURTH REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE ST ANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS 
AND FERTILIZERS (201 6-17) ON THE SUBJECT R EPORT ON 
'IMPLEMENTATION OF P OLICY ON PROMOTION O F CITY COMPOST' OF 
THE MINISTRY OF CHEM ICALS AND FERTILIZER S (DEPARTMENT OF 
FERTILIZERS).’ 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 12 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 5, 6, 8, 10 ,11 and 12 )   
7 
 
Percentage of Total 58.33% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
(Vide Recommendation No.4)   
1 
 
Percentage of Total   8.33% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:-   
 (Vide Recommendation No.  2 & 7 )   
2 
Percentage of Total 16.66% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 3 and 9) 
2 
 
Percentage of Total 16.66% 
 
 