 
  
1 
 
 
30 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS (2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on the subject "Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector - (CDP-PS)" of 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
 
 
 
 THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2016 /AGRAHAYANA, 1938 (SAKA) 
 
  


 
  
2 
 
CC&F.No.30 
 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained  
in the Twenty Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  on the subject "Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector - 
(CDP-PS)"  of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09 DECEMBER 2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 09 DECEMBER 2016 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2016 /AGRAHAYANA, 1938 (SAKA) 
  

 
  
3 
 
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) (iii) 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
Chapter I Report   
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government' s  
replies 
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee  
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Fifth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2016-17) held on 06.12.2016. 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth 
Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2016 -17) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals). 
 
  

 
  
4 
 
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Innocent 
9. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
11. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle 
12. Shri Rajendran S. 
13. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
14. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
15. Dr. Uma Saren 
16. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
17. Shri Taslimuddin 
18.  Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
21. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27. Shri K Parasaran 
28. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
29. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
30. Shri Abdul Wahab 
31. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
  
SECRETARIAT 
  Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
  Shri A.K.Srivastava  - Director 
  Shri H. RamPrakash  - Additional Director 
  Shri  S. Vijayaraghavan  - Senior Committee Assistant  

 
  
5 
 
(v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2016-2017) having been authorised  by the Committee to present the Report 
on their behalf, present this Thirtieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action 
Taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in 
the Twenty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (2016 -17) on the subject "Cluster Development 
Programme for Pharma Sector - (CDP-PS)" of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).  
2. The Twenty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of  the Standing Committee 
on Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 28.07.2016. The 
Action Taken replies of Government to all observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Report were received  on 24.10.2016. The Standing Committee 
on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2016 -2017) considered and adopted this Report  
at their sitting held on 6.12.2016. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth Report  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                            ANANDRAO ADSUL 
 08 DECEMBER, 2016                                                                                                    Chairperson 
17 Agrahayana 1938 (Saka)                                          Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 

 
  
1 
 
 
REPORT 
        CHAPTER  I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the  Twenty-Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the Subject 
“Cluster Devel opment Programme for Pharma Sector (CDP -PS)” of the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) which was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 28.7.2016.  In all, the Committee made  6  Observations / Recommendations 
in the Report. 
2.  Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) were 
requested to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommend ations contained in the  
Twenty-Fourth Report within three months from the date of presentation of the 
Report, i.e., by  28.10 .2016. The Action Taken Replies of the Go vernment in respect of 
all the 6 Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report have been received 
from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) vide 
their O.M. No.  31026/168/2015-PI-II dated 24 .10.2016. These Replies  have been 
categorized as follows:- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations  that have been accepted by the 
Government :- 
 Sl.Nos.  1, 2 and 4                                                    (Total =3 )                                                     
 This may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply :- 
 Sl.No. Nil                             (Total = Nil)  
 This may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report. 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
 Sl.No.   6                      (Total = 1 )  
 This may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 
 Sl.No.3 and 5                                         (Total =2)  
These may be included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report  and the Final Replies in 
respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter IV and V which have 
not been accepted  or replies are still awaited  should be furnished expeditiously. 

 
  
2 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations which  still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
 A. Need for  Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector (CDP-PS) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.1 
 
5. While stressing that overdependence on imports for its bulk drugs needs is not 
a healthy sign for the Indian Pharmaceutical Industry the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) has 
announced the Scheme for Cluster Development Programme for Pharma  Sector 
(CDP-PS) in July 2014 with a vision to catalyze and encourage quality, 
productivity and innovation to enable the Indian pharmaceutical industry to 
play a leading role in a competitive global market. By this programme, the DoP 
aims to increase the easy access to standard testing facilities and value addition 
especially to SMEs through creation of common world class facilities. The 
Committee, appreciate the Department for announcing the CDP -PS and desire 
that these clusters should have all common scie ntific infrastructure facilities so 
as to reduce the cost of production of drugs by individual units. Further, the 
Committee, also feel that more interaction by the Department with Pharma 
Industry/associations to know the ground realities and practical dif ficulties 
would accelerate the implementation of the scheme. The Committee, therefore 
recommend that the Department may regularly have interaction with Pharma 
Industry and associations to expeditiously implement the scheme in a 
systematic, professional and transparent manner and ensure that the objectives 
of the Scheme are achieved at the earliest”.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
6. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“The Gov ernment along with the Project Management Consultant (PMC) is 
regularly interacting with the Pharma Industries and Associations to 
expeditiously implement the scheme in a systematic, professional and 
transparent manner and to ensure that the objectives of the Scheme are 
achieved at the earliest. In this regard, Department of Pharmaceuticals in 
association with Indian Drug Manufacturers Association (IDMA) has already 
organised 2 seminars on Cluster Development to apprise stakeholders about 
the salient featur es of the Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector 
(CDP-PS) at different locations. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. The Committee  noted that  the Department of Pharmaceuticals  has 
announced the Scheme for Cluster Development Programme for Pharma  Sector 
(CDP-PS) in July 2014.     The Committee desired that these clusters should have 
all common scientific infrastructure facilities so as to reduce the cost of 
production of drugs by individual units.  The Committee  had recommended that 

 
  
3 
 
the Department may regularly have interaction with Pharma Industry and 
associations to expeditiously implement the scheme in a systematic, 
professional and transparent manner and ensure that the objectives of the 
Scheme are achieved at the earliest. In their Action Taken Reply, the Department 
has stated that  the Government along with the Project Management Consultant 
(PMC) is regularly interacting with the Pharma Industries and Associations to 
expeditiously implement the scheme in a systematic, professiona l and 
transparent manner and to ensure that the objectives of the Scheme are 
achieved at the earliest. In this regard,  the Department of Pharmaceuticals in 
association with Indian Drug Manufacturers Association (IDMA) has already 
organised 2 seminars on Cluster Development to apprise stakeholders about the 
salient features of the Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector (CDP-
PS) at different locations.   While appreciating the efforts made by the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals, the Committee would like to know the outcome 
of the efforts in terms of interest shown in this Programme by the stake holders.  
The Committee, therefore stress that all out efforts should be made to exped ite 
the process and would like to be apprised about the latest status in this regard.  
 
B. Need for Special Purpose Vehicle  (SPV) for the implementation of Cluster 
Development Programme. 
Recommendation Sl. No.2  
8. While expressing  the view that Cluster Development Programme will be  
implemented through Special Purpose Vehicle, the Committee had recommended as 
under:-  
“The Committee note that the Cluster Development Programme will be 
implemented through a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) which will have 
representatives from cluster members, financial institutions, State &  Central 
Governments and R&D organisations with full operational autonomy to 
develop, operate and maintain the infrastructure. The Committee, further note 
that the programme is to be implemented on a Public Private Partnership (PPP) 
format through one time  grant-in-aid to be released in various phases for 
creation of identified infrastructure and common facilities to the SPVs set up for 
the purpose. The State Governments role would mainly arise after the SPV and 
DPR are approved by Scheme Steering Committee  (SSC). The Committee 
observe that till date SSC has held five meetings and all the meetings were held 
in Delhi only and whenever it was felt necessary. During the course of the 
evidence even the department felt that holding of SSC meeting at different 
places will associate the local Industry more. The Committee are of the opinion 
that the development of Cluster Programme is of paramount importance and 
fits in realizing the Make in India goal of the Government. The Committee desire 
that the Department should take proactive measures toward developing Cluster 
Development Scheme. The Committee, therefore recommend that SSC should 
hold more meetings at regular interval and also at different relevant places 
where the Pharma companies are concentrated for proper m onitoring and 

 
  
4 
 
early establishment of the scheme. The Department should also enlist the 
support of State Governments for making the scheme successful. The 
Committee would like to know the initiatives taken to expedite the scheme and 
the progress made in the matter so far”.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
9. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“The Government along with the Project Management Consultant (PMC) is 
regularly interacting with the Pharma Industries and Associations to 
expeditiously implement the scheme in a systematic, professional and 
transparent manner and to ensure that the objecti ves of the Scheme are 
achieved at the earliest. In this regard, Department of Pharmaceuticals in 
association with Indian Drug Manufacturers Association (IDMA) has already 
organised 2 seminars on Cluster Development to apprise stakeholders about 
the salient features of the Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector 
(CDP-PS) at different locations. In the meeting of the Scheme Steering 
Committee (SSC) held on 5/10/2016, the following decisions have been taken:- 
(i)        DPR submitted by M/s. Chennai Ph arma Industrial Infrastructure 
Upgradation Complex (CPIIUC), Alathur Distt. Kanchipuram, Tamilnadu 
was approved by SSC. 
(ii)               In the 3 rd EOI called and proposal from M/s Andhra Pradesh 
Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Limited (APIICL) was  received, 
however, they requested for in -principle approval of DPR before 
formation of SPV which was approved by SSC”. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10 The Committee noted  that  the Cluster Development Programme will be 
implemented through a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV).   The Committee, further 
noted that the programme is to be implemented on a Public Private Partnership 
(PPP) format through one time grant -in-aid to be released in various phases for 
creation of identified infrastructure and common facilitie s to the SPVs set up for 
the purpose.  The Committee observed that till date Scheme Steering Committee 
(SSC) has held five meetings and all the meet ings were held in Delhi only  
whenever it was felt necessary. During the course of the evidence even the 
department felt that holding of SSC meeting at different places will associate the 
local Industry more.    The Committee, therefore  had recommended that SSC 
should hold more meetings at regular interval and also at different relevant 
places where the Pharma  companies are concentrated for proper monitoring 
and early establishment of the scheme.    The Committee had also recommended 
that the Department should enlist the support  of State Governments for making 
the scheme successful. 

 
  
5 
 
In their Action Taken Reply , the Department of Pharmaceuticals stated 
that the Department of Pharmaceuticals in association with Indian Drug 
Manufacturers Association (IDMA) has already organised  2 seminars on Cluster 
Development to apprise stakeholders about the salient features of the Cluster 
Development Programme for Pharma Sector (CDP -PS) at different locations. In 
the meeting of the SSC  held on 5/10/2016, two decisions have been taken  
(i) DPR submitted by M/s. Chennai Pharma Industrial Infrastructure 
Upgradation Complex (CPIIUC), Alathur Distt. Kanchipuram, Tamiln adu was 
approved by SSC.  (ii) T he 3 rd EOI called  and the proposal from M/s Andhra 
Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Li mited (APIICL) was received, 
however, they requested for in -principle approval of DPR before formation of 
SPV which was approved by SSC.   
While appreciating the efforts made by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals,  the Committee would like to stress  that the SPV in respect of  
the above mentioned two firms  may be expeditiously  set up .  Moreover, the 
Committee observed  that the reply of the Department is silent  about enlisting 
the support of State Governments.  The Committee are of the view that without 
the support of State Governments the Scheme cannot become fully functional.  
The Committee , therefore, reiterate its earlier recommendation that the 
Department should also enlist the support of  State Governments   and make  
earnest efforts in this regard.   The Committee further recommend that  the 
meetings of the SSC should be held at  different locations  region wise so that the 
whole country gets the benefit of the scheme and other Pharma companies  also 
become stake holders to form pharma clusters .   The Committee would like to 
know  the progress made in this regard. 
 
C. Need to Review Terms and conditions for formation of  SPVs under    CDP-
PS 
Recommendation Sl. No.3 
 
11. While expressing that the Department should relook the scheme and review all 
bottlenecks and reduce the number of members required to form SPV and also the 
amount to be invested,  the Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that Common Facilities under the CDP -PS will consist of 
creation of tangible "assets" such as (i) Common Testing Facilities (ii)Training 
Centre (iii) R&D Centres (iv) Effluent Treatment Plant and (v) Common 
Logistics Centre. The Committee also note that each cluster could have its own 
specific re quirements based on the nature of units being set up and the 
products proposed to be manufactured. The Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) 
shall approve the project components and funding thereof depending upon the 
merits of the proposal.  
 

 
  
6 
 
The Committee note that a minimum of 10 Pharma Companies are required to 
form a SPV under CDP -PS. Further each company who joins the SPV as 
members under CDP -PS has to invest about Rs.15 to 20 lakh. The Committee 
note that these conditions are coming in the way of successful  implementation 
of the scheme. There have been suggestions to include Ayurvedic, Unani drug 
manufacturers and cosmetic companies also as member in the Cluster 
Development Programme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Department may relook the scheme and review all bottlenecks and reduce the 
number of members required to form SPV and also the amount to be invested. 
Further suggestions for including the cosmetic and Ayurveda and all the other 
drug companies may also be considered in formation of cluster s. The 
Committee, would like to know the changes made in the scheme to make it 
implementable”. 
Reply of the Government 
 
12. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“ As desired by the Pharma Industry in the 6 th Scheme Steering Committee 
(SSC) meeting on 29/6/2016, it was decided that Ayurvedic, Unani and 
Cosmetics firms shall also be considered as Pharma Firms”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
13. The Committee observed that Common Facilities under the CDP -PS will 
consist of creation of tangible "assets" . such as (i) Common Testing Facilities 
(ii)Training Centre (iii) R&D Centres (iv) Effluent Treatment Plant and (v) 
Common Logistics Centre. The Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) shall approve 
the project components and funding thereof depending upon the merits of the 
proposal.  The Committee also noted that a minimum of 10 Pharma Companies 
are required to form a SPV under CDP -PS. Further each co mpany who joins the 
SPV as members under CDP -PS has to invest about Rs.15 lakh to Rs.20 lakh.  The 
Committee further noted that these conditions are coming in the way of 
successful implementation of the scheme.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that  the Department may relook the scheme and review all 
bottlenecks and reduce the number of members required to form SPV and also 
the amount to be invested.     In their Action taken reply, the Department stated 
that as desired by the Pharma Industry in the 6 th SSC meeting held on 
29/6/2016, it was decided that Ayurvedic, Unani and Cosmetics firms shall also 
be considered as Pharma Firms.     
 The Committee are disappointed  to note that the Depa rtment has not 
properly considered the bottlenecks  such as  review of the number of members 
required to form SPV and  also the amount to be invested by the member 
companies.   The Committee, t herefore, reiterate that its recommendation may 
be implemented without any further delay as the Committ ee are of the opinion  

 
  
7 
 
that this  will give  an impetus and boost to the development of  CDP-PS.   The 
Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard. 
 
D. Need for  expedient monitoring and timely utilisation of Budgetary 
allocation of funds. 
Recommendation Sl. No.4 
 
14. While expressing  concern over the timely utilisation of funds allocated for the 
current year for the  Cluster Development Programme,  the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
  ”The Committee note under the 12th Five Year Plan, Rs.125 crore has been 
allotted for the CDP -PS Scheme. The Committee observe that the maximum 
limit for the grant in aid from Government under this category would be Rs. 20 
Crore per cluster or 70 per cent o f the cost of the project, whichever is less. 
Government grant will be 90 per cent for Common Facility Centres (CFCs) for 
difficult and backward regions. Till 2015 -16, the grants for cluster scheme was 
covered under the head of new schemes but from this budget, the allocation has 
been made for cluster scheme separately. The Committee, further note that no 
grant in aid was released under the cluster development scheme during 2015 -
16 as none qualified for grant in spite of two rounds of EOIs. Although, a sum of 
Rs. 60 crore was requested for BE 2016 -17, only a provision of Rs.10 crore has 
been made in BE 2016 -17. The Committee express their displeasure over the 
fact that the Department has not been successful in the last two years in 
implementation of the Sche me and the funds have remained unutilised. 
Presently, the Project Management Consultant (PMC) has been requested to 
review the whole process and suggest remedial measures. The Committee 
therefore, desire that the Department should make the scheme implement able 
at the earliest and that expedient monitoring and timely action may be taken to 
utilise the funds allocated for the current year to the utmost as it is very vital 
for the growth of Pharmaceutical companies especially the SME Pharma Units.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“The directions of the Committee have been noted and the Government along 
with the Project Management Consultant (PMC) is regularly interacting with 
the Pharma Industries and Associations to expeditiously implement the scheme 
in a systematic, professional a nd transparent manner and to ensure that the 
objectives of the Scheme are achieved at the earliest.  
In the meeting of the Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) held on 5/10/2016, the 
following decisions have been taken:- 
(i)          DPR submitted by M/s. Chenn ai Pharma Industrial Infrastructure 
Upgradation Complex (CPIIUC), Alathur Distt. Kanchipuram, Tamilnadu 
was approved by SSC. 

 
  
8 
 
(ii)  In response to the 3 rd EOI called, proposals from M/s Andhra Pradesh 
Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Limited (APIICL) w ere received. 
However, they requested for in -principle approval of DPR before 
formation of SPV which was considered favourably by the SSC”. 
Comments of the Committee 
16. The Committee noted that  under the 12th Five Year Plan, Rs.125 crore 
has been allotted for the CDP -PS Scheme. The Committee observe d that the 
maximum limit for the grant in aid from Government under this category would 
be Rs. 20 Crore per cluster or 70 per cent of the cost of the project, whichever is 
less.  The Committee, further n oted that no grant  in aid was released under the 
Cluster development scheme during 2015 -16 as none qualified for grant in spite 
of two rounds of EOIs. Although, a sum of Rs. 60 crore was requested for BE 
2016-17, only a provision of Rs.10 crore has been ma de in BE 2016 -17.   The 
Committee had also expressed its displeasures over the f act that the whatever 
the meagre   funds given to the Department of Pharmaceu ticals also remained 
unutilised and desired that the Department should  make the scheme 
implementable at the earliest and that expedient monitoring and timely action 
may be taken to utilise the funds allocated for the current year to the utmost. 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Department stated that the Government 
along with  the Project Management Consultant (PMC) is regularly interacting 
with the Pharma Industries and Associations to expeditiously implement the 
scheme in a systematic, professional and transparent manner and to ensure that 
the objectives of the Scheme are ach ieved at the earliest.  In the meeting of the 
Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) held on 5/10/2016, two decisions have been 
taken  (i)   DPR submitted by M/s. Chennai Pharma Industrial Infrastructure 
Upgradation Complex (CPIIUC), Alathur Distt. Kanchipuram, Ta milnadu was 
approved by SSC. (ii)    In response to the 3 rd EOI called, proposals from M/s 
Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Limited (APIICL) were 
received. However, they requested for in -principle approval of DPR before 
formation of SPV which was considered favourably by the SSC.  Further although, 
a sum of Rs. 60 crore was requested for BE 2016 -17, only a provision of Rs.10 
crore has been made in BE 2016-17.  
The Committee express their displeasure over the fact that the 
Department has not been successful in the last two years in implementation of 
the Scheme and the funds have remained unutilised . In view of the reply, the 
Committee recommend that two clusters for which approval has already been 
given should be provided timely grant -in-aid of the cost of the project.  The 
Committee also reiterate its recommendation that the Department should make 

 
  
9 
 
the scheme implementable at the earliest and that expedient monitor ing and 
timely action may be taken to utilise the funds allocated for the current year to 
the utmost as it is very vital for the growth of Pharmaceutical companies 
especially the SME Pharma Units. 
 
E  Need for  Alternative  Model for Cluster Development 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.5 
17 While expressing the need for   alternative model for cluster development, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that Expression of Interest (EoI) for receiving the 
grant by Pharma  Companies under the Cluster Development Programme was 
issued on 7.7.2015 and closed on 11.9.2015 only six EoI’s were received. The 
Scheme Selection Committee (SSC) found that except one EoI, others did not 
fulfill the criteria required for receiving the g rant under the scheme. The 
Committee observe that only one project has been given in -principle approval 
and that its Proposal& Detailed Project Report(DPR) is awaited. The Committee 
also observe that PMC has contacted representatives of the Pharma firms an d 
Pharma Associations all over India, through telephonic discussion and also 
visited many clusters, such as Baddi(H.P.), Deraabassi (near Chandigarh), 
Maharashtra, Tamilnadu, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh & West Bengal area. 
However, the Committee observe that i n practice not much response has been 
received from SME Pharma companies for this programme.  
 
Keeping in view of the poor response the Committee, further note that the SSC 
is revaluating the scheme in consultation with the stakeholders to make it more 
feasible so that the scheme could be successfully implemented in a time bound 
manner. The Committee are of the opinion that the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals should identify some existing locations which have the 
potential to emerge as a pharmaceutical cluste r and in collaboration with the 
concerned State Governments and local pharma companies should set up the 
basic infrastructure facilities envisaged under CDP in a PPP mode which can be 
utilised by pharma units at reasonable charges which will also enable th e 
objectives of the programme to be achieved. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Department of Pharmaceuticals should explore the 
possibility of establishment of world class facilities in cities or in States where 
cluster of pharma companies alrea dy exist and such common facilities can be 
created under PPP mode”.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
18. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“The directions of the Committee have been noted. The proposals have been 
received from M/s Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation 
Limited (APIIC). The DPR from APIIC has been received by the Project 
Management Consultant (PMC)”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 

 
  
10 
 
19 The Committee  observed that out of six EoI s received, the SSC found  that 
only one EoI fulfilled the criteria required for receiving the grant under the 
scheme.   The Committee also observed that in practice not much response has 
been received from SME Pharma companies for this programme.  The Committee 
further noted that  keeping in view of the poor response, SSC was revaluating the 
scheme in consultation with the stakeholders to make it more feasible so that 
the scheme could be successfully implemented in a time  bound manner. The 
Committee were of the opinion that the Department of Pharmaceuticals should 
identify some existing locations which have the potential to emerge as a 
pharmaceutical cluster and in collaboration with the concerned State 
Governments and local pharma companies should set up the basic infrastructure 
facilities envisaged under CDP in a PPP mode which can be utilised by pharma 
units at reasonable charges which will also enable the objectives of the 
programme to be achieved.  
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated that the directions 
of the Committee have been noted.  The Department has mentioned that a 
proposal have been received from M/s Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure 
Corporation Limited (AP IIC).  The DPR from AP IIC has been received by the  
Project Management Consultant (PMC).     
 The Committee observed that no comments have been made by the 
Department regarding the development of existing  Pharma Companies in the 
country.  The Committee , therefore,  reiterate its  suggestion that the 
Department  of Pharmaceuticals  should identify some  existing locations which 
have the potential to emerge as a pharmaceutical cluster and  in collaboration 
with the concerned State Governments and Pharma Companies explore the 
possibility of establishment of world class facilities under PPP mode.  
 
F. Need for allowing PSU Pharma Companies to establish clusters 
Recommendation Sl. No. 6 
20 While expressing that  the  need for allowing PSU Pharma  companies to 
establish clusters,  the Committee had recommended as under:- 
“In order to give thrust to the scheme, the Committee desire that the 
Department should also consider entrusting creation of clusters to PSU 
pharmaceutical companies like IDPL and HAL etc. These companies have huge 
vacant land and also infrastructure facilities that are required for 
pharmaceutical companies. These PSUs pharma companies may be encouraged 
to utilise land available with them for setting up of clusters along with the 
creation of common world class facilities in the clusters through SPV or PPP 
mode. The Department of Pharmaceuticals may also provide suitable grant for 

 
  
11 
 
creation of such facilities. The Committee are of the opinion that this may 
benefit as good revenue strea m to the PSU pharma companies by utilization of 
their vacant land. The Committee, therefore, recommend that during the review 
of the scheme, the Department may seriously consider allowing the PSU 
pharma companies to utilise their vacant land for promo tion of pharmaceutical 
clusters”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
21. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“M/s Hindustan Antibiotic Limited (HAL) and Indian Drugs &  Pharmaceuticals 
Limited (IDPL) are sick public sector pharmaceutical companies which have 
been referred to BIFR since 1992 and 1997 respectively. The Cabinet has 
constituted a Committee of 3 Ministers to comprehensively examine and 
recommend the suitable course of action for all the Pharma Sector CPSUs”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
22. The Committee observed that Pharma PSUs may be encouraged to utilise 
land available with them for setting up of Clusters alongwith  the creation of 
common world class facilities in the clusters through SPV or PPP mode.    The 
Committee are of the opinion that this would be helpful in generating good 
revenue to pharma PSUs. 
 In their Action Taken Reply, the Department stated that M/s H industan 
Antibiotic Limited (HAL) and Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL) 
are sick public sector pharmaceutical companies which have been referred to 
BIFR since 1992 and 1997 respectively. The Cabinet has constituted a 
Committee of three  Ministers to comprehensively examine and recommend the 
suitable course of action for all the Pharma Sector CPSUs. 
 The Committee observe  that Department of Pharmaceuticals has not 
commented anything about the recommendation of t he Committee to utilise 
vacant land of PSUs for setting up Pharma Clusters of world class standard and 
instead gave a stereotyped reply that HAL and IDPL have been referred to BIFR 
since 1992 and 1997 respectively and Cabinet has constituted a Committee of 
three Ministers to examine and rep ort for suitable course of action.    The 
Committee, therefore recommend that apart from ongoing process of revival of 
these sick PSUs, the Department should explore the feasibility of setting up of 
world class Pharma Clusters in the vacant land of  companies such  as HAL and 
IDPL.   The Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken in this 
regard.  

 
  
12 
 
  

 
  
13 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation Sl. No.1 
 
The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) has 
announced the Scheme for Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector (CDP -
PS) in July 2014 with a vision to catalyze and encourage quality, productivity and 
innovation to enable the Indian pharmaceutical industry  to play a leading role in a 
competitive global market. By this programme, the DoP aims to increase the easy 
access to standard testing facilities and value addition especially to SMEs through 
creation of common world class facilities. The Committee, appre ciate the Department 
for announcing the CDP -PS and desire that these clusters should have all common 
scientific infrastructure facilities so as to reduce the cost of production of drugs by 
individual units. Further, the Committee, also feel that more inter action by the 
Department with Pharma Industry/associations to know the ground realities and 
practical difficulties would accelerate the implementation of the scheme. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that the Department may regularly have interaction 
with Pharma Industry and associations to expeditiously implement the scheme in a 
systematic, professional and transparent manner and ensure that the objectives of the 
Scheme are achieved at the earliest”.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The Government along with the Project Management Consultant (PMC) is 
regularly interacting with the Pharma Industries and Associations to expeditiously 
implement the scheme in a systematic, professional and transparent manner and to 
ensure that the objecti ves of the Scheme are achieved at the earliest. In this regard, 
Department of Pharmaceuticals in association with Indian Drug Manufacturers 
Association (IDMA) has already organised 2 seminars on Cluster Development to 
apprise stakeholders about the salient  features of the Cluster Development 
Programme for Pharma Sector (CDP-PS) at different locations. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
  (Please see Para No.7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation Sl. No.2  
 The Committee note that the Cluster Development Programme will be 
implemented through a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) which will have representatives 
from cluster members, financial institutions, State & Central Governments and R&D 
organisations with full  operational autonomy to develop, operate and maintain the 
infrastructure. The Committee, further note that the programme is to be implemented 
on a Public Private Partnership (PPP) format through one time grant -in-aid to be 
released in various phases for c reation of identified infrastructure and common 
facilities to the SPVs set up for the purpose. The State Governments role would mainly 
arise after the SPV and DPR are approved by Scheme Steering Committee (SSC). The 
Committee observe that till date SSC has  held five meetings and all the meetings were 
held in Delhi only and whenever it was felt necessary. During the course of the 
evidence even the department felt that holding of SSC meeting at different places will 
associate the local Industry more. The Comm ittee are of the opinion that the 
development of Cluster Programme is of paramount importance and fits in realizing 

 
  
14 
 
the Make in India goal of the Government. The Committee desire that the Department 
should take proactive measures toward developing Cluster Development Scheme. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that SSC should hold more meetings at regular 
interval and also at different relevant places where the Pharma companies are 
concentrated for proper monitoring and early establishment of the scheme. The  
Department should also enlist the support of State Governments for making the 
scheme successful. The Committee would like to know the initiatives taken to expedite 
the scheme and the progress made in the matter so far. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Gove rnment along with the Project Management Consultant (PMC) is 
regularly interacting with the Pharma Industries and Associations to expeditiously 
implement the scheme in a systematic, professional and transparent manner and to 
ensure that the objectives of t he Scheme are achieved at the earliest. In this regard, 
Department of Pharmaceuticals in association with Indian Drug Manufacturers 
Association (IDMA) has already organised 2 seminars on Cluster Development to 
apprise stakeholders about the salient feature s of the Cluster Development 
Programme for Pharma Sector (CDP -PS) at different locations. In the meeting of the 
Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) held on 5/10/2016, the following decisions have 
been taken:- 
(i)        DPR submitted by M/s. Chennai Pharma Ind ustrial Infrastructure 
Upgradation Complex (CPIIUC), Alathur Distt. Kanchipuram, Tamilnadu 
was approved by SSC. 
(ii)               In the 3 rd EOI called and proposal from M/s Andhra Pradesh 
Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Limited (APIICL) was receive d, 
however, they requested for in -principle approval of DPR before 
formation of SPV which was approved by SSC. 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.10 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation Sl. No.4 
 
 The Committee note under the 12th Five Year Plan, Rs.125 crore has been 
allotted for the CDP -PS Scheme. The Committee observe that the maximum limit for 
the grant in aid from Government under this category would be Rs. 20 Crore per 
cluster or 70 per cent o f the cost of the project, whichever is less. Government grant 
will be 90 per cent for Common Facility Centres (CFCs) for difficult and backward 
regions. Till 2015 -16, the grants for cluster scheme was covered under the head of 
new schemes but from this bu dget, the allocation has been made for cluster scheme 
separately. The Committee, further note that no grant in aid was released under the 
cluster development scheme during 2015-16 as none qualified for grant in spite of two 
rounds of EOIs. Although, a sum of Rs. 60 crore was requested for BE 2016 -17, only a 
provision of Rs.10 crore has been made in BE 2016 -17. The Committee express their 
displeasure over the fact that the Department has not been successful in the last two 
years in implementation of the Sche me and the funds have remained unutilised. 
Presently, the Project Management Consultant (PMC) has been requested to review 
the whole process and suggest remedial measures. The Committee therefore, desire 
that the Department should make the scheme implement able at the earliest and that 
expedient monitoring and timely action may be taken to utilise the funds allocated for 

 
  
15 
 
the current year to the utmost as it is very vital for the growth of Pharmaceutical 
companies especially the SME Pharma Units.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The directions of the Committee have been noted and the Government along 
with the Project Management Consultant (PMC) is regularly interacting with the 
Pharma Industries and Associations to expeditiously implement the scheme in a 
systematic, professional and transparent manner and to ensure that the objectives of 
the Scheme are achieved at the earliest.  
In the meeting of the Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) held on 5/10/2016, the 
following decisions have been taken:- 
(i)             DPR submi tted by M/s. Chennai Pharma Industrial Infrastructure 
Upgradation Complex (CPIIUC), Alathur Distt. Kanchipuram, Tamilnadu 
was approved by SSC. 
(ii)               In response to the 3 rd EOI called, proposals from M/s Andhra 
Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure  Corporation Limited (APIICL) were 
received. However, they requested for in -principle approval of DPR 
before formation of SPV which was considered favourably by the SSC. 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.16 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
  

 
  
16 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
-NIL- 
  

 
  
17 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
Recommendation Sl. No. 6 
 In order to give thrust to the scheme, the Committee desire that the 
Department should also consider entrusting creation of clusters to PSU 
pharmaceutical companies like IDPL and HAL etc. Th ese companies have huge vacant 
land and also infrastructure facilities that are required for pharmaceutical companies. 
These PSUs pharma companies may be encouraged to utilise land available with them 
for setting up of clusters along with the creation of common world class facilities in the 
clusters through SPV or PPP mode. The Department of Pharmaceuticals may also 
provide suitable grant for creation of such facilities. The Committee are of the opinion 
that this may benefit as good revenue stream to the PS U pharma companies by 
utilization of their vacant land. The Committee, therefore, recommend that during the 
review of the scheme, the Department may seriously consider allowing the PSU 
pharma companies to utilise their vacant land for promo tion of pharmace utical 
clusters. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
M/s Hindustan Antibiotic Limited (HAL) and Indian Drugs &  Pharmaceuticals 
Limited (IDPL) are sick public sector pharmaceutical companies which have been 
referred to BIFR since 1992 and 1997 respectively. The Cabinet has constituted a 
Committee of 3 Ministers to comprehensively examine and recommend the suitable 
course of action for all the Pharma Sector CPSUs. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.22 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
  

 
  
18 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE  STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.3 
 
  The Committee note that Common Facilities under the CDP -PS will consist of 
creation of tangible "assets" such as (i) Common Testing Facilities (ii)Training Centre 
(iii) R&D Centres (iv) Effluent Treatment Plant and (v) Common Logistics Centre. The 
Committee also note that each cluster could have its own specific requirements based 
on the nature of units being set up and the products proposed to be manufactured. The 
Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) shall approve the project components and funding 
thereof depending upon the merits of the proposal.  
 
 The Committee note that a minimum of 10 Pharma Companies are required to 
form a SPV under CDP-PS. Further each company who joins the SPV as members under 
CDP-PS has to invest about Rs.15 to 20 lakh. The  Committee note that these conditions 
are coming in the way of successful implementation of the scheme. There have been 
suggestions to include Ayurvedic, Unani drug manufacturers and cosmetic companies 
also as member in the Cluster Development Programme. T he Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Department may relook the scheme and review all bottlenecks and 
reduce the number of members required to form SPV and also the amount to be 
invested. Further suggestions for including the cosmetic and Ayurveda and al l the 
other drug companies may also be considered in formation of clusters. The Committee, 
would like to know the changes made in the scheme to make it implementable”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
   As desired by the Pharma Industry in the 6 th Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) 
meeting on 29/6/2016, it was decided that Ayurvedic, Unani and Cosmetics firms shall 
also be considered as Pharma Firms. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.13 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation Sl. No.5 
 The Committee observe that Expression of Interest (EoI) for receiving the 
grant by Pharma Companies under the Cluster Development Programme was issued 
on 7.7.2015 and closed on 11.9.2015 only six EoI’s  were received. The Scheme 
Selection Committee (SSC) found that except one EoI, others did not fulfill the criteria 
required for receiving the grant under the scheme. The Committee observe that only 
one project has been given in -principle approval and that  its Proposal& Detailed 
Project Report(DPR) is awaited. The Committee also observe that PMC has contacted 
representatives of the Pharma firms and Pharma Associations all over India, through 
telephonic discussion and also visited many clusters, such as Badd i(H.P.), Deraabassi 
(near Chandigarh), Maharashtra, Tamilnadu, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh & West Bengal 
area. However, the Committee observe that in practice not much response has been 
received from SME Pharma companies for this programme.  
 
 Keeping in view of the poor response the Committee, further note that the SSC 
is revaluating the scheme in consultation with the stakeholders to make it more 
feasible so that the scheme could be successfully implemented in a time bound 

 
  
19 
 
manner. The Committee are of the opi nion that the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
should identify some existing locations which have the potential to emerge as a 
pharmaceutical cluster and in collaboration with the concerned State Governments 
and local pharma companies should set up the basic infrastructure facilities envisaged 
under CDP in a PPP mode which can be utilised by pharma units at reasonable charges 
which will also enable the objectives of the programme to be achieved. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the Department of Pharmac euticals should explore the 
possibility of establishment of world class facilities in cities or in States where cluster 
of pharma companies already exist and such common facilities can be created under 
PPP mode”.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The directions o f the Committee have been noted. The proposals have been 
received from M/s Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Limited 
(APIIC). The DPR from APIIC has been received by the Project Management Consultant 
(PMC). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.19 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
New Delhi;                      ANANDRAO ADSUL 
08 December,  2016                         Chairperson 
17 Agrahayana 1938 (Saka)                             Standing Committee on  
                            Chemicals and Fertilizers 
  

 
  
20 
 
APPENDIX – I 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 07 December, 2016 from 1615 hrs. to 
1700 hrs. in Committee Room 'B ', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B. N. Chandrappa 
5. Smt. Veena Devi 
6. Shri  R. Dhruvanarayana 
7. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
8. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
9. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
10. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
12. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
13. Shri K. Parasaran 
14. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
15. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
SECRETARIAT 
             1. Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
 3. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director  
 4. Shri Nishant Mehra  -  Under Secretary 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the members of the 
Committee.   
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the Draft Action Taken 
Reports on 'Demands for Grants 2016 -17' and on the subject 'Cluster Development  
Programme for Pharma Sector' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals). After some deliberations  the Draft Action Taken 
Reports were adopted by the Committee without any changes. 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairpers on to make consequential changes, if 
any, arising out of the factual verification of the Action Taken Reports by the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
5. It was also decided in the meeting that presentation of 02 Action Taken Reports 
shall take place in both the Houses on 9.12.2016.  
6. The Committee thereafter decided to hold its next meeting on  
6th January, 2017.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 
  
21 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION T AKEN BY THE GOVERNME NT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONT AINED IN THE TWENTY -FOURTH REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA ) OF THE STANDING CO MMITTEE ON CHEMICALS  
AND FERTILIZERS (201 5-16) ON THE SUBJECT CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAMME FOR PHARMA  SECTOR (C DP-PS) (2016-17) OF THE MINISTRY 
OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 6 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos.1, 2 and 4 )   
3 
 
Percentage of Total 50% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
NIL 
 
 
 
00 
Percentage of Total    00 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:-   
(Vide Recommendation No.6 )   
 
1 
Percentage of Total 17% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 3 and  5) 
2 
 
Percentage of Total 33% 
 
 