STANDING  COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(2015-2016)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2015-2016)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
SixthReport of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on Demands for Grants (2015-2016) of the Ministry of Chemicals
and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)]
THIRTEENTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2015/ Kartika, 1937 (Saka)
13

THIRTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(2015-2016)
( SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2015-2016)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained
in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry
of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.11.2015
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.11.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2015/Kartika, 1937 (Saka)

CC&F No. 13
Price : Rs. 69.00
© 2015 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-16) ........................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 26
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................................... 39
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration ..... 40
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government are of interim nature ....... 41
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of Second Sitting of the Standing Committee
on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2015-16) held on
22nd September 2015 ..................................................... 46
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Sixth Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014-15) on ‘Demands for
Grants (2015-16)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) ............. 48

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2015-16)
Shri Anandrao Adsul —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Idris Ali
3. Smt. Anju Bala
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta
6. Smt. Veena Devi
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana
8. Shri Innocent
9. Shri K. Ashok Kumar
10. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan
12. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle
13. Shri Rajendran S.
14. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
15. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu
16. Dr. Kulamani Samal
17. Dr. Uma Saren
18. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh
19. Shri Taslimuddin
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma
21. Shri Baker George 
#
(iii)
# nominated w.e.f. 28.9.2015.

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary
23. Dr. M.S. Gill
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade
25. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya
27. Shri K. Parasaran
28. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
29. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy
30. Dr. Sanjay Sinh
31. Shri Abdul Wahab
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava — Director
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers
(2015-2016) having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on their behalf, present this Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of
the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014-2015) on
Demands for Grants (2015-2016) of the Ministry of Chemicals and
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).
2. The Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on
20.4.2015. The Action Taken replies of Government to all observations/
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 31.7.2015.
The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2015-2016)
considered and adopted this Report on Action Taken Replies at their
sitting held on 22.9.2015.
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; ANANDRAO ADSUL,
5 October, 2015 Chairperson,
13 Asvina, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) which was
presented to Lok Sabha on 20.4.2015. In all, the Committee made
8 Observations/Recommendations in the Report.
2. Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals) were requested to furnish replies to the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report within three months
from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e., by 20.7.2015. The Action
Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 8 Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)
vide their O.M. No. 23003/2/2015-Fin.II dated 31.7.2015. These Replies
have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:—
Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8
(Total : 06)
Chapter - II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:—
Sl. No. -Nil-
(Total : 00)
Chapter - III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:—
Sl. No. -Nil-
(Total : 00)
Chapter - IV

2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are of interim nature:—
Sl. Nos. 1 and 4
(Total : 02)
Chapter - V
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and
the Final Replies in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained
in Chapter V for which replies are of interim nature should be furnished
expeditiously.
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations which still
require reiteration or merit comments.
A. Need to encourage Indigenous Production by Pharma Companies
Recommendation No. 1
5. While stressing that Government should boost and incentivize
domestic bulk drugs and discourage Indian Pharmaceutical firms from
importing, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the annual turnover of the Indian
Pharmaceutical Industry is estimated to be about Rs. 128044.29
crore during the year 2013-14. This segment of Industry has shown
tremendous progress in terms of infrastructure development,
technology base and wide range of products. The industry has
developed excellent GMP (Good Manufacturing Practices) compliant
facilities for the production of different dosage forms. The Indian
pharmaceutical companies maintain highest standards in Purity,
Stability and International Safety, Health and Environmental (SHE)
protection in production and supply of bulk drugs. The country
is almost self-sufficient in case of formulations. However, the
Committee note with concern that a large sum of money is being
spent on imports by the country. During the year 2013-14,
Rs. 17944.05 crore was spent to import medicinal and
pharmaceuticals products. According to the Department, the imports
are being made on quality and economic considerations and not
necessarily due to non-availability from domestic sources. However,
the Committee is not satisfied with the explanation of the
Department on this issue. The Committee are of the strong view
that to realize the dream of ‘Make in India’ concept in
pharmaceutical sector, the Government should boost and incentivize

3
domestic bulk drug industry and discourage Indian pharmaceutical
firms from importing. It is also essential that revival of closed/sick
public sector units may be expedited to create capacity of bulk
drugs in the country itself and to make the country self-reliant in
bulk drugs as also recommended by the Committee in their 2nd
Report. Incentives should be given for Research and Development
in the pharmaceutical sector. In this context, the Committee note
that the Government had constituted a committee under the
chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Health and Research.
The mandate of this Committee was to carefully study the whole
issue of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) of critical
importance by identifying important APIs and then working out
a package of interventions/concession required to build domestic
production capabilities and examine the cost implications. The said
Committee has reportedly submitted its report. Based on the
recommendations of the said Committee and consultations with
stakeholders, the Department would come up with a policy on
promotion of production of APIs in India. The Committee now
expect from the Department to expedite the process of formulation
of the policy on promotion of production of APIs in India. The
Committee hope that as a result of the proposed policy, Indian
pharmaceutical companies will be encouraged to produce bulk
drugs in the country and consequently cheap and quality drugs
will be available to the consumers in India. The Committee would
like to know the initiatives taken to expedite the policy and the
progress made in the matter so far.”
Reply of the Government
6. In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
The Government is examining the Katoch Committee
recommendation for formulation of a policy for promotion of
manufacturing of bulk drugs for being placed before the Cabinet.
Comments of the Committee
7. The Committee note that the Government is examining the
Katoch Committee recommendation for formulation of a policy for
promotion of manufacturing of bulk drugs for placing the same before
the Cabinet. The Committee hope that as a result of the proposed
policy, Indian pharmaceutical companies will be encouraged to produce
bulk drugs in the country and consequently cheap and quality drugs

4
will be available to the consumers in India. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the examination of the Katoch Committee
recommendations may be done in a time-bound manner and they may
be implemented at the earliest. The Committee also recommend that
the imports may be resorted by companies only when the same is
absolutely necessary for the industry. The Committee would like to
know the initiatives taken to expedite the policy and the progress
made in the matter so far.
B. Need to allocate funds commensurate to the outlays proposed by
the Department
Recommendation No. 2
8. While stressing that the allocation made by the Planning
Commission should commensurate to the outlays proposed by the
Department, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are constrained to note that an outlay of
Rs. 12341.89 crore was proposed by the Department for the 12th
Five Year Plan covering various Schemes to the Planning
Commission, against which an allocation of Rs. 2968 crore was
approved. However, for the first three years of the 12th Five Year
Plan, against a proposed outlay of Rs. 2566.86 crore (Rs 1127.45
crore for 2012-13, Rs. 567.60 crore for 2013-14 and Rs. 871.81 crore
for 2014-15) sought by the Department, the Planning Commission
allocated a Plan provision of Rs. 583 crore only i.e. Rs. 188 crore
each for 2012-13 and 2013-14, and Rs. 207 crore for 2014-15. The
balance outlay available for this Department, out of the total
approved 12th Plan outlay of Rs. 2968 crore, is Rs. 2385 crore.
According to the Department, the allocation made to them falls far
short of the urgent funds requirements projected by them for
carrying out its laid down mandate and its Vision for development
of Indian Pharmaceuticals Industry under ‘Make in India’ initiative,
to make India a largest global provider of quality medicines.
According to the Department, the funds allocated for NIPER will
be insufficient if NIPER buildings are to be completed in two years.
Notwithstanding the position stated above, the Committee’s
examination revealed that the Department has not been able to
spend the plan outlay allocated to them over a period of time and
the actual utilization of funds by the Department had remained
unsatisfactory. The Committee find that as against the Plan outlay
of Rs. 188 crore in BE 2012-13 which was slashed to Rs. 85 crore
at RE stage, only Rs. 51.26 crore was spent. For the year 2013-14,

5
the actual expenditure was only Rs. 74.02 crore against
Rs. 188 crore in BE 2013-14 which was reduced to Rs. 75 crore at
RE stage. The Plan outlay for the year 2014-15 was Rs. 207 crore
at BE stage which was curtailed to Rs. 87.49 crore at RE stage and
out of which only Rs. 65.86 crore was spent by the Department.
Rs. 20 crore was allocated to NIPER, Mohali in BE 2014-15 but the
same could not be released for want of Third Pay Evaluation and
EFC approval of these schemes. Delay in expenditure was the reason
for reduction from Rs. 30 crore in BE 2014-15 to Rs. 26.49 core at
RE stage for project based support to PSUs. Cluster Development
Programme for Pharma sector was approved in January 2014 but
there was delay in selection of Project Management consultant and
therefore, due to delay in selection, the BE 2014-15 was reduced
at RE stage. Similarly, funds could not be released for setting up
of National Centre for R&D in Bulk Drugs at NIPER, Hyderabad.
Under Plan Revenue Head for Other Schemes, BE 2014-15 was
Rs. 64 crore which was reduced to Rs. 20.70 crore at RE 2014-15
stage but the Actual Expenditure during the year 2014-15 was only
Rs. 0.71 crore and a large sum of funds under Plan for Other Schemes
could not be spent. Against the allocated funds of Rs. 2.44 crore for
the scheme on targets specific new drugs discovery for Anti TB and
Kalaazar, a sum of Rs. 0.71 crore was released in last fiscal year
2014-15 and balance amount could not be released as the Utilisation
Certificate was not be provided by NIPER, Mohali. All these facts
illustrated above clearly speaks about the poor performance of the
Department in utilization of its plan allocation. In fact, the
Department was candid enough to accept the fact that they could
not spend the allotted funds in the past. The Committee, therefore,
feel that the Department can not achieve its avowed objectives and
targets set for various schemes/programmes unless the funds are
utilized by the Department optimally and efficiently. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Department should make earnest
efforts for optimum utilisation of funds allocated to them. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken
by the Department in this regard.”
Reply of the Government
9. In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the
Committee, the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“The Plan outlay for the year 2014-15 was Rs. 207 crore at BE stage
which was reduced to Rs. 87.49 crore at RE stage. Actual expenditure
incurred for the year was Rs. 85.28 crore i.e. 97.69% of RE. The
initiatives undertaken by the Department for timely and optimal

6
utilization of Plan funds of Rs. 210 crore for 2015-16 are as follows:—
The allocation of Rs. 177 crore under Plan Scheme out of which
Rs. 87 crore for NIPERs at BE Stage 2014-15 was keeping in view
of the proposed construction of New campuses for NIPERs of
Guwahati, Gandhinagar and Hyderabad. However, these could not
be materialized due to delay in selection of PMC, approval of design
and estimates and signing of MoU. Now PMC for Gandhinagar
and Guwahati have been finalized and construction work is going
to start shortly. The foundation stone ceremony of NIPER, Guwahati
was held on 30.05.2015. For NIPER, Hyderabad MoU is under
process and the construction work will start after signing of MoU.
As far as proposal for Setting up of National Centre for R&D in
Bulk Drugs at NIPER, Hyderabad is concerned, it has been approved
by SFC and finalization of MoU with PMC is under process. After
signing of MoU with PMC, construction activity will be undertaken
to utilize the funds allocated for 2015-16. Efforts will be made for
optimum utilization of funds allocated for 2015-16.
To implement the Cluster Development Programme for Pharma
Sector Scheme, Project Development India Limited (PDIL) has been
appointed as the Project Management Consultant (PMC) to
implement this scheme. The first meeting of Scheme Steering
Committee (SSC) was held on 23.06.2015 wherein Expression of
Interest (EoI) was finalized.
The proposed ‘Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector’
Scheme would be a central sector scheme to be implemented as
Public Private Partnership (PPP) format for developing Pharma
cluster. Rs. 125 crores has been approved for this scheme during
the current plan. As each SPV will cost about Rs. 20 crore, to
implement 3-4 SPVs. Department would require at least Rs. 75
crore during the current financial year. However, the fund allocated
in BE 2015-16 is Rs. 15 crore under the head New Scheme of
Pharmaceuticals. As the fund allotted under the head is too meager,
Rs. 75 crore has been requested during the current financial year
for implementing the scheme.
As for creation of IPR Facilitation Centre Scheme, no fund was
allotted in BE 2015-16. As the two IPR’s have already been approved
and for this purpose an estimate of Rs. 2 crore is required for
running the said facilitation centres. As such, Rs. 2 crore has been
requested to be provided during current financial year for
implementing this scheme.

7
An allocation of Rs. 5 crore has been made during 2015-16 for the
Consumer Awareness Scheme which is anticipated to be fully
utilized and an annual plan for release of advertisement through
print and electronic media for the purpose has been chalked out.
Keeping in view the delay in finalization of Strategic Action Plan
2015, Jan Aushadhi Stores with new format which was to be
launched from June 21, 2015 has been postponed and is expected
to be launched in August 2015. The final shape of policy regarding
opening of new stores is being SAP 2015. Basket of drugs has been
increased to 500 medicines. About 160 items of consumables and
disposable surgical has also been finalized and planned to be made
available at Jan Aushadhi Stores in SAP 2015.
As regards the Scheme for target specific new drugs discovery for
Anti-TB and Kala Azar, the entire amount allocated for 2014-15 i.e.
Rs. 2.44 crore was released by the end of the fiscal year after
obtaining utilization certificate from NIPER Mohali. Further, a
Committee has been formed to review the progress of the Scheme
on six monthly basis.
Implementation of Plan Schemes and progress of utilization of funds
is continuously being monitored at regular intervals. Plan
expenditure is monitored Scheme wise at the level of Secretary,
Department of Pharmaceuticals in Coordination meetings convened
twice a month, as also on a case to case basis. Targeted activities
are broken up into individual timelines of achievements, hurdles
identified and pace of expenditure speeded up under various Plan
Schemes. Process of timely obtaining of requisite appraisals/
approvals from concerned agencies, convening of EFC Meetings
etc. is being speeded up.”
Comments of the Committee
10. The Committee noted that Planning Commission has
approved an allocation of Rs. 2968 crore for 12th Five Year Plan.
However, the actual budget allocation was Rs. 583 crore i.e. Rs. 188
crore each for 2012-13 and 2013-14 and Rs. 207 crore for 2014-15. The
balance outlay available for this Department, for last two years out of
the total approved 12th Plan outlay of Rs. 2968 crore, is Rs. 2385 crore.
According to the Department, the allocation made to them falls far
short of the urgent funds requirements projected by them for carrying
out its laid down mandate and its Vision for development of Indian

8
Pharmaceuticals Industry under “Make in India” initiative, to make
India a largest global provider of quality medicines.
The Committee noted from the Action Taken Replies that out of
allocation of Rs. 177 crore under Plan Scheme, Rs. 87 crore was
earmarked for NIPERs at BE stage 2014-15 keeping in view the proposed
construction of New Campuses for NIPERs at Guwahati, Gandhinagar,
and Hyderabad. However, the same could not be utilised due to various
reasons viz. delay in selection of PMC, approval of design and estimates
and signing of MoU. They have also stated that PMC for Guwahati
and Gandhinagar has been finalised and construction work is going
to start shortly. The foundation stone for Guwahati has been laid on
30.05.2015. As regards NIPER, Hyderabad, MoU is under process and
the construction will start after signing of MoU. Similarly, the proposal
for setting up of National Centre for R&D in Bulk Drugs at NIPER,
Hyderabad has been approved by SFC and finalization of MoU with
PMC is under process. It has been further stated that after signing
MoU with PMC construction activity will be undertaken and efforts
will be made for optimum utilisation of funds allocated for 2015-16.
While noting the above points, the Committee express their displeasure
over the facts that many formalities are yet to be finalised and only
after that construction work will start and therefore, the Committee is
apprehensive about utilisation of funds. As such the Committee desire
that earnest efforts should be made by the Department for completing
all the formalities urgently in a time bound manner so that the
BE 2015-16 for the establishment of NIPERs is utilised fully.
As regards ‘Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector’,
the Department in Action Taken Reply stated that Rs. 125 crore has
been approved for this scheme during the current plan. Accordingly,
each SPV will cost about Rs. 20 crore and to implement 3-4 SPVs the
Department would require at least Rs. 75 crore during the current
financial year. However, the fund allocated in BE 2015-16 is Rs. 15 crore
under the head New Scheme of Pharmaceuticals. As the fund allotted
under the head is too meagre, Rs. 75 crore has been requested during
the current financial year for implementing the scheme. The Committee
feel that Cluster Development Programme is an innovative programme
with a view to catalyze and encourage quality, productivity and
innovation in Pharma Sector and to enable the Indian Pharmaceutical
Industry, especially SMEs to play a leading role in a competitive global
market. The Committe, therefore, urge that such innovative and
developmental scheme should not suffer for want of money and

9
recommend that efforts should be made at the highest level to get the
requisite funds for the Cluster Development Programme.
C. Need for optimum utilization of funds
Recommendation No. 3
11. While observing that funds allocated to the Department are
utilized optimally and evenly during the year to enable them to achieve
the physical targets, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that total budgetary allocation was reduced
from Rs. 247.87 crore in BE 2014-15 to Rs. 137.04 crore in RE 2014-15
by Ministry of Finance. The Department had sought an enhanced
provision of Rs. 236.26 crore for RE 2014-15, against which only
Rs. 87.49 crore was actually made available to them. For Plan BE
2015-16, at RE stage, in November 2014, the Department had sought
Rs. 871.63 crore. This request for Plan BE 2015-16 was subsequently
enhanced by this Department after finalization of Plan proposals
to Rs. 1590.78 crore in February 2015, to address the long pending
pressing needs of development of 6 old NIPERs and 3 new NIPERs,
upgradation/modernization of CPSUs, Jan Aushadhi Yojana, new
schemes etc. As against the request of the Department, only
Rs. 210 crore was actually provided for Plan BE 2015-16 by Ministry
of Finance. In the total allocation of Rs. 259.02 crore for BE 2015-16,
81% i.e. Rs. 210 crore is accounted for by Plan provisions. NIPER
has been allocated Rs. 126.44 crore in BE 2015-16 which according
to the Department is insufficient against the proposal of Rs. 1128.57
crore. In addition to 6 NIPERs, the Budget speech for 2015-16 lists
three new NIPERs at Maharastra, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh. The
Committee also note that Plan allocation of Rs. 155 crore in
BE 2014-15 was reduced to Rs. 56 crore at RE stage for Phamaceutical
industries. Under Critical Assistance to Pharma CPSEs for WHO
(GMP) Compliance scheme, Rs. 6.84 crore was allocated in RE 2014-15
and Rs. 10 crore allocated in Supplementary Budget Grant (SBG),
out of which Rs. 3.3 crore could be sanctioned and the Planning
Commission did not approve projects totaling Rs. 3.16 crore of
IDPL. Similarly, Rs. 9.67 crore was allocated at RE stage for the
year 2014-15 for Jan Aushadhi Scheme as against Rs. 30 crore at
BE stage and actual expenditure was Rs. 9.67 crore only.
In view of the foregoing, the Committee strongly feel that the funds
allocated to the Department by the Ministry of Finance is abysmally
low with reference to their proposals. In the absence of adequate
funds available with them, the plan schemes/programmes

10
undertaken by the Department would be adversely affected. The
Committee, therefore, strongly feel that the Ministry of Finance
should allocate the funds as per the proposed requirement of the
Department and would like that the Department may strongly take
up the matter with the Ministry of Finance. At the same time, the
Department, on their part, should ensure that funds allocated to
them are utilized optimally and evenly during the year to enable
them to achieve the physical targets set for various schemes/
programmes which would in turn boost the sustained growth and
development of pharma sector in the country. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department
in this regard.”
Reply of the Government
12. In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the
Committee, the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“The matter regarding allocation of funds has been taken up with
the Budget Division, Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of
Finance. Department is also trying to get additional allocation of
funds as admissible through supplementary Demand for Grants.
The efforts will be made for allocation of more funds as per the
requirement of the Department at the stage of formulation of
Revised Estimates—2015-16.
As mentioned in reply to Recommendation No. 2 above the
implementation of Plan Schemes and progress of utilization of funds
is continuously being monitored at regular intervals. Plan
expenditure is monitored Scheme wise at the level of Secretary,
Department of Pharmaceuticals in Co-ordination meetings convened
twice a month, as also on a case to case basis. Targeted activities
are broken up into individual timelines of achievements, hurdles
identified and pace of expenditure speeded up under various Plan
Schemes. Process of timely obtaining of requisite appraisals/
approvals from concerned agencies, convening of EFC Meetings
etc. is being speeded up.”
Comments of the Committee
13. The Department in Action Taken Reply stated that the total
budgetary allocation was reduced from Rs. 247.87 crore in BE 2014-15
to Rs. 137.04 crore in RE 2014-15 by Ministry of Finance. For Plan BE
2015-16, at RE stage, in November 2014, the Department had sought
for Rs. 871.63 crore. This request for Plan BE 2015-16 was subsequently

11
enhanced by the Department after finalization of Plan proposals to
Rs. 1590.78 crore in February, 2015. As against the request of the
Department only Rs. 210 crore was actually provided for BE 2015-16
by Ministry of Finance. The Committee noted that the Department has
taken up the matter regarding allocation of funds with the Budget
Division, Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance. The
Department is also trying to get additional allocation of funds as
admissible through supplementary Demand for Grants. The efforts
will also be made for demand of more funds as per the requirement
of the Department at the stage of formulation of Revised Estimates—
2015-16. Further, the Committee also noted that the implementation of
Plan Schemes and progress of utilization of funds is continuously being
monitored at regular intervals. Plan expenditure is monitored Scheme
wise at the level of Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals in
Co-ordination meetings convened twice a month, as also on a case to
case basis. Targeted activities are broken up into individual timelines
of achievements, hurdles identified and pace of expenditure speeded
up under various Plan Schemes.
The Committee are of the opinion that without the availability
of proper funds for all the schemes of the Department, it will not be
possible in toto to implement the schemes of Department of
Pharmaceuticals. Further the Department should look into the
challenges and shortcomings on an urgent basis. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate its earlier recommendation that the Department
should impress upon Ministry of Finance to allocate required fund by
highlighting the actions being undertaken by the Department of
Pharmaceuticals. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.
D. National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research
(NIPER)
Recommendation No. 4
14. While observing that to impress upon the State Governments
to provide land for NIPER without any delay, the Committee had
recommended as under:—
“NIPER was declared as an “Institute of National importance” under
the Act of Parliament on 26th June, 1998. NIPER is a member of
Association of Indian Universities. In addition to NIPER, SAS Nagar,
Mohali the Government had set up six new NIPERs at Hyderabad,
Hajipur, Ahmedabad, Rae Bareli, Guwahati and Kolkata. These New
NIPERs will cater to the growing demand of the pharmaceutical

12
industry for highly trained manpower for continuous growth of
the pharmaceuticals sector with increased focus on R&D, particularly
after the amendment of Indian Patent Act. At present, new NIPERs
are functioning with the assistance of the Mentor Institutes.
However, the six New NIPERs are yet to be provided with buildings
and regular faculty. In the year 2015-16 it is proposed to construct
buildings and provide regular faculties for the six NIPERs. However,
the budgetary provision is very limited to take up the same. Thus
a supplementary demand is being proposed. Further the Department
proposed setting up of three new NIPERs at Andhra Pradesh,
Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka. The Budget Speech for 2015-16
lists three new NIPERs at Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh.
The Committee further observed that the work relating to
construction of NIPER Campus at Guwahati and Gandhinagar has
since been awarded to Engineering Projects (India) Ltd. and
Hindustan Steelworks Constructions Ltd. respectively. Further, the
Committee noted that Department has not spent the money because
it got into all the procedural difficulties. To construct one NIPER
the State Governments have to give 100 acres of land free of cost
and then only NIPER is sanctioned. The Committee have been
apprised that State Governments do not provide adequate land
that is why construction activities cannot be started immediately.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of
Pharmaceuticals should take up the matter with State Governments
at the highest level and impress upon them to provide land for
NIPER without any delay. Further they may also take up the matter
with the Finance Ministry for required fund allotment after
substantial work is in progress. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
15. In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the
Committee, the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“The Department has since awarded the work of construction of
NIPER campus from concept to completion at Guwahati to
Engineering Project India Ltd. (EPIL) and Gandhinagar to Hindustan
Steelworks Constructions Ltd. (HSCL). Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) is to be signed by NIPER, Hyderabad with
the National Project Construction Corporation (NPCC) Ltd. After
signing the MoU, funds would be released to NIPER for making
available to the concerned PSU so as to enable them to commence
work relating to construction of NIPER campus at Gandhinagar
and Hyderabad. The construction of NIPERs Guwahati, Ahmedabad

13
and Hyderabad will start during the current year. However,
construction could not be taken up as sufficient fund has not been
provided. Department is planning for supplementary demands/
budgets proposal for additional funds to undertake construction
properly.
The issue of allotment of land with respect to NIPERs at Hajipur,
Kolkata and Rae Bareli are yet to be resolved.
Status of land allocation at NIPER, Kolkata (West Bangal)
National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research
(NIPER), Kolkata was set up after the State Government committed
to provide 100 acres of land free of cost. Subsequently, State
Government allotted 35 acres land free of cost at Baruipur. However,
out of 35 acres, NIPER was required to spare 10 acres for common
facilities, which leaves a very small piece of land for setting up of
an Institute of national importance. In addition, State Government
wanted Government of India to pay for the External Development
Charges (EDC). Since, Union Cabinet approved setting up of NIPERs
in other parts of country , including Kolkata, on the premise that
100 acres of land would be provided free of cost by the State
Governments. Therefore, it is not possible to pay for EDC. The
matter has been followed up vigorously with the State Government
for allotment of 100 Acres of land near Kolkata free of cost and
free from all encumbrances. A letter has also been written on
29.12.2014 by Hon’ble Minister (C&F) to the Chief Minister of
West Bengal. However, response from the State Government is yet
to be received.
Status of land allocation at NIPER, Hajipur (Bihar)
I. Based on the firm assurances given in writing by the State
Government of Bihar for allotment of 100 acres land free of
cost, this Department set up NIPER at Hajipur in 2007 under
the mentorship of Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of
Medical Sciences (RMRIMS), Patna. Since, 2007, NIPER is
functioning in the EPIP Campus, BIADA Industrial Area,
Hajipur. State Government has, however, not yet allotted the
land for setting up full-fledged NIPER Campus at Hajipur,
in spite of the matter being followed up with the State
Government at Chief Minister and Chief Secretary level.
II. The matter has been brought to the notice that in the
10th State level co-ordination Committee meeting held at
Hajipur on 21.3.2013. The Principal Secretary, Industries, Bihar

14
has advised that 50 acres of land was not readily available
for allotment to NIPER, the institution may proceed with
vertical construction worked on the 12.43 acres of land already
in possession of NIPER Hajipur, along with 3 buildings. At
the same time the institute has been advised to pursue with
the District Magistrate, Vaishali for alternative land for
acquisition for the NIPER.
In the Eastern Zonal Council meeting held on 16.01.2015
chaired by Union Home Minister, the matter was taken up
and State Government reiterated their view that 50 acres of
land around Patna is not available and that the NIPER campus
at the present site may be constructed vertically.
III. Matter has not been settled as yet. Recently, the matter has
been taken up at the level of Secretary and Minister. However,
the quantum and location of land is yet to be settled
satisfactorily.
IV . Establishment of NIPER may be a great addition to the
educational infrastructure of any State. However, since 2007
NIPER, Kolkata and Hajipur are functioning from the
premises of their mentor institutes, and facing acute shortage
of accommodation and they are unable to plan construction
of full-fledged campus for providing inter-alia all essential
infrastructure facilities essential for quality education at Post
Graduate level and Ph.D in Pharmaceutical Sciences.
V . A letter has also been written on 30.12.2014 by Hon’ble
Minister (C&F) to the Chief Minister of Bihar.
NIPER, Raebareli
As regards NIPER, Raebareli, the Steering Committee constituted
for all the NIPERs in its 20th meeting held on 18.11.2014 observed
that the issues related to adequacy and clear title of the land be
assured and the related issues should be resolved before proceeding
further in the matter of the appointment of the PMC for NIPER,
Raebareli. Accordingly, the issue is being taken up with State
Government to sort out the impediments so that PMC could be
selected.
Setting up of Three new NIPERs
The Hon’ble Finance Minister in his Budget Speech for 2015-16
announced setting up of three new NIPERs. However, no budget

15
allocation has been made. The matter is being taken up with Ministry
of Finance for allocation of fund.”
Comments of the Committee
16. The Committee noted that in addition to NIPER, SAS Nagar,
Mohali the Government had set up six new NIPERs at Hyderabad,
Hajipur, Ahmedabad, Raebareli, Guwahati and Kolkata. At present,
new NIPERs are functioning with the assistance of the Mentor Institutes.
The Committee observed that in the year 2015-16, it is proposed to
construct buildings and provide regular faculties for the six NIPERs.
The Committee also observed that to construct one NIPER, the State
Governments have to give 100 acres of land free of cost and then only
NIPER is sanctioned. The Committee were further apprised that State
Governments do not provide adequate land due to which construction
activities cannot be started immediately.
The Committee note from the action taken replies of the
Department, that the construction work of NIPER Guwahati,
Gandhinagar and Hyderabad has been pending due to the various
reasons in spite of allotment of land. Further, the issue of allotment
of land with respect to NIPERs at Hajipur and Kolkata and Raebaerali
is yet to be resolved.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department
should vigorously pursue with the respective State Governments to
allocate land of requisite dimension within a fixed timeframe and for
this purpose the Department may consider to create a Special Cell to
monitor and pursue vigorously with the States for acquisition of land.
The Committee also recommend that the process of construction work
in respect of NIPERs for which land has already been acquired should
be expedited and be completed within a fixed timeframe. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the
Department in this regard.
E. National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority
Recommendation No. 5
17. With the objective to make all drugs available especially Life
Saving Drugs, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the functions of NPPA, interalia include
fixation and revision of prices of scheduled drug under the Drugs
(Prices Control) Order (DPCO), as well as monitoring and

16
enforcement of prices. NPPA also provides inputs to Government
for policy formulation on other specific issues concerning making
available affordable medicines to the consumers. The Government
has notified DPCO, 2013 on 15th May, 2013 in supersession of
DPCO, 1995 and as per the order the prices of scheduled
formulations which are based on National List of Essential
Medicines (NLEM)-2011 issued by the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare are to be fixed based on market based data. No one
is permitted to sell any scheduled drug/formulation at a price higher
than the ceiling price fixed by NPPA/Government. NPPA has fixed
the ceiling prices of 509 formulation packs under DPCO, 2013.
NPPA is in the process of collecting market based information for
fixing the prices of remaining formulations. The Committee were
surprised to know that all the medicines are not listed in National
List of Essential Medicines. The Committee are of the view that
all medicines are essential and is taken only when it is needed by
the patient. All these medicines including Life Saving Drugs should
be available in the market at affordable cost. To keep this in view,
the Committee recommend that the scope of price control needs
to be enlarged to make all the drugs available especially Life Saving
Drugs in all parts of the country. The Government should also
expedite the process of notifying the ceiling prices of the remaining
medicines. The Committee would like the department to act
accordingly and be apprised of the targets achieved in the matter.”
Reply of the Government
18. In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the
Committee, the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“Drug Price Control Order, 2013 is an offshoot of NPPP-2012 which
was approved by the Cabinet on 22.11.2012. The Objective of
NPPP-2012 is to put in place a regulatory framework for pricing
of drugs so as to ensure availability of required medicines—
“essential medicines” at reasonable prices even while providing
sufficient opportunity to innovation and competition to support
the growth of pharma industry thereby meeting the goals of
employment and shared economic well-being for all.
Life Saving Drugs are neither defined in the National Pharmaceutical
Pricing Policy (NPPP), 2012 nor in the First Schedule of the Drugs
(Prices Control) Order, 2013 (DPCO, 2013) issued pursuant to NPPP ,
2012. All essential drugs specified in the National List of Essential
Medicines, 2011 (NLEM-2011) are included in Schedule-I of the
DPCO, 2013 and are under price control.

17
NPPA is empowered to fix/notify the ceiling price of all essential
medicines. Out of 680 medicines (628 net) specified in Schedule-I
of DPCO, 2013, ceiling prices have been fixed in respect of 530
essential medicines under provisions of the said order. In spite of
the best efforts made by NPPA, ceiling prices of 98 medicines could
not be fixed due to non-availability of the data in the retail sector.
NPPA is empowered to fix/revise the prices of non-scheduled
formulations, not covered under price control, under para 19 of
DPCO, 2013. NPPA vide price notifications dated 10.07.2014 capped
the MRP of 106 non-scheduled single ingredient drug formulations
used in the treatment of diabetes and cardiovascular diseases.
As regards enlargement of the scope of price control, it is mentioned
that Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has constituted a Core
Committee for revision of NLEM-2011 under the chairmanship of
Dr. V .M. Katoch, former Secretary, Department of Health Research
and DG, ICMR. The said Core-Committee (on which both the
Department of Pharmaceuticals and NPPA are also represented)
will be submitting its recommendations to the Government with
regard to revision of the list of essential medicines.
Regarding availability of medicines, it is mentioned that NPPA
regularly monitors shortages of essential medicines mainly through
Drug Controllers of the State Governments. Whenever shortage is
reported by the State Drugs Controller, or when any such shortage
comes to the notice of NPPA, NPPA takes remedial steps for
ensuring availability of drugs by impressing upon manufacturers
to rush the stocks to the places of shortage.
Also, there is a mechanism for monitoring the stock and availability
of the essential drugs/scheduled drugs under para 21 (i) of DPCO,
2013 that provides for submission of quarterly return in respect of
production/import and sales of scheduled medicines (NLEM
medicines) and Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients contained in
scheduled formulations as stated in Form- III of the said order by
the manufacturer/importer/marketer. Further, any manufacturer/
importer wanting to discontinue manufacture/import of a scheduled
formulation has to apply to NPPA in Form-IV of Schedule IV of
DPCO, 2013 at least 6 months in advance, and NPPA can direct
the applicant to continue production/import upto 1 year.
NPPA has recently launched ‘Pharma Jan Samadhan’, a web enabled
system which provides consumers and others with an online facility

18
to redress their complaint relating to pricing and availability of
medicines. The primary objective of ‘Pharma Jan Samadhan’ is to
put in place a speedy and effective complaint redressal system
with regard to non-availability or shortage of any medicine, refusal
of supply or sale of any medicine without good and sufficient
reason, overpricing of medicines etc.
Further, a web-enabled application called Integrated Pharmaceutical
Database Management System (IPDMS) has been developed with
the help of NIC and is being operationalized. Besides its usage for
price fixation, IPDMS will also serve the objective of price regulation
and price monitoring, and will help check price rise of scheduled
and non-scheduled formulations, help enforce notified prices, detect
price rise violations, and help in recovery of overcharged amounts
along with interest from the defaulter companies.
Comments of the Committee
19. The Committee had noted that the functions of NPPA, inter-
alia include fixation and revision of prices of scheduled drug under
the Drugs (Prices Control) Order (DPCO), as well as monitoring and
enforcement of prices. NPPA also provides inputs to Government for
policy formulation on other specific issues concerning making available
affordable medicines to the consumers. The Committee further, note
that NPPA is empowered to fix/notify the ceiling price of all essential
medicines. Out of 680 medicines (628 net) specified in Schedule-I of
DPCO, 2013, ceiling prices have been fixed in respect of 530 essential
medicines under provisions of the said order. In spite of the best efforts
made by NPPA, ceiling prices of 98 medicines could not be fixed due
to non-availability of the data in the retail sector.
In this regard, the Committee are disappointed to note that despite
of all efforts by NPPA, the ceiling price of 98 medicines could not be
fixed due to non-availability of data. The Committee also note that
reasons for non-availability of data in respect of 98 medicines have not
been clearly stated. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that the Department should ensure to get the collection of the data of
the remaining 98 medicines expeditiously in order to fix their price
without any further delay.
Further, the Committee are of the view that all the medicines are
essential and is taken only when it is needed by the patient. All

19
medicines including Life Saving Drugs should be available in the
market at affordable cost and the Committee expect that
recommendations submitted by the Core Committee under the
Chairmanship of Dr. V .M. Katoch should be looked into as it is
regarding the scope of Price Control of Essential Drugs and scope for
bringing more drugs under essential list of medicines. The Committee
also recommend that wide publicity be given to web-enabled
application called ‘Pharma Jan Samadhan’ which provides consumers
and others with an online facility to redress their complaint relating
to pricing and availability of medicines. The other web based
application ‘Integrated Pharmaceutical Database Management System’
which will serve the objective of price regulation and price monitoring
may also be operationalised at the earliest. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the achievements made in this regard.
F. Recovery of Overcharged Amount by NPPA
Recommendation No. 6
20. With the objective to the recovery of overcharged amount the
Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that since inception of NPPA till 28.2.2015
there are 1138 cases (1087 cases under DPCO 1995 and 51 cases
under DPCO 2013) where demand notices amounting to Rs. 4052.03
crore have been issued by NPPA to Pharmaceutical companies for
selling their medicines at prices higher than the price fixed by
NPPA/Government of which Rs. 371.60 crore has been recovered
till 28.02.2015 leaving a balance of Rs. 3680.43 crore. Out of the
balance amount of Rs. 3680.43 crore, Rs. 3485.01 crore is pending
in various High Courts and Supreme Court, Rs. 51.86 crore is
pending for recovery with Collectors of various States under DPCO
1995, Rs. 5.05 crore is pending with BIFR/Official liquidators under
DPCO 1995 and Rs. 139.50 crore is under process. The Committee
are given to understand that action for recovery of the overcharged
amount along with interest thereon is a continuous process and
NPPA takes action as per the provisions of DPCO’1995/DPCO, 2013
read with EC Act, 1955. However, the process of recovery is affected
due to orders passed by the various High Courts and also by
Supreme Court in cases filed by the pharmaceutical companies
challenging the price fixation order/notification issued by NPPA/
Government under DPCO, 1995. Inclusion of some Bulk Drugs

20
under Price Control (schedule-I of DPCO, 1995) has also been
challenged by the pharma companies in different courts of India.
NPPA/Government is defending such cases through senior
Government Counsels. Whenever necessary, NPPA files urgent
application in the Courts for vacation of interim orders and also
for early hearing/disposal of the case. While appreciating these
efforts, the Committee recommend that NPPA should vigorously
pursue all the recovery cases and recover the overcharged amount
from the companies. The Committee would also like to be apprised
of the action taken in this regard.”
Reply of the Government
21. In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of
the Committee, the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated
as under:—
“Since inception of NPPA till 30.04.2015, there are 1180 cases (1118
cases under DPCO, 1995 and 62 cases under DPCO, 2013) where
demand notices amounting to Rs. 4072.31 crore (Rs. 3918.83 crore
under DPCO, 1995 and Rs. 153.48 crore under DPCO 2013) have
been issued by NPPA to Pharmaceutical companies for selling their
medicines at prices higher than the price fixed by NPPA/
Government. Out of the above, Rs. 373.56 crore (Rs. 309.42 crore
under DPCO 1995 and Rs. 64.14 crore under DPCO 2013) has been
recovered till 30.04.2015 leaving a balance of Rs. 3698.75 crore
(Rs. 3609.41 crore under DPCO 1995 and Rs. 89.34 crore under
DPCO 2013). The amount recovered under DPCO 2013 also includes
an amount of Rs. 8.32 crore deposited by M/s Biological Evans Ltd.
in the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi. Out of the balance amount
of Rs. 3698.75 crore, Rs. 3477.82 crore is pending for collection on
account of litigation in various High Courts and the Supreme Court;
Rs. 54.58 crore is pending for recovery with Collectors of various
States; Rs. 5.05 crore is pending with BIFR/Official liquidators under
DPCO 1995; and recovery of Rs. 161.30 crore is in process.
Recovery of the overcharged amount gets pending on account of
stay orders passed by the various High Courts and the Supreme
Court. All efforts have been made to recover the overcharged
amounts from the companies through the following steps viz.
urgent filing of application for vacation of interim orders by various
Courts; pursuing cases with the concerned State Drug Controllers

21
(SDCs) to urge upon the companies for early recovery of the
overcharged amounts etc.”
Comments of the Committee
22. The Committee note from the action taken replies of the
Department that the recovery of the overcharged amount has been
adversely affected due to stay orders passed by the High Courts and
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in cases filed by pharmaceutical companies.
The Committee are given to understand that action for recovery of the
overcharged amount along with interest thereon is a continuous process
and NPPA takes action as per the provisions of DPCO, 1995/DPCO,
2013 read with EC Act, 1955. Inclusion of some Bulk Drugs under Price
Control (Schedule-I of DPCO, 1995) has also been challenged by the
pharma companies in different Courts of India. NPPA/Government is
defending such cases. The Committee also note that all efforts have
been made to recover the overcharged amounts from the companies
through the following steps viz. urgent filing of application for vacation
of interim orders by various Courts; pursuing cases with the concerned
State Drug Controllers (SDCs) to urge upon the companies for early
recovery of the overcharged amounts etc. The Committee reiterate that
NPPA should vigorously pursue all the recovery cases and recover the
overcharged amount from the companies. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
G. Public Sector Undertakings
Recommendation No. 8
23. While expressing their concern over the slow progress in the
revival of sick Pharma PSUs, the Committee had recommended as
under:—
“The Committee note that the Department has 5 running PSUs
under its administrative control  viz. Karnataka Antibiotics and
Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL), Rajasthan Drugs and
Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL), Bengal Chemicals and
Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL), Hindustan Antibiotics Limited
(HAL) and Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL). Out
of these KAPL is profit making, while RDPL has reported losses
for the first time in 2013-14 and BCPL, HAL and IDPL are BIFR
referred Companies. However consistent with the policy to ensure

22
availability of good quality life saving drugs at reasonable prices,
Government of India has since approved rehabilitation scheme for
revival of HAL and BCPL.
As the HAL is still incurring losses, the 2nd Rehabilitation Plan
of HAL including the sale of some portion of surplus land has been
approved by the Government. The Committee note that proceeds
from sale of surplus land could generate a substantial amount for
the revival of the company. The Committee expressed their
displeasure that no significant progress on the proposal has been
made. The Committee now expect that necessary action would be
taken by the Government in the matter and the formalities would
be finalised expeditiously to implement the 2nd rehabilitation Plan
of HAL for the early revival of company and to ensure welfare of
its employees.
As regard the sickness and revival of BCPL the revival package for
BCPL was approved by the Government on 21st December 2006.
As envisaged in the Revival Scheme of BCPL, Government has so
far released Rs. 207.19 crore in full as cash infusion component.
The company has appointed Consultants for undertaking the work
of up gradation and modernization of plant and machinery
including compliance with Schedule ’M’/WHO GMP standards. The
company is on the path of revival. The production sale and gross
margin during the last 9 months of 2014-15 surpassed the production
and sale during the last two financial year.
IDPL was declared as a sick industrial company on 12th August,
1992. After failure to privatize IDPL, BIFR ordered its winding–up
on 4.12.2003. AAIFR set aside the impugned order of BIFR dated
4.12.2003 and remanded the matter back to BIFR for taking further
action for rehabilitation of IDPL and to pass further orders in
accordance with law. GoM in its meeting held on 11.10.2007 advised
that IDPL’s revival plan should be based on public interest goals
and ensuring the viability of the Company. Based on the observations
made by GoM, in its meeting held on 11.10.2007, IDPL appointed
a leading consultant Company E&Y to carry out the feasibility study.
E&Y submitted its report to the Ministry/DoP . A revised updated
Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) has been prepared taking cut
off date 31.3.2014 and submitted to the DoP/Ministry in January,
2015 for consideration and approval. The DRS of IDPL is self-
financing in nature in other words no fund will be sought from

23
the Government rather the present assets will be sold off and the
fund released will be used to payoff secured creditors. The
Committee are given to understand that Government has also
decided to sell surplus land of IDPL , Gurgaon to generate revenue.
The Committee hope that with the sale of land, the IDPL would
generate revenue which would help them to revive IDPL, Gurgaon.
The Committee are, however, unhappy with the slow pace of
progress to revive the sick PSUs in spite of their repeated
recommendations in this regard. The Committee once again reiterate
its recommendation that the Department should make vigorous
efforts in coordination with all concerned to expedite the revival
of the sick PSUs in time bound manner. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the action plan by the Department in this regard.”
Reply of the Government
24. In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the
Committee, the Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:—
“Hindustan Antibiotic Ltd.
IDBI, the Operating Agency appointed by BIFR for HAL has
prepared and submitted the Modified Draft Rehabilitation Scheme
(MDRS) in February, 2015. The same has been approved by Board
of Directors of HAL. Action is being taken to prepare Cabinet Note
and obtain necessary approval before approaching BIFR for
sanctioning the second rehabilitation package for HAL.
Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
As regard the sickness and Revival of BCPL the revival package
for BCPL was approved by the Government on 21st December,
2006. As envisaged in the Revival Scheme of BCPL, Government
has so far released Rs. 207.19 crore in full as cash infusion
component. The company has appointed consultants for
undertaking the work of upgradation and modernization of plant
and machinery including compliance with Schedule ‘M’/WHO GMP
standards. The Company has taken initiative to commission
Ointment, Cephalosporin and Betalactum Blocks which is as per
Ministry’s approval in its Appraisal Meeting for Revised Cost
Estimate, held on 13.01.2015. The Company is on the path of revival.
The Production, Sales and Gross Margin during the financial year

24
2014-15 surpassed the Production and Sales achieved during the
last two financial years ( i.e., 2013-14 and 2012-13).”
Financial Year Financial Year Financial Year
2014-15 2013-14 2012-13
(Rs. in Cr.) (Rs. in Cr.) (Rs. in Cr.)
Unaudited Audited Audited
Production 64.11 19.71 36.33
Sales 53.00 19.04 30.03
Gross Margin (7.33) (20.36) (22.90)
Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
On the directions of BIFR, the Operating Agency i.e. IDBI drafted
the Modified Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (MDRS) and submitted
to the Department.
MDRS has since been approved by the Board of Directors of IDPL
in their Board meeting dated 05.05.2015. Cabinet Note is under
finalization and is expected to be circulated for inter-ministerial
consultation shortly.”
Comments of the Committee
25. The Committee noted that the Department has 5 running
PSUs under its administrative control. Out of these KAPL is profit-
making, while RDPL has reported losses for the first time in 2013-14
and BCPL, HAL and IDPL are BIFR referred Companies. However,
consistent with the policy to ensure availability of good quality life
saving drugs at reasonable prices, Government of India has since
approved rehabilitation scheme for revival of IDPL, HAL and BCPL.
In the case of HAL IDBI, the Operating Agency appointed by BIFR
for HAL has prepared and submitted the Modified Draft Rehabilitation
Scheme (MDRS) in February, 2015. The same has been approved by
Board of Directors of HAL. Action is being taken to prepare Cabinet
Note and obtain necessary approval before approaching BIFR for
sanctioning the second rehabilitation package for HAL With regard to
revival of BCPL, the revival package for BCPL was approved by the
Government on 21st December 2006. The company has appointed
consultants for undertaking the work of upgradation and modernization
of plant and machinery including compliance with Schedule ‘M’/WHO
GMP standards. Now, the production sale and gross margin during the

25
last 9 months of 2014-15 surpassed the production and sale during the
last two financial years 2013-14 and 2012-13.
In the case of IDPL on the directions of BIFR, the Operating
Agency i.e. IDBI drafted the Modified Draft Rehabilitation Scheme
(MDRS) and submitted to the Department. MDRS has since been
approved by the Board of Directors of IDPL in their Board meeting
dated 05.05.2015. Cabinet Note is under finalization and is expected
to be circulated for inter-ministerial consultation shortly.
The Committee are, however, unhappy with the slow pace of
progress to revive the sick PSUs in spite of their repeated
recommendations in this regard. The Committee once again reiterate
its recommendation that the Department should make vigorous efforts
in coordination with all concerned to expedite the revival of the sick
PSUs in a time bound manner and if felt necessary the Department
may also consider to overhaul the management of sick units. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action plan by the
Department in this regard.

26
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation No. 2
The Committee are constrained to note that an outlay of Rs. 12341.89
crore was proposed by the Department for the 12th Five Year Plan covering
various Schemes to the Planning Commission, against which an allocation
of Rs. 2968 crore was approved. However, for the first three years of the
12th Five Year Plan, against a proposed outlay of Rs. 2566.86 crore
(Rs. 1127.45 crore for 2012-13, Rs. 567.60 crore for 2013-14 and Rs. 871.81
crore for 2014-15) sought by the Department, the Planning Commission
allocated a Plan provision of Rs. 583 crore only i.e. Rs. 188 crore each
for 2012-13 and 2013-14, and Rs. 207 crore for 2014-15. The balance outlay
available for this Department, out of the total approved 12th Plan outlay
of Rs. 2968 crore, is Rs. 2385 crore. According to the Department, the
allocation made to them falls far short of the urgent funds requirements
projected by them for carrying out its laid down mandate and its Vision
for development of Indian Pharmaceuticals Industry under “Make in
India” initiative, to make India a largest global provider of quality
medicines. According to the Department, the funds allocated for NIPER
will be insufficient if NIPER buildings are to be completed in two years.
Notwithstanding the position stated above, the Committee’s examination
revealed that the Department has not been able to spend the plan outlay
allocated to them over a period of time and the actual utilization of funds
by the Department had remained unsatisfactory. The Committee find that
as against the Plan outlay of Rs. 188 crore in BE 2012-13 which was
slashed to Rs. 85 crore at RE stage, only Rs. 51.26 crore was spent. For
the year 2013-14, the actual expenditure was only Rs. 74.02 crore against
Rs. 188 crore in BE 2013-14 which was reduced to Rs. 75 crore at RE
stage. The Plan outlay for the year 2014-15 was Rs. 207 crore at BE stage
which was curtailed to Rs. 87.49 crore at RE stage and out of which only
Rs. 65.86 crore was spent by the Department. Rs. 20 crore was allocated
to NIPER, Mohali in BE 2014-15 but the same could not be released for
want of Third Pay Evaluation and EFC approval of these schemes. Delay

27
in expenditure was the reason for reduction from Rs. 30 crore in BE 2014-15
to Rs. 26.49 crore at RE stage for project based support to PSUs. Cluster
Development Programme for Pharma sector was approved in January
2014 but there was delay in selection of Project Management consultant
and therefore, due to delay in selection, the BE 2014-15 was reduced at
RE stage. Similarly, funds could not be released for setting up of National
Centre for R&D in Bulk Drugs at NIPER, Hyderabad. Under Plan Revenue
Head for Other Schemes, BE 2014-15 was Rs. 64 crore which was reduced
to Rs. 20.70 crore at RE 2014-15 stage but the Actual Expenditure during
the year 2014-15 was only Rs. 0.71 crore and a large sum of funds under
Plan for Other Schemes could not be spent. Against the allocated funds
of Rs. 2.44 crore for the scheme on targets specific new drugs discovery
for Anti-TB and Kala Azar, a sum of Rs. 0.71 crore was released in last
fiscal year 2014-15 and balance amount could not be released as the
Utilisation Certificate was not be provided by NIPER, Mohali. All these
facts illustrated above clearly speaks about the poor performance of the
Department in utilization of its plan allocation. In fact, the Department
was candid enough to accept the fact that they could not spend the
allotted funds in the past. The Committee, therefore, feel that the
Department can not achieve its avowed objectives and targets set for
various schemes/programmes unless the funds are utilized by the
Department optimally and efficiently. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Department should make earnest efforts for optimum
utilisation of funds allocated to them. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Plan outlay for the year 2014-15 was Rs. 207 crore at BE stage
which was reduced to Rs. 87.49 crore at RE stage. Actual expenditure
incurred for the year was Rs. 85.28 crore i.e. 97.69% of RE. The initiatives
undertaken by the Department for timely and optimal utilization of Plan
funds of Rs. 210 crore for 2015-16 are as follows:—
The allocation of Rs. 177 crore under Plan Scheme out of which
Rs. 87 crore for NIPERs at BE Stage 2014-15 was keeping in view of the
proposed construction of New campuses for NIPERs of Guwahati,
Gandhinagar and Hyderabad. However, these could not be materialized
due to delay in selection of PMC, approval of design and estimates and
signing of MoU. Now PMC for Gandhinagar and Guwahati have been
finalized and construction work is going to start shortly . The foundation
stone ceremony of NIPER, Guwahati was held on 30.05.2015. For NIPER,

28
Hyderabad MoU is under process and the construction work will start
after signing of MoU. As far as proposal for Setting up of National Centre
for R&D in Bulk Drugs at NIPER, Hyderabad is concerned, it has been
approved by SFC and finalization of MoU with PMC is under process.
After signing of MoU with PMC, construction activity will be undertaken
to utilize the funds allocated for 2015-16. Efforts will be made for optimum
utilization of funds allocated for 2015-16.
To implement the Cluster Development Programme for Pharma
Sector Scheme, Project Development India Limited (PDIL) has been
appointed as the Project Management Consultant (PMC) to implement
this scheme. The first meeting of Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) was
held on 23.06.2015 wherein Expression of Interest (EoI) was finalized.
The proposed ‘Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector’
Scheme would be a central sector scheme to be implemented as Public
Private Partnership (PPP) format for developing Pharma cluster.
Rs. 125 crore has been approved for this scheme during the current plan.
As each SPV will cost about Rs. 20 crores, to implement 3-4 SPVs
Department would require at least Rs. 75 crore during the current financial
year. However, the fund allocated in BE 2015-16 is Rs. 15 crore under
the head New Scheme of Pharmaceuticals. As the fund allotted under
the head is too meager, Rs. 75 crore has been requested during the current
financial year for implementing the scheme.
As for creation of IPR Facilitation Centre Scheme, no funds was
allotted in BE 2015-16. As the two IPR’s have already been approved and
for this purpose an estimate of Rs. 2 crore is required for running the
said facilitation centres as such, Rs. 2 crore has been requested to be
provided during current financial year for implementing this scheme.
An allocation of Rs. 5 crore has been made during 2015-16 for the
Consumer Awareness Scheme which is anticipated to be fully utilized
and an annual plan for release of advertisement through print and
electronic media for the purpose has been chalked out.
Keeping in view the delay in finalization of Strategic Action Plan
2015, Jan Aushadhi Stores with new format which was to be launched
from June 21, 2015 has been postponed and is expected to be launched
in August, 2015. The final shape of policy regarding opening of new
stores is being SAP 2015. Basket of drugs has been increased to 500
medicines. About 160 items of consumables and disposable surgical has
also been finalized and planned to be made available at Jan Aushadhi
Stores in SAP 2015.

29
As regards the Scheme for target specific new drugs discovery for
Anti-TB and Kala Azar, the entire amount allocated for 2014-15 i.e.
Rs. 2.44 crore was released by the end of the fiscal year after obtaining
utilization certificate from NIPER Mohali. Further, a Committee has been
formed to review the progress of the Scheme on six monthly basis.
Implementation of Plan Schemes and progress of utilization of funds
is continuously being monitored at regular intervals. Plan expenditure
is monitored Scheme-wise at the level of Secretary, Department of
Pharmaceuticals in Coordination meetings convened twice a month, as
also on a case to case basis. Targeted activities are broken up into
individual timelines of achievements, hurdles identified and pace of
expenditure speeded up under various Plan Schemes. Process of timely
obtaining of requisite appraisals/approvals from concerned agencies,
convening of EFC Meetings etc. is being speeded up.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation No. 3
The Committee note that total budgetary allocation was reduced
from Rs. 247.87 crore in BE 2014-15 to Rs. 137.04 crore in RE 2014-15
by Ministry of Finance. The Department had sought an enhanced provision
of Rs. 236.26 crore for RE 2014-15, against which only Rs. 87.49 crore
was actually made available to them. For Plan BE 2015-16, at RE stage,
in November, 2014, the Department had sought Rs. 871.63 crore. This
request for Plan BE 2015-16 was subsequently enhanced by this
Department after finalization of Plan proposals to Rs. 1590.78 crore in
February, 2015, to address the long pending pressing needs of development
of 6 old NIPERs and 3 new NIPERs, upgradation/modernization of CPSUs,
Jan Aushadhi Yojana, new schemes etc. As against the request of the
Department, only Rs. 210 crore was actually provided for Plan BE 2015-16
by Ministry of Finance. In the total allocation of Rs. 259.02 crore for BE
2015-16, 81% i.e. Rs. 210 crore is accounted for by Plan provisions. NIPER
has been allocated Rs. 126.44 crore in BE 2015-16 which according to the
Department is insufficient against the proposal of Rs. 1128.57 crore. In
addition to 6 NIPERs, the Budget speech for 2015-16 lists three new
NIPERs at Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh. The Committee also
note that Plan allocation of Rs. 155 crore in BE 2014-15 was reduced to
Rs. 56 crore at RE stage for Pharmaceutical Industries. Under Critical
Assistance to Pharma CPSEs for WHO (GMP) Compliance scheme,
Rs. 6.84 crore was allocated in RE 2014-15 and Rs. 10 crore allocated in
Supplementary Budget Grant (SBG), out of which Rs. 3.3 crore could be

30
sanctioned and the Planning Commission did not approve projects
totalling Rs. 3.16 crore of IDPL. Similarly, Rs. 9.67 crore was allocated
at RE stage for the year 2014-15 for Jan Aushadhi Scheme as against Rs.
30 crore at BE stage and actual expenditure was Rs. 9.67 crore only.
In view of the foregoing, the Committee strongly feel that the funds
allocated to the Department by the Ministry of Finance is abysmally low
with reference to their proposals. In the absence of adequate funds
available with them, the plan schemes/programmes undertaken by the
Department would be adversely affected. The Committee, therefore,
strongly feel that the Ministry of Finance should allocate the funds as
per the proposed requirement of the Department and would like that the
Department may strongly take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance.
At the same time, the Department, on their part, should ensure that
funds allocated to them are utilized optimally and evenly during the year
to enable them to achieve the physical targets set for various schemes/
programmes which would in turn boost the sustained growth and
development of pharma sector in the country. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
The matter regarding allocation of funds has been taken up with
the Budget Division, Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance.
Department is also trying to get additional allocation of funds as
admissible through supplementary Demand for Grants. The efforts will
be made for allocation of more funds as per the requirement of the
Department at the stage of formulation of Revised Estimates—2015-16.
As mentioned in reply to Recommendation No. 2 above the
implementation of Plan Schemes and progress of utilization of funds is
continuously being monitored at regular intervals. Plan expenditure is
monitored Scheme-wise at the level of Secretary, Department of
Pharmaceuticals in Coordination meetings convened twice a month, as
also on a case to case basis. Targeted activities are broken up into
individual timelines of achievements, hurdles identified and pace of
expenditure speeded up under various Plan Schemes. Process of timely
obtaining of requisite appraisals/approvals from concerned agencies,
convening of EFC Meetings etc. is being speeded up.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)

31
Recommendation No. 5
The Committee note that the functions of NPPA, inter-alia include
fixation and revision of prices of scheduled drug under the Drugs (Prices
Control) Order (DPCO), as well as monitoring and enforcement of prices.
NPPA also provides inputs to Government for policy formulation on
other specific issues concerning making available affordable medicines
to the consumers. The Government has notified DPCO, 2013 on
15th May , 2013 in supersession of DPCO, 1995 and as per the order the
prices of scheduled formulations which are based on National List of
Essential Medicines (NLEM)-2011 issued by the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare are to be fixed based on market based data. No one is
permitted to sell any scheduled drug/formulation at a price higher than
the ceiling price fixed by NPPA/Government. NPPA has fixed the ceiling
prices of 509 formulation packs under DPCO, 2013. NPPA is in the process
of collecting market based information for fixing the prices of remaining
formulations. The Committee were surprised to know that all the
medicines are not listed in National List of Essential Medicines. The
Committee are of the view that all medicines are essential and is taken
only when it is needed by the patient. All these medicines including Life
Saving Drugs should be available in the market at affordable cost. To
keep this in view, the Committee recommend that the scope of price
control needs to be enlarged to make all the drugs available especially
Life Saving Drugs in all parts of the country. The Government should
also expedite the process of notifying the ceiling prices of the remaining
medicines. The Committee would like the department to act accordingly
and be apprised of the targets achieved in the matter.
Reply of the Government
Drug Price Control Order, 2013 is an offshoot of NPPP-2012 which
was approved by the Cabinet on 22.11.2012. The Objective of NPPP-2012
is to put in place a regulatory framework for pricing of drugs so as to
ensure availability of required medicines—“essential medicines” at
reasonable prices even while providing sufficient opportunity to
innovation and competition to support the growth of pharma industry
thereby meeting the goals of employment and shared economic well-
being for all.
Life Saving Drugs are neither defined in the National Pharmaceutical
Pricing Policy (NPPP), 2012 nor in the First Schedule of the Drugs (Prices
Control) Order, 2013 (DPCO, 2013) issued pursuant to NPPP , 2012. All
essential drugs specified in the National List of Essential Medicines, 2011
(NLEM-2011) are included in Schedule-I of the DPCO, 2013 and are under
price control.

32
NPPA is empowered to fix/notify the ceiling price of all essential
medicines. Out of 680 medicines (628 net) specified in Schedule-I of DPCO,
2013, ceiling prices have been fixed in respect of 530 essential medicines
under provisions of the said order. In spite of the best efforts made by
NPPA, ceiling prices of 98 medicines could not be fixed due to non-
availability of the data in the retail sector.
NPPA is empowered to fix/revise the prices of non-scheduled
formulations, not covered under price control, under para 19 of DPCO,
2013. NPPA vide price notifications dated 10.07.2014 capped the MRP of
106 non-scheduled single ingredient drug formulations used in the
treatment of diabetes and cardiovascular diseases.
As regards enlargement of the scope of price control, it is mentioned
that Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has constituted a Core
Committee for revision of NLEM 2011 under the chairmanship of
Dr. V .M. Katoch, former Secretary, Department of Health Research and
DG, ICMR. The said Core-Committee (on which both the Department of
Pharmaceuticals and NPPA are also represented) will be submitting its
recommendations to the Government with regard to revision of the list
of essential medicines.
Regarding availability of medicines, it is mentioned that NPPA
regularly monitors shortages of essential medicines mainly through Drugs
Controllers of the State Governments. Whenever shortage is reported by
the State Drugs Controller, or when any such shortage comes to the
notice of NPPA, NPPA takes remedial steps for ensuring availability of
drugs by impressing upon manufacturers to rush the stocks to the places
of shortage.
Also, there is a mechanism for monitoring the stock and availability
of the essential drugs/scheduled drugs under para 21 (i) of DPCO, 2013
that provides for submission of quarterly return in respect of production/
import and sales of scheduled medicines (NLEM medicines) and Active
Pharmaceutical Ingredients contained in scheduled formulations as stated
in Form-III of the said order by the manufacturer/importer/marketer.
Further, any manufacturer/importer wanting to discontinue manufacture/
import of a scheduled formulation has to apply to NPPA in Form-IV of
Schedule-IV of DPCO, 2013 at least 6 months in advance, and NPPA can
direct the applicant to continue production/import upto 1 year.
NPPA has recently launched ‘Pharma Jan Samadhan’, a web enabled
system which provides consumers and others with an online facility to

33
redress their complaint relating to pricing and availability of medicines.
The primary objective of ‘Pharma Jan Samadhan’ is to put in place a
speedy and effective complaint redressal system with regard to non-
availability or shortage of any medicine, refusal of supply or sale of any
medicine without good and sufficient reason, overpricing of medicines
etc.
Further, a web-enabled application called Integrated Pharmaceutical
Database Management System (IPDMS) has been developed with the
help of NIC and is being operationalized. Besides its usage for price
fixation, IPDMS will also serve the objective of price regulation and price
monitoring, and will help check price rise of scheduled and non-scheduled
formulations, help enforce notified prices, detect price rise violations,
and help in recovery of overcharged amounts along with interest from
the defaulter companies.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation No. 6
The Committee note that since inception of NPPA till 28.2.2015
there are 1138 cases (1087 cases under DPCO-1995 and 51 cases under
DPCO-2013) where demand notices amounting to Rs. 4052.03 crore have
been issued by NPPA to Pharmaceutical companies for selling their
medicines at prices higher than the price fixed by NPPA/Government of
which Rs. 371.60 crore has been recovered till 28.02.2015 leaving a balance
of Rs. 3680.43 crore. Out of the balance amount of Rs. 3680.43 crore,
Rs. 3485.01 crore is pending in various High Courts and Supreme Court,
Rs. 51.86 crore is pending for recovery with Collectors of various States
under DPCO-1995, Rs. 5.05 crore is pending with BIFR/Official liquidators
under DPCO-1995 and Rs. 139.50 crore is under process. The Committee
are given to understand that action for recovery of the overcharged amount
along with interest thereon is a continuous process and NPPA takes action
as per the provisions of DPCO-1995/DPCO-2013 read with EC Act, 1955.
However, the process of recovery is affected due to orders passed by the
various High Courts and also by Supreme Court in cases filed by the
pharmaceutical companies challenging the price fixation order/notification
issued by NPPA/Government under DPCO-1995. Inclusion of some Bulk
Drugs under Price Control (Schedule-I of DPCO-1995) has also been
challenged by the pharma companies in different courts of India. NPPA/

34
Government is defending such cases through senior Government
Counsels. Whenever necessary , NPPA files urgent application in
the Courts for vacation of interim orders and also for early
hearing/disposal of the case. While appreciating these efforts, the
Committee recommend that NPPA should vigorously pursue all the
recovery cases and recover the overcharged amount from the companies.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the action taken in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
Since inception of NPPA till 30.04.2015, there are 1180 cases
(1118 cases under DPCO 1995 and 62 cases under DPCO 2013)
where demand notices amounting to Rs. 4072.31 crore (Rs. 3918.83 crore
under DPCO 1995 and Rs. 153.48 crore under DPCO 2013) have
been issued by NPPA to Pharmaceutical companies for selling
their medicines at prices higher than the price fixed by NPPA/Government.
Out of the above, Rs. 373.56 crore (Rs. 309.42 crore under DPCO 1995
and Rs. 64.14 crore under DPCO 2013) has been recovered
till 30.04.2015 leaving a balance of Rs. 3698.75 crore (Rs. 3609.41 crore
under DPCO 1995 and Rs. 89.34 crore under DPCO 2013). The amount
recovered under DPCO 2013 also includes an amount of Rs. 8.32 crore
deposited by M/s Biological Evans Ltd. in the Hon’ble High Court of
Delhi. Out of the balance amount of Rs. 3698.75 crore, Rs. 3477.82 crore
is pending for collection on account of litigation in various High Courts
and the Supreme Court; Rs. 54.58 crore is pending for recovery with
Collectors of various States; Rs. 5.05 crore is pending with BIFR/Official
liquidators under DPCO 1995; and recovery of Rs. 161.30 crore is in
process.
Recovery of the overcharged amount gets pending on
account of stay orders passed by the various High Courts and the
Supreme Court. All efforts have been made to recover the
overcharged amounts from the companies through the following steps
viz. urgent filing of application for vacation of interim orders by various
Courts; pursuing cases with the concerned State Drug Controllers (SDCs)
to urge upon the companies for early recovery of the overcharged amounts
etc.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report)

35
Recommendation No. 7
The Committee note that under the Strategic Action Plan 2015, a
pilot initiative will be launched during 2015-16 to reach out all sections
of society with results and will be expanded across the country in the
coming 3 years covering all therapeutic groups. The Committee were
informed regarding Jan Aushadhi Scheme that the said Scheme will be
launched in a new format from June 21st onwards in six States in the
first phase. Rest of the States would be covered in second and third
phases. Over a period of another one year time, Jan Aushadhi Stores are
expected to be opened throughout the country in the medical colleges
and district hospitals in the first phase. The Committee were further
informed that the organisation which is responsible to implement this
particular Jan Aushadhi scheme, the Bureau of Public Sector Pharmacy
Companies is very weak organisation. Now the Department is
strengthening that organisation. The Department is telling them to see
that drugs are procured and stored adequately. Now, the Department is
increasing the number of products also. Earlier there were 350 products,
now the Department want to raise it to 500 plus products including
surgical carton, syringes, etc.
The Committee, would like the Department to sort out all procedural
issues well before actually launching the Strategic Action Plan 2015. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress in the matter ensuring
that generic drugs are made available at cheaper rate to the common man
throughout the country at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
BPPI has been actively working to finalize Strategic Action Plan
2015 to ensure its role out as soon as possible.  Keeping in view the delay
in finalization of Strategic Action Plan Jan Aushadhi Stores with new
format which was to be launched from June 21, 2015 has been postponed
and is expected to be launched in August 2015.
BPPI is planning to open 3000 stores in Medical colleges, district
Hospitals and by  Charitable/NGOs/Entrepreneurs/Pharmacist in coming
two years.  The final shape of policy regarding opening of new stores
is being finalized in SAP 2015.  Through SAP 2015, BPPI is also
strengthening organizational structure of BPPI to ensure that Jan Aushadhi
scheme is made successful. Basket of drugs has already been increased
to 500 medicines. Approx-160 items of consumables and disposable
surgical has also been finalized and planned to be made available at Jan
Aushadhi stores in SAP 2015. BPPI has also started strengthening its

36
supply chain structure to ensure timely availability of medicines at Jan
Aushadhi Stores.
Through this planning and effective implementation,  BPPI is
confident that generic drugs at cheaper rate will be made available to
the common man throughout the country at the earliest.
Recommendation No. 8
The Committee note that the Department has 5 running PSUs under
its administrative control viz. Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals
Limited (KAPL), Rajasthan Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL),
Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL), Hindustan
Antibiotics Limited (HAL) and Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited
(IDPL). Out of these KAPL is profit making, while RDPL has reported
losses for the first time in 2013-14 and BCPL, HAL and IDPL are BIFR
referred Companies. However, consistent with the policy to ensure
availability of good quality life saving drugs at reasonable prices,
Government of India has since approved rehabilitation scheme for revival
of HAL and BCPL.
As the HAL is still incurring losses, the 2nd Rehabilitation Plan
of HAL including the sale of some portion of surplus land has been
approved by the Government. The Committee note that proceeds from
sale of surplus land could generate a substantial amount for the revival
of the company. The Committee expressed their displeasure that no
significant progress on the proposal has been made. The Committee now
expect that necessary action would be taken by the Government in the
matter and the formalities would be finalised expeditiously to implement
the 2nd rehabilitation Plan of HAL for the early revival of company and
to ensure welfare of its employees.
As regard the sickness and Revival of BCPL the revival package
for BCPL was approved by the Government on 21st December 2006. As
envisaged in the Revival Scheme of BCPL, Government has so far released
Rs. 207.19 crore in full as cash infusion component. The company has
appointed Consultants for undertaking the work of up gradation and
modernization of plant and machinery including compliance with
Schedule ’M’/WHO GMP standards. The company is on the path of revival.
The production sale and gross margin during the last 9 months of 2014-15
surpassed the production and sale during the last two financial year.
IDPL was declared as a sick industrial Company on 12th August,
1992. After failure to privatize IDPL, BIFR ordered its winding–up on
4.12.2003. AAIFR set aside the impugned order of BIFR dated 4.12.2003

37
and remanded the matter back to BIFR for taking further action for
rehabilitation of IDPL and to pass further orders in accordance with law.
GoM in its meeting held on 11.10.2007 advised that IDPL’s revival plan
should be based on public interest goals and ensuring the viability of
the Company. Based on the observations made by GoM, in its meeting
held on 11.10.2007, IDPL appointed a leading consultant Company E&Y
to carry out the feasibility study. E&Y submitted its report to the Ministry/
DoP . A revised updated Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) has been
prepared taking cut off date 31.3.2014 and submitted to the DoP/Ministry
in January 2015 for consideration and approval. The DRS of IDPL is self-
financing in nature in other words no fund will be sought from the
Government rather the present assets will be sold off and the fund released
will be used to payoff secured creditors. The Committee are given to
understand that Government has also decided to sell surplus land of
IDPL , Gurgaon to generate revenue. The Committee hope that with the
sale of land, the IDPL would generate revenue which would help them
to revive IDPL, Gurgaon.
The Committee are, however, unhappy with the slow pace of
progress to revive the sick PSUs in spite of their repeated
recommendations in this regard. The Committee once again reiterate its
recommendation that the Department should make vigorous efforts in
coordination with all concerned to expedite the revival of the sick PSUs
in time bound manner. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
action plan by the Department in this regard.”
Reply of the Government
Hindustan Antibiotic Ltd.
IDBI, the Operating Agency appointed by BIFR for HAL has
prepared and submitted the Modified Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (MDRS)
in February, 2015. The same has been approved by Board of Directors
of HAL. Action is being taken to prepare Cabinet Note and obtain
necessary approval before approaching BIFR for sanctioning the second
rehabilitation package for HAL.
Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
As regard the sickness and Revival of BCPL the revival package
for BCPL was approved by the Government on 21st December, 2006. As
envisaged in the Revival Scheme of BCPL, Government has so far released
Rs. 207.19 Crore in full as cash infusion component. The company has
appointed Consultants for undertaking the work of upgradation and
modernization of plant and machinery including compliance with

38
Schedule ‘M’/WHO GMP standards. The Company has taken initiative
to commission Ointment, Cephalosporin and Betalactum Blocks which
is as per Ministry’s approval in its Appraisal Meeting for Revised Cost
Estimate, held on 13.01.2015. The Company is on the path of revival. The
Production, Sales and Gross Margin during the financial year 2014-15
surpassed the Production and Sales achieved during the last two financial
years ( i.e., 2013-14 and 2012-13).”
Financial Year Financial Year Financial Year
2014-15 2013-14 2012-13
(Rs. in cr.) (Rs. in cr.) (Rs. in cr.)
Unaudited Audited Audited
Production 64.11 19.71 36.33
Sales 53.00 19.04 30.03
Gross Margin (7.33) (20.36) (22.90)
Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
On the directions of BIFR, the Operating Agency i.e. IDBI drafted
the Modified Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (MDRS) and submitted to the
Department.
MDRS has since been approved by the Board of Directors of IDPL
in their Board meeting dated 05.05.2015. Cabinet Note is under finalization
and is expected to be circulated for inter-ministerial consultation shortly.”
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report)

39
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF
THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
-Nil-

40
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
-Nil-

41
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE
Recommendation No. 1
The Committee note that the annual turnover of the Indian
Pharmaceutical Industry is estimated to be about Rs. 128044.29 crore
during the year 2013-14. This segment of Industry has shown tremendous
progress in terms of infrastructure development, technology base and
wide range of products. The industry has developed excellent GMP (Good
Manufacturing Practices) compliant facilities for the production of different
dosage forms. The Indian Pharmaceutical companies maintain highest
standards in Purity, Stability and International Safety, Health and
Environmental (SHE) protection in production and supply of bulk drugs.
The country is almost self-sufficient in case of formulations. However,
the Committee note with concern that a large sum of money is being
spent on imports by the country. During the year 2013-14, Rs. 17944.05
crore was spent to import medicinal and pharmaceuticals products.
According to the Department, the imports are being made on quality and
economic considerations and not necessarily due to non-availability from
domestic sources. However, the Committee is not satisfied with the
explanation of the Department on this issue. The Committee are of the
strong view that to realize the dream of ‘Make in India’ concept in
pharmaceutical sector, the Government should boost and incentivize
domestic bulk drug industry and discourage Indian pharmaceutical firms
from importing. It is also essential that revival of closed/sick public sector
units may be expedited to create capacity of bulk drugs in the country
itself and to make the country self-reliant in bulk drugs as also
recommended by the Committee in their 2nd Report. Incentives should
be given for Research and Development in the pharmaceutical sector.
In this context, the Committee note that the Government had constituted
a committee under the chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Health
and Research. The mandate of this Committee was to carefully study the
whole issue of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) of critical
importance by identifying important APIs and then working out a package
of interventions/concession required to build domestic production
capabilities and examine the cost implications. The said committee has
reportedly submitted its report. Based on the recommendations of the

42
said committee and consultations with stakeholders, the Department
would come up with a policy on promotion of production of APIs in
India. The Committee now expect from the Department to expedite the
process of formulation of the policy on promotion of production of APIs
in India. The Committee hope that as a result of the proposed policy,
Indian pharmaceutical companies will be encouraged to produce bulk
drugs in the country and consequently cheap and quality drugs will be
available to the consumers in India. The Committee would like to know
the initiatives taken to expedite the policy and the progress made in the
matter so far.
Reply of the Government
The Government is examining the Katoch Committee
recommendation for formulation of a policy for promotion of
manufacturing of bulk drugs for being placed before the Cabinet.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Recommendation No. 4
NIPER was declared as an “Institute of National importance” under
the Act of Parliament on 26th June 1998. NIPER is a member of Association
of Indian Universities. In addition to NIPER, SAS Nagar, Mohali the
Government had set up six new NIPERs at Hyderabad, Hajipur,
Ahmedabad, Raebareli, Guwahati and Kolkata. These New NIPERs will
cater to the growing demand of the pharmaceutical industry for highly
trained manpower for continuous growth of the pharmaceuticals sector
with increased focus on R&D, particularly after the amendment of Indian
Patent Act. At present, new NIPERs are functioning with the assistance
of the Mentor Institutes. However, the six New NIPERs are yet to be
provided with buildings and regular faculty. In the year 2015-16 it is
proposed to construct buildings and provide regular faculties for the six
NIPERs. However, the budgetary provision is very limited to take up the
same. Thus a supplementary demand is being proposed. Further the
Department proposed setting up of three new NIPERs at Andhra Pradesh,
Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka. The Budget Speech for 2015-16 lists
three new NIPERs at Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh. The
Committee further observed that the work relating to construction of
NIPER Campus at Guwahati and Gandhinagar has since been awarded
to Engineering Projects (India) Ltd. and Hindustan Steelworks
Constructions Ltd. respectively. Further, the Committee noted that

43
Department has not spent the money because it got into all the procedural
difficulties. To construct one NIPER the State Governments have to give
100 acres of land free of cost and then only NIPER is sanctioned. The
Committee have been apprised that State Governments do not provide
adequate land that is why construction activities cannot be started
immediately. The Committee therefore recommend that the Department
of Pharmaceuticals should take up the matter with State Governments
at the highest level and impress upon them to provide land for NIPER
without any delay . Further they may also take up the matter with the
Finance Ministry for required fund allotment after substantial work is
in progress. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The Department has since awarded the work of construction of
NIPER campus from concept to completion at Guwahati to Engineering
Project India Ltd. (EPIL) and Gandhinagar to Hindustan Steelworks
Constructions Ltd. (HSCL). Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) is to
be signed by NIPER, Hyderabad with the National Project Construction
Corporation (NPCC) Ltd. After signing the MoU, funds would be released
to NIPER for making available to the concerned PSU so as to enable them
to commence work relating to construction of NIPER campus at
Gandhinagar and Hyderabad. The construction of NIPERs Guwahati,
Ahmedabad and Hyderabad will start during the current year. However,
construction could not be taken up as sufficient fund has not been
provided. Department is planning for supplementary demands/budget
proposal for additional funds to undertake construction properly.
The issue of allotment of land with respect to NIPERs at Hajipur,
Kolkata and Raebareli are yet to be resolved.
Status of land allocation at NIPER, Kolkata (West Bangal)
National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research
(NIPER), Kolkata was set up after the State Government committed to
provide 100 acrec of land free of cost. Subsequently, State Government
allotted 35 acres land free of cost at Baruipur. However, out of 35 acres,
NIPER was required to spare 10 acres for common facilities, which leaves
a very small piece of land for setting up of an Institute of national
importance. In addition, State Government wanted Government of India
to pay for the External Development Charges (EDC). Since, Union Cabinet
approved setting up of NIPERs in other parts of country, including
Kolkata, on the premise that 100 acres of land would be provided free
of cost by the State Governments. Therefore, it is not possible to pay for

44
EDC. The matter has been followed up vigorously with the State
Government for allotment of 100 acres of land near Kolkata free of cost
and free from all encumbrances. A letter has also been written on
29.12.2014 by Hon’ble Minister (C&F) to the Chief Minister of West Bengal.
However, response from the State Government is yet to be received.
Status of land allocation at NIPER, Hajipur (Bihar)
I. Based on the firm assurances given in writing by the State
Government of Bihar for allotment of 100 acre land free of
cost, this Department set up NIPER at Hajipur in 2007 under
the mentorship of Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of
Medical Sciences (RMRIMS), Patna. Since, 2007, NIPER is
functioning in the EPIP Campus, BIADA Industrial Area,
Hajipur. State Government has, however, not yet allotted the
land for setting up full-fledged NIPER Campus at Hajipur,
in spite of the matter being followed up with the State
Government at Chief Minister and Chief Secretary level.
II. The matter has been brought to the notice that in the 10th
State level coordination Committee meeting held at Hajipur
on 21.3.2013. The Principal Secretary, Industries, Bihar has
advised that 50 acres of land was not readily available for
allotment to NIPER, the institution may proceed with vertical
construction worked on the 12.43 acres of land already in
possession of NIPER Hajipur, along with 3 buildings. At the
same time, the institute has been advised to pursue with the
District Magistrate Vaishali for alternative land for acquisition
for the NIPER.
In the Eastern Zonal Council meeting held on 16.01.2015
chaired by Union Home Minister, the matter was taken up
and State Government reiterated their view that 50 acre of
land around Patna is not available and that the NIPER campus
at the present site may be constructed vertically.
III. Matter has not been settled as yet. Recently, the matter has
been taken up at the level of Secretary and Minister. However,
the quantum and location of land is yet to be settled
satisfactorily.
IV . Establishment of NIPER may be a great addition to the
educational infrastructure of any State. However, since 2007
NIPER, Kolkata and Hajipur are functioning from the
premises of their mentor institutes, and facing acute shortage

45
of accommodation and they are unable to plan construction
of full-fledged campus for providing inter-alia all essential
infrastructure facilities essential for quality education at Post
Graduate level and Ph.D in Pharmaceutical Sciences.
V . A letter has also been written on 30.12.2014 by Hon’ble
Minister (C&F) to the Chief Minister of Bihar.
NIPER, Raebareli
As regards NIPER, Raebareli, the Steering Committee constituted
for all the NIPERs in its 20th meeting held on 18.11.2014 observed that
the issues related to adequacy and clear title of the land be assured and
the related issues should be resolved before proceeding further in the
matter of the appointment of the PMC for NIPER, Raebareli. Accordingly,
the issue is being taken up with State Government to sort out the
impediments so that PMC could be selected.
Setting up of Three new NIPERs
The Hon’ble Finance Minister in his Budget Speech for 2015-16
announced setting up of three new NIPERs. However, no budget allocation
has been made. The matter is being taken up with Ministry of Finance
for allocation of fund.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
N
EW DELHI; ANANDRAO ADSUL,
5 October, 2015 Chairperson,
13, Asvina, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers.

46
APPENDIX I
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2015-16)
The Committee sat on Tuesday , the 22nd September, 2015 from
1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Anandrao Adsul — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Idris Ali
3. Shri Anju Bala
4. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta
5. Shri K. Ashok Kumar
6. Shri Chhedi Paswan
7. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu
8. Dr. Kulamani Samal
9. Shri Tasleem Uddin
10. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma
11. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya
13. Shri K. Parasaran

47
14. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya
15. Shri Abdul Wahab
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Director
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the members
of the Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:—
(a) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Chemicals and Petrochemicals); and
(b) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals).
4. Both the draft Action Taken Reports were adopted by the
Committee without any amendment.
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to make
consequential changes, if any, arising out of the factual verification of the
Reports by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals and
Department of Pharmaceuticals of the Ministry of Chemicals and
Fertilizers and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
6. The Committee decided to undertake a study tour to Kochi,
Munnar, Chennai, Mumbai, Vadodra and Dahej from 2nd to
6th November, 2015. The Committee also decided to hold the next sitting
on 07 October, 2015.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

48
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2014-15) ON
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16)’ OF THE
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT
OF PHARMACEUTICALS)
I. Total No. of Recommendations 8
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8)
Total : 06
Percentage : 75%
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:
-Nil-
Total : 00
Percentage : 00
IV . Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:
-Nil-
Total : 00
Percentage : 00
V . Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited:
(Vide Recommendation No. 1 and 4)
Total : 02
Percentage : 25%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”