1 
 
8 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2014-15) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2014-2015) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-2015) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
22 July, 2015 / 31  Ashadha 1935, (Saka) 
  


2 
 
CC&F No. - 8 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2014-15) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2014-2015) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Third Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-2015) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.07.2015 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.07.2015 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
22 July, 2015 / 31  Ashadha 1935, (Saka) 
  


3 
 
(i) 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-15) ………………………………... (iii) 
Introduction. …………………………………………………..………………………… (v) 
Chapter I Report ……………….………………………………………………….. 1-13 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
14-30 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
31 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
32-33 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim nature 
34-36 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of  Seventeenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2014-15) held on  16 June 2015 
37-38 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Third Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals &  Fertilizers (2014 -15) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2014 -15)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers).  
38 
 
  

4 
 
(ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2013-14) 
 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Idris Ali 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N Chandrappa 
5. ShriSankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
9. Shri K Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi 
11. ShriChhediPaswan 
12. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle 
13. Shri Rajendran S 
14. Shri ChanduLal Sahu 
15. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
16. Dr. Uma Saren 
17. Dr. Krishan Pratap Singh 
18. Shri Taslimuddin 
19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20.* Shri Innocent 
21.* ShriKotha Prabhakar Reddy 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Dr. MS Gill 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Narayan LalPanchariya 
26. Shri K Parasaran 
27. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao 
28. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
29.* Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
30.% Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
31.$ Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Smt Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri U.B.S. Negi   - Director 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Additional Director 
4. Shri Nishant Mehra   - Under Secretary 
 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
Changed the nomination of ShriMurliDeora, Member of RajyaSabha from the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers to the Committee on External 
Affairs w.e.f. 25-09-2014. 
* ShriPalvaiGovardhan Reddy, Member of RajyaSabha nominated w.e.f. 08-10-2014 
Shri Mohanbhai KalyanjibhaiKundariya Nominated as Minister of State w.e.f. 09.11.2014 
The term of ShriBrijlalKhabri, MP (RS) has expire w.e.f. 25.11.2014 
Changed the nomination of Adv. Joice George, Member of LokSabha from the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers to the Personnel, Public  
Grievances, Law and  Justice w.e.f. 24-12-2014. 
*Shri Innocent, and ShriKothaPrabhakar Reddy, Member of LokSabhanominated w.e.f. 22-12-2014 
% ShriMansukh L. Mandaviya, Member of RajyaSabha nominated w.e.f. 31-12-2014 
% Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav, Member of RajyaSabha nominated w.e.f. 29.01.2015 
$Changed the nomination of Dr. Chandrapal Singh Yadav, Member of Rajya Sabha from the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers to the 
Committee on Industry w.e.f. 07.05.2015 
  

5 
 
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014 -15) having 
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Eighth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the  observations/ 
recommendations contained in the Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014 -2015) on Demands for Grants (2014 -2015) of 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
 
2. The Third Report(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on18.12.2014. The Action Taken replies of Government 
to all observations/  recommendations contained in the Report were received on5.3.2015. The 
Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers(2014 -2015) considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on 16.6.2015. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/  
recommendations contained in the Third Report ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is 
given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; 
 14 January, 2014   .       ANANDRAO ADSUL 
23  Ashadha,1937 (Saka)         Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014 -15) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendati ons contained 
in the Third  Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2014 -
15)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) which was 
presented to Lok Sab ha/ Rajya Sabha on 18 .12.2014. In all, the Committee made 10 
Observations / Recommendations in the Report. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were requested to 
furnish replies to the Observations/ Recommendations contai ned in the Third Report within 
three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e. by 17.03.2015. The Action Taken 
Replies of the Government in respect of all the 10 Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Report have been received from  the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department 
of Fertilizers vide their O.M. No. -5(1)/2014-Fin-II/Vol.II, dated 05.03.2015.  Accordingly, the 
Replies  of the Ministry have been examined and categorized as follows:-  
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:- 
S. Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 & 10         
          (Total=8) 
           Chapter II 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s reply:- 
S. No.NIL          (Total=0) 
          Chapter III 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:- 
S. No.  4           (Total=1) 
            Chapter IV 
(iv) Observations / Reco mmendations  in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited:- 
S. No. 1           (Total=1) 
            Chapter V 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I, Chapter IV in respect  of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and Chapter V for which final 
replies are still awaited, of this Report, should be furnished expeditiously.  

7 
 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations / Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A.  Need to ensure supply of gas to the fertilizer manufacturing units. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1 
 
5.  Emphasizing the need to ensure supply of  gas to the fertilizer manufacturing units , the 
Committee had recommended as under:   
 "The Committee note that presently India is 3 rd largest fertiliser producer in the world 
with installed capacity of 127.67 lakh MT of nitrogen and 62.08 lakh MT of phosp hatic 
nutrient during the year 2013-14. However, the indigenous production of fertilizers has 
not increased to meet the growing requirement largely due to raw materials / inputs 
limitation and partially due to lack of new investments in urea sector in the last decade. 
India is completely deficient in potassic resources and has to entirely depend upon 
import for meeting the requirement of potash (MOP) for the Indian agriculture. The 
country is also deficient in phosphatic resources with more than 90% require ment of 
the country being met through direct import of finished phosphatic fertilizers or 
phosphatic raw materials/intermediates for indigenous production of phosphatic 
fertilizers. At present, there are 30 urea units in our country. Out of these 30 urea u nits, 
27 urea units use Natural Gas (using either domestic gas/LNG or both) as feedstock and 
fuel and the remaining three urea units use Naphtha as feedstock and fuel. T hree 
Naphtha units viz., SPIC -Tuticorin, MFL-Manali and MCFL -Mangalore are in process f or 
conversion from Naphtha to Gas feedstock. 
The Committee were informed that th e availability of gas is one of the major 
limiting factor to the growth of urea industry in the country. Presently, the availability 
of domestic natural gas is not even sufficient to meet the demand of existing gas based 
urea units in the country. Due to s hortage of domestic gas, many FO/LSHS/Naphtha 
based urea plants which have converted to gas recently, are meeting its requirement of 
gas by using costly RLNG. The total requirement of daily gas is 46 mmscmd out of which 
25.413 mmscmd is met through domesti c gas and 20.587 mmscmd gas is met through 
Regassified Liquefied Natural Gas (RLNG) in September, 2014.  The Empowered Group 
of ministers (EGoM) on Gas pricing and Commercial Utilization of gas in their meeting 
held on 23.08.2013 decided to maintain the sup plies of domestic gas to the Fertilizer 
sector at 31.5 mmscmd level and give the sector first priority in meeting the 
requirements of any shortfall below the level of 31.5 mmscmd from any additional 
production of NELP gas.  The Committee are distressed to n ote that PSUs like FACT, 
Kochi has become a loss making unit since it has converted its plant to use gas as the 
feed stock but domestic gas is not being supplied to the plant and it has to get very high 
cost RLNG for the plant. At that rate, it is not econ omical to produce and sell and meet 
the margins within the subsidy that is available. 
According to the Department, excessive emphasis given on production of urea 
using natural gas has impeded the goal of India to become self -sufficient in the 
fertilizers sector because of lack of long term availability of natural gas in the country 
for urea plants, high cost of imported RLNG prices and volatility in prices . If Naphtha is 
used for production of urea as an alternative which is available as raw material in the  
country and if pricing is kept at Rs. 30000 per MT, then urea can be produced at Rs. 
20000 per MT. However, considerable quantity of domestic natural gas is given at 
subsidised/controlled price for gas -based units but the same is not done for Naphtha 
FO/LSHS used by non -gas based units. Further, while pricing of natural gas is done 
based on its thermal energy ( MMBTU), the same is not done in the pricing of 

8 
 
Naphtha/FO/LSHS which has resulted in higher cost of production of urea using 
Naphtha/FO/LSHS. The De partment has claimed that if the same pricing principle is 
followed for Naphtha/FO/LSHS, the non -gas based urea units would not have been so 
cost inefficient and sufficient additional capacity could have been installed to make 
country self sufficient in urea sector. 
In view of the forgoing, the Committee recommend that the Department should 
play a proactive role and take up the matter vigorously with the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas ensuring that adequate quantity of natural gas is supplied without any 
hindrance to all the existing gas based urea units. The Committee also recommend that  
the Department should also ensure gas connectivity and supply of domestic gas to three 
Naphtha units viz., SPIC -Tuticorin, MFL -Manali and MCFL -Mangalore which are in  
process for conversion from Naphtha to Gas feedstock. The Committee further 
recommend that the Department should also impress upon the Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas to work out a pricing mechanism for Naphtha/FO/LSHS so that non - 
gas based units c ould become cost efficient  till they become gas based . The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
6. In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
 "To ensure the adequate supply of domestic gas to the urea manufacturing units, this 
Department regularly takes up the matter with MoP&NG. 
Three urea units viz., MFL -Manali, MCFL - Mangalore and SPIC -Tuticorin have 
started the process  of conversion from Naphtha based units to Gas based units. 
However, the conversion of these three units is held up due to delay in commissioning 
of the gas pipeline connectivity.  MFL-Manali has already signed Heads of Agreement 
with IOCL for supply of natural gas from its proposed LNG terminal at Ennore, which is 
likely to get commissioned by last quarter of 2017. As per original plan, MCFL was 
supposed to get LNG from petronet LNG -terminal at Kochi through a gas pipeline 
planned by GAIL from Kochi to Mangalore.  But the laying of pipeline is facing stiff 
resistance from farmers and may take 24 months or more to lay approximately 350 kms 
of the pipeline in Kerala. GAIL is also exploring the o ption of laying a spurline from 
Dabhol-Bengaluru pipeline connecting to Mangalore from Chitradurga as progress on 
Kochi-Mangalore pipeline is severely dented due to non -availability of Right of Way 
(RoW) for lands under State of Kerala. A dedicated pipelin e may also be laid from 
Ramnad to SPIC, Tuticorin by GAIL for which no permission is required from PNGRB or 
after finalisation of Ennore-Tuticorin pipeline by PNGRB, the successful bidder may take 
up the Ramnad -Tuticorin line on priority basis. Subsequent to connectivity of gas 
pipeline, the three companies may consider tying up imported RLNG to meet their 
requirement since as per the projections on availability of domestic gas, the same is not 
going to increase substantially in the coming years. As regards , domestic gas, the same 
shall be allocated as per the prevailing Gas Utilisation Policy as and when pipeline 
connectivity is established and the plants are in a position to consume gas.   
  So far as pricing mechanism for Naphtha is concerned, the matter is under 
discussion with MoP&NG.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
7. The Committee were informed  that the  availability of gas is one of the major 
limiting factors to the growth of urea industry in the country. Due to shortage of 
domestic gas, many FO/LSHS/Nap htha based urea plants wh ich have been converted to 

9 
 
gas are meeting its requirement of gas by using costly RLNG. According to the 
Department, excessive emphasis given on production of urea using natural gas has 
impeded the goal of India to become self -sufficient in the fertilizers sector because of 
lack of long term availability of natural gas in the country for urea plants, high cost of 
imported RLNG prices and volatility in prices .  Further, while pricing of natural gas is 
done based on its thermal energy ( MMBTU), the same is not done in the pricing of 
Naphtha/FO/LSHS which has resulted in higher cost of production of urea using 
Naphtha/FO/LSHS. The Department had  claimed that if the same pricing principle is 
followed for Naphtha/FO/LSHS, the non -gas based urea units would not have been so 
cost inefficient and sufficient additional capacity could have been installed to make 
country self sufficient in urea sector. The  Committee, therefore, had  recommended that 
the Department should play a proactive role and take up the matter vigorously with the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas ensuring that adequate quantity of natural gas is 
supplied without any hindrance to all the existing gas based urea units. The Committee 
had also recommend ed that the Department should also ensure gas connectivity and 
supply of domestic gas to three Naphtha  based units viz., SPIC -Tuticorin, MFL -Manali 
and MCFL-Mangalore which are in process of  conversion from Naphtha to Gas feedstock. 
The Committee had also further  recommended that the Department should also 
impress upon the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas   (MoP&NG) to work out a 
pricing mechanism for Naphtha/FO/LSHS so that non- gas based units could become cost 
efficient till they become gas based.  In its Action Taken Reply , the  Department has 
stated that to ensure the adequate supply of domestic gas to the urea m anufacturing 
units, the Department regularly takes up the matter with MoP&NG.  However, the 
Department is silent about the response of MoP&NG or the outcome of efforts/initiatives 
made by the Department  in the matter.  As regards the conversion of t hree urea units 
viz., MFL-Manali, MCFL- Mangalore and SPIC -Tuticorin from Naphtha  based units to Gas 
based units,  the Committee regret to note that the process of  conversion of these three 
units is held up due to delay in commissioning of the gas pipeline connectivity . In this 
context, the  Committee expect the Department to  play  a proactive role and  impress 
upon the authorities concerned to expedite the conversion of aforesaid Naphtha based 
units to Gas based units as well as commissioning of the gas pipeline connectivity with in 
a fixed time frame. The Committee also recommend that the Department should  take up 
the matter vigorously with all stakeholders including the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas and explore all possible options  to supply gas  on regular basis  to the urea 
units and till then they  may be allowed to continue to use naphtha a s feedstock to 
produce urea under the existing arrangement.So far as pricing mechanism for Naphtha 
is concerned, the Department has stated that the matter is under discussion with 

10 
 
MoP&NG.  However, the Committee would  like to reiterate its recommendation that the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas should  expedite  working  out a pricing 
mechanism for Naphtha/FO/LSHS so that non -gas based units using these products 
could become cost efficient.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives 
undertaken by the Department  and the progress on various issues as stated above.  
 
B.  Need for allocation of adequate funds under Gross Budgetary Support/ plan 
allocation for effective implementation of schemes/programmes of the Department.   
RECOMMENDATION NO.3  
 
8. Emphasizing the need for allocation of adequate funds under Gross Budgetar y Support, 
the Committee had recommended as under:   
 "The Committee note with concern that for the year 2012 -13, only Rs. 10 crore was 
allocated at RE stage against the plan allocation of Rs. 256 crore and the actual 
expenditure was Rs.9.40 crore only. Further, for the year 2013-14, the plan allocation of 
Rs.269 crore was also drastically reduced to Rs.9 crore at the RE stage. Even the 
allocation of Rs 9 crore at RE stage could not be utilized fully as the actual expenditure 
was only Rs. 2.32 crores. The C ommittee also note that the main component of plan 
allocation was loans to Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs). Since the PSUs defaulted in 
repayment of earlier loans and its interest, the Ministry of Finance could not disperse 
further plan loans. The Commit tee are apprehensive that lesser funds allocated under 
GBS may upset the schemes/programmes of the Department finalised by them in 
consultation with PSUs/Co -operatives. The Committee also feel that as a result of 
reduction in the GBS allocation, the proces s of revival/rehabilitation of the three major 
loss making fertilizer units viz., BVFCL, FACT and MFL is also likely to be affected 
adversely. The Committee are of the view that Department should chalk out a realistic 
plan in consultation with all concerne d PSUs and make projections to the Ministry of 
Finance to ensure allocation commensurate to the projections made by the Department 
so that the targeted growth of fertilizer sector and the revival/rehabilitation plan of loss 
making fertilizer units do not g et hampered for want of resources during the 12 th plan 
period.  
The Committee expect the Department to convey the Committee’s concern in the 
matter to the Ministry of Finance. However, keeping in view the financial restriction 
imposed by the Ministry of Finance, the Committee expect from the Department to take 
corrective measures for capacity building of the sick units so that they are in a position 
to pay back the loans along with interest thereon. The Com mittee also expect the 
Department to make all efforts for full utilisation of funds allocated to them.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
9. In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
 "Allocation for the Annual Plan 2012 -13 (BE) was made by the Planning Commission in 
consultation with fertilizer PSUs.  The Commission had approved  Gross Budgetary 
Support of Rs.256.00 crore .  PSUs which were to receive GBS, were requested to send 
Plan schemes for timely execution. But in the meantime, Ministry of Finance imposed 
financial restrictions vide its letter dated September 20, 2012 and accordingly, loan to 
loss making / defaulter P SUs viz. Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizers Corporation Limited 

11 
 
(BVFCL), Fertilizers & Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) and Madras Fertilizers 
Limited (MFL) could not be released.  Also, Ministry of Finance revised the estimates 
and Plan funds were reduced from Rs.256.00 crore (BE) to Rs.10.00 crore (RE).  Loan 
could not be released to any of the three PSUs. The actual expenditure of Rs.9.40 crore 
during the year was incurred on schemes viz. “Management of Information Technology” 
and “Science & Technology” programme of the Department.   
  Position during the year 2013 -14 also remained similar.  Planning Commission 
approved an outlay of Rs. 269.00 (BE) crore in the form of GBS. At RE stage, Ministry of 
Finance reduced the Plan outlay from Rs. 269.00 crore (BE)  to Rs.9.00 crore (RE).  The 
actual expenditure of Rs.2.32 crore incurred during the year was on schemes viz. 
“Management of Information Technology” and “Science & Technology” programme of 
the Department. The major part of the budget had been kept for mobi le based Fertilizer 
Monitoring System (mFMS) scheme under MIT.  However, due to non -completion of the 
2nd phase of the mFMS, the fund earmarked, could not be fully utilized.  As regards the 
programme of “Science & Technology” the allocated fund could not b e utilized in its 
totality due to non-receipt of specific proposals. 
  Secretary (Fertilizers) wrote a letter to Finance Secretary on 12 th June 2013 for 
seeking relaxations on the financial restrictions.  In response, Ministry of Finance 
replied that any f urther assistance/releases to the PSUs will be considered as a part of 
the revival package approved by the Cabinet.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
10. The Committee  had  noted with concern that funds a llocated to the Depa rtment 
under plan was reduced drastically at RE stage and  that  even the funds allocated at RE 
stage could not be fully utilized. The Committee had also notedthat plan allocation  
mainly comprises loans to loss making three Public Sector fertilizer companies namely 
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizers Corporation Limited (BVFCL), Fertilizers and Chemicals 
Travancore Limited (FACT) and Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL). S ince these PSUs have 
defaulted in repayment of earlier loan and its interest, the Ministry of Finance could not 
disperse further plan loans. The Committee were apprehensive that lesser funds 
allocated under GBS  may upset the Scheme/ programmes of the Department. The 
Committee were of the view that  a realistic plan should be chalked out by the 
Department in consultation with all concerned PSUs  ensuring allocation commensurate 
to the projections made by the them so that the targeted growth of fertilizer sector and 
the revival/rehabilitation plan of loss making fertilizer units do not get hampered for 
want of resources  during the 12 th plan period. The Committee also  expected from the 
Department to take corrective measures for capacity building of the sick units and  to 
make all efforts for full utilization of funds allocated to them. In its Action Taken Reply, 
the Department has explained thatGBS  of Rs. 256 crore  was approved by the Planning 
Commission for the year 2012-13. PSUs were requested  to send Plan schemes for timely 
execution but the Ministry of Finance imposed finan cial restrictions vide its letter dated 
20 September 2012 and accordingly loan to loss making/defaulter PSUs  viz. BVFCL, 
FACT and MFL could not be released.  Position during the year 2013 -14 also remained 

12 
 
similar. The major part of budget  which was reduced from Pl an outlay of Rs.269 crore 
(BE) to Rs. 9 crore(RE) was kept for mFMS scheme under MIT   but the same also  could 
not be fully utilized due to non -completion of 2 nd phase of mFMS. Further  funds 
allocated under “Science & Technology” programme could not be ut ilized in its totality 
due to non -receipt of specific proposals. It has also been stated that Secretary 
(Fertilizers) wrote a letter to Finance Secretary on 12 th June 2013 for seeking 
relaxations on the financial restrictions.  In its response, the Ministry of Finance replied 
that any further assistance/releases to the PSUs will be considered as  part of the revival 
package approved by the Cabinet.  The Committee feel that the entire explanation given 
by the Department clearly reflects lack of concerted and c oordinated efforts and well 
thought action planfor timely execution of its various programmes as a result of which 
funds allocated to them were curtailed and/or  remained under utilized .  The very fact 
that  the Department has  taken up the matter with the  Ministry of Finance  after almost 
9 months seeking relaxations on the financial restr ictions imposed by them  in 
September 2012 also indicates the level of  seriousness with which the Department has 
dealt with the issue. Further, in its Action Taken Reply,  nothing has been elaborated by 
the Department about the efforts made/being made by them  in this regard  during the 
last two years since June 2013 . The Department  is also silent about the efforts made by 
them  to chalk out a realistic plan and projections to ensure allocation of requisite funds 
for its various programmes and for capacit y building of the sick units and to ensure 
optimum utilization of funds allocated to them  as recommended by the Committee . In 
view of the foregoing , the Committee  are extremely disappointed with the explanation 
given by the Department  and its approach on  various  issues confronting them. 
Needless to say that  in the absence of adequate funds under GBS, it would be difficult for 
the loss making PSUs  to sustain their operations.  The Committee, therefore,recommend 
that  the  entire  issue may  be revisited afresh in a holistic manner in the  
overall interest of the fertilizer sector.  The Committee also reiterate its earlier 
recommendation that a realistic projections of the funds required for sustaining the 
operations of the loss making PSUs  be worked out to ensure allocation by theMinistry of 
Finance and earnest efforts be made for optimum util ization of funds al locatedand 
capacity building of t he sick units. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
initiatives undertaken   by the Department to address the  various issues  as stated 
above.   
 
  

13 
 
C.  Need to reduce or restrict the non plan expenditure of the Department in order to 
control heavy outgo of expenditure on account of subsidy. 
RECOMMENDATION No. 4 
11. Emphasizing the need to control non -plan expenditure of the Department of Fertilizers , 
the Committee had recommended as under: 
 "The Committee observe from the notes on demands for grants (2014 -15) that the non-
plan allocation for the financial years 2012 -13 and 2013 -14 are Rs. 65,628.86 crore 
(AE) and Rs 68,000 crore (RE), respectively. The budget allocation against non plan 
expenditure for the year 2014 -15 is R s 73,000 crore (BE). Thus, while the non -plan 
expenditure of the Department has remained almost stagnant over the years from 
2012-13 to 2013 -14, the same has been increased by about Rs 5000 crore for the year 
2014-2015 over the previous year allocation. The Committee also note that the non plan 
expenditure of the Department primarily relates to subsidy on fertilizers. While budget 
allocation for subsidy on imported fertilizers for the year 2014 -2015 is Rs. 12300 crore, 
the same on decontrolled fertilizers i s Rs. 24670.32 crore for payment to 
manufacturers/agencies for concessional sale of decontrolled fertilizers and subsidy on 
indigenous fertilizers is Rs. 36,000 crore. The subsidy on fertilizers is granted by the 
Government with a view to protect the farme rs from adverse impact of price volatility 
in the international market and other negative factors. While the country is deficient in 
decontrolled fertilizers which is largely being imported, the country has achieved 75% 
self sufficiency in the production o f urea. The Committee are of the view that it is 
essential that the production of indigenous fertilizers at low cost may be augmented in 
the country by increasing the efficiency and reducing the operational and 
administrative costs.  The Committee feel tha t as a result of these measures the heavy 
outgo of expenditure on account of subsidy could be controlled/ reduced. In view of the 
foregoing, the Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should work out 
an effective mechanism to reduce or restric t the non plan expenditure of the 
Department. The Committee would like the Department to address this issue and 
intimate the measures taken by them in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
12. In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
 "Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Scheme has been under implementation since 1.4.2010, 
under which subsidy is fixed on annual basis based on nutrient content taking into 
account international and domestic pri ces of P&K fertilizers, exchange rate inventory 
level etc. The prices of P&K fertilizer are fixed by fertilizer companies. After decontrol of 
prices and subsidy being fixed, variation in the international prices of P&K  fertilizers 
and devaluation in excha nge rate has affected the domestic prices of these fertilizers.  
After implementation of NBS Scheme the domestic prices of P&K fertilizers have 
increased and the subsidy rates remained more or less static  or less than the pre NBS 
regime.  This has resulted in reduction in subsidy burden on P&K fertilizers. 
  Under NBS Policy the Government does not interfere in the functioning of 
fertilizer companies.  The premise of the NBS Policy is that it will encourage competition 
amongst the fertilizer companies both  indigenous and imported and in different sectors 
and the market forces will ensure stability in the prices.  Hence, the companies 
themselves work towards increasing efficiency and reducing the operational and 
administrative cost to remain competitive in t he market.  This has also ensured  
reasonable price of P&K fertilizers in the country and for the farmers. 
  At present, the non -plan expenditure is in line with the consumption of P&K 
fertilizers in the country.  The only way to reduce non -plan subsidy would be to reduce 

14 
 
NBS rates and if NBS Rates are reduced in order to reduce non -plan expenditure, the 
prices of P&K fertilizers will go up and will affect consumption of P&K fertilizers and 
ultimately the balanced fertilization of soil.  
  Hence, we may prop ose to the committee that the Department may continue 
with the existing practice to encourage competition amongst the fertilizer companies 
and let the market forces determine the prices of P&K fertilizers. 
  A new urea policy is being formulated in which issues relating to energy 
efficiency to reduce the subsidy burden are being considered." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
13. The Committee had noted that the non plan expenditure of the Department which 
primarily relates to subsidy on fertilizers has remained stagnant over the years from 
2012-13 to 2013 -14. However,  the same has  increased by about Rs 5000 crore for the 
year 2014-2015 over the previous year allocation.  The subsidy on fertilizers is granted  
by the Government with a view to protect the farmers from adverse impact of price 
volatility in the international market and other negative factors. The Committee were of 
the view that it is essential that the production of indigenous fertilizers at low co st may 
be augmented in the country by increasing the efficiency and reducing the operational 
and administrative costs and thereby controlling/ reducing the heavy outgo of 
expenditure on account of subsidy. The Committee  had, therefore, recommended that 
the Department should work out an effective mechanism to reduce or restrict the non 
plan expenditure of the Department.  In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has 
stated  that  under NBS Policy the Government does not interfere in the functioning of 
fertilizer companies.  The NBS Policy encourages competition amongst the fertilizer 
companies both indigenous and imported and in different sectors and the market forces  
ensure stability in the prices.  Hence,  according to the Department, the companies 
themselves work towards increasing efficiency and reducing the operational and 
administrative cost to remain competitive in the market.  This has also ensured 
reasonable price of P&K fertilizers in the country and for the farmers. The Departm ent 
has contended that  the only way to reduce non -plan subsidy wo uld be to reduce NBS 
rates. However, if NBS Rates are reduced in order to reduce non -plan expenditure, the 
prices of P&K fertilizers will go up and will affect consumption of P&K fertilizers  and 
ultimately the balanced fertilization of soil. The Committee are not entirely convinced 
with the explanation of the Department that the existing practice to encourage 
competition amongst the fertilizer companies may continue and let the market forces 
determine the prices of P&K fertilizers. The fact remains that the prices of P&K 
fertilizers have gone up sharply under NBS regime   which is one of the reasons for 
unbalanced use of fertilizers by the farmers  as they  have gone  for less costly urea  in 

15 
 
place of costly P&K fertiliz ers.  The prices of fertiliz ers fixed by the fertilizer companies 
are  also on higher side . The Committee are , therefore,  of the strong view that the 
Department being the nodal authority,  can not simply ignore its responsibility to ensure 
supply of fertilizers to the farmers at affordable prices and also its balanced utilization  
by the farmers in order to check degradation of soil.  It is, therefore, imperativethat  the 
production of low cost indigenous fertilizers may be augmented in the country which , in 
turn,  may result restricting/reducing  expenditure on account of subsidy . In this regard,  
the Committee note that a new urea policy is being formulated in which issues relating  
to energy efficiency to reduce the subsidy burden are being considered. The Committee 
hope and trust that the proposed  policy would  help to reduce or restrict the non plan 
expenditure of the Department. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken by the Department on all the issues as discussed above. 
 
D.  Need to expedite the implementation of the scheme for direct payment of subsidy 
to the farmers. 
RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
 
14. Emphasizing the need to implement the scheme for direct payment of subsidy to the 
farmers, the Committee had recommended as under:   
 "In their earlier Reports, the Committee had recommended for direct payment of 
subsidy to the poor and marginal farmers. Th e Committee have been informed that the 
Department is following a phased approach for direct disbursement of fertiliser subsidy 
to the intended beneficiaries. The implementation of Phase -I has already been made 
operational and is under stabilization and Ph ase-II of mFMS which capture the retailer 
sales of fertilizers to ‘buyer’ is in pilot stage and was rolled out in 6 districts 
(Nawanshahar-Punjab, East Godavari - Andhra Pradesh, Sonipat - Haryana, Bilaspur - 
Himachal Pradesh, Ajmer - Rajasthan, and Madurai - Tamil Nadu) on 1 st August 2013. 
However, the Department is facing various problems. As regards to subsequent phases 
of project i.e. Phase -III and Phase -IV, the Committee were appraised that it was 
discussed and decided in the meeting on Direct Transfer of Fertilizer Subsidy that Direct 
Benefit Transfer (DBT) in fertilizers was complex matters as there are problems in 
targeting, determining entitlements and preparing beneficiary databases. Therefore, for 
the moment it would be better to keep DBT away from fer tilizers but the Department 
would take steps to build up a digital database of 'buyers'. In view of above, Phase -III 
and Phase-IV have been put on hold and the Department focusing on implementation of 
Phase-I & Phase-II. The Committee are of the view that transfer of the benefits of direct 
subsidy to the farmers would check the corruption, close the loopholes and profligacy in 
subsidies. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should work out 
a mechanism in consultation with all concerned an d address the problems faced in 
targeting, determining entitlements and preparing beneficiary databases so that the 
benefit of subsidy is disbursed directly to the intended beneficiaries at the earliest. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the initi atives undertaken by the Department in 
this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 

16 
 
15. In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
 "Department of Fertilizer is examining the feasibility and practicality of tracing each bag 
of fertilizer by studying the prevailing practice in case of other commodities.  If found 
practical and implementable, Department of Fertilizers will take steps to introduce 
similar mechanism in case of fertilizer also. Further, this Department is also exploring 
possibilities for rolling out the Pilot for Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) of Fertilizer 
Subsidy in the two districts in Odisha. In this regard, the departmen t is interacting with 
state Agriculture Department, Odisha and their implementation agency for feasibility of 
pilot implementation." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
16. The Committee  were informed  that the Department is following a phased 
approach for direct disbursement of fertiliser subsidy to the intended beneficiaries.  The 
Phase-I has already been made operati onal and is under stabilization. In   Phase-II of 
mFMS which capture the retailer sales  of fertilizers to ‘buyer’ and which was rolled out 
in 6 districts in pilot stage, the Department is facing  various problems. As regards to 
subsequent phases of project i.e. Phase -III and Ph ase-IV, the Committee were appr ised 
that the same have been put o n hold as there are problems in targeting, determining 
entitlements and preparing beneficiary databases. The Committee were of the view that 
transfer of the benefits of direct subsidy to the farmers would check the corruption, 
close the loopholes and profl igacy in subsidies. The Committee had , therefore, 
recommended that the Department should work out a mechanism in consultation with 
all concerned and address the problems as  mentioned above  so that the benefit of 
subsidy is disbursed directly to the inte nded beneficiaries at the earliest.  Inits Action 
Taken Reply, it has been  informed to the Committee that Department is examining the 
feasibility and practicality of tracing each bag of fertilizer by studying the prevailing 
practice in case of other commod ities.  If found practical and implementable, the 
Department will take steps to introduce similar mechanism in case of  fertilizer also. 
Further, the Department is also exploring possibilities for rolling out the Pilot project 
for Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) of Fertilizer Subsidy on the various districts of India . 
In view of the foregoing, the  Committee hope and trust  that the Department would  
make earnest efforts to  examine the  feasibility and practica lity of tracing each bag of 
fertiliser expeditious ly as well as exploring the possibilities for rolling out the pilot 
project for Direct Benefit Transfer  of fertiliser subsidy i n the two districts in Odisha.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made  on issues as explained 
above.  
 

17 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
RECOMMENDATION NO.2  
 
The Committee note with concern that the imbalance use of fertilizers has resulted in 
deterioration of the soil health leading to decline in the agri cultural productivity. There is 
limited infrastructure for soil testing due to which the farmers do not have any information 
regarding requisite dose of plant nutrient i.e. fertilizers. The Committee also note that, in order 
to improve soil fertility, the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) proposed to 
launch a Central Sector Scheme ‘Soil Health Card’. This scheme aims at providing the farmers 
the required information on soil analysis and recommendations on appropriate doses of 
nutrients to be use d for various crops depending upon the physical, chemicals and biological 
health of the soil. In order to promote the balanced use of fertilizers, fertilizer companies 
including PSUs undertake Fertilizer Education Projects as part of their extension and 
marketing activities. The Committee hope that the new scheme of 'Soil Health Card' would help 
the farmers to check  the deteriorating soil health and take corrective actions and thereby 
boosting the agricultural productivity in the country. The Committee are  also of the view that it 
would be absolutely essential if Soil Health Card is made mandatory for purchase of fertilizers 
by the farmers so that they could get appropriate doses of nutrients which is balanced and 
essential for the health of soil.  The Comm ittee, therefore, recommend that the Department in 
consultation with DAC and other stakeholders should make an action plan on the subject and 
before making soil health card as essential, an extensive and vigorous awareness campaign 
amongst the farmers may be made by the Department, DAC and all fertiliser companies about 
Soil Health Cards a s well as regarding the ill effects of over doses of fertilizers and the benefits 
of balanced use of fertilizers by the farmers. The Committee also recommend that the 
Department should also impress upon DAC to establish soil testing centres in every district of 
the country so that the farmers need not to go far away for the purpose.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 Soil health Card Scheme has been approved for implementation with an outlay of 
Rs.568.54 crore during 12th Plan period.  The scheme has components for providing soil health 
cards to all farmers in the country in 3 years period, training of farmers for bala nced nutrient 
practice, workshops to create awareness among farmers and financial assistance for 
micronutrients & soil ameliorants for adoption of doses recommended in soil health cards. 
 Apart from above, under National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA), Financial 
Assistance is provided to States for training to farmers and demonstrations on farmer’s field on 
soil health management. 

18 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.3  
 The Committee note with concern that for the year 2012 -13, only Rs. 10 crore  was 
allocated at RE stage against the plan allocation of Rs. 256 crore and the actual expenditure 
was Rs.9.40 crore only. Further, for the year 2013 -14, the plan allocation of Rs.269 crore was 
also drastically reduced to Rs.9 crore at the RE stage. Even t he allocation of Rs 9 crore at RE 
stage could not be utilized fully as the actual expenditure was only Rs. 2.32 crores. The 
Committee also note that the main component of plan allocation was loans to Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs). Since the PSUs defaul ted in repayment of earlier loans and its interest, 
the Ministry of Finance could not disperse futher plan loans. The Committee are apprehensive 
that lesser funds allocated under GBS may upset the schemes/programmes of the Department 
finalised by them in c onsultation with PSUs/Co -operatives. The Committee also feel that as a 
result of reduction in the GBS allocation, the process of revival/rehabilitation of the three 
major loss making fertilizer units viz., BVFCL, FACT and MFL is also likely to be affected 
adversely. The Committee are of the view that Department should chalk out a realistic plan in 
consultation with all concerned PSUs and make projections to the Ministry of Finance to ensure 
allocation commensurate to the projections made by the Department s o that the targeted 
growth of fertilizer sector and the revival/rehabilitation plan of loss making fertilizer units do 
not get hampered for want of resources during the 12th plan period.  
The Committee expect the Department to convey the Committee’s concer n in the matter 
to the Ministry of Finance. However, keeping in view the financial restriction imposed by the 
Ministry of Finance, the Committee expect from the Department to take corrective measures 
for capacity building of the sick units so that they are  in a position to pay back the loans along 
with interest thereon. The Committee also expect the Department to make all efforts for full 
utilisation of funds allocated to them. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 Allocation for the Annual Plan 2012 -13 (BE) was made by the Planning Commission in 
consultation with fertilizer PSUs.  The Commission had approved  Gross Budgetary Support of 
Rs.256.00 crore.  PSUs which were to receive GBS, were requested to send Plan schemes for 
timely execution. But in the meantime, Minis try of Finance imposed financial restrictions vide 
its letter dated September 20, 2012 and accordingly, loan to loss making / defaulter PSUs viz. 
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizers Corporation Limited (BVFCL), Fertilizers & Chemicals 
Travancore Limited (FACT) and Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) could not be released.  Also, 
Ministry of Finance revised the estimates and Plan funds were reduced from Rs.256.00 crore 
(BE) to Rs.10.00 crore (RE).  Loan could not be released to any of the three PSUs. The actual 

19 
 
expenditure of Rs.9.40 crore during the year was incurred on schemes viz. “Management of 
Information Technology” and “Science & Technology”  programme of the Department.   
Position during the year 2013 -14 also remained similar.  Planning Commission 
approved an outlay of Rs. 269.00 (BE) crore in the form of GBS. At RE stage, Ministry of Finance 
reduced the Plan outlay from Rs. 269.00 crore (BE) to Rs.9.00 crore (RE).  The act ual 
expenditure of Rs.2.32 crore incurred during the year was on schemes viz. “Management of 
Information Technology” and “Science & Technology” programme of the Department. The 
major part of the budget had been kept for mobile based Fertilizer Monitoring S ystem (mFMS) 
scheme under MIT.  However, due to non -completion of the 2 nd phase of the mFMS, the fund 
earmarked, could not be fully utilized.  As regards the programme of “Science & Technology” 
the allocated fund could not be utilized in its totality due to non-receipt of specific proposals. 
  Secretary (Fertilizers) wrote a letter to Finance Secretary on 12 th June 2013 for seeking 
relaxations on the financial restrictions.  In response, Ministry of Finance replied that any 
further assistance/releases to the PSUs will be considered as a part of the revival package 
approved by the Cabinet. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No.10  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
 
 The Committee note that NBS policy is being implemented by the Department for P&K 
fertilizers w.e.f. 1.4.2010 under which a fixed rate of subsidy, decided on annual basis, i s 
provided on each grade of subsidized P&K fertilizers depending on their nutrient content. The 
NBS rates for P&K fertilizers are fixed by the Government taking into consideration all relevant 
factors including the likely impact of these rates on total sub sidy payout. The Committee note 
that there has been a gradual decline in subsidy on decontrolled fertilizers i.e. Phosphatic (P) 
and potassic (K) fertilizers from Rs.30,576.10 crore in 2012 -13 (AE) to Rs.24,670.32 crore in 
the year 2014 -15 (BE). According to the Department, g radual decline in the budgetary 
allocation on decontrolled Fertilizers is due to reducing per K.G Subsidy on each Nutrient 
covered under NBS and also partly due to lower consumption of P&K Fertilizers. The 
Committee are, therefore, incl ined to conclude that since the introduction of NBS policy, the 
consumption of decontrolled fertilizers is declining in the country primarily due to reducing 
per Kg. subsidy on each nutrient covered under NBS regime. As a result thereof, the 
consumption of  controlled fertilizer i.e. urea has increased leading to imbalanced use of 
fertilizers and deterioration of soil health. The Committee feel that the NBS policy of the 
Government has not gone well as the same has  resulted in sharp increase in prices of 
decontrolled fertilizers and consequent reduction in its consumption leading to imbalanced use 

20 
 
of fertilizers affecting the soil health. Further, under the NBS regime, small and marginal 
farmers are worst affected as they are not able to afford the high cost  of decontrolled 
fertilizers.  
In this regard, the Committee were informed that in order to study the impact of NBS 
Policy Government had appointed M/s Ernst & Young (EY). M/s EY has submitted the draft 
study report, however, it has been asked to incorpora te certain analysis to bring out more 
results. The final report was expected to be received in the 1 st week of November 2014 . The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should find ways so that rise in price of 
fertilizers due to reduction in subsidy on fertilizers is not passed on to the farmers. The 
Department should also closely scrutinise the price of P&K fertilizers fixed by the fertilizers 
companies so that the same are not unreasonable. The report of M/s EY may be got expedited 
and should also be examined expeditiously so that NBS policy may be suitably modified in the 
interest of the farmers at large. The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures taken 
by the Department in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 The C ommittee recommended that the Department should find ways so that rise in 
price of fertilizers due  to reduction in subsidy on fertilizers is not passed on the farmers.  The 
Department should also closely scrutinize the price of P&K fertilizers fixed by the fertili zer 
companies so that the same are not unreasonable.  The committee further advised for 
examination of the report of M/s Ernst and Young expeditiously so that NBS Policy may be 
suitably modified in the interest of the farmers at large. 
 The delivered cost of fertilizers depends on the international prices of P & K fertilizers 
and their raw materials and also the exchange rate.  India being dependent on imports upto 
90% in phosphatic sector and 100% in potassic sector and even for nitrogen requirement most 
indigenous P & K fertilizers depend on imported ammonia / urea, any increase / decrease in 
international prices of P&K fertilizers, ammonia / urea and raw materials will have a bearing 
on the delivered price of these fertilizers.  Since under NBS Scheme the  subsidy rates are fixed, 
the increase in international prices will definitely affect the domestic prices of P&K fertilizers.  
However, the Department is monitoring the reasonableness of prices of P & K fertilizers fixed 
by fertilizer companies in order to  protect the interest of the farmers.  In this regard, the 
Government has put in place a mechanism to ensure reasonableness of prices fixed by fertilizer 
companies.  Under the new mechanism, a provision has been made for submission of cost data 
relating to material, input costs including cost of gas, production etc. from 2012 -13 onwards, 
by fertilizer companies to assess the reasonableness of prices.  If at any stage it is found that 
the MRP being fixed by the companies are resulting in undue profiteering, the same shall be 
recovered from the company.  In order to analyze the cost data submitted by the P&K fertilize 

21 
 
companies and to find out  the reasonableness of prices, the Department has appointed Cost 
Accountants / Firms.  The cost Accountants/firms have started submitting their reports. 
 As regards the study by M/s E&Y, it is stated that the consultancy firm has submitted 
the report and the report has been accepted for taking further necessary action.  The 
recommendations are under examination. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
 
 In their earlier Reports, the Committee had recommended for direct payment of subsidy 
to the poor and marginal farmers. The Committee have been informed that the Department is 
following a phased approach for direct disbursement of fer tiliser subsidy to the intended 
beneficiaries. The implementation of Phase -I has already been made operational and is under 
stabilization and Phase-II of mFMS which capture the retailer sales of fertilizers to ‘buyer’ is in 
pilot stage and was rolled out i n 6 districts (Nawanshahar -Punjab, East Godavari - Andhra 
Pradesh, Sonipat- Haryana, Bilaspur- Himachal Pradesh, Ajmer- Rajasthan, and Madurai- Tamil 
Nadu) on 1 st August 2013. However, the Department is facing various problems. As regards to 
subsequent phases of project i.e. Phase -III and Phase-IV, the Committee were appraised that it 
was discussed and decided in the meeting on Direct Transfer of Fertilizer Subsidy that Direct 
Benefit Transfer (DBT) in fertilizers was complex matters as there are problems in  targeting, 
determining entitlements and preparing beneficiary databases. Therefore, for the moment it 
would be better to keep DBT away from fertilizers but the Department would take steps to 
build up a digital database of 'buyers'. In view of above, Phase -III and Phase -IV have been put 
on hold and the Department focusing on implementation of Phase -I & Phase-II. The Committee 
are of the view that transfer of the benefits of direct subsidy to the farmers would check the 
corruption, close the loopholes and pr ofligacy in subsidies. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should work out a mechanism in consultation with all 
concerned and address the problems faced in targeting, determining entitlements and 
preparing beneficiary databases so that the benefit of subsidy is disbursed directly to the 
intended beneficiaries at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 Department of Fertilizer is exami ning the feasibility and practicality of tracing each bag 
of fertilizer by studying the prevailing practice in case of other commodities.  If found practical 
and implementable, Department of Fertilizers will take steps to introduce similar mechanism in 
case of fertilizer also. Further, this Department is also exploring possibilities for rolling out the 
Pilot for Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) of Fertilizer Subsidy in the two districts in Odisha. In this 

22 
 
regard, the department is interacting with state Agricu lture Department, Odisha and their 
implementation agency for feasibility of pilot implementation. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No.16  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
 
  The Committee note that in order to reduce import dependency on urea and attract 
fresh investment, the New Investment Policy 2012 (NIP -2012), has been notified on 2nd 
January, 2013 by the Government of India.  In this regard, the Department has moved an 
amendment in New Investment Policy (NIP) - 2012 through CCEA for substituting the phrase 
“guaranteed buyback” with expression that subsidies will be given only upon domestic sale as 
at present with proper safeguards. The Committee have also been informed that the 
Department has received the proposals/project s of the 15 companies under the NIP – 2012 
and the final decision in this regard will be taken after the issuance of the notification of 
amendment to NIP – 2012, which has already been approved by the competent authority. The 
Committee are of the view that  notification of amendment to NIP – 2012 is imperative for 
examination of the proposals/projects of the 15 companies. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the notification of amendment to NIP – 2012 may be expedited so that the 
proposals/projects recei ved from the 15 companies may be considered and decided at the 
earliest. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 Department of Fertilizers has notified the amendment to New Investment Policy (NIP) – 
2012 on 07 th October, 2014.  As of now, this Department has received twelve proposals for 
setting up of Revamp, Expansion, Revival and Greenfield plants in response to the amendment 
to NIP – 2012. 
Further, Department of Fertilizers is examining these proposals in the light of the 
provisions of the NIP-2012 and amendments thereof. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.8 
 
 The Committee note that out of 9 public sector fertilizer companies under 
administrative control of Department of Fertilizers, 3 companies viz. FACT, MFL and BVFCL are 
sick units. The Committee also note that financial performance of these units have been dismal 
except MFL which has showed positive growth in the previous two years, 2012 -13 and 2013-
14. With regards to steps being taken for revival of HPCL and FCIL, the D epartment of 

23 
 
Fertilizers informed that the revival of Talcher, Ramagundam and Sindri units of FCIL is under 
process and revival of Gorkhpur and Korba of FCIL unit will be taken up subsequently.  
For the revival of MFL, the Department has informed that a fi nancial restructuring 
proposal has been submitted to Department of Public enterprises (DPE) for placing the same 
before Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) which has been returned 
as the posts of Chairman, BRPSE, Secretary, BRPSE and two other non official members of 
BRPSE are vacant. Further, with regard to revival of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation 
Ltd. (BVFCL), the Committee were informed that the BRPSE has recommended the financial 
restructuring plan to the Government . Based on the recommendations of BRPSE, a draft CCEA 
note seeking financial relief for BVFCL has been circulated for inter -ministerial consultations. 
With regards to revival of FACT, a proposal seeking approval of CCEA for sanction of financial 
reliefs ha s been submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat. However, d ue to financial restriction 
imposed by the Ministry of Finance to defaulter companies, Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) in 
the form of loan was not released to any of the loss making companies i.e. Fertil izers and 
Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) and Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL), during 2012 -13 
and 2013-14. 
The Committee are of the view that expeditious revival of sick and closed fertilizer units 
is essential for making India self -sufficient in the fertilizer sector and to reduce imports 
dependency. However, the Committee regret to note the slow progress made by the 
Government in the revival of these sick units so far. The Committee also feel that the delay in 
the revival of closed and sick units lea ds to time and cost overruns.  Keeping in view the 
significant role which are expected to be played by these sick units after their revival, the 
Committee recommend that the process of revival of closed units of fertilizers be expedited 
with in a fixed time frame.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 A status note on the progress made by the Government to revive the closed units of 
fertilizers is as under: 
 Eight fertilizers units of the PSUs under the administrative control of the Department of 
Fertilizers have been lying closed at present. Out of these five closed units are of Fertilizer 
Corporation of India Limited (FCIL) and three are of Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited 
(HFCL).  Government is considering the revival all the eight closed units. 
  CCEA i n its meeting held on  9.5.2013, inter -alia, approved waiver of Government of 
India loan and interest to facilitate FCIL to arrive at positive net worth. This enabled FCIL to get 
de-registered from the purview of Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstr uction (BIFR). 
CCEA approved the proposal of Department of Fertilizers to revive the closed units of FCIL and 
for the closed units of HFCL, CCEA decided that Proposal/action plan on revival of HFCL units 

24 
 
to be taken up once revival of FCIL units is on track. As per this proposal out of five closed units 
of FCIL, Talcher, Ramagundam and Sindri units are to be revived on nomination route while 
Gorakhpur and Korba units are to be revived on bidding route.  Unit wise progress made on 
revival of the closed units of FCIL is as under: 
 
(a) Talcher Unit: 
The pre -project activities for revival of Talcher Unit (Odisha) of FCIL by the 
nominated PSUs, namely, Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF), Coal India 
Limited (CIL), Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) &  FCIL are in progress to set -up a 
coal-based fertilizer plant. It has been  proposed to establish two joint venture (JV) 
companies viz. First company for upstream coal gasification section with GAIL and 
second company comprising RCF, CIL and FCIL  for downs tream section of Ammonia -
urea, Nitric Acid, Ammonia Nitrate plants, off sites and utilities. The Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) and JV agreement among consortium PSUs i.e. CIL, RCF, GAIL and 
FCIL, has been signed on 5.9.2013 and 24.12.2014 respectively.   Selection of coal 
gasification technology is in process. The project is likely to be completed by end of 2018. 
 
(b) Ramagundam Unit 
The pre -project activities for revival of Ramagundam Unit (Telangana) of FCIL by 
the nominated PSUs, namely, Engineers India Limited (EIL) & National Fertilizers Limited 
(NFL) are in progress to set -up a gas -based fertilizer plant. The Joint Venture agreement 
and Concession agreement are under discussion and are being targeted for 
conclusion/approval by respective boards. EIL & N FL are having discussions with the 
Technology providers. Technology selection for Ammonia and Urea process unit would 
be completed by the end of October, 2014.  The JV company would operate the plant and 
EIL would take up the detailed Engineering Procureme nt of equipment and Construction 
(EPC) of the plant. JV agreement among consortium PSUs i.e. NFL, EIL and FCIL has been 
signed on 14.01.2015.  The project is likely to be completed by September 2018. 
 
(c) Sindri unit 
For Sindri unit, SAIL -Sindri Projects Ltd. (SSPL), a wholly owned subsidiary of SAIL, 
has been incorporated in November 2011 for the purpose of revival of Sindri Unit of FCIL.  
However, not much progress has been made due to non -availability of around 3000 Acres 
of contiguous piece of land for the Steel Plant due to encroachment.   
In the meantime SAIL has informed that the scenario for SAIL has undergone 
change, a massive modernization and expansion plan of SAIL is currently under 
implementation, with capital expenditure (CAPEX) commitment of Rs.72,000 crore. SAIL’s 
borrowings have increased to around Rs. 25,300 crore. SAIL has drawn a vision plan 2025 

25 
 
to expand to 50 MTPA Hot Metal capacity by 2025. This requires a commitment around 
Rs. 2.02 lakh crore. In view of the above, SAIL Boa rd has taken a view not to pursue the 
Sindri Revival project further 
At present, PSUs/ Cooperatives with the experience of fertilizer manufacturing are 
not free to take -up revival of Sindri unitto enable GoI to offer the same on nomination 
basis. DoF while  exploring the feasibility of fast tracking the revival of Sindri unit, 
considered the alternative route for revival, i.e. through the ‘bidding route’ to ensure 
anchoring Sindri unit en-route the Jagdishpur-Haldia Pipeline (JHPL) of GAIL for utilizing 
the gas and to leverage the existing infrastructure of Sindri unit. 
A Cabinet Note for revival of Sindri (Jharkhand) unit of FCIL has been circulated for 
inter-ministerial consultations on 23.1.2015. 
 
(a) Gorakhpur unit 
M/s. GAIL is planning to lay a gas pipeline from Jagdishpur (Uttar Pradesh) to 
Haldia (West Bengal).  To make this gas pipeline financially viable, there is a need of 
anchor units en-route the pipeline for utilizing the gas, therefore, it has been decided that 
revival of Gorakhpur unit of FCIL, which is en -route of Jagdishpur -Haldia pipeline(JHPL) 
should be fast tracked. Earlier, CCEA had approved revival of Gorakhpur unit on “ bidding 
route” and since the “bidding route” is a time consuming process (may tak e 6 months to 
an year), involving two -bid global bidding process and also there is uncertainty in this 
regard, it has been proposed that in order to fast track the revival of the Gorakhpur unit, 
the unit be revived through “nomination route”. 
During the ea rlier consultations, no PSU came forward to take up the revival of 
Gorakhpur unit to enable GoI to offer the same on nomination basis, therefore, CCEA on 
recommendation of ECOS, approved its revival through “bidding route”. At present, p rofit 
making/big Fe rtilizer PSUs, namely National Fertilizers Limited ( NFL) & Rashtriya 
Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited ( RCFL), are already tied -up with the revival of 
Ramagundam & Talcher units of FCIL respectively in association with other non -fertilizer 
PSUs. No other PSU with the experience of fertilizer production is large enough to take-up 
the revival of Gorakhpur unitto enable GoI to offer the same on nomination basis. DoF 
while exploring the feasibility of fast tracking the revival of Gorakhpur and Barauni units, 
held discussions with Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative Limited (IFFCO) & KRIBHCO. 
KRIBHCO has  agreed ‘in-principle’ to consider setting up of a urea manufacturing 
complex with 1.3 million MT urea annual capacity at Gorakhpur. KRIBHCO has experience 
in p roduction and trade of fertilizers and is well versed in various ammonia & urea 
technologies, apart from being a profit making multi-state large Cooperative. Therefore, it 
has been proposed to revive Gorakhpur unit through nomination route by KRIBHCO.  

26 
 
Accordingly, a Cabinet note has been sent to Cabinet Secretariat to place it before the 
CCEA on 30.1.2015. 
 
(b) Korba unit  
The revival of Korba (Chattisgarh) unit of FCIL would be taken up later on. 
 
 Hindustan Fertilizer Company Limited (HFCL) 
 As per the decision of CCEA the proposal/ action plan on revival of HFCL units i.e, 
Barauni, Durgapur and Haldia, is to be taken up once revival of FCIL units is on track in 
terms of CCEA approval in May 2013. However, in the context of the recent 
announcement of the proposed Jagdishpur -Haldia Pipeline of GAIL, DoF is exploring the 
feasibility of fast tracking the revival, of Barauni unit of HFCL. 
(a) Barauni unit 
M/s. GAIL India Limited(GAIL) is planning to lay a gas pipeline from Haldia (West 
Bengal) to Jagdi shpur (Uttar Pradesh) (HBJ).  This pipeline would be passing around 70 
km away from Barauni Unit. To make the gas pipeline financially viable, there is a need of 
anchor units en-route the pipeline for utilizing the gas. Therefore, it has been decided that 
revival of Barauni Unit of HFCL, which is en-route of HBJ pipeline should be fast tracked.  
 A Cabinet Note for revival of Barauni (Bihar) unit of HFCL is being finalized in the 
Department. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.9 
 The Committee note that out of 9 fertilizer PSUs, 4 are profit making fertilizer PSUs. 
However, only 2 PSUs i.e. RCF and FAGMIL have shown marginal increase in the profits during 
2011-12 to 2012 -13 and other 2 PSUs i.e. PDIL and MFL, the profits margin has come down 
during the said period. For the y ear 2013-14 (provisional), except for the PSUs like RCF, MFL 
and FAGMIL, other PSUs are incurring losses. The Committee, therefore, would like to 
recommend that the Department in coordination with the PSUs should meticulously study the 
factors responsible for the growth and development of these PSUs and come out with a 
detailed plan for improving and streamlining the functioning of these organisations in order to 
increase their profit margins. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by 
the Department in this regard. 
  

27 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
(1) Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizers Corporation Limited (BVFCL): 
BVFCL has two operating plants – Namrup-II and Namrup -III at Namrup  in 
Assam. BVFCL is incurring financial losses since inception due to low capacity utilization 
& high energy consumption.  
Namrup-II and Namrup -III plants are based on older generation technology and 
are of smaller capacity than the present available stand ard size plants. These plants 
never attained the designed stream days, capacity utilization and energy efficiency; 
even the normative energy consumption of these plants is very high.  
Considering the above, a Cabinet Note has been submitted to the Cabinet 
Secretariat for placing it before the Cabinet for the approval. In this Note there is a 
proposal for the Setting up a New brown field Ammonia -Urea Plant by phasing out the 
existing Namrup-II & III plants. This will result in the long term viability of the Company 
(BVFCL) and also most efficient use of scarce natural resource i.e. Natural Gas (NG). In 
addition, the Note also seeks approval on the Financial Restructuring of the BVFCL that 
will help the company in making its net-worth positive.  
(2) Fertilizers & Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT): 
 
FACT, which was a profit making organization, went into losses due to various 
reasons beyond the control of the organization. The earlier supports by the Government 
of India helped in cleaning up the balance sheet and staying out of the purview of BIFR. 
Networth of the company became negative during 2012-13 and has further deteriorated 
to a level of (-) 457 crore by 31-03-2014. 
In order to ensure the revival of FACT and help it sustain and grow over the 
years, short term, medium term and long term plans have been identified. Accordingly, a 
proposal for the Financial restructuring of  FACT has been prepared. Board for 
Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE) has recommended the proposal in 
its meeting held on 20.12.2013. Accordingly , a proposal seeking approval of CCEA for 
sanction on the financial  reliefs to FACT has been submitted to Cabinet Secretariat. 
Department of Expenditure has raised some issues on the matter.  Department of 
Fertilizers is in discussions with Department of Expenditure to resolve these issues. 
 
(3) Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL): 
MFL started incurring losses in the year 2003 -04 and declared Sick in 2009.  
Though the company has incurred profit in the last two financial years, the net -worth of 
the company is still negative i.e. Rs. ( -) 206.19 Crore as on 31.03.2014. To make the net -
worth of the company positive a proposal for the financial restructuring of MFL has 

28 
 
been prepared. As the posts of Chairman, Secretary and two other non official members 
of BRPSE are vacant the proposal is still to be placed before the BRPSE for the 
recommendations of BRPSE. 
(4) National Fertilizers Limited(NFL): 
National Fertilizers Limited is a profit making PSU. Company earned profit 
before tax till Financial Year 2011-12. However, Company incurred loss before tax of Rs. 
230.62 crore and Rs.161 Crore during 2012-13 and 2013-14 respectively. 
During 2014 -15, Company has come out of losses and reported a profit before 
tax of Rs.109.76 crore for the half year ended 30th Sept.,2014. 
During the financial year 2012 -13 & 2013 -14, the flagship projects underta ken 
by the company were commissioned. The Changeover of Feed Stock Project from Fuel 
Oil to Gas at Panipat and Bathinda were commissioned in 2012 -13 and at Nangal in 
2013-14. The Energy Saving & Urea Capacity Augmentation Projects at Vijaipur -I&II 
were com missioned in the year 2012 -13. Due to commissioning of these Projects, all 
units were under shut down for around two months resulting in lower production and 
higher energy consumption due to time taken by the units in stabilizing the operations 
post commis sioning of the projects. The losses incurred by the company during the 
financial year 2012-13  & 2013-14 mainly pertained to lower production, higher energy 
consumption and non -revision in the reimbursement of fixed cost under New Pricing 
Scheme (NPS) of Urea. 
During the financial year 2014 -15, all the plants have since stabilized and 
operating at optimum levels. Government has also implemented Modified NPS Stage III 
Policy from 2 nd April, 2014 under which reimbursement of fixed cost has been 
increased. Company has come out of losses and reported a profit of Rs. 109.76 crore for 
the half year ended 30th September, 2014. The profitability of the company shall, further 
improve with the implementation of NIP – 2008 which is under revision with the 
Government.   
 
(5) PDIL: 
The reasons for decline in performance since 2012-13 are as below : 
i) PDIL is predominantly dependent on the projects in Fertilizer Industry. PDIL 
could secure consultancy jobs for the  revamping, energy saving, feed stock conversion  
of major  fertilizer companies like  IFFCO, KRIBHCO, RCF, NFL etc. PDIL also executed 
consultancy services for the only Grass -root Ammonia/Urea plant of M/s. Matix 
Fertilizers at Panagarh, West Bengal.  All these jobs were completed by the yearended 
2011-12. 

29 
 
ii) There are no grass -root/brown-field Ammonia/Urea plants for the past more 
than 15 years (except that of M/s. Matix Fertilizers in West Bengal) due to policy issues 
and feed stock issues. 
iii) Besides the trend in execution of the contracts has shifted to LSTK mod e from 
the traditional EPCM mode, shrinking the order size. 
iv) Competition in the limited field of Fertilizers has increased as MNC’s have set up 
their offices in India and in PSU’s EIL has also entered into fertilizer sector. 
v) Consequently the order book of P DIL from the year 2011-12 has been low which 
is showing on the Income and Profits from the year 2012-13. 
 
Steps taken/being taken to increase the profit margins : 
i) PDIL is focusing on the diversified fields of Oil, Gas & Refinery sector. PDIL is 
resorting to strategic bidding through tender route and has been successful in many of 
the tenders. 
ii) PDIL is focusing to diversify into Infrastructure Sector. PDIL has applied to 
Ministry of Urban Development for notifying PDIL under Section 126(2) of GFR to 
enable PDIL to bid for civil works for any ministry, Department and State Government 
Organizations. DoF shall facilitate such empanelment. 
iii) PDIL is focusing on its inspection business and plans to double its business in 
this area. 
iv) In the core sector of Fertilizers,  Amendment to NIP 2012 has been notified  
recently and 11 Fertilizer companies shown their interest  for setting up Ammonia/Urea 
Plants. PDIL is hopeful of securing business on clearance of few of the proposals. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.10 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that the Department has taken initiatives to 
encourage joint ventures with the resource rich countries with the buy -back arrangements and 
to enter into long term agreement for supply of fertilizers and fertilizer inputs to I ndia This is 
being done to fulfil the need of the fertilizes industries whose dependency on import at present 
is to the extent of 25% of our requirement of Urea, 90% in case of Phosphates, either as raw 
material or finished fertilizers (DAP/MAP/TSP) and 10 0% in case of Potash. The Committee 
also note that the Department is also working with the goal of having access to / acquisition of 
fertilizer raw material abroad. The Department has undertaken Joint Ventures (JVs) abroad 
with 6 Countries (1 Country in Ur ea Sector and 5 Countries in P&K Sector) in the previous 
years. Out of these, only 2 JVs viz., Oman India Fertilizer Co., Oman in Urea sector and ICS 
Senegal, Senegal in P&K Sector are running successfully. The Committee are of the view that 
since India ha s near total dependency in P&K fertilizers, the Department, being the nodal 

30 
 
authority, should make vigorous efforts to set up JVs abroad and acquire fertilizer raw 
materials abroad as also recommended by the Committee in its earlier reports. The Committee 
hope that as a result of these efforts adequate quantity of phosphatic fertilisers would be 
available to the farmers in the country. The Committee would like to be apprised of th e 
progress made in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
Joint Ventures abroad 
India's dependency on import at present is to the extent of 25% of our 
requirement of Urea, 90% in case of Phosphates, either as raw material or finished fertilizers 
(DAP/MAP/TSP) and 100% in case of Potash. The Government has been encouraging Indian 
Companies to establish Joint Ventures abroad in Countries which are rich in fertilizer resources 
for production facilities with buy back arrangements and to enter into long term agreement for 
supply of fertilizers and fertilizer inputs to India.  Further, the Department is also working with 
the goal of having access to acquisition of the fertilizer raw materials abroad. 
Joint Ventures Projects 
During the year 2014 -15, no joint venture with any country was finalized.  However, 
during the said year a number of major developments took place with the following Countries:- 
Iran:  A Urea/Ammonia Joint venture project with RCF and GNFC as Indian entities has been 
proposed to be set up in Iran. Iranian Government has indicated gas price of $ 2.9/MMBTU for 
the project which is cheaper than the price prevailing in Indian market. For identification of 
Iranian partners for the joint venture and location of plant for the project, SBI Cap has been 
appointed as consultant who is expected to give its report in 4 months.  After  receipt of the 
report from SBI Cap, further action to negotiate gas supply agreement and MOU with the 
Iranian partners would be taken. The annual Urea production from the joint venture is 
expected to be 1.3 million MT which would be imported to India. On 11.06.2014, a meeting was 
taken by Hon’ble Minister for Chemicals and Fertilizers to review the progress and directed SBI 
Cap to submit the report early. After receipt of the report from SBI Cap, further action to 
negotiate gas supply agreement and MOU with the Iranian partners would be taken. The annual 
Urea production from the Joint venture is expected to be 1.3 million MT which would be 
imported in India. Meanwhile GSFC has also been included in the Indian consortium. Hon’ble 
Minister (C&F) has desired all parties to put up best efforts so that the project could commence 
by January 2015. Hon’ble Minister (C&F) has also written to the Iranian Oil Minister 
highlighting the issue of gas price and its availability for this project. He has also requested for 
according national treatment to this project at par with domestic projects. 
Russia:  In December 2013, a communication from EOI in Moscow has been received about the 
offer of 30% stake in the fertilizer project being undertaken by ACRON to develop the Talitsky 
Potassium-Magnesium deposit in Perm, Russia. As per the communication, Vnesheconombank, 

31 
 
a major Russian owned bank, has taken a 25% stake in the Talitsky project and that China has 
shown much interest and in investing in Talitsky but Russia would prefer India as a partner 
and the terms and conditions offered to India would be identical to those given to 
Vnesheconombank when it acquired its stake. From Indian side, NMDC has confirmed its firm 
interest in the project and has now sent a draft Memorand um of Understanding (MOU) of 
exclusivity for initiating comprehensive due diligence. The MOU has been sent to EOI, Russia 
for necessary further action on Russian side. Indian Ambassador to Russia has been requested 
to follow up with the Russian side for si gning of MoU between NMDC & ACRON. Further, due 
diligence activity for the project is to be initiated by the consortium members. In the Sub group 
meeting on fertilizers between India and Russia held on 08.10.2014, the outstanding issues 
were discussed and it was decided to send a delegation of the Indian consortium to Russia in 
early November, 2014 to finalize the MoU.  A team of representatives from RCF, NMDC, NFL 
and M/o Steel visited Russia in first week of December 2014 and a MoU between ACRON and 
Indian consortium has been signed on 11th December, 2014 during the visit of Russian 
President. 
Oman:  Department of Fertilizers had, vide letter dated 19 th May 2014 agreed to release the 
payments to OMIFCO with an increase of USD 44.6 Per MT for the Urea being  supplied by the 
Company to the Government of India from January 2014 onwards subject to the settlement of 
any differences in the prices that may arise, as a result of the studies being conducted by PDIL, 
consequent to amendments in the Gas Supply Agreemen t, as agreed by Government of India. A 
high level delegation led by Secretary (F) visited Oman during 28 -29 April 2014 to discuss the 
issues of (a) extension of present terms of UOTA for a further period of 5 years beyond 2015, 
on the same terms and condit ions; (b) to maintain the existing gas price escalation formula; 
and (c) allocation of additional gas to OMIFCO for revamp/creation of new ammonia/Urea 
capacities. 
Ghana:  For the proposed Ammonia/Urea JV in Ghana, an MOU  was signed on 6 th July 2010 at 
the Government level between the two Countries, followed by several visits of Indian 
delegation to Ghana to discuss issues relating to finalisation of draft JV agreement and price of 
Gas. It has now been informed that Gas being offered by Ghanaian authorities  for the project is 
not available. Therefore, project would be perused after some time.  
Togo:  For cooperation with Togo, a proposal was sent to Togolese Government for 
cooperation in production of Phosphate and Phosphoric fertilizers by way of Joint Vent ure 
project between India and Togolese entities in July, 2012. Togolese responded by sending a 
revised proposal and also included construction of railway Lome -Cinkasse and installation of 
agronomic research institute. The same was sent back, through MEA, t o Togolese Government 
with our comments in August 2012. Secretary (F) led Indian delegation visited Togo in June 
2013 wherein it was decided that Indian side would send details of the information and 

32 
 
documents required for preparation of a detailed Indian proposal for development of 
carbonated phosphate and thereafter a Togolese delegation would visit India along with 
information and documents sought by the Indian side for firming up the proposal. As agreed, a 
questionnaire seeking required details was sent  to Togolese side on 01.07.2013 and thereafter, 
a letter dated 24 th July 2013 from MOS (I/C) for Chemicals &  Fertilizers was also sent to 
Minister of Transport, Mines and Energy, Togo inviting Togolese delegation along with 
information/details as requested by Indian side. The response of Government of Togo on these 
issues is still awaited.   
Canada:  A delegation of M/s ENCANTO visited Department of Fertilizers on 11 th & 12 th June 
2013 and met Secretary (F).  On these dates, meetings were also held with RCF led consortium.  
As outcome of these meetings, a draft of Principle terms and purchase and sales agreement was 
initiated between RCF (on behalf of Indian consortium) and M/s ENCANTO to finalize the Draft 
Off-Take Agreement.  An aggregate off -take of 1.8 million tonne per annum MOP has been 
mentioned in the Draft Agreement.  A copy of the draft agreement has bee n sent by RCF to 
Indian consortium to members for their review and necessary action.  In this connection, a 
meeting held on 2 nd July 2013 under the Chairmanship of Secretary (F) with the RCF led 
consortium to discuss the draft agreement initiated by RCF (o n behalf of consortium) and M/s 
ENCANTO. The members of the consortium were requested to intimate the details of 
commitment of off -take quantity. However, due to lack of interest from Indian consortium 
members and international potash market scenario, issue has been kept on hold for some time. 
Belarus: On 20 th May 2013, the Hon’ble speaker of Lok Sabha visited Belarus and a meeting 
was held with the President of Belarus.  During the meeting, the President of Belarus expressed 
interest in India’s participati on in the privatization of the potash industry in Belarus. Further, 
Joint Secretary (Eurasia), MEA, vide D.O. letter dated 30.05.2013, has suggested to invite a 
delegation from Belarus to discuss these matters.  The Department of Fertilizers conveyed to 
Embassy of India at Minsk that Indian side is ready to receive a delegation from Belarus during 
the week starting on 10 th June 2013 to discuss issues related with Potash Fertilizers but the 
response from Belarus is still awaited. 
Tunisia and Jordan :- On the invitation of Mr. Mehdi Jomaa, Tunisian Minister of Industry a 
delegation led by  Hon’ble MOS (I/C) (C&F) alongwith Secretary (F) and technical team from 
Fertilizers companies namely M/s Coromandel and M/s GSFC visited Tunisia during 11 th -12th 
July, 2013 to jointly inaugurate the TIFERT plant, an important Tunisia -India Joint Venture and  
to explore further cooperation and the potential of new joint projects in the field of industrial 
phosphate of fertilizers.  Before visiting Tunisia, Hon’ble MOS(I/C) (C& F) along with 
Secretary(F) and representative of fertilizer PSU M/s RCF, visited Jordan during 09 th-10th July, 
2013 on the invitation received from the Chairman of the Board of Jordan  Phosphate Mining 
Company, a Govt. of Jordan company to visit Jordan with the purpose to :- 

33 
 
(i)   review the market conditions in India and the ways to improve them for the 
benefit of both sides I.e. JPMC and the Govt. of India 
(ii)  Explore the potential of new joint venture projects leading to establishment of 
new Industrial phosphate of fertilizers for export. 
(iii)  Presenting the future activities of JPMC and the infrastructural projects that would 
be needed to have them materialize. 
As an outcome to the India delegation visit to Jordan, a draft EOI is submitted by RCF for  
the proposed Joint Venture with JPMC and JAFCO and the same is under process. 
IRAQ : On the request of Ministry of Petroleum and  Natural Gas, AS &FA of Department of 
Fertilizers accompanied the delegation led by Minister (PNG) to attend the 17 th Indian-Iraq 
Joint Commission Meeting (JCM) held at Baghdad during 7 -8th July, 2013 to explore the 
possibilities of Joint Venture in Fertilizer in Iraq.  During the discussions the Indian side 
expressed interest in (i) setting  up ofa JV project in Al -Qaim/Al-Anbar area  for establishing a 
Urea and Phosphate unit ; and (ii) import of sulphur from Iraq. Meanwhile an Inter -Ministerial 
Meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary (East), MEA to review the actions taken 
subsequent to the 17 th India-Iraq Joint Co mmission Meeting and in preparation for the 
forthcoming visit of Prime Minister of Iraq to India on 23 rd August, 2013. In the meeting DOF 
was asked to share Draft Letter of Interest (LOI) and Confidentiality Agreement to establish 
proposed Urea Plant and P hosphate Fertilizer Unit as JV project in Al -Qaim/Al-Anbar area of 
Iraq. The same has been done and forwarded to MEA and Ambassador  of India to Iraq on 
31.7.2013. 
  

34 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY  
 
- NIL - 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
 The Committee observe from the notes on demands for grants (2014 -15) that the non -
plan allocation for the financial years 2012 -13 and 2013 -14 are Rs. 65,628.86 crore (AE) and 
Rs 68,000 crore (RE), respectively. The budget allocation against non plan expend iture for the 
year 2014-15 is Rs 73,000 crore (BE). Thus, while the non -plan expenditure of the Department 
has remained almost stagnant over the years from 2012 -13 to 2013 -14, the same has been 
increased by about Rs 5000 crore for the year 2014 -2015 over t he previous year allocation. 
The Committee also note that the non plan expenditure of the Department primarily relates to 
subsidy on fertilizers. While budget allocation for subsidy on imported fertilizers for the year 
2014-2015 is Rs. 12300 crore, the sam e on decontrolled fertilizers is Rs. 24670.32 crore for 
payment to manufacturers/agencies for concessional sale of decontrolled fertilizers and 
subsidy on indigenous fertilizers is Rs. 36,000 crore. The subsidy on fertilizers is granted by 
the Government w ith a view to protect the farmers from adverse impact of price volatility in 
the international market and other negative factors. While the country is deficient in 
decontrolled fertilizers which is largely being imported, the country has achieved 75% self 
sufficiency in the production of urea. The Committee are of the view that it is essential that the 
production of indigenous fertilizers at low cost may be augmented in the country by increasing 
the efficiency and reducing the operational and administrative  costs.  The Committee feel that 
as a result of these measures the heavy outgo of expenditure on account of subsidy could be 
controlled/ reduced. In view of the foregoing, the Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should work out an effective  mechanism to reduce or restrict the non plan 
expenditure of the Department. The Committee would like the Department to address this 
issue and intimate the measures taken by them in this regard.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Scheme has been under implementation since 1.4.2010, 
under which subsidy is fixed on annual basis based on nutrient content taking into account 
international and domestic prices of P&K fertilizers, exchange rate inventory level  etc. The 
prices of P&K fertilizer are fixed by fertilizer companies. After decontrol of prices and subsidy 
being fixed, variation in the international prices of P&K  fertilizers and devaluation in exchange 
rate has affected the domestic prices of these fe rtilizers.  After implementation of NBS Scheme 
the domestic prices of P&K fertilizers have increased and the subsidy rates remained more or 

36 
 
less static  or less than the pre NBS regime.  This has resulted in reduction in subsidy burden 
on P&K fertilizers.  
 Under NBS Policy the Government does not interfere in the functioning of fertilizer 
companies.  The premise of the NBS Policy is that it will encourage competition amongst the 
fertilizer companies both indigenous and imported and in different sectors and  the market 
forces will ensure stability in the prices.  Hence, the companies themselves work towards 
increasing efficiency and reducing the operational and administrative cost to remain 
competitive in the market.  This has also ensures reasonable price of  P&K fertilizers in the 
country and for the farmers. 
 At present, the non -plan expenditure is in line with the consumption of P&K fertilizers 
in the country.  The only way to reduce non -plan subsidy would be to reduce NBS rates and if 
NBS Rates are reduced  in order to reduce non -plan expenditure, the prices of P&K fertilizers 
will go up and will affect consumption of P&K fertilizers and ultimately the balanced 
fertilization of soil. 
 Hence, we may propose to the committee that the Department may continue wi th the 
existing practice to encourage competition amongst the fertilizer companies and let the market 
forces determine the prices of P&K fertilizers. 
 A new urea policy is being formulated in which issues relating to energy efficiency to 
reduce the subsidy burden are being considered. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No.13  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
  

37 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1 
 
 The Committee note that presently India is 3 rd largest fertiliser producer in the world 
with installed capacity of 127.67 lakh MT of nitrogen and 62.08 lakh MT of phosphatic nutrient 
during the year 2013 -14. However, the indigenous production of fertilizers ha s not increased 
to meet the growing requirement largely due to raw materials / inputs limitation and partially 
due to lack of new investments in urea sector in the last decade. India is completely deficient in 
potassic resources and has to entirely depend upon import for meeting the requirement of 
potash (MOP) for the Indian agriculture. The country is also deficient in phosphatic resources 
with more than 90% requirement of the country being met through direct import of finished 
phosphatic fertilizers or ph osphatic raw materials/intermediates for indigenous production of 
phosphatic fertilizers. At present, there are 30 urea units in our country. Out of these 30 urea 
units, 27 urea units use Natural Gas (using either domestic gas/LNG or both) as feedstock and  
fuel and the remaining three urea units use Naphtha as feedstock and fuel. Three Naphtha units 
viz., SPIC -Tuticorin, MFL -Manali and MCFL -Mangalore are in process for conversion from 
Naphtha to Gas feedstock.  
The Committee were informed that th e availability of gas is one of the major limiting 
factor to the growth of urea industry in the country. Presently, the availability of domestic 
natural gas is not even sufficient to meet the demand of existing gas based urea units in the 
country. Due to s hortage of domestic gas, many FO/LSHS/Naphtha based urea plants which 
have converted to gas recently, are meeting its requirement of gas by using costly RLNG. The 
total requirement of daily gas is 46 mmscmd out of which 25.413 mmscmd is met through 
domestic gas and 20.587 mmscmd gas is met through Regassified Liquefied Natural Gas 
(RLNG) in September, 2014.  The Empowered Group of ministers (EGoM) on Gas pricing and 
Commercial Utilization of gas in their meeting held on 23.08.2013 decided to maintain the 
supplies of domestic gas to the Fertilizer sector at 31.5 mmscmd level and give the sector first 
priority in meeting the requirements of any shortfall below the level of 31.5 mmscmd from any 
additional production of NELP gas.  The Committee are distressed to n ote that PSUs like FACT, 
Kochi has become a loss making unit since it has converted its plant to use gas as the feed stock 
but domestic gas is not being supplied to the plant and it has to get very high cost RLNG for the 
plant. At that rate, it is not econ omical to produce and sell and meet the margins within the 
subsidy that is available. 
According to the Department, excessive emphasis given on production of urea using 
natural gas has impeded the goal of India to become self -sufficient in the fertilizers sector 
because of lack of long term availability of natural gas in the country for urea plants, high cost 

38 
 
of imported RLNG prices and volatility in prices. If Naphtha is used for production of urea as an 
alternative which is available as raw material in the country and if pricing is kept at Rs. 30000 
per MT, then urea can be produced at Rs. 20000 per MT. However, consid erable quantity of 
domestic natural gas is given at subsidised/controlled price for gas -based units but the same is 
not done for Naphtha FO/LSHS used by non -gas based units. Further, while pricing of natural 
gas is done based on its thermal energy ( MMBTU), the same is not done in the pricing of 
Naphtha/FO/LSHS which has resulted in higher cost of production of urea using 
Naphtha/FO/LSHS. The Department has claimed that if the same pricing principle is followed 
for Naphtha/FO/LSHS, the non -gas based urea uni ts would not have been so cost inefficient 
and sufficient additional capacity could have been installed to make country self sufficient in 
urea sector. 
In view of the forgoing, the Committee recommend that the Department should play a 
proactive role and ta ke up the matter vigorously with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas ensuring that adequate quantity of natural gas is supplied with out any hindrance to all the 
existing gas based urea units. The Committee also recommend that the Department should also 
ensure gas connectivity and supply of domestic gas to three Naphtha units viz., SPIC -Tuticorin, 
MFL-Manali and MCFL -Mangalore which are in process for conversion from Naphtha to Gas 
feedstock. The Committee further recommend that the Department should also impress upon 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to work out a pricing mechanism for 
Naphtha/FO/LSHS based units so that non - gas based units could become cost efficient.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 To ensure the adequate supply of domestic gas to the urea manufacturing units, this 
Department regularly takes up the matter with MoP&NG. 
 Three urea units viz., MFL -Manali, MCFL - Mangalore and SPIC -Tuticorin have started 
the process of conversion from Naphtha based units to Gas based units. However, the 
conversion of these three units is held up due to delay in commissioning of the gas pipeline 
connectivity.  MFL-Manali has already signed Heads of Agreement with IOCL for supply of 
natural gas from its proposed LNG terminal at Ennore, which is likely to get commissioned by 
last quarter of 2017. As per original plan, MCFL was supposed to get LNG from petronet LNG -
terminal at Kochi through a gas pipeline planned by GAIL from Kochi to Mangalore.  But the 
laying of pipeline is facing stiff resistance from farmers and may take 24 months or more to lay 
approximately 350 kms of the pipeline in Kerala. GAIL is also exploring the o ption of laying a 
spurline from Dabhol -Bengaluru pipeline connecting to Mangalore from Chitradurga as 
progress on Kochi -Mangalore pipeline is severely dented due to non -availability of Right of 
Way (RoW) for lands under State of Kerala. A dedicated pipelin e may also be laid from Ramnad 

39 
 
to SPIC, Tuticorin by GAIL for which no permission is required from PNGRB or after finalisation 
of Ennore -Tuticorin pipeline by PNGRB, the successful bidder may take up the Ramnad -
Tuticorin line on priority basis. Subsequent to connectivity of gas pipeline, the three companies 
may consider tying up imported RLNG to meet their requirement since as per the projections 
on availability of domestic gas, the same is not going to increase substantially in the coming 
years. As regards, domestic gas, the same shall be allocated as per the prevailing Gas Utilisation 
Policy as and when pipeline connectivity is established and the plants are in a position to 
consume gas.   
 So far as pricing mechanism for Naphtha is concerned, the matter is under discussion 
with MoP&NG. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No. 7  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;             (ANAND RAO ADSUL) 
14, July 2015                                  Chairperson 
23, Ashadha 1937 (Saka)            Standing Committee on  
         Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2014-15) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 16 June, 2015 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in 
Room No. 139, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Shri Anandrao Adsul  - Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Idris Ali 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Shankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Satish Kumar Gautam 
9. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
10. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
11. Dr. Krishan Pratap Singh 
12. Smt. Rekha Arim Verma 
13. Shri Innocent 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
15. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
Secretariat 
  
1.  Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary  
2.  Shri U.B.S. Negi  - Director 
3.  Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee.  
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
a) Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers); 
b) ************************ 
c) ************************ 

41 
 
4. The draft Reports relating to the Department of Fertilizers, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals and Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals were adopted by the 
Committee without any amendment.   
5. The Committee authorised the Chairman to make consequential changes, if any, arising 
out of the factual verification of the Reports by the Department of Fertilizers, Department of  
Chemicals and Petrochemicals and Department of Pharmaceuticals of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
6. The Committee then decided to hold its next meeting on 25th June, 2015 for briefing on 
the subject "  Functioning of National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
(NIPER)" by the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).   
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  
 
 
________________________________________________ 
***** Matters not related to this Report. 
  

42 
 
 
Appendix-II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
  
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION T AKEN BY THE GOVERNME NT ON THE RECOMMENDA TIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE THI RD REPORT (SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CHEMICA LS AND FERTILIZERS ( 2014-15) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANT S 
(2014-15) OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTI LIZERS (DEPARTMENT O F 
FERTILIZERS) 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 10 
 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted  by 
the Government: 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10)  
08 
Percentage of Total 80% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil)  
 
0 
Percentage of Total 0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation No. 4)  
 
01 
Percentage of Total 10% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are still awaited:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation No. 1) 
 
01 
Percentage of Total 10% 
 
 