1 | P a g e  
 
    
19 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Subject  Movement of Fertilizers And Monitoring System) 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
 
REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
FEBRUARY, 2016/  PHALGUNA , 1937 (SAKA) 
 
  


2 | P a g e  
 
CC&F No.19  
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Eleventh Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Subject  Movement of Fertilizers And Monitoring System) 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.02.2016 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  25.02.2016 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2016/  PHALGUNA, 1937 (SAKA) 
 


3 | P a g e  
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-16) ………………………………... (iii) 
Introduction. …………………………………………………..………………………… (v) 
Chapter I Report ……………….………………………………………………….. 6-27 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
28-34 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
35 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect  of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
36-38 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which  final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
39-45 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of  Eighth Sitting of the Stand ing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2015-16) held on  28  January, 2016 
46 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2014-15) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers).  
47 
 
  

4 | P a g e  
 
(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16)  
 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Idris Ali 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Innocent 
9. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi 
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle 
13. Shri Rajendran S. 
14. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
15. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
16. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
17. Dr. Uma Saren 
18.  Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
19. Shri Taslimuddin 
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
21. Shri   Baker George  
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Dr. M.S. Gill 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27. Shri K. Parasaran 
28.   Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao 
29.  Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
30.  Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
31. Shri Abdul Wahab 
 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Director 
3. Shri Nishant Mehra   - Under Secretary 
  

5 | P a g e  
 
(v) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2015-16) having 
been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their  behalf, present this 
Nineteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (Sixteenth  Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on  Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014 -2015) on the subject Movement 
of Fertilizers and Monitoring System   of the Ministry of Chemicals and  Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers). 
 
2. The  Eleventh Report  (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers was pre sented to Lo k Sabha on  31.07.2015 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
24.07.2015.  The Action Taken replies of Government to all observations/recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 18.11.2015.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertili zers(2015-16) co nsidered and adopted this Report  on Action Taken Replies  at 
their sitting held on  28 January, 2016.. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (Sixteenth  Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the  comments of the Committee have  been 
printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
                                              
 
    
NEW DELHI;                          (ANANDRAO ADSUL) 
18 FEBRUARY, 2016                  CHAIRPERSON 
29 PHALGUNA, 1937 (SAKA)                                                        STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
                CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
  

6 | P a g e  
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2015-16) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 'Movement of Fertilizers 
and Monitoring System' of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Departm ent of Fertilizers) 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 31.07.2015 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.07.2015. In 
all, the Committee made 10 Observations / Recommendations in the Report. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were requested to 
furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report 
within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e., by 30.10.2015. The 
Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all th e 10 Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of  Fertilizers) vide their O.M. No. H-11021/9/2014-
Parl. dated 18.11.2015. These Replies have been examined and categorized as follows:- 
 
 (i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government:  
 
 Sl.Nos. 1,2,4 and 5         (Total =04 )   
           Chapter II  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply : 
  
Sl.No. Nil            (Total =Nil) 
            Chapter III  
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee : 
  
Sl.No. 10         (Total =01)  
           Chapter IV  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are of still awaited: 
  
Sl.No. 3,6,7,8 and 9         (Total =05)  
 Chapter V  
 
 
1.3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations  / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I, Chapter IV in respect of which replies of the 

7 | P a g e  
 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and Chapter V for which final 
replies are still awaited, of this Report, should be furnished expeditiously. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Governmen t on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A.   Need to ensure realistic assessment of fertilizers required by the States   
 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. Nos.1 & 2 
 
1.5 Emphasizing the need to ensure realistic assessment of fertilizers, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 
A. FERTILIZER ASSESSMENT 
"The Committee note that on an average about 30 to 32 MMT of urea is required 
annually to meet the requirement of the farmers. Annual requirement of DAP and NPK 
is about 10 MMT each and that of MOP is about 3 MMT. The domestic production of 
DAP and NPK is about 4 MMT and 7 MMT respectively. There is no domestic 
production of MOP. The country is 90% import dependent for P&K fertilizers either in 
finished form or raw material. The assessment of the requirement of fertilizers i.e. 
Urea, DAP, MOP and NPK for each season is finalized by Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation (DAC) in consultation with Depart ment of Fertilizers, States, 
Railways, Fertilizers Association of India, Companies and other Stake holders. For this 
purpose, biannual Zonal Conferences are held before start of each cropping season i.e. 
Kharif (April to September) and Rabi (October to Mar ch). The country is divided into 
five zones based on geographical location namely North, South, West, East and North -
East in the context of Biannual Zonal Conferences. Before Zonal Conference, the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers advises States that d etailed consultations should 
be done with Lead Fertilizer suppliers, farmers, Panchayat/Block Samitis etc. while 
computing the requirement of fertilizers. According to the Department, the 
requirement of fertilizers depends upon many factors such as croppin g pattern, 
cropped area, requirement of nutrients in soil as per soil health status & 
recommended doses, irrigated area, consumption pattern etc. Information in respect 
of cropped area, irrigated area, cropping pattern is compiled by States at the level of  
block and information regarding requirement of nutrients as per soil health status etc 
is compiled by the States Government at the level of Districts. Accordingly, 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) has devised various 
formats/proforma and thes e proforma are circulated to States before Zonal 
Conference. States compile their data as per the parameters/details defined in these 
proforma and project the requirement of fertilizers. Thereafter, the requirement is 
finalized in these Zonal Conferences i n consultation with stakeholders namely States, 
Department of Fertilizers, Lead Fertilizer Suppliers, Fertilizer Association of India 
(FAI) and NIC. It has also been informed that Agro scientists of Indian Council of 
Agriculture Research (ICAR) are involved in the process of assessment of requirement 
of fertilizers. So far, the detailed examination of requirement of fertilizers based on 
requirement of nutrients as per soil health status and recommended doses has been 
carried out in consultation with ICAR fo r high fertilizer consuming states namely 
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh. Outcome of the said examination is taken 
in to account while finalizing the requirement of fert ilizers of these states. Similar 

8 | P a g e  
 
exercise is also being conducted for another five states namely Jharkhand, Odisha, 
Bihar, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu.  
 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee observed that it would be essential that the 
data furnished by the States as per Performa devised by the DAC to project the 
requirement of fertilizers by the States reflects the ground realities and therefore, it 
would be essential that data furnished by the States are thoroughly examined by the 
Department with a view to ensure realistic assessment of requirement of fertilizers by 
the States . If felt necessary the Performa devised for the purpose could be further 
revised on the basis of the experience gained over the years. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that all th e issues/factors relating to computation of requirement of 
fertilizers may be thoroughly and meticulously examined/deliberated by the 
Department in consultation with all concerned in zonal conferences held for the 
purpose.  
 
The Committee further observed that attempts are being made to assess the 
requirement of fertilizers in a scientific and realistic manner. Agro -scientists of ICAR 
are also being involved in the process of assessment of requirement of fertilizers. 
However, the fact remains that the sever al states of the country still remain 
uncovered by the Agro scientists for assessment of requirement of fertilizers as per 
soil health status. In the absence of soil health status in respect of large number of 
States, the Committee are of the view that it would be difficult to compute the actual 
requirement of nutrients for various crops. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that exercise undertaken by the Agro scientists may be intensified for all the States of 
the country in order to get relevant and accur ate information about the nutrients 
based soil health status to arrive at accurate demand of the fertilizers in the country. 
Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the 
Department in this regard." 
 
B.       Assessed  requirement  and consumption of Fertilizers  
The examination of last three years data furnished by the Department to the 
Committee revealed that there was consistent gap between Sale (consumption) and 
assessed requirements of fertilizers. As for illustr ation, during Kharif 2014, the 
projected requirement of urea was 146.60 LMT against which the actual consumption 
(sale) was only 139.97 LMT. For Rabi 2014 -15, while the projected requirement of 
urea was 160.11 LMT, the actual consumption (sale) was 168.79 LMT. Further, the 
projected requirement of DAP, MOP and NPK for Kharif 2014 was 48.07 LMT, 14.85 
LMT and 49.60 LMT respectively against which the actual consumption (sale) was 
37.05 LMT , 14.12 LMT and 38.92 LMT 40 respectively. For Rabi 2014 -15, the 
projected requirement of DAP, MOP and NPK was 47.87 LMT, 15.41 LMT and 50.22 
LMT respectively against which the actual consumption (sale) of fertilizers was 38.53 
LMT, 13.68 LMT and 47.06 LMT respectively. All these figures clearly shows that there 
is variation  in actual consumption figures of major fertilizers vis -a-vis the projected 
requirement. In fact it has been found that by and large, the actual consumption (sale) 
of fertilizers is considerably less than the projected requirement of fertilizers. This 
clearly reveals that the existing methodology adopted for assessment of fertilizers is 
not meticulous and scientific and still needs further improvement. The Committee are 
not convinced with the explanation of the Department that the assessment of demand 
for fertilizers by the States is generally on safer side and hence there is a tendency to 
over estimation. The assessed demand for fertilizers is based on ideal conditions 
whereas due to changes in actual sown area, pattern of rainfall and other conditions 
prevailing during the season, the demand changes. According to the Department, the 
seasonal projection of demand, availability and sales always remain at satisfactory 

9 | P a g e  
 
level. But there may be a minor deviation in actual sales of fertilizers month -wise 
against the availability and assessed demand. However, on close scrutiny of minutes 
of the zonal conference by the Committee reveals that the projected requirement of 
fertilizers by the States is primarily based on the trend of consumption of fertilizers 
against the requirement during the past three years which is certainly not the prudent 
way of computing the projected requirement of fertilizers by the States. Needless to 
say, it is absolutely essential that the requirement of fertilizers is computed as 
accurately as possible. Any variation in the projection of requirement of fertilizers 
may upset the whole process of planning involved in production, import, transport 
and timely distribution of fertilsers to the farmers and ultimately may adversely affect 
the agricu lture productivity of the country. On the contrary, if the demand is over 
estimated, the same may force the Government to go for unnecessary import of 
fertilizers and in the process, the same may result in outgo of precious foreign 
exchange. In view of the  foregoing, the Committee recommend that methodology 
being adopted for computing requirement of fertilizers of various States may be 
comprehensively reviewed and a methodology based on scientific approach may be 
adopted for realistic assessment of requirem ent of fertilizers. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.  
 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
1.6 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 "1. The requirement of fertilizers is governed by various factors viz. types of crop, 
area under the crops, soil health/fertility status. The general recommended doses of 
fertilizers per unit area basis (generally kg/hectare) are formulated for every crop by 
State Agriculture Universities/Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR) 
institutes depending on the soil health/fertility status. (In other words, the 
recommended dose for a particular crop sown in soil having low fertility status will be 
different in soils having medium/high fertility). The total requirement of fertilizers for 
a particular crop is then worked out by multiplying the recommended dose with the 
total area under the said crop.  
 
 This Ministry requested ICAR to carry out the detailed analys is of the requirement of 
fertilizers based on recommended dosages for all the major fertilizer consuming 
States namely Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,   Odisha, 
Jharkhand, West Bengal.  
 
 Ideally, the requirement of fertilizers shall be as per recommended doses. However, 
while assessing the requirement of fertilizers for a state, the consumption 
trend/capacity of the state in previous seasons is also tak en in to account.  If the 
consumption in previous seasons is more than the recommended dose, then the 
requirement should be ideally restricted up to the recommended quantity. If the 
consumption is less than the recommended dose, the consumption shall be in creased 
up to the recommended quantity to arrive at the required quantity. It is also a matter 
of fact that the consumption of fertilizers is also governed by the financial capacity of 
the farmers and hence, cannot be increased suddenly.  Therefore, the co nsumption 
trend in previous seasons also becomes one of the important factors while assessing 
the requirement of fertilizers. 
 

10 | P a g e  
 
The proformas for assessment of requirement of fertilizers have been devised by this 
Ministry by taking into account all the abov e said factors. Agro scientists of ICAR are 
also involved in the process of assessment of requirement of fertilizers. 
 
2. In case of P&K (DAP, MOP and NPK etc.) fertilizers, high prices P&K fertilizers 
may be one of the major reasons for actual consumption  being less than the assessed 
requirement rather than the deficiency in the adopted methodology. 
 
It may also be pertinent to mention here that in case of P&K fertilizers, the assessed 
requirement is already being kept less than the recommended quantities keeping in 
view of the above stated fact. 
 
3. To promote soil test based judicious use of fertilizers, Government of India has 
launched Soil Health Card (SHC) scheme in the year 2015 -16. The guidelines of the 
scheme have been prepared in consultation with the scientists of ICAR. Under the 
scheme, the soil samples will be collected from a grid of 2.5 hectare in irrigated area 
and 10 ha in rainfed area. The soil samples will be tested for 12 parameters namely 
primary (NPK) nutrients, secondary (S) nutrient, m icro nutrients (B, Zn, Mn, Fe & Cu), 
and others (pH, EC & Organic Carbon). Based on the analysis of soil samples, the Soil 
Health Cards containing information on fertiliser recommendations will be generated 
for all the 14 crore landholdings in the country. 
 
For implementation of the scheme, Soil Health Card portal in consultation with ICAR 
scientists has also been developed. The test results of the soil samples will be entered 
in the portal. State -wise Soil Test-Crop Response (STCR) formulae developed by IC AR 
or crop -wise General Fertilizer Recommendations (GFR) will also be entered in the 
portal.  Based on the soil test results and STCR formulae/GFR, fertilizer 
recommendations will be calculated by the system automatically. 
 
Since the soil fertility gets changed in a time period of 3-4 years, therefore, the cycle of 
issue of SHCs will be repeated every three years. The first cycle of issue of SHCs has 
been planned to be completed by the end of the year 2017-18.  
 
The data on landholding -wise fertilizer recom mendations, available in the portal, 
would be utilized to project the state -wise total requirement of fertilizers. This will 
lead to more precise and realistic assessment of requirement of fertilizers based on 
scientific methodology." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
FERTILIZER REQUIREMENT: 
  
1.7 The Committee in order to ensure realistic assessment of requirement of 
fertilizers by the states recommended that all the issues/factors relating to 
computation of requirement of fertilizers may be thoroughly and meticulously 
examined/deliberated by the D epartment in consultation with all concerned in 
zonal conferences held for the purpose and if felt necessary the Performa 
devised for the purpose could be further revised on the basis of the experience 
gained over the years. The Committee had also recommen ded that exercise 
undertaken by the Agro scientists in the process of assessment of requirement 
of fertilizers may be intensified for all the States in the country in order to get 
relevant and accurate information about the nutrients based soil health stat us 
to arrive at accurate demand of the fertilizers. 

11 | P a g e  
 
 
 In its Actions Taken reply, the Department has stated that the proformas for 
assessment of requirement of fertilizers have been devised by this Ministry by 
taking into account all the factors, like, types of crop, area under the crops, soil 
health/fertility status, agro scientists of ICAR are also involved in the process of 
assessment of requirement of fertilizers.  The consumption trend/capacity of 
the state in previous seasons is also taken in to accoun t. Further, the Ministry 
has requested ICAR to carry out the detailed analysis of the requirement of 
fertilizers based on recommended dosages for all the major fertilizer 
consuming States namely Andhra Pradesh, Telangana , Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, 
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Haryana, Punjab, Uttar 
Pradesh, Bihar, Odisha, Jharkhand and West Bengal. Noting the action taken by 
the Department, t he Committee are of the view that the current exercise 
undertaken by the Agro scientists  is restricted to only major fertilizer 
consuming States, which may result in incomplete assessment of requirement of 
fertilizers. The Committee, therefore,  strongly reiterate its earlier 
recommendation that exercise undertaken by t he Agro scientists may be 
intensified for all the States  in the country in order to get relevant and accurate 
information about accurate demand of the fertilizers in the country. 
 
ASSESSED REQUIREMENT AND CONSUMPTION OF FERTILIZERS 
 
1.8 The Committee after examination of the  data for the last three years furnished 
by the Depa rtment to the Committee observed  that there was consistent gap 
between Sale (consumption) and assessed requirements of fertilizers . There is 
variation in actual consumption figure s of major fertilizers vis -a-vis the 
projected requirement. In fact, it has been found that by and large, the actual 
consumption (sale) of fertilizers is considerably less than the projected 
requirement of fertilizers. The Committee, therefore, recommended  that 
methodology being adopted for computing requirement of fertilizers of various 
States may be comprehensively reviewed and a methodology based on scientific 
approach may be adopted for realistic assessment of requirement of fertilizers.  
In its Actions Taken reply, the Department has stated that to promote soil test 
based judicious use of fertilizers, Government of India has launched Soil Health 
Card (SHC) scheme in the year 2015-16. The guidelines of the scheme have been 
prepared in consultation with the scientists of ICAR and based on the analysis of 
soil samples, the Soil Health Cards containing information on fertiliser 
recommendations will be generated for all the 14 crore landholdings in the 
country. The test results of the soil samples are entered in the Soil Health Card 
portal in co nsultation with ICAR scientists.  State-wise Soil Test -Crop Response 
(STCR) formulae developed by ICAR or crop -wise General Fertilizer 
Recommendations (GFR) will also be entered in the portal.  Based on the soil 
test resu lts and STCR formulae/GFR, fertilizer recommendations will be 
calculated by the system automatically . The data on landholding -wise fertilizer 
recommendations, available in the portal, would be utilized to project the state -
wise total requirement of fertili zers. The Committee are of the view that use of 
this data on landholding -wise fertilizer recommendations will lead to more 
precise and realistic assessment of requirement of fertilizers. This would make 
methodology adopted for computing requirement of fertilizer more scientific as 
well. The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to utilize the data on 
land holding -wise fertilizer recommendations while computing the 
requirement of fertilizer for various States. While appreciating the efforts made 
by the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), the Committee hope 

12 | P a g e  
 
that the scheme would soon fructify and pe rcolate at the block level.  The 
Committee would therefore like to be apprised of the further development 
made in this matter. 
       
C. Need to ensure sealing of trucks transporting fertilizers to avoid any chance of 
pilferage. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No.3 
 
1.9 Emphasizing the need for sealing of trucks transporting fertilizers , the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
SUPPLY PLAN /MOVEMENT OF FERTILIZERS: 
"The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers prepares agreed monthly 
supply plan of all the fertilizers in consultation with the manufacturers and importers 
as  per Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985 (FCO). However, as per Fertilizer (Movement 
Control) Order,1973, the Department of Fertilizers is empowered to direct fertilizer 
suppliers to supply their 50% of Urea, 20% of Phosphatic and Potassic fertilizers 
(P&K) produced or imported in India to any particular area. The agreed monthly 
supply plan is  generally issued before 25th of each month for the next month. The 
fertilizers are mainly transported through railways and for this purpose directions are 
issued to all suppliers to maintain 80:20 ratio i.e. 80% of the total quantity to be 
moved through r ailways and 20 % by road. The guideline for maintaining rail/road 
coefficient of 80:20 for urea is for reduction in cost of transportation as the cost of 
transportation by rail is substantially lower than the cost of transportation by road. 
However, road m ovement is permitted up to 500 Kms keeping in view the local 
requirements. However, this guideline is not area specific and is not strictly adhered 
to for the sake of equal distribution of fertilizers at every corner of the country. 
During the course of ev idence, the Committee were informed that while railway 
wagons transporting fertilizers are completely sealed, trucks transporting fertilizers 
are not sealed and the same are covered simply by tarpaulin which are tied by ropes. 
The Committee are not convinc ed with the explanation of the Department that 
quantity supplied by road is too less to pilferage. The Committee apprehend that in 
the absence of any seal on trucks transporting fertilizers may lead to pilferage or 
cause adulteration of fertilizers on the way by unscrupulous elements. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the trucks transporting fertilizers may also be 
sealed as per the procedure being followed in the context of railway wagons, to avoid 
any chance of pilferage or adulteration of fertiliz ers on the way to its destination by 
unscrupulous elements. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
by the Department in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.10 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Departm ent of 
Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "As desired, all Companies supplying fertilizers have been requested to work out the 
modalities for sealing the trucks transporting fertilizers." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.11 The Committee had noted that the for transporting of fertilizers, directions are 
issued to all suppliers to maintain 80:20 ratio i.e. 80% of the total quantity to be 

13 | P a g e  
 
moved through railways and 20% by road.  While railway wagons transporting 
fertilizers are completely sealed, trucks transporting fertilizers are not sealed 
and the same are covered simply by tarpaulins which are  tied by ropes. In this 
regard t he Committee apprehend ed that the absence of any seal s on trucks 
transporting fertilizers may lead to pilferage or cause adulteration of fertilizers 
on the way by unscrupulous elements. The Committee, therefore, recommended 
that the trucks transporting fertilizers may also be sealed as per the procedure 
being followed in the context of railway wagons, to avoid any chance of pilferage 
or adulteration of fertilizers on the way to its destination by unscrupulous 
elements. In its Action  Taken reply, the Department has stated that  all 
companies supplying fertilizers have been requested to work out the modalities 
for sealing the trucks transporting fertilizers.  The Committee are  glad to know 
that the Department has made an request to all the fertilizer companies in this 
regard. The Committee would like the Department to ensure that such 
guidelines are prepared and strictly adhered to by the fertilizer companies.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the further progress made by the 
Department in this regard. 
        
D.  Need to ensure availability of adequate no. of rakes for movement of fertilizers, 
the Committee had recommended as under 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No.4 
 
1.12 Emphasizing the need to ensure availability of adequate no. of rakes for movement of 
fertilizers, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 AVAILABILITY OF RAKES FOR MOVEMENT OF FERTILIZERS: 
"The Committee were further informed that on an average, 45 rakes per day are 
required for movement of fertilizers including imported fertilizers. However, loading 
and unloading time in most of the States is much more than the stipulated time of 9 to 
10 hours as pointed by the Ministry of Railways during the zonal conference held for 
assessment of requirement of fertilizers for Kharif 2015. The Committee feel that the 
timely supply and movement of fertilize rs to the various parts of the country largely 
depends upon the adequate number of railway rakes and its speedy loading and 
unloading at origin and destination points. It is, therefore, imperative for the 
Department to monitor and coordinate with Ministry of Railways ensuring availability 
of adequate number of rakes for timely and smooth movement of fertilizers from 
ports/plants to the States. It is also essential  that the indents for railway rakes are 
timely placed by the State Governments in compliance wi th monthly supply plan 
issued by the Department. Further, loading and unloading operations are facilitated in 
the minimum possible time to maintain continuous flow of rakes especially in peak 
consumption time. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a mec hanism may be 
put in place by the Department to monitor and coordinate with Ministry of Railways 
to ensure availability of adequate number of rakes for timely and smooth movement 
of fertilizers. Further, the Committee also recommend that the State Governme nts 
may also be urged to facilitate the loading/unloading operations in the minimum 
possible time. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Department in this regard." 
 
 
 
 
 

14 | P a g e  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.13 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"In this regard , it may be stated that Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & 
Farmers Welfare) (DAC&FW), Department of Fertilizers(DoF), M/o, Railways 
(Railway Board) al l State Governments & all fertilizers supplying Companies are 
closely associated with each other at every stage of fertilizers movement i.e. right 
from season-wise assessment to delivery at destinations. In the assessment stage, all 
the above stake holders  take part. Thereafter, monthly requirement and daily 
availability of rakes for smooth supply of fertilizers are monitored in close 
coordination with each other. State Govts.,  M/o Railways, DAC&FW & all Companies 
are provided  supply Plan in advance for m onthly planning. Information regarding 
daily rake movement to various destination is given in Department website. Similarly 
stock at port & its movement are also monitored on daily basis. Apart from this 
weekly Video conference (VC) is conducted jointly by  DAC&FW, DoF. M/o Railways 
(Railway Board), with all State Govts. Following the VC and feedback from Sates 
corrective measures are taken for smooth movement & adequate availability for rakes 
at all over the country. Therefore, it may be stated that all arr angement are in place 
for rake movement & availability. The system is working well. However, detention of 
rakes at some loading & unloading points is an issue which has been taken by this 
department regularly with all concerned. Secretary, DoF has already taken up the 
matter with all State Govts./companies to reduce the detention period. The situation 
is improving. In the beginning of the year the average detention period was much 
higher than the present situation. However, as desired again a letter from Se cretary 
(F) to all States Govts./ Companies has been issued emphasiging the need for reducing 
the detention period further during loading & unloading of fertilizers’ rake."  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.14 The Committee in order to ensure  timely supply and movement of fertilizers to 
the various parts of the country recommended that the a mechanism may be put 
in place by the Department to monitor and coordinate with Ministry of Railways 
to ensure availability of adequate number of rakes for  timely and smooth 
movement of fertilizers. Further, the Committee also recommended that the 
State Governments may also be urged to facilitate the loading/unloading 
operations in the minim um possible time. In its Action  Taken reply, the 
Department has stated that all arrangement are in place for rake movement and 
availability and the system is working well. However, detention of rakes at 
some loading and unloading points is an issue which has been taken by this 
department regularly with all concerned. The Secretary, DoF has already taken 
up the matter with all State Governments/ companies to reduce the detention 
period. The Committee are of the view that  the adequate number of railway 
rakes and its speedy loading and unloading at origin and destination point s are 
imperative for timely supply and movement of fertilizers to various parts of the 
country and therefore, the Committee would like the Department to actively 
pursue the matter with all the State Government s concerned/ Companies and 
ensure adequate step s are taken to ensure speedy loading and unloading  
operation of fertilizers. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken by the Department in this regard. 
 

15 | P a g e  
 
E.  Need to ensure transportation of fertilizers by the companies to the last mile i.e. 
retailer  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SL. NO.5 
 
1.15 Emphasizing the need to ensure transportation of fertilizers by the companies to the 
last mile i.e. retailer, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 TRANSPORTATION OF FERTILIZERS 
"The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers reimburse the freight subsidy 
to the fertilizer companies for delivering it to the retailer and finally to the farmers. It 
is, therefore, the responsibility of the company to transport the fertilizer to the 
retailer at any corner of the block/district. However, it has been brought to the notice 
of the Committee that certain companies are not transporting the fertilizers to the last 
mile i.e. retailer and asking the retailer to take it on its  own. The Committee feel that it 
should be the responsibility of the company to transport the fertilizers to the retailer 
and ultimately for distribution to the farmers for its usage and the Department should 
take stringent action against those companies w hich fail to transport the fertilizers to 
the retailer. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the 
Department in this regard.  
 
The Committee also note that the fertilizers are transported to the district through 
railways and t hereafter the same are transported by road from district to the retail 
shopkeepers. The Department reimburses the cost of freight to the companies. The 
Committee were informed that there is uniform freight rate for every district fixed by 
the Department. T he average distance between the district and the block is worked 
out so that the freight cost is reimbursed with uniform rate with in the district. Rate of 
freight is revised every year keeping in view in inflation in transport index. However, 
the Committe e could not understand the rationale behind working out average 
distance between the district and the blocks for payment of road freight. The 
Committee are of the view that the road freight being paid at a uniform rate 
irrespective of distance does not see m to be rationale or logical. Companies are not 
inclined to transport the fertilizers to its last destination, particularly in far flung 
areas unless they are reimbursed road freight on the 43 basis of actual distance. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend t hat the existing mechanism being followed by the 
Department for reimbursement of road transport of fertilizers from district to the 
blocks on the basis of average distance and price may be revisited so that expenses 
incurred on the basis of actual distance  of road transport are reimbursed to the 
companies as being reimbursed in the case of rail transport. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.16 In reply to the aforesa id recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
“Before the Uniform Freight Scheme (UFS)  the freight subsidy for each fertilizer units 
was different and based on a fixed freight element. For indigenous urea units, r ailway 
freight was paid on actual and the road freight on the basis of actual leads up to the 
district level (primary godowns) and a normative per KM rate.   Beyond the primary 
godowns, the secondary freight was paid on the basis of average leads and normat ive 
per KM rate. It implies that actual freight was paid up to the district level and a 
normative freight beyond that point to the block for each fertilizer units. 

16 | P a g e  
 
 
 Reasons for Uniform freight Scheme 
Under the policies before UFS, the freight subsidy for each fertilizer was different and 
mostly with a fixed freight element.   Resultantly, the manufacturers and importers 
were having a tendency to sell fertilizers in areas close to their production/import 
facilities to keep their freight expenditure within th e fixed freight element 
available.  Besides, the rising transportation costs further limited their ability to send 
fertilizers to distant/remote corners of the country.   This was resulting in temporary 
shortages in availability of fertilizers especially in remote pockets of the country.  
 
 It was evident that a fixed freight regime was not serving the objective of easy 
availability of subsidized fertilizers.   Accordingly, a proposal for a Uniform Freight 
Policy for all subsidized fertilizers was discussed i n the meeting of the Group of 
Ministers (GOM) held on 12th February, 2008 as one of the measures towards 
restructuring of fertilizer subsidy and promoting easy accessibility of subsidized 
fertilizers. The GOM supported the proposal and gave its ‘in princip le’ approval. 
Therefore, it was proposed to move towards a uniform freight subsidy regime for all 
subsidized fertilizers.  
 
  The Uniform freight policy was introduced to arrive at a working arrangement that is 
fair to the industry and meet the prime objec tive of ensuring easy availability in an 
environment of optimized distribution system. It was a simple calculation for the 
companies and the department since the district wide leads were calculated, and the 
rates were standardized. The freight was proposed to be paid on the basis of receipt of 
fertilizers in the districts as per the approved movement plan. 
 
 In addition to above, the reimbursement of actual freight rates to the urea 
manufacturing companies instead of uniform rates will also be not feasible due to the 
following: 
 
i.           There will not be uniformity in the lead distances of the particular district and 
it is likely that there would be a wide variation in the actual freight claims 
submitted by the companies which will hamper the proper & e ffective 
administration of the bills and subsequent subsidy reimbursement. The 
administration of such variety of lead distances, bill claims & subsidy 
reimbursement will require huge man power. At present, the rates and lead 
distances have been uploaded in  FMS and bills can been generated through 
system, which is easier to handle. 
 
ii.          Moreover, the per tonne per KM (PTPK) rates recommended by the Tariff 
Commission is based on the scientific study conducted by them.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.17 The Department has mentioned about Uniform Freight Scheme (UFS)  which 
they have introduced replacing Actual Freight Rates.  The Committee 
understand that Uniform Freight Scheme (UFS)  has been introduced to 
remove the anomaly under Actual Freight Rates.  The Committee are given to 
understand that Actual Freight Rates, freight subsidy for each fertilizer unit 
was different and based on fixed freight element.   For indigenous urea unit, 
railway freight was paid on actual and the road freight on the actual  lead up 
to the district level (primary godown) and normative per Kms. rate.  Beyond 
the primary godowns, the secondary freight was paid on the basis of average 

17 | P a g e  
 
leads and normative per Km. rate.  It means that actual freight was paid up 
to the district lev el and a normative freight beyond that point to the block 
for each fertilizer unit.  Resultantly, the manufacturers and importers were 
having a tendency to sell fertilizers in areas close to their production / 
import facilities to keep their freight expend iture within the fixed freight 
element available.  The Uniform Freight Scheme (UFS) is based on simple 
calculation for the companies and the Department since the district wi se 
leads have been calculated and the rates have been standardized. Beside, 
this under the erstwhile policy there was no uniformity in the lead distances 
of the particular district and there was likelihood of wide variation in the 
actual freight claims submitted by the companies resulting into hindrance in 
proper and effective administra tion of bills and subsequent subsidy 
reimbursement.  This would also require huge man power.  As per the 
Department, at present the rates and lead distances have been uploaded in 
Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) and bills can be generated through 
system.  Moreover, per ton per Km. (PTPK) rates are recommended by tariff 
commission based on scientific study conducted by them.   
 
 While acknowledging the facts submitted by the Department in favour of 
Uniform Freight Scheme (UFS) the Committee observe that un der Uniform 
Freight Scheme (UFS), the reimbursement of subsidy to companies would be 
hassle free and expeditious.  At the same time the Committee observed that 
the objective of the new scheme should not be solely for the expeditious 
disposal of subsidy bill but also to ensure the availability of the fertilizers to 
the remotest area of the district and up to block level.  They therefore, 
caution that new scheme of UFS should also support the basic objective of 
timely availability of fertilizer at the remotest area rather than changing the 
nomenclature of the scheme much to the convenience of companies and 
Department only.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that pa yment of 
subsidies to the companies should only be given when they supply the 
fertilizer at the block level. 
 
F.  Need to explore the possibilities of transport ation of fertilizers using inland 
water ways  
  
RECOMMENDATIONS SL. NO.6 
 
1.18 Emphasizing the need to explore the possibilities of transportation of fertilizers using 
inland water ways, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 MOVEMENT OF FERTILIZERS THROUGH INLAND WATER WAYS: 
The Committee further note that Department of Fertilizers has started t o experiment 
to transport fertilizers using inland water ways and the Ministry of Shipping had also 
circulated the cabinet note in this regard. The Committee feel that transportation of 
fertilizers through water ways at coastal areas would be comparatively  less costly, 
safer and environment friendly and therefore, the Department in coordination with 
Ministry of Shipping should explore all possibilities of using the inland waterways for 
transportation of fertilizer in the Country expeditiously. The Committee  would like to 
be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 

18 | P a g e  
 
1.19 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
"Department of Fertilizers conducted a trail run  for movement of fertilizer through 
National Waterway-1 (NW —1) Le. the Ganges basin stretches between Allahabad to 
Haldia where Phulpur 1FFCO urea plant (close to Allahabad) and TCL Hadia complex 
plants are located. This is an ideal situation for the mult imodal operator to take the 
advantage of cross -trade in undertaking upstream movement of complex fertilizers 
from Haldia to the states of West Bengal, Orissa, Bihar and part of UP and reverse 
movement of Phulpur urea on th e same route. However, the trai l run of fertilizers 
through NW-1 was not successful due to substantial delay (i.e. more than six months) 
in moving just one rake load each of complex fertilizers and urea up and down NW -1, 
between Haldia - Patna stretches due to poor navigability in NW -I, wat er draft 
restriction (inadequate water on NW-I), number of bends in the NW-1 between Haldia 
- Patna Sector and inadequate arrangement at the jetty points for loading or 
unloading cargo. Moreover, the trial run was expensive and Government had to 
additional expenses of about Rs. 80 Iakh on moving such a small quantity, due to 
trans-shipment, hiring of tugs, multiple handling & storage cost, poor arrangement at 
origin/ destination for loading/ unloading cargo etc. Thus the movement of fertilizers 
through inla nd waterway will be viable and economical only when the waterway is 
made navigable on the entire stretch of NW -1, with adequate water draft (at 'east 2.5 
meters), lesser bends and adequate arrangement at the jetty points for loading or 
unloading cargo. Dep artment of Fertilizers (DOF) has already adopted coastal 
shipping mode of transportation, for movement of fertilizer through coastal route in 
containers as well as break bulk vessels, admissible under the present fertilizer 
freight subsidy policy and neces sary notification to this effect was issued to all 
concerned way back during July, 2013. Thus as on date, the fertilizer companies are 
free to utilize this mode of transportation to supplement the rail & road movement, 
provided it is economical and efficie nt enough to meet the urgent requirement of 
fertilizers during peak agriculture seasons. The decontrolled complex fertilizer units 
which are import dependent are located at the Indian coastline and are exploring the 
possibility of adopting the movement of fertilizers through coastal routes. However, 
the fertilizer companies have not ventured to utilize the coastal mode of 
transportation in larger perspective. Integration of River - Sea Vessel' (RSV) for 
movement of fertilizers through coastal route to inland  water ways for reducing/ 
eliminating road bridging, multiple handling, storage etc. in reaching the fertilizers 
upto the end users in some of the States! Districts, falling on the coastline and river 
banks, would be an ideal situation for coastal movement  of fertilizers. DOF in 
consultation with Ministry of Shipping have organized meetings with the fertilizer 
companies to encourage coastal movement of fertilizers in larger scale." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.20 The Committee observed that transportation of fertilizers through water ways 
at coastal areas would be comparatively less costly, safer and environment 
friendly and therefore, the Department in coordination with Ministry of 
Shipping should explore all possibilities of using the inland waterways for  
transportation of fertilizer in the Count ry expeditiously. In its Action  Taken 
reply, the Department has stated that as on date, the fertilizer companies are 
free to utilize this mode of transportation to supplement the rail and road 
movement, provided it  is economical and efficient enough to meet the urgent 
requirement of fertilizers during peak agriculture seasons. The decontrolled 
complex fertilizer units which are import dependent are located at the Indian 

19 | P a g e  
 
coastline and are exploring the possibility of  adopting the movement of 
fertilizers through coastal routes. However, the fertilizer companies have not 
ventured to utilize the coastal mode of transportation in larger perspective. 
Integration of River - Sea Vessel' (RSV) for movement of fertilizers throu gh 
coastal route to inland water ways for reducing/ eliminating road bridging, 
multiple handling, storage etc., in reaching the fertilizers upto the end users in 
some of the States, Districts, falling on the coastline and river banks, would be 
an ideal sit uation for coastal movement of fertilizers. The Department of 
Fertilizers in consultation with Ministry of Shipping have organized meetings 
with the fertilizer companies to encourage coastal movement of fertilizers in 
larger scale. The Committee are therefore, pleased to note that the Department 
is encouraging coastal movement of fertilizers, however, desire  that sincere 
efforts in this regard should be made on the wider scale.  The Committee 
observed that Decontrolled (P & K) fertilizers which are largely imported come 
through coastal route are ideal suited for transportation through inland water 
ways as it would facilitate in reducing/ eliminating road bridging, multiple 
handling, storage etc . The Committee would like to reiterate its earlier 
recommendation that the Department in coordination with Ministry of Shipping 
should explore all possibilities of using the inland waterways for transportation 
of fertilizer in the Country.   In addition to this, Department of Fertilizers should 
also explore the possibilities of transporting through rivers in consultation with 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation. So 
that cities / towns situated near river banks can be developed as stock point s 
and fertilizers can be supplied at minimal f reight cost. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
 
G.  Need for strict monitoring of decontrolling the movement of fertilizers. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SL. NO.7 
 
1.21 Emphasizing the need  for strict monitoring of  decontrolling the Movement of 
Fertilizers, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 DECONTROL ON MOVEMENT OF FERTILIZERS 
"The Committee note that the movement of fertilizers is being decontrolled by the 
Government from April 2015.  According to the Depart ment, this will result in 
competition amongst the fertilizer companies making the fertilizers more affordable 
to farmers increasing consumption and production. However, the Committee are of 
the view that that decontrolling of movement of fertilizer may hav e its adverse effect 
as the fertilizer companies would like to go and supply fertilizers only in those areas 
which are accessible and would not be very much inclined to go to far flung and 
inaccessible areas like in hilly and north -east areas of the countr y. The Department in 
this regard explained that freight subsidy has now been merged with nutrient based 
subsidy and it is now not necessary to issue the movement plan. Earlier one company 
was asked to go to a particular area but under the decontrolled regi me, several 
companies can go to sell fertilizers at competitive rates. According to the Department, 
this will result in availability and decrease in the rates of DAP and MOP. Further, a 
separate rate of freight subsidy has been given to difficult area like  in North Eastern 
States, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu & Kashmir. Moreover, under 
Fertilizer (Movement Control) Order, 1973, the Department of Fertilizers can adopt 
legal recourse to force the companies to supply fertili zers to any particular ar ea. In 
view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that the movement of fertilizers 

20 | P a g e  
 
under the decontrolled regime may be strictly monitored ensuring availability of 
adequate quantity of fertilizers to all the farmers of the country with special attentio n 
towards remote and inaccessible areas of the country." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.22 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
"The Cabinet had accorded approval for merger of freight  subsidy with product 
subsidy in respect of P&K fertilizers under NBS Scheme.  The Cabinet decision for 
merger of freight subsidy with product subsidy was to be implemented along with 
decontrol of movement of supply plan.  However, in the process of notifi cation of the 
decision of the Cabinet, few states including Haryana and Punjab had raised the 
apprehensions that the decision will affect availability of P&K fertilizers and increase 
prices of these fertilizers. 
 
After discussions with the various States, it was decided to take up the matter with the 
Cabinet for review of the decision.  Inter Ministerial consultation, is being done and 
the matter is under consideration.  At present the existing system of separate 
payment of freight subsidy and product subsi dy and issue monthly supply plans for 
movement of P&K fertilizers are continuing." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.23 The Committee noted that the movement of fertilizers is being decontrolled by 
the Government from April 2015.  However, the Committee are of the view that 
that decontrolling of movement of fertilizer may have its adverse effect as the 
fertilizer companies would like to go and supply fertilizers only in those areas 
which are accessible and would not be very much inclined to go to far flung and 
inaccessible areas like in hilly and north -east areas of the country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommended that the  movement of fertilizers under the 
decontrolled regime may be strictly monitored ensuring availability of 
adequate quantity of fertilizers to all the farmers of the country with special 
attention towards remote and inaccessible areas of the country. In its  Action 
Taken reply, the Department has stated that  the Cabinet decision for merger of 
freight subsidy with product subsidy was to be implemented along with 
decontrol of movement of supply plan.  However, in the process of notification 
of the decision of t he Cabinet, few states including Haryana and Punjab had 
raised the apprehensions that the decision will affect availability of P&K 
fertilizers and increase prices of these fertilizers. After discussions with the 
various States, it was decided to take up th e matter with the Cabinet for review 
of the decision. Further, i nter Ministerial consultation, is being done and the 
matter is under consideration.  In view of the forgoing, the Committee strongly 
reiterate its earlier recommendation for ensuring availabili ty of adequate 
quantity of fertilizers to all the farmers in the country with special attention 
towards remote and inaccessible areas of the country and would like the 
Department to address the concerns and apprehension of all the State before 
the implementation of merger of freight subsidy with product subsidy . The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 

21 | P a g e  
 
H. Need to strengthen the monitoring mechanism and ensuring smooth movement 
of fertilizers.   
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SL. NO.8 
 
1.24 Need to strengthen the monitoring mechanism and ensuring smooth movement of 
fertilizers, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 MONITORING OF FERTIL IZERS MOVEMENT AND D IRECT SUBSIDY TO THE  
FARMERS 
"The Committee note that the movement of all major  subsidized fertilizers is 
monitored throughout the country by an online web based monitoring system 
(www.urvarak.com) which is also known as Fertilizers Monitoring System (FMS). 
With the help of this System, it is possible to track the movement of fertili zers up to 
the district level at the click of the mouse. The companies are able to use the system 
for both tracking their movement as also subsidy bill processing. The system is 
operational 24 X 7 and daily production/import data, its dispatch to the distr icts, 
receipt thereafter are captured. The Department has also developed mobile Fertilizer 
Monitoring System (mFMS) to upgrade the existing FMS to capture the availability of 
fertilizers at various points in supply chain below the district. The mFMS captur es the 
sales made by Companies and wholesalers to the retailers and also the confirmation 
of receipt by the wholesalers and retailers. It is being implemented in the phased 
manner. So far mFMS is being implemented in 2 phases, i.e. Phase -I- Information 
visibility till the retailer’s level where part subsidy is disbursed to the manufacturers 
on the basis of the information of retail acknowledgment reported in mFMS and 
Phase-II- part subsidy payment to the manufacturers on the basis of the information 
of reta iler sales of fertilizers captured in mFMS. Phase I which is made operational 
from 1st November,2012 is being rolled out through all the registered fertilizers 
manufacturers (116), wholesalers (22000) and retailers (1.90 lakhs) across the 
country. Phase I is approaching stabilization. For Phase II, it was decided to conduct 
pilot before its implementation across the country and accordingly, pilot project was 
launched in 6 districts in various States in country on 1st August 2013 with the help of 
6 Lead Fert ilizer Suppliers (LFS) of the concerned States. However, on the basis of 
feedback reports from 6 LFS, the Department has decided to discontinue Phase II pilot 
implementation as it was not found sustainable for country wide roll - out and mFMS 
Phase II has b een suspended w.e.f. April 2015. However, the Department is 
contemplating to implement a USSD (Unstructured Supplementary Service Data) 
based application in consultation with DAC to capture the sales made by retailers in 
the mFMS application. The solution being prepared by NIC for the purpose is in final 
stages of testing and will be launched soon for use by retailers. It was also informed 
that the farmers will be able to operate the new software in their local 45 languages. 
Phase III and Phase IV have been  kept on hold as per the decision taken on 6.6.13 as 
there are problems in targeting, determining entitlements and preparing beneficiary 
databases and therefore, Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) is being kept away from 
fertilizers for the moment. However, the  Committee were informed that the 
Department is working on a roadmap to capture the details/unique IDs of farmers so 
that sales data can also be captured and subsidy can be transferred to farmers’ 
accounts directly. A separate department Mission Directorat e (DBT) has been opened 
for the purpose and districts of Gujarat and Odisha are being selected to go for pilot 
project. The Committee were also informed that the Department is also exploring the 
applicability of Barcode/RFID based solutions to track end to  end movement of 
fertilizer in the entire supply chain. While taking note of the initiatives 
undertaken/contemplated by the Department to monitor movement of fertilizers as 

22 | P a g e  
 
well as to reform subsidy disbursement mechanism, the Committee recommend that 
the initiatives undertaken by the Department may be intensified and made time 
bound in coordination with State Governments to strengthen the monitoring 
mechanism ensuring timely and smooth movement of fertilizer to the farmers and 
disbursement of the benefit o f subsidy directly to the beneficiaries in a transparent 
manner at the earliest. In this regard, the Committee desire that the development of 
USSD based application to capture the sales made by retailers in the mFMS 
application may be expedited. The Commit tee hope and trust that this would help the 
farmers to get all information about the availability of fertilizers in retail shop without 
going elsewhere, in their local languages as assured by the Department during the 
course of evidence. The Committee also  recommend that the applicability of 
Barcode/RFID based solutions to track end to end movement of fertilizer in the entire 
supply chain may also be explored and expedited with in fixed time frame. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.25 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 "A brief update on the recent developments in Monitoring of Fertilizer Movement and   
Direct subsidy to Farmers: 
1. USSD based application for capture of Retailer Sale: USSD application has been 
development by NIC in consultation with DAC.  The application is being 
examined by DoF for its technical and financial feasibility to be implemented at 
retailer level. 
 
2. Tracking of Fertilizer Bags through RFID/ barcode based solution: The 
department explored feasibility to track the fertilizer bags through RFID/ 
barcode based solution. After analysis, it has emerged that the adoption of 
RFID/ barcodes in fertilizer supply  chain is cumbersome due to the multiple 
transit points in supply chain and physical handling of bags. Furthermore, the 
size and dimension of fertilizer bags is not practically suitable for barcode 
based tagging and RFID technology is costly to implement and maintain.  
 
In view of above, the Department has decided to drop the above approaches for 
extending the supply chain monitoring up to the Retailers and farmers. However, 
Department is working closely with Mission Directorate (DBT) to implement DBT in 
fertilizers." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.26 The Committee in order to strengthen the monitoring mechanism and ensuring 
smooth movement of fertilizers to the farmers recommended that the 
development of USSD (Unstructured Supplementary Service Data)  based 
application to capture the sales made by retailers in the mFMS application may 
be expedited. The Committee hope and trust that this would help the farmers to 
get all information about the availability of fertilizers in retail shop without 
going elsewhere, in their local languages as assured by the Department during 
the course of evidence. In its Actions Taken reply, the Department has stated 
that USSD application is being examined by DoF for its technical and financial 
feasibility for its implementation at retailer level.  However, Department is 
working closely with Mission Directorate to implement Direct Benefits Transfer 

23 | P a g e  
 
(DBT) in fertilizers.  In view of the foregoing,  the Committee are distressed to 
note that the USSD based application is still under consideration of the 
Department and there is no change in the status. The  Committee feel that  
implementation of USSD based application will be helpful to capture the sales 
made by retailer, therefore,  desire that the  USSD application may be 
expeditiously examined by the Department of Fertilizers. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
I. Need to curb unscrupulous activities of smuggling and black marketing of 
subsidized fertilizer its Diversion for nonagricultural purposes. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SL. NO.9 
 
1.27 Emphasizing the need to curb unscrupulous activities of Smuggling /Black marketing 
of subsidized fertilizers or its Diversion for nonagricultural purposes , the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 SMUGGLING /BLACK MARKETING OF SUBSIDI ZED FERTILIZERS OR I TS 
DIVERSION FOR NONAGRICULTURAL PURPOSES: 
"The Committee note that the prices of fertilizers in the country is substantially less as 
compared to neighbouring countries which is primarily due to grant of subsidy on 
fertilizers. As a result of this, substantial quantity of fertilizers is smuggled through 
border areas to the neighbouring counties. One of the efforts being made by the 
Department is that the demand of fertilizers of the neighbouring country is met by the 
Government which is supplied to them at full price in order to check the outgo of 
subsidized fertilizers meant for Indian farmers. As the Department has no mechanism 
in the field, letters are also being written to BSF, Coast Guards , Custom and State 
Governments time and again to check 46 smuggling of fertilizers to the neighboring 
countries. However, the Committee are not satisfied with the explanation given by the 
Department on the issue and strongly feel that simply by writing letter to the 
authorities c oncerned would not be enough to check the menace of smuggling and 
black marketing of subsidized to the neighboring countries. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that the Department, being the nodal authority, should take 
initiatives and hold regul ar meetings with all the authorities concerned including 
State Governments and they should be made responsible to check the smuggling of 
fertilizers effectively as otherwise they should face strict action under the law. 
Further, a mechanism should also be developed that where companies and dealers 
are also made responsible if they are involved in smuggling or black marketing of 
fertilizers. In this context, the Committee also desire that the Department should also 
find out the feasibility of establishing vigilance cell in every state to inspect the depots 
of companies or dealers on regular basis with a view to ensure that the fertilizers are 
being sold/supplied to the farmers and also to curb unscrupulous activities of 
smuggling and black marketing of subsid ized fertilizer. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.28 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
"Govt. of India has notified Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985 & Fertilizer (Movement 
Control) Order, 1973 under Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and all State Govts. have 

24 | P a g e  
 
been empowered to take punitive measures against the person, who indulge in 
diversion, black marketing & smuggling of fertilizers. Apart from this, Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Central Board of Excise & Customs are mandated to curb diversion & 
smuggling. Therefore, Department of Fertilizers has been writing frequently to all 
State Govts./MHA/CBE&C emphasizing the need for taking appropriate action to curb 
these illegitimate activities. Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion (DIPP) has 
been requested to identify the industries which consume urea as raw material. 
 
State Govts. have been asked to report the cases category -wise like diversion, 
smuggling & black marketing.  Report is awaited. 
 
As has been stated above DoF has from time to time writing to all Chief Secretaries, 
M/o MHA and CBEC to activate the enforcement agencies under their jurisdiction 
because they have the local machinery and wherewithal to ensure adequate 
availability of fertilizers at reasonable prices to the farmers and also to keep strict 
vigil to stop black marketing, smuggling & diversion which may not be possib le for 
DoF. 
 
Regarding establishing vigilance cell in every state to inspect the depots of companies 
of dealers on regular basis, it may be stated that under FCO,1985, all State Govts. have 
been empowered to establishing enforcement authorities for impleme ntation of 
various proviso of FCO and for taking appropriate action to curb all illegimate 
activities in respect of fertilizers." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.29 The Committee noted that in order to curb unscrupulous activities of smuggling 
and black marketing, the Department should take initiatives and hold regular 
meetings with all the authorities concerned including State Governments and 
they should be made responsible to check the smuggling of fertilizers effectively 
as otherwise they should face strict action under the law. Further, a mechanism 
should also be developed that where companies and dealers are also made 
responsible if they are involved in smuggling or black marketing of fertilizers.  
In its Actions Taken reply, the Department has stated that  Government of India 
has notified Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985 and Fertilizer (Movement Control) 
Order, 1973 under Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and all Stat e Governments 
have been empowered to take punitive measures against the person, who 
indulge in diversion, black marketing and  smuggling of fertilizers. DoF has from 
time to time writing to all Chief Secretaries, M/o MHA and CBEC to activate the 
enforcement agencies under their jurisdiction because they have the local 
machinery and wherewithal to ensure adequate availability of fertilizers at 
reasonable prices to the farmers and also to keep strict vigil to stop black 
marketing, smuggling and diversion whic h may not be possible for DoF. The 
State Governments have been asked to re port the cases category -wise like 
diversion, smuggling and black marketing  and the Report is awaited. After 
analyzing the action taken reply, the Committee are dismayed to note the a part 
from writing to Chief Secretaries of the States and other agencies, the 
Department has not taken any proactive measures to curb the instances of 
smuggling and black marketing, etc. The Committee, therefore, reiterate its 
earlier recommendation and wou ld also like the Department to take stringent 
steps in co -ordination with State Governments to curb such instances.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
  

25 | P a g e  
 
J. NEED TO ENSURE JUDICIOUS USE OF FERTILIZERS BY THE FARMERS 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SL. NO.10 
 
1.30 Emphasizing the need to ensure judicious use of fertilizers by the farmers , the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
OVER USAGE OF FERTILIZERS BY THE FARMERS: 
The Committee note with concern that the urea is being utilized by the farmers in 
excessive quantity as result of which the fertility of soil has degraded. It was brought 
to the notice of the Committee that the soil of various States like Punjab, Haryana, 
Andhra Pradesh has degraded due to over usage of urea. In this regard, the 
Department explained to the Committee that urea is being used by farmers 
extensively particularly due to the fact the urea is inexpensive as compared to 
phosphate and potash fertili zers. It is, therefore, imperative that the farmers are 
educated on this aspect for which vigorous awareness campaign needs to be launched 
through the country by the Department in consultation with all stakeholders. About 
the steps being taken by the Depar tment to check adverse effect of over usage of urea, 
the Committee were informed that Soil Health Card Scheme has been started by the 
Ministry of Agriculture from April, 2015 under which Soil Health Cards to 14 crore 
holdings will be given in three years. These cards will indicate the shortcomings of 
micro nutrients or NPK and will also contain recommendations to be followed by the 
farmers. After every three years, the Card will be renewed to get the fresh status of 
soil fertility. The Committee are of the view that soil Health Cards are absolutely 
essential to help the farmers to use the fertilizers judiciously not only for increasing 
the productivity and production of the crops but also to stop degradation of soil 
health of their 47 fields. The Committee w ere of the view that the Soil Health Card 
should also reflect various other factors like land holdings, cropped area, irrigated 
area, etc., which would help in assessment of requirement of fertilizers and also would 
be helpful in determining the entitlemen ts and preparing the data bases of the 
beneficiaries to facilitate direct payment of subsidy to the farmers. It is, therefore, 
imperative that vigorous efforts may be made to expedite the process of grant of Soil 
Health Cards to the farmers. In this regard  all the States should be urged to involve 
Agriculture universities/colleges of their State so that these Cards could be issued to 
the farmers in a time bound manner. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should pursue with Ministry of Ag riculture and States Government to 
take appropriate measures so that Soil Health Cards are issued to the farmers with in 
a targeted time frame. The Committee would like to apprised of the initiatives 
undertaken by the Department in this regard.  
 
The Commi ttee were also informed that a policy decision has been taken by the 
Department to go for 100% production of neem coated urea which will be compulsory 
for all fertilizers companies and importers as well. According to the Department, 
neem coated urea will i ncrease nitrogen efficiency and hence less demand of urea by 
the farmers. This will increase crop yield by 4 -6% and the profitability of farmers. It 
also acts as bactericide and pesticide. At the same time neem coated urea could not be 
used by industries for nonagricultural purposes. The Department has also taken steps 
to simplify the procedure for the industrialists to import urea without taking 
permission of the Department or DGF. As a result of these steps, the industrialists will 
not try to purchase ure a from farmers for nonagricultural purposes. The Committee 
were also informed that the Department gives lot of encouragement in agri extension 
activities under which demonstration about the usage of fertilizers are given in front 
of the farmers. For usage of neem coated urea, the fields of farmers are actually taken 

26 | P a g e  
 
over and utilized to demonstrate the fact that yield of the crop increases by 4 -6% by 
utilizing neem coated urea. Kishan Melas are also being organized where farmers are 
given free training as t o how to use fertilizer in a better manner. However, the 
Committee strongly feel that the steps taken by the Department are not enough as a 
large number of farmers in the entire country still remain uneducated and untrained 
in the judicious use of fertiliz ers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
sustained and vigorous awareness campaign through electronic and print media 
should be made by the Department in coordination with Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation and other stake holders. The Committe e also desire that the 
Department in coordination with State Governments should set up demonstration 
centers in each State to provide extensive training to the farmers in judicious use of 
fertilizers.   The Committee would like to be apprised of the initia tives undertaken by 
the Department in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.31 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
"Soil Health Card (SHC) scheme, launched in year 2014 -15, aims to cover all 14 crore 
holdings in the country to promote science based soil health management practices. 
Under the scheme, a total of about 2.53 crore soil samples are required to be collected 
and tested to generate about 14 crore Soil Health Cards (SHC) to individual farmers in 
a cycle of 3 years. Since the soil fertility gets changed in a time period of 3 -4 years, 
therefore, the cycle will be repeated every three years. The first cycle is plan ned to be 
completed by the end of the year 2017-18.  
 
The progress of the scheme is monitored on weekly basis through video -conference 
with the States. The States have been advised to involve KVKs and State Agricultural 
Universities/Colleges and farmer fri ends in implementation of the scheme.  Central 
funds for the financial year 2015 -16 have been released to the States. District -wise 
mapping of target and resources has been given to the States and they have been 
advised to deploy manpower for time bound implementation of the scheme. 
 
The data on land holdings, cropped area and irrigated area will also be reflected in 
Soil Health Cards which would help in assessment of requirement of fertilizers and 
preparing data base of beneficiaries.   
 
The Ministry is us ing print/electronic media to spread awareness about benefits of 
judicious use of fertilizers. Audio-Video Spot on “Judicious Use of Fertilizers’’, in Hindi 
and regional languages, is being telecast through the National and Regional channels. 
 
To educate farmers about balanced use of fertilisers, a target of 580 farmers’ trainings 
has been kept under the SHC scheme in the financial year 2015-16. 
 
IEC campaign is being planned in consultation with DAVP. Print advertisements/video 
spots/audio spots etc are be ing prepared for various schemes e.g. balanced use of 
fertilisers through SHC scheme and benefits of use of neem coated urea." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.32 In order to ensure judicious use of fertilizers, the committee recommended that 
sustained and vigorous awareness campaign through electronic and print 

27 | P a g e  
 
media should be made by the Department in coordination with Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation and other stake holders. The Committee also 
desire that the Department in coordinat ion with State Governments should set 
up demonstration centers in each State to provide extensive training to the 
farmers in judicious use of fertilizers. The Committee also recommended that 
the Department should pursue with Ministry of Agriculture and Sta tes 
Government to take appropriate measures so that Soil Health Cards are issued 
to the farmers with in a targeted time frame. The Committee further 
recommended that  the Soil Health Card should also reflect various other 
factors like land holdings, croppe d area, irrigated area, etc., which would help 
in assessment of requirement of fertilizers and also would be helpful in 
determining the entitlements and preparing the data bases of the beneficiaries 
to facilitate direct payment of subsidy to the farmers. 
 
In its Actions Taken reply, the Department has stated that the progress of the 
Soil Health Card scheme is being monitored on weekly basis through video -
conference with the States. The States have been advised to involve Krishi 
Vigyan Kendra and State Agric ultural Universities/Colleges and farmer friends 
in implementation of the scheme.  Central funds for the financial year 2015 -16 
have been released to the States. District -wise mapping of target and resources 
has been given to the States and they have been advised to deploy manpower 
for time bound implementation of the scheme. The data on land holdings, 
cropped area and irrigated area will also be reflected in Soil Health Cards which 
would help in assessment of requirement of fertilizers and preparing data b ase 
of beneficiaries. The Ministry in this regard, is using print/electronic media to 
spread awareness about benefits of judicious use of fertilizers. Audio -Video 
Spot on “Judicious Use of Fertilizers’’, in Hindi and regional languages, is being 
telecast through the National and Regional channels. To educate farmers about 
balanced use of fertilizers, a target of 580 farmers’ trainings has been kept 
under the SHC scheme in the financial year 2015-16. 
 
The Committee are pleased to know that the Department is keeping an eye on 
the progress on the SHC scheme  also using print/ electronic media to spread 
awareness about benefits of judicious use of fertilizer . However, the Committee 
are of the view that SHC s are absolutely essential to help the farmers to use 
fertilizers judiciously which will also have positive impact on the production 
and the productivity of the crops and will also reduce degradation of the soil 
health. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation that  
the Department should actively monitor the progress of the scheme and also 
ensure that the SHCs are issued to the farmers in a time bound manner. Also 
desire that the Department in coordination with State Governments should set 
up demonstration centers in each State to provide extensive training to the 
farmers on judicious use of fertilizers. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.  

28 | P a g e  
 
                                                                             CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
A.   Need to ensure realistic assessment of fertilizers required by the States   
 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. Nos.1 & 2 
 
2.1 Emphasizing the need to ensure realistic assessment of fertilizers, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 
A. FERTILIZER ASSESSMENT 
"The Committee note that on an average about 30 to 32 MMT of urea is required 
annually to meet the requirement of the farmers. Annual requirement of DAP and NPK 
is about 10 MMT each and that of MOP is about 3 MMT. The domestic production of 
DAP and NPK is about 4 MMT and 7 MMT respectively. There is no domestic 
production of MOP. The country is 90% import dependent for P&K fertilizers either in 
finished form or raw material. The assessment of the requirement of fertilizers i.e. 
Urea, DAP, MOP and NPK for ea ch season is finalized by Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation (DAC) in consultation with Department of Fertilizers, States, 
Railways, Fertilizers Association of India, Companies and other Stake holders. For this 
purpose, biannual Zonal Conferences are held before start of each cropping season i.e. 
Kharif (April to September) and Rabi (October to March). The country is divided into 
five zones based on geographical location namely North, South, West, East and North -
East in the context of Biannual Zonal Conferences. Before Zonal Conference, the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers advises States that detailed consultations should 
be done with Lead Fertilizer suppliers, farmers, Panchayat/Block Samitis etc. while 
computing the requirement of fertilizers. According to the Department, the 
requirement of fertilizers depends upon many factors such as cropping pattern, 
cropped area, requirement of nutrients in soil as per soil health status & 
recommended doses, irrigated area, consumption pattern etc. Informati on in respect 
of cropped area, irrigated area, cropping pattern is compiled by States at the level of 
block and information regarding requirement of nutrients as per soil health status etc 
is compiled by the States Government at the level of Districts. Acc ordingly, 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) has devised various 
formats/proforma and these proforma are circulated to States before Zonal 
Conference. States compile their data as per the parameters/details defined in these 
proforma and project the requirement of fertilizers. Thereafter, the requirement is 
finalized in these Zonal Conferences in consultation with stakeholders namely States, 
Department of Fertilizers, Lead Fertilizer Suppliers, Fertilizer Association of India 
(FAI) and NIC. It has  also been informed that Agro scientists of Indian Council of 
Agriculture Research (ICAR) are involved in the process of assessment of requirement 
of fertilizers. So far, the detailed examination of requirement of fertilizers based on 
requirement of nutrie nts as per soil health status and recommended doses has been 
carried out in consultation with ICAR for high fertilizer consuming states namely 
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pra desh. Outcome of the said examination is taken 
in to account while finalizing the requirement of fertilizers of these states. Similar 

29 | P a g e  
 
exercise is also being conducted for another five states namely Jharkhand, Odisha, 
Bihar, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu.  
 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee observed that it would be essential that the 
data furnished by the States as per Performa devised by the DAC to project the 
requirement of fertilizers by the States reflects the ground realities and therefore, it 
would be essential that data furnished by the States are thoroughly examined by the 
Department with a view to ensure realistic assessment of requirement of fertilizers by 
the States . If felt necessary the Performa devised for the purpose could be further 
revised on the basis of the experience gained over the years. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that all the issues/factors relating to computation of requirement of 
fertilizers may be thoroughly and meticulously examined/deliberated by the 
Department in consult ation with all concerned in zonal conferences held for the 
purpose.  
 
The Committee further observed that attempts are being made to assess the 
requirement of fertilizers in a scientific and realistic manner. Agro -scientists of ICAR 
are also being involved  in the process of assessment of requirement of fertilizers. 
However, the fact remains that the several states of the country still remain 
uncovered by the Agro scientists for assessment of requirement of fertilizers as per 
soil health status. In the absen ce of soil health status in respect of large number of 
States, the Committee are of the view that it would be difficult to compute the actual 
requirement of nutrients for various crops. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that exercise undertaken by the Ag ro scientists may be intensified for all the States of 
the country in order to get relevant and accurate information about the nutrients 
based soil health status to arrive at accurate demand of the fertilizers in the country. 
Further, the Committee would l ike to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the 
Department in this regard." 
 
B.       Assessed  requirement  and consumption of Fertilizers  
The examination of last three years data furnished by the Department to the 
Committee revealed that there was consistent gap between Sale (consumption) and 
assessed requirements of fertilizers. As for illustration, during Kharif 2014, the 
projected requirement of urea was 146.60 LMT against which the actual consumption 
(sale) was only 139.97 LMT. For Rabi 2014 -15, while the projected requirement of 
urea was 160.11 LMT, the actual consumption (sale) was 168.79 LMT. Further, the 
projected requirement of DAP, MOP and NPK for Kharif 2014 was 48.07 LMT, 14.85 
LMT and 49.60 LMT respectively against which the actual consumption (sale) was 
37.05 LMT , 14.12 LMT and 38.92 LMT 40 respectively. For Rabi 2014 -15, the 
projected requirement of DAP, MOP and NPK was 47.87 L MT, 15.41 LMT and 50.22 
LMT respectively against which the actual consumption (sale) of fertilizers was 38.53 
LMT, 13.68 LMT and 47.06 LMT respectively. All these figures clearly shows that there 
is variation in actual consumption figures of major fertiliz ers vis -a-vis the projected 
requirement. In fact it has been found that by and large, the actual consumption (sale) 
of fertilizers is considerably less than the projected requirement of fertilizers. This 
clearly reveals that the existing methodology adopte d for assessment of fertilizers is 
not meticulous and scientific and still needs further improvement. The Committee are 
not convinced with the explanation of the Department that the assessment of demand 
for fertilizers by the States is generally on safer s ide and hence there is a tendency to 
over estimation. The assessed demand for fertilizers is based on ideal conditions 
whereas due to changes in actual sown area, pattern of rainfall and other conditions 
prevailing during the season, the demand changes. Ac cording to the Department, the 

30 | P a g e  
 
seasonal projection of demand, availability and sales always remain at satisfactory 
level. But there may be a minor deviation in actual sales of fertilizers month -wise 
against the availability and assessed demand. However, on  close scrutiny of minutes 
of the zonal conference by the Committee reveals that the projected requirement of 
fertilizers by the States is primarily based on the trend of consumption of fertilizers 
against the requirement during the past three years which is certainly not the prudent 
way of computing the projected requirement of fertilizers by the States. Needless to 
say, it is absolutely essential that the requirement of fertilizers is computed as 
accurately as possible. Any variation in the projection of requirement of fertilizers 
may upset the whole process of planning involved in production, import, transport 
and timely distribution of fertilsers to the farmers and ultimately may adversely affect 
the agriculture productivity of the country. On the contra ry, if the demand is over 
estimated, the same may force the Government to go for unnecessary import of 
fertilizers and in the process, the same may result in outgo of precious foreign 
exchange. In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that methodo logy 
being adopted for computing requirement of fertilizers of various States may be 
comprehensively reviewed and a methodology based on scientific approach may be 
adopted for realistic assessment of requirement of fertilizers. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard.  
 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
2.3 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 "1. The requirement of fertilizer s is governed by various factors viz. types of crop, 
area under the crops, soil health/fertility status. The general recommended doses of 
fertilizers per unit area basis (generally kg/hectare) are formulated for every crop by 
State Agriculture Universities /Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR) 
institutes depending on the soil health/fertility status. (In other words, the 
recommended dose for a particular crop sown in soil having low fertility status will be 
different in soils having medium/high fertility). The total requirement of fertilizers for 
a particular crop is then worked out by multiplying the recommended dose with the 
total area under the said crop.  
 
 This Ministry requested ICAR to carry out the detailed analysis of the requirement of 
fertilizers based on recommended dosages for all the major fertilizer consuming 
States namely Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,  Odisha, 
Jharkhand, West Bengal.  
 
 Ideally, the requirement of fertilizers shall be as per recommended doses. However, 
while assessing the requirement of fertilizers for a state, the consumption 
trend/capacity of the state in previous seasons is also taken in to account.  If the 
consumption in previous seasons is more than the recommended dose, then the 
requirement should be ideally restricted up to the recommended quantity. If the 
consumption is less than the recommended dose, the consumption shall be increased 
up to the recommended  quantity to arrive at the required quantity. It is also a matter 
of fact that the consumption of fertilizers is also governed by the financial capacity of 
the farmers and hence, cannot be increased suddenly.  Therefore, the consumption 
trend in previous s easons also becomes one of the important factors while assessing 
the requirement of fertilizers. 

31 | P a g e  
 
 
The proformas for assessment of requirement of fertilizers have been devised by this 
Ministry by taking into account all the above said factors. Agro scientis ts of ICAR are 
also involved in the process of assessment of requirement of fertilizers. 
 
2. In case of P&K (DAP, MOP and NPK etc.) fertilizers, high prices P&K fertilizers 
may be one of the major reasons for actual consumption being less than the assessed  
requirement rather than the deficiency in the adopted methodology. 
 
It may also be pertinent to mention here that in case of P&K fertilizers, the assessed 
requirement is already being kept less than the recommended quantities keeping in 
view of the above stated fact. 
 
3. To promote soil test based judicious use of fertilizers, Government of India has 
launched Soil Health Card (SHC) scheme in the year 2015 -16. The guidelines of the 
scheme have been prepared in consultation with the scientists of ICAR. Under the 
scheme, the soil samples will be collected from a grid of 2.5 hectare in irrigated area 
and 10 ha in rainfed area. The soil samples will be tested for 12 parameters namely 
primary (NPK) nutrients, secondary (S) nutrient, micro nutrients (B, Zn, Mn, Fe & Cu), 
and others (pH, EC & Organic Carbon). Based on the analysis of soil samples, the Soil 
Health Cards containing information on fertiliser recommendations will be generated 
for all the 14 crore landholdings in the country. 
 
For implementation of the scheme, Soil Healt h Card portal in consultation with ICAR 
scientists has also been developed. The test results of the soil samples will be entered 
in the portal. State -wise Soil Test-Crop Response (STCR) formulae developed by ICAR 
or crop -wise General Fertilizer Recommendat ions (GFR) will also be entered in the 
portal.  Based on the soil test results and STCR formulae/GFR, fertilizer 
recommendations will be calculated by the system automatically. 
 
Since the soil fertility gets changed in a time period of 3-4 years, therefore, the cycle of 
issue of SHCs will be repeated every three years. The first cycle of issue of SHCs has 
been planned to be completed by the end of the year 2017-18.  
 
The data on landholding -wise fertilizer recommendations, available in the portal, 
would be utilized to project the state -wise total requirement of fertilizers. This will 
lead to more precise and realistic assessment of requirement of fertilizers based on 
scientific methodology." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 and 1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
C.  Need to ensure availability of adequate no. of rakes for movement of fertilizers, 
the Committee had recommended as under 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No.4 
 
3.3 Emphasizing the need to ensure availability of adequate no. of rakes for movement of 
fertilizers, the Committee had recommended as under:-  

32 | P a g e  
 
 AVAILABILITY OF RAKES FOR MOVEMENT OF FERTILIZERS: 
"The Committee were further informed that on an average, 45 rakes per day are 
required for movement of fertilizers including imported fer tilizers. However, loading 
and unloading time in most of the States is much more than the stipulated time of 9 to 
10 hours as pointed by the Ministry of Railways during the zonal conference held for 
assessment of requirement of fertilizers for Kharif 2015.  The Committee feel that the 
timely supply and movement of fertilizers to the various parts of the country largely 
depends upon the adequate number of railway rakes and its speedy loading and 
unloading at origin and destination points. It is, therefore, im perative for the 
Department to monitor and coordinate with Ministry of Railways ensuring availability 
of adequate number of rakes for timely and smooth movement of fertilizers from 
ports/plants to the States. It is also essential that the indents for railw ay rakes are 
timely placed by the State Governments in compliance with monthly supply plan 
issued by the Department. Further, loading and unloading operations are facilitated in 
the minimum possible time to maintain continuous flow of rakes especially in p eak 
consumption time. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a mechanism may be 
put in place by the Department to monitor and coordinate with Ministry of Railways 
to ensure availability of adequate number of rakes for timely and smooth movement 
of fertil izers. Further, the Committee also recommend that the State Governments 
may also be urged to facilitate the loading/unloading operations in the minimum 
possible time. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Department in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.4 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
"In this regard , it may be stated that Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & 
Farmers Welfare) (DAC&FW), De partment of Fertilizers(DoF), M/o, Railways 
(Railway Board) all State Governments & all fertilizers supplying Companies are 
closely associated with each other at every stage of fertilizers movement i.e. right 
from season-wise assessment to delivery at dest inations. In the assessment stage, all 
the above stake holders take part. Thereafter, monthly requirement and daily 
availability of rakes for smooth supply of fertilizers are monitored in close 
coordination with each other. State Govts.,  M/o Railways, DAC &FW & all Companies 
are provided  supply Plan in advance for monthly planning. Information regarding 
daily rake movement to various destination is given in Department website. Similarly 
stock at port & its movement are also monitored on daily basis. Apart from this 
weekly Video conference (VC) is conducted jointly by DAC&FW, DoF. M/o Railways 
(Railway Board), with all State Govts. Following the VC and feedback from Sates 
corrective measures are taken for smooth movement & adequate availability for rakes 
at all over the country. Therefore, it may be stated that all arrangement are in place 
for rake movement & availability. The system is working well. However, detention of 
rakes at some loading & unloading points is an issue which has been taken by this 
department regularly with all concerned. Secretary, DoF has already taken up the 
matter with all State Govts./companies to reduce the detention period. The situation 
is improving. In the beginning of the year the average detention period was much 
higher than the  present situation. However, as desired again a letter from Secretary 
(F) to all States Govts./ Companies has been issued emphasiging the need for reducing 
the detention period further during loading & unloading of fertilizers’ rake."  
  

33 | P a g e  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
D.  Need to ensure transportation of fertilizers by the companies to the last mile i.e. 
retailer  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SL. NO.5 
 
2.5 Emphasizing the need to ensure transportation of fertilizers by the companies to the 
last mile i.e. retailer, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 TRANSPORTATION OF FERTILIZERS 
"The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers reimburse the freight subsidy 
to the fertilizer companies for delivering it to t he retailer and finally to the farmers. It 
is, therefore, the responsibility of the company to transport the fertilizer to the 
retailer at any corner of the block/district. However, it has been brought to the notice 
of the Committee that certain companies are not transporting the fertilizers to the last 
mile i.e. retailer and asking the retailer to take it on its own. The Committee feel that it 
should be the responsibility of the company to transport the fertilizers to the retailer 
and ultimately for distribution to the farmers for its usage and the Department should 
take stringent action against those companies which fail to transport the fertilizers to 
the retailer. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the 
Department in this regard.  
 
The Committee also note that the fertilizers are transported to the district through 
railways and thereafter the same are transported by road from district to the retail 
shopkeepers. The Department reimburses the cost of freight to the companies.  The 
Committee were informed that there is uniform freight rate for every district fixed by 
the Department. The average distance between the district and the block is worked 
out so that the freight cost is reimbursed with uniform rate with in the district.  Rate of 
freight is revised every year keeping in view in inflation in transport index. However, 
the Committee could not understand the rationale behind working out average 
distance between the district and the blocks for payment of road freight. The 
Committee are of the view that the road freight being paid at a uniform rate 
irrespective of distance does not seem to be rationale or logical. Companies are not 
inclined to transport the fertilizers to its last destination, particularly in far flung 
areas unless they are reimbursed road freight on the 43 basis of actual distance. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the existing mechanism being followed by the 
Department for reimbursement of road transport of fertilizers from district to the 
blocks on the b asis of average distance and price may be revisited so that expenses 
incurred on the basis of actual distance of road transport are reimbursed to the 
companies as being reimbursed in the case of rail transport. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.6 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
“Before the Uniform Freight Scheme (UFS)  the freight subsidy for each fertilizer units 
was different and based on a fixed freight element. For indigenous urea units, railway 
freight was paid on actual and the road freight on the basis of actual leads up to the 

34 | P a g e  
 
district level (primary godowns) and  a normative per KM rate.   Beyond the primary 
godowns, the secondary freight was paid on the basis of average leads and normative 
per KM rate. It implies that actual freight was paid up to the district level and a 
normative freight beyond that point to the block for each fertilizer units. 
 
 Reasons for Uniform freight Scheme 
Under the policies before UFS, the freight subsidy for each fertilizer was different and 
mostly with a fixed freight element.   Resultantly, the manufacturers and importers 
were having a  tendency to sell fertilizers in areas close to their production/import 
facilities to keep their freight expenditure within the fixed freight element 
available.  Besides, the rising transportation costs further limited their ability to send 
fertilizers to distant/remote corners of the country.   This was resulting in temporary 
shortages in availability of fertilizers especially in remote pockets of the country.  
 
 It was evident that a fixed freight regime was not serving the objective of easy 
availability o f subsidized fertilizers.   Accordingly, a proposal for a Uniform Freight 
Policy for all subsidized fertilizers was discussed in the meeting of the Group of 
Ministers (GOM) held on 12th February, 2008 as one of the measures towards 
restructuring of fertiliz er subsidy and promoting easy accessibility of subsidized 
fertilizers. The GOM supported the proposal and gave its ‘in principle’ approval. 
Therefore, it was proposed to move towards a uniform freight subsidy regime for all 
subsidized fertilizers.  
 
  The Uniform freight policy was introduced to arrive at a working arrangement that is 
fair to the industry and meet the prime objective of ensuring easy availability in an 
environment of optimized distribution system. It was a simple calculation for the 
companies and the department since the district wide leads were calculated, and the 
rates were standardized. The freight was proposed to be paid on the basis of receipt of 
fertilizers in the districts as per the approved movement plan. 
 
 In addition to above, the  reimbursement of actual freight rates to the urea 
manufacturing companies instead of uniform rates will also be not feasible due to the 
following: 
 
i.           There will not be uniformity in the lead distances of the particular district and 
it is likely  that there would be a wide variation in the actual freight claims 
submitted by the companies which will hamper the proper & effective 
administration of the bills and subsequent subsidy reimbursement. The 
administration of such variety of lead distances, b ill claims & subsidy 
reimbursement will require huge man power. At present, the rates and lead 
distances have been uploaded in FMS and bills can been generated through 
system, which is easier to handle. 
 
ii.          Moreover, the per tonne per KM (PTPK) r ates recommended by the Tariff 
Commission is based on the scientific study conducted by them.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  

35 | P a g e  
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY  
 
-- NIL-- 
  

36 | P a g e  
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
A. NEED TO ENSURE JUDICIOUS USE OF FERTILIZERS BY THE FARMERS 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SL. NO.10 
 
1.30 Emphasizing the need to ensure judicious use of fertilizers by the farmers, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
OVER USAGE OF FERTILIZERS BY THE FARMERS: 
The Committee note with concern that the urea is being utilized by the farmers in 
excessive quantity as result of which the fertility of soil has degraded. It was brought 
to the notice of the Committee that the soil of various States like Punjab, Haryana, 
Andhra Pradesh has degraded due to over usage of urea. In this regard, the 
Department explained to the Committee that urea is being used by farmers 
extensively particularly due to the fact the urea is inexpensive as compared to 
phosphate and potash fertili zers. It is, therefore, imperative that the farmers are 
educated on this aspect for which vigorous awareness campaign needs to be launched 
through the country by the Department in consultation with all stakeholders. About 
the steps being taken by the Depar tment to check adverse effect of over usage of urea, 
the Committee were informed that Soil Health Card Scheme has been started by the 
Ministry of Agriculture from April, 2015 under which Soil Health Cards to 14 crore 
holdings will be given in three years. These cards will indicate the shortcomings of 
micro nutrients or NPK and will also contain recommendations to be followed by the 
farmers. After every three years, the Card will be renewed to get the fresh status of 
soil fertility. The Committee are of the view that soil Health Cards are absolutely 
essential to help the farmers to use the fertilizers judiciously not only for increasing 
the productivity and production of the crops but also to stop degradation of soil 
health of their 47 fields. The Committee w ere of the view that the Soil Health Card 
should also reflect various other factors like land holdings, cropped area, irrigated 
area, etc., which would help in assessment of requirement of fertilizers and also would 
be helpful in determining the entitlemen ts and preparing the data bases of the 
beneficiaries to facilitate direct payment of subsidy to the farmers. It is, therefore, 
imperative that vigorous efforts may be made to expedite the process of grant of Soil 
Health Cards to the farmers. In this regard  all the States should be urged to involve 
Agriculture universities/colleges of their State so that these Cards could be issued to 
the farmers in a time bound manner. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should pursue with Ministry of Ag riculture and States Government to 
take appropriate measures so that Soil Health Cards are issued to the farmers with in 
a targeted time frame. The Committee would like to apprised of the initiatives 
undertaken by the Department in this regard.  
 
The Commi ttee were also informed that a policy decision has been taken by the 
Department to go for 100% production of neem coated urea which will be compulsory 
for all fertilizers companies and importers as well. According to the Department, 
neem coated urea will i ncrease nitrogen efficiency and hence less demand of urea by 
the farmers. This will increase crop yield by 4 -6% and the profitability of farmers. It 
also acts as bactericide and pesticide. At the same time neem coated urea could not be 
used by industries for nonagricultural purposes. The Department has also taken steps 

37 | P a g e  
 
to simplify the procedure for the industrialists to import urea without taking 
permission of the Department or DGF. As a result of these steps, the industrialists will 
not try to purchase ure a from farmers for nonagricultural purposes. The Committee 
were also informed that the Department gives lot of encouragement in agri extension 
activities under which demonstration about the usage of fertilizers are given in front 
of the farmers. For usage of neem coated urea, the fields of farmers are actually taken 
over and utilized to demonstrate the fact that yield of the crop increases by 4 -6% by 
utilizing neem coated urea. Kishan Melas are also being organized where farmers are 
given free training as t o how to use fertilizer in a better manner. However, the 
Committee strongly feel that the steps taken by the Department are not enough as a 
large number of farmers in the entire country still remain uneducated and untrained 
in the judicious use of fertiliz ers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
sustained and vigorous awareness campaign through electronic and print media 
should be made by the Department in coordination with Department of Agriculture 
and Cooperation and other stake holders. The Committe e also desire that the 
Department in coordination with State Governments should set up demonstration 
centers in each State to provide extensive training to the farmers in judicious use of 
fertilizers.   The Committee would like to be apprised of the initia tives undertaken by 
the Department in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.31 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
"Soil Health Card (SHC) scheme, launched in year 2014 -15, aims to cover all 14 crore 
holdings in the country to promote science based soil health management practices. 
Under the scheme, a total of about 2.53 crore soil samples are required to be collected 
and tested to generate about 14 crore Soil Health Cards (SHC)  to individual farmers in 
a cycle of 3 years. Since the soil fertility gets changed in a time period of 3 -4 years, 
therefore, the cycle will be repeated every three years. The first cycle is planned to be 
completed by the end of the year 2017-18.  
 
The progress of the scheme is monitored on weekly basis through video -conference 
with the States. The States have been advised to involve KVKs and State Agricultural 
Universities/Colleges and farmer friends in implementation of the scheme.  Central 
funds for the financial year 2015 -16 have been released to the States. District -wise 
mapping of target and resources has been given to the States and they have been 
advised to deploy manpower for time bound implementation of the scheme. 
 
The data on land holdings, cropp ed area and irrigated area will also be reflected in 
Soil Health Cards which would help in assessment of requirement of fertilizers and 
preparing data base of beneficiaries.   
 
The Ministry is using print/electronic media to spread awareness about benefits  of 
judicious use of fertilizers. Audio-Video Spot on “Judicious Use of Fertilizers’’, in Hindi 
and regional languages, is being telecast through the National and Regional channels. 
 
To educate farmers about balanced use of fertilisers, a target of 580 far mers’ trainings 
has been kept under the SHC scheme in the financial year 2015-16. 
 

38 | P a g e  
 
IEC campaign is being planned in consultation with DAVP. Print advertisements/video 
spots/audio spots etc are being prepared for various schemes e.g. balanced use of 
fertilisers through SHC scheme and benefits of use of neem coated urea." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.32 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  
  

39 | P a g e  
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH  FINAL REPLIES  OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
A. Need to ensure sealing of trucks transporting fertilizers to avoid any chance of 
pilferage. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS Sl. No.3 
 
5.1 Emphasizing the need for sealing of trucks transporting fertilizers , the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
SUPPLY PLAN /MOVEMENT OF FERTILIZERS: 
"The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers prepares agreed monthly 
supply plan of all the fertilizers in consultation with the manufacturers and importers 
as  per Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985 (FCO). However, as per Fertilizer (Movement 
Control) Order,1973, the Department of Fertilizers is empowered to direct fertilizer 
suppliers to supply their 50% of Urea, 20% of Phosphatic and Potassic fertilizers 
(P&K) produced or imported in India to any particular area. The agreed monthly 
supply plan is  generally issued before 25th of each month for the next month. The 
fertilizers are mainly transported through railways and for this purpose directions are 
issued to all suppliers to maintain 80:20 ratio i.e. 80% of the total quantity to be 
moved through r ailways and 20 % by road. The guideline for maintaining rail/road 
coefficient of 80:20 for urea is for reduction in cost of transportation as the cost of 
transportation by rail is substantially lower than the cost of transportation by road. 
However, road m ovement is permitted up to 500 Kms keeping in view the local 
requirements. However, this guideline is not area specific and is not strictly adhered 
to for the sake of equal distribution of fertilizers at every corner of the country. 
During the course of ev idence, the Committee were informed that while railway 
wagons transporting fertilizers are completely sealed, trucks transporting fertilizers 
are not sealed and the same are covered simply by tarpaulin which are tied by ropes. 
The Committee are not convinc ed with the explanation of the Department that 
quantity supplied by road is too less to pilferage. The Committee apprehend that in 
the absence of any seal on trucks transporting fertilizers may lead to pilferage or 
cause adulteration of fertilizers on the way by unscrupulous elements. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the trucks transporting fertilizers may also be 
sealed as per the procedure being followed in the context of railway wagons, to avoid 
any chance of pilferage or adulteration of fertiliz ers on the way to its destination by 
unscrupulous elements. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
by the Department in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.2 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Departme nt of 
Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 "As desired, all Companies supplying fertilizers have been requested to work out the 
modalities for sealing the trucks transporting fertilizers." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

40 | P a g e  
 
 
  
B.  Need to explore the possibilities of transportation of fertilizers using inland 
water ways  
  
RECOMMENDATIONS SL. NO.6 
 
5.3 Emphasizing the need to explore the possibilities of transportation of fertilizers using 
inland water ways, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 MOVEMENT OF FERTILIZERS THROUGH INLAND WATER WAYS: 
The Committee further note that Department of Fertilizers has started to experiment 
to transport fertilizers using inland water ways and the Ministry of Shipping had also 
circulated the cabinet note in this regard. The Committee feel that transportation of  
fertilizers through water ways at coastal areas would be comparatively less costly, 
safer and environment friendly and therefore, the Department in coordination with 
Ministry of Shipping should explore all possibilities of using the inland waterways for 
transportation of fertilizer in the Country expeditiously. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the progress made in this regard.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.4 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
"Department of Fertilizers conducted a trail run for movement of fertilizer through 
National Waterway-1 (NW —1) Le. the Ganges basin stretches between Allahabad to 
Haldia where Phulpur 1FFCO urea plant (close to Allahabad) and TCL Had ia complex 
plants are located. This is an ideal situation for the multimodal operator to take the 
advantage of cross -trade in undertaking upstream movement of complex fertilizers 
from Haldia to the states of West Bengal, Orissa, Bihar and part of UP and re verse 
movement of Phulpur urea on th e same route. However, the trail  run of fertilizers 
through NW-1 was not successful due to substantial delay (i.e. more than six months) 
in moving just one rake load each of complex fertilizers and urea up and down NW -1, 
between Haldia - Patna stretches due to poor navigability in NW -I, water draft 
restriction (inadequate water on NW-I), number of bends in the NW-1 between Haldia 
- Patna Sector and inadequate arrangement at the jetty points for loading or 
unloading cargo. Moreover, the trial run was expensive and Government had to 
additional expenses of about Rs. 80 Iakh on moving such a small quantity, due to 
trans-shipment, hiring of tugs, multiple handling & storage cost, poor arrangement at 
origin/ destination for loading/ unloading cargo etc. Thus the movement of fertilizers 
through inland waterway will be viable and economical only when the waterway is 
made navigable on the entire stretch of NW -1, with adequate water draft (at 'east 2.5 
meters), lesser bends and adequa te arrangement at the jetty points for loading or 
unloading cargo. Department of Fertilizers (DOF) has already adopted coastal 
shipping mode of transportation, for movement of fertilizer through coastal route in 
containers as well as break bulk vessels, ad missible under the present fertilizer 
freight subsidy policy and necessary notification to this effect was issued to all 
concerned way back during July, 2013. Thus as on date, the fertilizer companies are 
free to utilize this mode of transportation to supp lement the rail & road movement, 
provided it is economical and efficient enough to meet the urgent requirement of 
fertilizers during peak agriculture seasons. The decontrolled complex fertilizer units 
which are import dependent are located at the Indian co astline and are exploring the 

41 | P a g e  
 
possibility of adopting the movement of fertilizers through coastal routes. However, 
the fertilizer companies have not ventured to utilize the coastal mode of 
transportation in larger perspective. Integration of River - Sea Ves sel' (RSV) for 
movement of fertilizers through coastal route to inland water ways for reducing/ 
eliminating road bridging, multiple handling, storage etc. in reaching the fertilizers 
upto the end users in some of the States! Districts, falling on the coast line and river 
banks, would be an ideal situation for coastal movement of fertilizers. DOF in 
consultation with Ministry of Shipping have organized meetings with the fertilizer 
companies to encourage coastal movement of fertilizers in larger scale." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
C.  Need for strict monitoring of decontrolling the movement of fertilizers. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SL. NO.7 
 
5.5 Emphasizing the need for strict monitoring of decontrolling the Movement of 
Fertilizers, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 DECONTROL ON MOVEMENT OF FERTILIZERS 
"The Committee note that the movement of fertilizers is being decontrolled by the 
Government from April 2015.  According to the Department, this will re sult in 
competition amongst the fertilizer companies making the fertilizers more affordable 
to farmers increasing consumption and production. However, the Committee are of 
the view that that decontrolling of movement of fertilizer may have its adverse effe ct 
as the fertilizer companies would like to go and supply fertilizers only in those areas 
which are accessible and would not be very much inclined to go to far flung and 
inaccessible areas like in hilly and north -east areas of the country. The Department in 
this regard explained that freight subsidy has now been merged with nutrient based 
subsidy and it is now not necessary to issue the movement plan. Earlier one company 
was asked to go to a particular area but under the decontrolled regime, several 
companies can go to sell fertilizers at competitive rates. According to the Department, 
this will result in availability and decrease in the rates of DAP and MOP. Further, a 
separate rate of freight subsidy has been given to difficult area like in North Eastern 
States, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Jammu & Kashmir. Moreover, under 
Fertilizer (Movement Control) Order, 1973, the Department of Fertilizers can adopt 
legal recourse to force the companies to supply fertili zers to any particular area. In 
view of the  foregoing, the Committee recommend that the movement of fertilizers 
under the decontrolled regime may be strictly monitored ensuring availability of 
adequate quantity of fertilizers to all the farmers of the country with special attention 
towards remote and inaccessible areas of the country." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.6 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
"The Cabinet had accorded approval for merger of freight subsidy with product 
subsidy in respect of P&K fertilizers under NBS Scheme.  The Cabinet decision for 
merger of freight subsidy with product subsidy was to be implemented along with 
decontrol of movement of supply plan.  However, in the process of notification of the 

42 | P a g e  
 
decision of the Cabinet, few states including Haryana and Punjab had raised the 
apprehensions that the decision will affect availability of P&K fertilizers and increase 
prices of these fertilizers. 
 
After discussions with the various States, it was decided to take up the matter with the 
Cabinet for review of the decision.  Inter Ministerial consultation, is being done and 
the matter is under consideration.  At present the existing system of separate 
payment of freight subsidy and product subsidy and issue monthly supply plans for 
movement of P&K fertilizers are continuing." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  
D. Need to strengthen the monitoring mechanism and ensuring smooth movement 
of fertilizers.   
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SL. NO.8 
 
5.7 Need to strengthen the monitoring mechanism and ensuring smooth movement of 
fertilizers, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 MONITORING OF FERTIL IZERS MOVEMENT AND DIRECT SUBSIDY TO THE 
FARMERS 
"The Committee note that the movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is 
monitored throughout the country by an online web based monitoring system 
(www.urvarak.com) which is also known as Fertilizers Monitorin g System (FMS). 
With the help of this System, it is possible to track the movement of fertilizers up to 
the district level at the click of the mouse. The companies are able to use the system 
for both tracking their movement as also subsidy bill processing.  The system is 
operational 24 X 7 and daily production/import data, its dispatch to the districts, 
receipt thereafter are captured. The Department has also developed mobile Fertilizer 
Monitoring System (mFMS) to upgrade the existing FMS to capture the avai lability of 
fertilizers at various points in supply chain below the district. The mFMS captures the 
sales made by Companies and wholesalers to the retailers and also the confirmation 
of receipt by the wholesalers and retailers. It is being implemented in t he phased 
manner. So far mFMS is being implemented in 2 phases, i.e. Phase -I- Information 
visibility till the retailer’s level where part subsidy is disbursed to the manufacturers 
on the basis of the information of retail acknowledgment reported in mFMS an d 
Phase-II- part subsidy payment to the manufacturers on the basis of the information 
of retailer sales of fertilizers captured in mFMS. Phase I which is made operational 
from 1st November,2012 is being rolled out through all the registered fertilizers 
manufacturers (116), wholesalers (22000) and retailers (1.90 lakhs) across the 
country. Phase I is approaching stabilization. For Phase II, it was decided to conduct 
pilot before its implementation across the country and accordingly, pilot project was 
launched in 6 districts in various States in country on 1st August 2013 with the help of 
6 Lead Fertilizer Suppliers (LFS) of the concerned States. However, on the basis of 
feedback reports from 6 LFS, the Department has decided to discontinue Phase II pilot 
implementation as it was not found sustainable for country wide roll - out and mFMS 
Phase II has been suspended w.e.f. April 2015. However, the Department is 
contemplating to implement a USSD (Unstructured Supplementary Service Data) 
based application in consul tation with DAC to capture the sales made by retailers in 

43 | P a g e  
 
the mFMS application. The solution being prepared by NIC for the purpose is in final 
stages of testing and will be launched soon for use by retailers. It was also informed 
that the farmers will be a ble to operate the new software in their local 45 languages. 
Phase III and Phase IV have been kept on hold as per the decision taken on 6.6.13 as 
there are problems in targeting, determining entitlements and preparing beneficiary 
databases and therefore, D irect Benefit Transfer (DBT) is being kept away from 
fertilizers for the moment. However, the Committee were informed that the 
Department is working on a roadmap to capture the details/unique IDs of farmers so 
that sales data can also be captured and subsi dy can be transferred to farmers’ 
accounts directly. A separate department Mission Directorate (DBT) has been opened 
for the purpose and districts of Gujarat and Odisha are being selected to go for pilot 
project. The Committee were also informed that the D epartment is also exploring the 
applicability of Barcode/RFID based solutions to track end to end movement of 
fertilizer in the entire supply chain. While taking note of the initiatives 
undertaken/contemplated by the Department to monitor movement of ferti lizers as 
well as to reform subsidy disbursement mechanism, the Committee recommend that 
the initiatives undertaken by the Department may be intensified and made time 
bound in coordination with State Governments to strengthen the monitoring 
mechanism ensur ing timely and smooth movement of fertilizer to the farmers and 
disbursement of the benefit of subsidy directly to the beneficiaries in a transparent 
manner at the earliest. In this regard, the Committee desire that the development of 
USSD based applicatio n to capture the sales made by retailers in the mFMS 
application may be expedited. The Committee hope and trust that this would help the 
farmers to get all information about the availability of fertilizers in retail shop without 
going elsewhere, in their l ocal languages as assured by the Department during the 
course of evidence. The Committee also recommend that the applicability of 
Barcode/RFID based solutions to track end to end movement of fertilizer in the entire 
supply chain may also be explored and ex pedited with in fixed time frame. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.8 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 "A brief update on the recent developments in Monitoring of Fertilizer Movement and   
Direct subsidy to Farmers: 
1. USSD based application for capture of Retailer Sale: USSD application has been 
development by NIC in consultation with DAC.  The application is being examined by 
DoF for its technical and financial feasibility to be implemented at retailer level. 
 
2. Tracking of Fertilizer Bags through RFID/ barcode based solution: The 
department explored feasibility to track the fertilizer bags through RFID/ 
barcode based solution. After analysis, it has emerged that the adoption of 
RFID/ barcodes in fertilizer supply chain is cumbersome due to the multiple 
transit points in supply chain and physical handling of bags. Furthermore, the 
size and dimension of fertilizer  bags is not practically suitable for barcode 
based tagging and RFID technology is costly to implement and maintain.  
 
In view of above, the Department has decided to drop the above approaches for 
extending the supply chain monitoring up to the Retailers and farmers. However, 
Department is working closely with Mission Directorate (DBT) to implement DBT in 
fertilizers." 

44 | P a g e  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
E. Need to curb unscrupulous activities of smuggling and black marketing of 
subsidized fertilizer its Diversion for nonagricultural purposes. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SL. NO.9 
 
5.9 Emphasizing the need to curb unscrupulous activities of Smuggling /Black marketing 
of subsidized fertilizers or its Diversion for nonagricultural purposes , the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 SMUGGLING /BLACK MAR KETING OF SUBSIDIZED  FERTILIZERS OR ITS 
DIVERSION FOR NONAGRICULTURAL PURPOSES: 
"The Committee note that the prices of fertilizers in the country is substantially less as 
compared to neighbouring countries which is primarily due to grant of subsidy on 
fertilizers. As a result of this, substantial quantity of fertilizers is smuggled through 
border areas to the neighbouring counties. One of the efforts being made by the 
Department is that the demand of fertilizers of the neighbouring country is met by the 
Government which is supplied to them at full price in order to check the outgo of 
subsidized fertilizers meant for Indian farmers. As the Department has no mechanism 
in th e field, letters are also being written to BSF, Coast Guards , Custom and State 
Governments time and again to check 46 smuggling of fertilizers to the neighboring 
countries. However, the Committee are not satisfied with the explanation given by the 
Department on the issue and strongly feel that simply by writing letter to the 
authorities concerned would not be enough to check the menace of smuggling and 
black marketing of subsidized to the neighboring countries. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion t hat the Department, being the nodal authority, should take 
initiatives and hold regular meetings with all the authorities concerned including 
State Governments and they should be made responsible to check the smuggling of 
fertilizers effectively as otherwi se they should face strict action under the law. 
Further, a mechanism should also be developed that where companies and dealers 
are also made responsible if they are involved in smuggling or black marketing of 
fertilizers. In this context, the Committee al so desire that the Department should also 
find out the feasibility of establishing vigilance cell in every state to inspect the depots 
of companies or dealers on regular basis with a view to ensure that the fertilizers are 
being sold/supplied to the farmer s and also to curb unscrupulous activities of 
smuggling and black marketing of subsidized fertilizer. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
5.10 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
"Govt. of India has notified Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985 & Fertilizer (Movement 
Control) Order, 1973 under Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and all State Go vts. have 
been empowered to take punitive measures against the person, who indulge in 
diversion, black marketing & smuggling of fertilizers. Apart from this, Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Central Board of Excise & Customs are mandated to curb diversion & 
smuggling. Therefore, Department of Fertilizers has been writing frequently to all 
State Govts./MHA/CBE&C emphasizing the need for taking appropriate action to curb 

45 | P a g e  
 
these illegitimate activities. Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion (DIPP) has 
been requested to identify the industries which consume urea as raw material. 
 
State Govts. have been asked to report the cases category -wise like diversion, 
smuggling & black marketing.  Report is awaited. 
 
As has been stated above DoF has from time to time writing  to all Chief Secretaries, 
M/o MHA and CBEC to activate the enforcement agencies under their jurisdiction 
because they have the local machinery and wherewithal to ensure adequate 
availability of fertilizers at reasonable prices to the farmers and also to k eep strict 
vigil to stop black marketing, smuggling & diversion which may not be possible for 
DoF. 
 
Regarding establishing vigilance cell in every state to inspect the depots of companies 
of dealers on regular basis, it may be stated that under FCO,1985, all State Govts. have 
been empowered to establishing enforcement authorities for implementation of 
various proviso of FCO and for taking appropriate action to curb all illegimate 
activities in respect of fertilizers." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.29 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                          (ANANDRAO ADSUL) 
18 FEBRUARY, 2016                  CHAIRPERSON 
29 PHALGUNA, 1937 (SAKA)                                                        STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
                CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
  

46 | P a g e  
 
Appendix – I 
 
MINUTES 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTYH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
The Committee sat on  Thursday, the 28th January, 201 6 from 1200 hrs.  
to 1230 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Smt. Anju Bala 
3. Smt. Veena Devi 
4. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
5. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
6. Shri S. Rajendran 
7. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
8. Dr. Uma Saren  
9. Shri Tasleem Uddin 
10. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Dr. M. S. Gill 
12. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
13. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
14. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
15. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee.   
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the Two Action Taken Reports on 
the subjects ‘Movement of Fertilizers and Monitoring System' (Department of Fertilizers) and 
'Functioning of National Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and Research,  (NIPER)' of 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
4. While the draft ATR on the subject ‘Movement of Fertilizers and Monitoring System' 
was adopted without any modification or amendments, the draft ATR` on the subject 'NIPER' 
was adopted by the Committee with minor modifications. 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to make consequential changes, if any, 
arising out of the factual verificati on of the Action Taken Reports by the Department of 
Fertilizers and Department of Pharmaceuticals of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  

47 | P a g e  
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
  
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE ELEVENTH REPORT (1 6TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (201 5-16) ON 'MOVEMENT OF FERTILIZ ERS 
AND MONITORING SYSTE M' OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMI CALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS).  
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 10 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1,2,4 and 5)   
4 
Percentage of Total 40 % 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 
(Vide Recommendation  No. Nil)  
 
0 
Percentage of Total 0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation No.10)  
1 
Percentage of Total 10 %  
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited:-  
 
(Vide Recommendations No.3, 6, 7, 8 and 9) 
 
5 
Percentage of Total 50 % 
 
 
 