 
 
 
 
   
38 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Thirty Third Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  "Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
 
 
 
 REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
   August, 2017/   Shravana, 1939 (Saka) 
  


2 
 
 
 
 
CC&F No.38 
 
THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Thirty Third Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  "Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2017 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2017 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
   August, 2017/   Shravana, 1939 (Saka)  


3 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) ………………………………... iii 
Introduction. …………………………………………………..………………………… iv 
Chapter I Report ……………….…………………………………………………..  
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2016-17) held on  09 August, 2017. 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Seventh Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (201 6-17) of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals).  
 
 
  

4 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(2016-17) 
 
  Shri Anandrao Adsul - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N Chandrappa 
5. ShriSankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Innocent 
9. Shri K Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
11. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
12. Shri S. Rajendran  
13. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
14. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
15. Dr. Uma Saren 
16. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
17. Shri Taslimuddin 
18. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
19.  Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
20. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
21.  Dr. (Smt.) Ratna De (Nag) 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary 
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27. Shri K Parasaran 
28. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
29. Shri Abdul Wahab 
30. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
31.* Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava    - Director  
3. Shri S. Holkhopao Baite   - Additional Director 
 
* Demise of Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy, MP (RS) on 09.06.2017. 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
  
                                                                
 
(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(2016-2017) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on 
their behalf, present this Thirty Eighth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken 
by the Government on the  observations/ recommendations contained in the Thirty 
Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (201 6-2017) on Demands for Grants (201 7-2018) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
 
2. The Thirty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 21.03.2017. The Action 
Taken replies of Government to all observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 25.07.2016.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (201 6-2017) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
09.08.2017.  
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/  
recommendations contained in the Thirty Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                        ANANDRAO ADSUL 
09 August,  2017                           Chairperson 
18 Shravana, 1939 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on  
                                    Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

6 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER  I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the  
Thirty-Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the Demands for Grants 
2017-18 of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 1.3.2017.  In all, the Committee 
made 08 Observations / Recommendations in the Report. 
2.  Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals ) 
were requested to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained in the  
Thirty-Third Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e., by 
20.07.2017. The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 08 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals ) vide 
their O.M. No. O.M. NO.23003/03/2017-Fin, dated  25th July, 2017. These Replies  hav e been 
categorized as follows:- 
(i) Observations /Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government :- 
 Sl.Nos.  1, 7 and  8                                             (Total =03)  
 This may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply :- 
 Sl.No. Nil                                       (Total = Nil) 
 This may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report. 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in  respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
 Sl.No.   5 and 6                              (Total = 02)  
 This may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 
 Sl.Nos. 2, 3 and 4                                    (Total =3)  
These may be included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 

7 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Ob servations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and V of this Report should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments. 
A. EXPORT AND IMPORT OF CHEMICALS 
RECOMMENDATION SI.NO. 1 
5.  While, recommending the Department to initiate prompt steps to p romote 
indigenous production of chemicals and its productions,  the Committee had recommended 
as under:- 
 "The Committee note that the imports of chemicals and products contributed 11.6% 
of the total imports in 2016 -17 (upto September, 2016) in comparison to 10.6% in 
2015-16 (upto September, 2015), whereas the exports contributed same 10.4% of 
total exports both in 2016-17 (upto September, 2016) and 2015-16 (upto September, 
2015). The Committee also observe that most of the chemicals are under open 
general license under the provisions of current foreign trade policy. The Committee 
are of the strong view that increase in the d omestic demand of chemical products 
without commensurate increase in the domestic production has led to increase in 
import and stagnation of export. The Committee, therefore recommend that the 
Department should take prompt steps to increase the indigenous production of 
chemicals and its products. The Committee would also like the Department to take up 
various fiscal measures like rationalization of tax structure, safeguard duty issues, 
anti-dumping measures with concerned authorities. The Committee would li ke to be 
informed of the action taken in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
6. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 "The chemical sector is de -licensed and  de-regulated.  The matter regarding 
rationalization / reduction of duties on chemicals and petrochemicals has been taken 
up with Ministry of Finance from time to time.  The Government has taken various 
steps including rationalization of Custom Duties for having a complete synergy in the 
value chain in the manufacturing process involving building blocks, intermediate and 
final products. The basic custom duty on some of the building blocks/ raw materials 
such as Liquefied Natural Gas has been reduced from 5%  to 2.5%, Ortho-Xylene from 
2.5% to Nil, 2 -Ethyl Anthraquinone from 7.5% to 2.5% etc. for the year 2017 -18 
which will help in the growth of the chemical sector. 
 The Govt. has introduced Goods and Services Tax (GST) from 1 st July, 2017. The GST 
in general on chemical items falling under chapter 28, 29, 32 & 38 has been put under 
the category of 18% GST rate." 
 

8 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
7. With respect to the increasing percentage of the share of  imports on Chemicals 
and pro ducts when that of its  exports remain stagnant in the last two years, the 
Committee had raised concern and recommended that the Department should take 
prompt steps to increase indigenous production of chemicals and its products. The 
Committee suggested som e fiscal measures including rationalization of tax structure, 
safeguard of duty issues, anti-dumping measures, among others. 
The Department, in its Action Taken Replies (ATR) ,  had mentioned that the Chemical 
sector had been de-licensed and de-regulated and also highlighted the steps taken by 
them along the lines of the recommendation of the Committee . They also mentioned 
the various steps taken towards the rationalization of Custom duties, by way of 
deduction of custom duties of building blocks/raw-materials which were all intended 
to boost the growth of the chemical sector. 
In the midst of these, the onset of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) regime, 
introduced by the Government of India fro m 1 July 2017, necessitated a fresh look on 
the issue. It appears  that the GST in general on chemical items falling under Chapters 
28, 29, 32 and 38 are on the higher category of 18% and 28% GST rates.  The 
Committee desire to be informed from the Department th e likely impact of the 
introduction of the GST on the chemica l sector, and also its impact on the export and 
import of the chemicals. 
B. BUDGET ALLOCATION 
RECOMMENDATIONS SI.NO.2 
8. While addressing the lack of adequate allocation for various schemes/Progrmmes in 
the Budget, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee observe that as against proposal of Rs.480.73 crore the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has been allocated an amount of Rs.298 crore for BE 
2017-18 and out of this Rs.150 crore has been approved for Central Sector Scheme, 
Rs.123.39 crore has been approved for other central expenditure and Rs.24.61 crore 

9 
 
for capital section. The Committee also note that an amount of Rs.100 crore has been 
earmarked for Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP), an amount of Rs.68.08 crore and 
Rs.9.16 crore have been allocated for CIPET and IPFT respectively and under the New 
Schemes of Petrochemicals including the scheme for setting up of Plastic Parks a sum 
of Rs.142.388 crore was sought against which only a sum of Rs.48 crore has been 
allocated as curtailed budget allocation by Ministry of Finance. In view of the 
foregoing the Committee feel that funds allocated to the Department by the Ministry 
of Finance are abysmally low with reference to their proposal. In the absence of 
adequate funds available to them, the schemes undertaken by the Department would 
be adversely affected. The Committee are of the view that the schemes of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals are of wide national importance and therefore recommend the 
Department should take up the issue of fund all ocation vigorously with the Ministry 
of Finance and impress upon them to allocate funds as per the demand of the 
Department. The Committee would like to be informed of t he action taken in this 
regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
9. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 "The additional requirement of funds for the various schemes/ programmes 
implemented by the Department has been sought from the Ministry of Finance at 1st 
Supplementary stage during 2017 -18. This includes   Rs. 246.09 crore  for 
implementation of the approved schemes of CIPET , Rs. 449.45 crore for balance 
amount of Capital Subsidy for the Assam Gas Cracker project , and Rs. 365.26 crore as 
Bridge loan in connection with the restructuring of the HOCL.   
As regards, additional funds for Setting up of New Plastic Parks, the same shall be 
taken up with Ministry of Finance at the appropriate time." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
10. The Committee , in their recommendation , had raised serious concern on the 
abysmally low allocation of funds for the various schemes and programmes of the 
Department by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee had pointed out that in the 
absence of adequate fundi ng the sc hemes undertaken were bound to be adversely 
affected.  In view of this, the Committee had urged the Department to vigorously take 
up the issue with the Ministry of Finance.  
The Department , in their Action Taken Replies , had informed that the additional 
requirement of funds were being sought from the Ministry of Finance. 

10 
 
The Committee have their apprehension that the Ministry of Finance would yield to 
the Demand of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals for additional funds 
in the supplementary Demands for Grants 2017-18.   The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Department should continue to take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Finance at Minister's level to obtain the requisite funds and communicate the action 
taken in this regard to the Committee.  
C. NEW SCHEMES OF PETROCHEMICALS 
RECOMMENDATIONS SI.NO.3 
11. Looking into the new schemes of Petrochemicals the Committee emphasizing the 
setting up of plastic parks and centres of Excellence, the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
"The Committee observe that an amount of Rs. 48.00 crore has been sanctioned for 
New Schemes of the Petrochemicals for the year 2017 -18. Under the Head of New 
Schemes of Petrochemicals there are three schemes, viz. Scheme for Plastic Parks 
(Rs.47.00 crore), Scheme for Na tional Award (Rs.1.00 crore) and Scheme for Centres 
for Excellence in Polymer Technology (CoE) (Rs.0.00 crore). The Committee are of 
the strong view that the allocation of Rs. 48.00 crore for New Schemes of 
Petrochemicals is much less than the requirement of funds." 
PLASTIC PARKS 
 The Committee note that Plastic Parks are the most ambitious schemes which takes 
the lion's share of the allocation. However, as per the Department, even the amount 
of Rs. 47 crore allocated for Plastic Parks is totally inadequate  to meet the 
requirement. At present, in the 1st phase, 10 Plastic Parks have been approved, out of 
which, Plastic Parks in Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Assam are under 
implementation. For setting up a Plastic Park at Voyalur Village, Ponneri Taluk, 
Thiruvallur District in Tamil Nadu, the final approval has been accorded in June, 2016 
and the Memorandum of Agreement has been signed on 24th November 2016 with 
the Tamil Nadu Plastic Park agency. 
Further, in -principle approval has been accorded for setting up th e remaining 6 
Plastic Parks i) Devipur, District Deoghar in Jharkhand, (ii) Bilaua, District Gwalior in 
Madhya Pradesh, (iii) Khairjhiti, District Rajnandgaon in Chhattisgarh, (iv) Sitarganj, 
District Udham Singh Nagar in Uttarakhand, (v) Industrial Estate , District Panipat in 
Haryana and (vi) Barjora, District Bankura in West Bengal. In addition, keeping in 
view the additional demand from States, setting up 8 more Plastic Parks (in addition 
to 10 Parks already approved) has been accorded in -principle approval. Further, the 
Committee are given to understand that due to infrastructural and budgetary 
constraints, the Department will concentrate only on four parks in Odisha, Madhya 
Pradesh, Assam and Tamil Nadu till 2019. 

11 
 
 The Committee are of the view that set ting up of Plastic Parks will boost ‘Make in 
India’ programme and also generate huge employment. In light of the above, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should ask for the requisite funds at the 
time of Supplementary Demands with proper justific ation so that the same may be 
sanctioned by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
12. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
"The Department is implementing a Plastic Park scheme to support setting up of Plastic 
Parks to promote the domestic downs tream plastic processing industry. Govt. of 
India provides grant funding up to 50% of the project cost subject to a ceiling of Rs.40 
crore per project. Ten Plastic Parks have been approved by SFC.  Out of which,  parks 
in Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Assam a re presently being set up and are under 
various stages of implementation. Tamil Nadu Plastic Park has been accorded final 
approval in June 2016.  A sum of 8.00 crore has been released to the Tamil Nadu 
Plastic Park as first installment. 
 Department of Chemi cals & Petrochemicals shall  make necessary efforts to seek 
additional funds from the Ministry of Finance at the  appropriate stage of 
Supplementary Grants (2017 -18) for implementing the 6 Plastic Parks, granted ‘in -
principle’ approval." 
CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE 
The Committee note that the Department has set up five Centres of Excellence (CoE) 
within the premises of reputed educational/research institutes viz (i)National 
Chemicals Laboratory (NCL), Pune – CoE for Sustainable Polymer Industry through 
Research, I nnovation & Training (CoE -SPIRIT); (ii)Central Institute of Plastics 
Engineering & Technology (CIPET), Chennai – CoE for Green Transportation Network 
(GREET), (iii) IIT, Delhi – CoE for Advanced Polymeric Materials, (iv) CIPET, 
Bhubaneswar- CoE on Sustaina ble Green Materials and (v) IIT, Guwahati – CoE for 
Sustainable Polymers. 
The Committee are of the view that the scheme is vital for improving the 
petrochemicals technology and research in the country and to promote development 
of new applications of polym ers and plastics. The Committee are dismayed to note 
that no funds have been allocated under the scheme. The Committee, would therefore 
recommend the Department to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance to 
provide funds under the scheme. The Commi ttee would like to be informed of the 
action taken in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
"Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals is proposing to apprise the work done 
under the scheme in the existing Centres of Excellence to suggest the way forward. 
 

12 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
13. The Committee , in their recommendation , had  opined that the budg etary 
allocation of Rs. 48.00 c rore was too meagre  for new schemes of Petrochemicals , 
considering the huge requirement of funds.  While there were  infrastructural and 
budgetary constraints, the Committee emphatically pointed out that setting up Plastic 
Parks would boost 'Make in India' programme as well as generate huge employment.  
In view of this, the Committee had recommended that the Department should ask for 
adequate funds at the time of S upplementary Demands with proper justification.  
Further, in respect of the  Centre of Excellence, which would be vital  in improving the 
Research and Technology of Petrochemicals and promote development of new 
application of p olymers and plastics, the Committee had expressed their dismay at 
the non allocation of funds under the scheme.  The Committee had also likewise 
recommended the Department to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance. 
The Department, in their Action Taken Replies pertaining to the Plastic Parks, had 
mentioned that they were on track in implementing the Plastic Park Scheme.  The 
Department ha d also made known  its commitment by making necessary efforts to 
seek additional funds from the Ministry of Finance at the appropriate stages of 
Supplementary Grants (2017-18).   Regarding Centre of Excellence, the Department is 
proposing to go ahead with the apprai sal of the work done under the scheme in the 
existing Centres of Excellence. 
The C ommittee reiterate their recommendation to the Department to take up the 
allocation of funds for  the Plastic Parks as also for the  Centre of Excellence with the 
Ministry of Finance.  The Committee desire that the appraisal of the work undertaken 
under the scheme for C entre of Excellence be considered by the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals to carry forwa rd the scheme with full vigour  and also 

13 
 
that adequate funds be released by the Ministry of Finance for this purpose .  The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken in this regard.  
D.  BHOPAL GAS LEAK DISASTER  
RECOMMENDATIONS SI.NO.4 
14. While concerning the Bhopal Gas leak Disaster in which  even after three decades 
toxic waste of 300 tonnes remains to be incinerated , the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
 "Concerning the Bhopal gas Leak Disaster in which after three decades toxic waste of 
300 tonnes remains to be incinerated, the Committee recommended as under:- 
The Committee observe that the Depa rtment in their Annual Report 2016 -17 have 
stated that UCIL waste was successfully incinerated at common h azardous waste 
incineration at Pitham Pur, District Dhar, Madhya Pradesh by Central Pollution 
Control Board (CPCB) during 13 -18 August 2015. During th e course of evidence the 
Committee has been informed that 300 tonnes of wastes is still lying there and has to 
be incinerated by Government of Madhya Pradesh and it has been taken up with t he 
Ministry of Environment and Pollution C ontrol Board because it i s to be done under 
their supervision and to their satisfaction. 
The Committee are deeply anguished to note that even after three decades the toxic 
waste of 300 tonnes has not been incinerated so far. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department may take immediate action in the matter to ensure 
that toxic waste is incinerated without any further delay by taking up the issue with 
the concerned Departments. The Committee would like to be informed of the action 
taken in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
15. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
"Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 24/6/2010 had decided that Govt. of Madhya 
Pradesh would be responsible for undertaking disposal of hazardous wastes and 
remediation of the erstwhile UCIL plant at Bhopal. Union Cabinet also  decided that  an 
Oversight Committee be  constituted in the Ministry of Environment , Forests and Climate 
Change to provide oversight and support to the State Government of Madhya Pradesh. As 
per the directions given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in  the Special Leave Petition ( Civil) 
No. 9874 of 2012 UoI Vs Alok Pratap Singh and Others,  10 MT of erstwhile UCIL waste was 
successfully incinerated at Common Hazardous Waste Incinerator at Pithampur, District 
Dhar, Madhya Pradesh by Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) during August 13 -18, 
2015 and thereafter the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change filed the 
report of incineration of 10 tonnes of UCIL waste to the Hon’ble Supreme Court.  
After successful incineration of 10 MT of UCIL waste, a meeting was taken by Secreta ry, 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals on 17/2/2016 with relevant stake holders 
to workout modalities for disposal of remaining UCIL waste of 337 MT (approximate). It 

14 
 
was decided in the meeting that State Govt. of Madhya Pradesh and CPCB will co -ordinate 
with each other and prepare technical, financial proposals and schedule for the disposal 
rest of the UCIL waste. The decision was further reiterated in the review meeting taken by 
Secretary, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals on 3/8/2016 wit h the 
representatives of State Govt. of Madhya Pradesh. Further, Govt. of Madhya Pradesh was 
requested to expedite the process of disposal of UCIL waste. Reminders were also issued 
to the Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate Change to expedite the p ending issue 
of disposal of the remaining UCIL waste.   
Chairman, CPCB took a meeting with representatives of Govt. of Madhya Pradesh, 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals and Ministry of Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change on 23/9/2016 to discus s the modalities for disposal of remaining UCIL 
waste at TSDF, Pithampur and also invited Technical and Financial proposals for 
submission of the same to Oversight Committee.  
Thereafter, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change has communicated  the 
following decisions to the State Government of Madhya Pradesh on 9/5/2017: 
(i) Disposal of the remaining 337  tons of toxic waste at UCIL site, Bhopal and 
remediation of the site thereafter being the exclusive responsibility of the Govt. of 
Madhya Pradesh should be carried out by the State Government itself. 
(ii)  CPCB will provide technical assistance for packaging , loading, transportation, 
unloading incineration, monitoring of the operation and assessment of emissions 
and other scientific requirements to the State Government for disposal of the waste. 
(iii) Madhya Pradesh  Govt. should select the facility operator for final disposal of the 
waste. The parameters for technical qualification should remain one and same as 
with the facility during the disposal of the waste at trial stages in Pithampur. 
(iv)  The selection process of the facility operator should have an integrated 
procurement offer with two bids, one for technical parameters and another for 
financial bid. 
(v)  The technical parameters can open the offer to any faci lity operator in the country 
meeting all technical requirements. However, there must be a condition that a 
facility operator having the installation outside the State boundaries of Madhya 
Pradesh  should provide a consent certificate and NOC from the State  Govt. to the 
effect that the state toxic waste would be allowed to enter that State and would be 
permitted to be incinerated on the site located in that State. 
(vi) The final proposal would be forwarded by Madhya Pradesh  Govt. to Oversight 
committee in Minist ry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change  for making 
recommendation to Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals  and D/o 
Expenditure for release of the funds to the State Govt. 
The matter is followed up with the State Government of Madhya Pradesh" 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
16. The Committee, in their recommendation , had expressed their dismay  at the 
amount of  toxic waste to the tune of over 300 tonnes still lying around to be 
incinerated. The Committee had urged the Department to take immediate action in 
this regard by taking up the issue with the Departments concerned. 

15 
 
In its Action Taken Replies, the Department had elaborately mentioned the role of 
various stake holders including the Government of Madhya Pradesh, the Ministry of 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change  and the Central Pollution C ontrol Board 
(CPCB). The Department also highlighted their initiative to workout modalities for 
disposing or incinerating the UCIL waste of about 337 MT. The Department also 
mentioned the latest decision of the Ministry of Environment, /forest and Climate 
Change which was communicated to the Government of Madhya Pradesh on 9 May 
2017, which theirin spelt out the role of the State Government.  
The Committee are of the view that the problem of incineration of 337 MT of toxic 
waste which is lyi ng waste for the last 32 years needs to be addressed with urgency 
and with the earnestness that it deserved.  This has become mockery before the whole 
world.  It would be very effective if a time frame could be chalked o ut for a timely 
disposal of the toxic waste.  The Department could consider impressing upon the 
various stake holders involved to convince them for incineration as communicated by 
the Ministry of Environment , Forests and Climate Change to the Government of the 
Madhya Pradesh. The Committee may be apprised on the steps taken in this regard. 
E. HINDUSTAN ORGANIC CHEMICALS LIMITED (HOCL) 
RECOMMENDATIONS SI.NO.5 
 
17. Expressing concern on the state of condition of the HOCL  and  looking at the decision 
for its revival, the Committee had recommended as under: 
  "It is observed that HOCL has been incurring losses since 2011 -12 and as such it has 
been declared a sick company. Though, a structuring plan has been made by the 
Government for revival of HOCL in view of its strategic importance as HOCL is the 
only company to manufacture Nitrogen Tetra Oxide (N2O4) which is supplied to ISRO 
but revival plan has not yet taken off. The Committee are given to understand that in 
view of th e poor financial position of HOCL, Rs. 24.61 crore was re -appropriated in 
the first batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2016 -17 by providing non 
plan loan to the company to enable it to pay the interest on the two Government of 
India Guaranteed B onds of Rs. 100 crore and 150 crore raised by HOCL. As the 
company is not in a position to pay the interest of the Government an allocation of Rs. 

16 
 
24.61 crore has also been made in BE 2017 -18 for the same purpose. The Committee 
feel that the Company is of strategic importance and therefore recommend the 
Department to finalise the revival plan of HOCL at the earliest. The Committee hope 
that the restructure plan would soon be implemented and they would be informed 
accordingly.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
18. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
"The committee in their recommendation mentioned that the company is not in a 
position to pay the interest to the bond hol ders of the Rs.250 crore  Govt. guaranteed 
bonds raised by HOCL. Accordingly an allocation of Rs.24.61 crore has been made in 
BE 2017-18 for payment of the said interest. 
The Governmen t on 17.05.2017 has approved a R estructuring Plan for HOCL. The 
Restructuring Plan involves closing down the operations of all the non -viable plants 
at Rasayani unit of HOCL except Di -Nitrogen Tetroxide (N 2O4) plant which is to be 
transferred to ISRO on ‘as is where is’ basis, with about 20 acres of land and 
employees associated with the plant. 'In principle' approval has also been accorded 
for HOCL to be put up for strategic disinvestment through DIPAM after the process 
of disposing land and other unencumbered assets at Rasayani is completed. 
Financial implication of the Restructuring Plan is Rs.1008.67 crore (cash) which is to 
be met partly from sale of 442 acres HOCL land at Rasayani to Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Ltd. (Rs.618.80 crore) and the balance (Rs.365.26 crore) through bridge 
loan from the Govt.  The funds wi ll be used to liquidate the various liabilities of the 
company, including payment of outstanding salary and statutory dues of employees 
and repayment of Govt. guaranteed bonds of Rs.250 crore due for redemption in 
Aug.-Sept. 2017. The bridge loan amount, a long with other Govt. liabilities of the 
company, is proposed to be repaid to the Govt. from the disposal of remaining 
unencumbered land and other assets of Rasayani unit. 
Necessary action has been initiated by the Department to implement the above 
restructuring plan for HOCL." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
19. The Committee, in their recommendation, had noted that HOCL had been 
incurring losses since 2011 -12 and its revival plan had not yet taken on despite the 
structuring plan made by the Government. Consid ering the strategic importance of 
the company, the Committee had recommended the Department to finalise the revival 
plan for the company at the earliest. 

17 
 
In its Action Taken Reply  the Department had informed the Committee about the 
restructuring plan for H OCL as approved by the Government on 17 May 2017 which 
involved closing down operations of all the non -viable plants at Rasayani unit of the 
company except the Di -Nitrogen Textroxide plant, which is to be transferred to ISRO 
on 'as is where is' basis with about 20 acres of land and employees associated with the 
plant. The Department had also informed that an 'in principle' approval had also been 
accorded for HOCL to be put up for strategic disinvestment through the Department of 
Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) after the process of disposing land 
and other unencumbered assets of Rasayani is completed. The Department also 
informed that the financial implication of the restructuring plan  is  Rs. 1008.67 crore 
and now the same would be raised by sale of HOCL land and through bridge loan from 
the Government which would be used to liquidate the various liabilities of the 
Company. 
The Committee, while earnestly recommending the revival of the company due to its 
strategic importance, are dismayed to learn that, contrar y to its expectations and 
recommendation, an 'in principle' approval has been accorded for HOCL to be put up 
for strategic disinvestment.  The Committee are deeply concerned on the 
deteriorating state of the company, which once was a Mini Ratna Company . The 
Committee are of the view that  efforts for revival of the company  had been  lacking 
focus and expertise and that Department had failed to come up with a comprehensive 
proposal to convince the Government in the past, as a result of which the Government 
had decided to restructure HOCL by closing nine of its twelve plants.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate its recommendation to the Department to  devise a revival 
package with greater diligence  and focus on long term commercial viability and 
sustainability. The C ommittee would like to re -emphasize on  the formation of an 
Expert Management Team to effectively implement the Revival Plan. With regard to 
monetization of surplus land assets, the Committee would like to caution that the 

18 
 
Department must ensure proper financial management of the sale proceeds of 'excess 
land'. Besides, the Committee ha ve empathy with the hardships of the work ers who 
had been deprived of  their salary for which the Department  are urged to come up 
with an effective proposal to ensure payment of salaries and statutory dues and also 
an attractive VRS for them.  In view of these, the Committee also reiterate its earlier 
recommendations and urge the Department to revisit the decision of the Gov ernment 
in which 'in principle' approval has been accorded for strategic disinvestment 
through DIPAM. The Committee desire that the Department should leave no stone 
unturned to come up with an alternative revival plan and apprise the Committee of 
the action taken  in this regard. 
F. HINDUSTAN FLUOROCARBONS LIMITED (HFL) 
RECOMMENDATIONS SI.NO.6 
 
20. Emphasizing the need for a revival plan for the HFL the Committee, in their 
recommendation, had stated as under:- 
 "The Committee note that Hindustan Fluorocarbons Ltd. (HFL) a subsidiary of HOCL. 
has been incurring losses for the last three years. The net worth as on 31.03.2016 is 
(-)Rs. 63.67 crore. The Government has therefore , given in -principle approval of 
strategic disinvestment of HFL with the p arent company of HOCL to exit the firm 
completely. The Committee observe that for revival of HFL, the company has 
diversified into profitable business of fluoro specialty chemicals which has higher 
profit margins than the existing grades of PTFE and adopted the strategy of switching 
over from single product to multiproduct facility to reduce dependency of PTFE. HFL 
has also developed superior grades of PTFE (modified PTFE or MPTFE) and fluoro 
specialty chemicals like TFE -Ether and Telomeres and started comm ercial facility of 
partial conversion of Telomeres. It has also developed Benzotrifluoride (BTF) on lab 
scale and sample has been accepted by the customer. The Committee also note that 
during 2016 -17 (upto September, 2016), the company achieved a turnover of Rs. 
17.24 crore and restricted its loss to Rs. 1.48 core, as per the provisional unaudited 
results. 
 The Committee are pained to note that inspite of the efforts made by the company to 
come out of loss by diversifying its various activities and also ach ieving a turnover of 
Rs. 17.24 crore (upto September 2016) in 2016 -17, the Government has decided for 
strategic disinvestment of HFL. The Committee, therefore, recommend that instead of 
strategic disinvestment of HFL, the Government may make a revival plan  for the 
Company keeping in view its diversified activities. The Committee would like to be 
appraised of the progress made in this regard." 

19 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
21. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 "Despite the efforts made by HFL to come out of loss by diversifying its activities, the 
company has been making losses since 2013 -14. For 2016 -17, the loss is estimated at 
Rs.4.89 crore. As on 31.03.2017, the company has accumulated losses of Rs.88.17 crore 
and negative net worth of Rs.68.55 crore. Due to inadequate working capital, HFL is not 
paying 20% salary to its officers/ employees since January, 2015. Statutory dues of 
around Rs.15.92 crore remain outst anding as the company does not have sufficient 
funds to clear these dues. Wage revision arrears of approx. Rs.15.05 crore pertaining to 
1997 and 2007 wage revisions have also not been paid due to shortage of funds. It is 
pertinent to mention here that the company is not in a position to generate the 
financial resources required to clear the above liabilities and to address the various 
factors like uneconomical plant capacity, old technology, high manpower cost, high 
interest cost due to outstanding loans, e tc. that have been adversely affecting the 
company’s performance over the years. Also, HFL does not manufacture any product of 
strategic interest for the country and can be categorised as a ‘non priority’ CPSE as per 
DPE guidelines dated 29.10.2015. 
The ‘in principle’ approval for strategic disinvestment of HFL has been accorded by the 
Government/Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) based on due 
examination of the matter by and based on the recommendations of the NITI Aayog 
and the Core Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment (CGD). As the decision for strategic 
disinvestment of HFL has been taken by the competent authority in the Government of 
India, further necessary action is being taken by the Department for implementing the 
said decision, in acc ordance with the guidelines / instructions issued by the 
Department of Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) on disinvestment of 
CPSEs and their subsidiaries / units." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
22. The Committee, in their recommendation, had poin ted out that for revival of 
HFL, the Company had diversified into profitable business, a strategy of switching 
over from single product to multi -product facility. The Committee had also pointed 
out that the C ompany had started to achieve a turnover (of Rs.  17.24 crore) and 
restricted its loss. In view of this positive devel opment, the Committee had urged, in 
their recommendation, that the Government may make a revival plan for the 
Company instead of its strategic disinvestment, keeping in view, its diversif ied 
activities. 

20 
 
In its Action Taken Replies, the Department,  while elaborating  the liabilities of the 
Company including the statutory dues and salaries due to the employees as a result of 
shortage of funds, stated that the Government is on the course for s trategic 
disinvestment of the Company. They had pointed out that the decision for the 
strategic disinvestment had been taken by the competent authority in the 
Government of India. 
The Committee desire that the strategic disinvestment of HFL should be gainfully 
done and that the sale should not incur any loss to the State exchequer. Having said 
this, the Committee is of the view that the Government should have a stand -by plan or 
alternative plan in case the strategic sale could not be arrived to its logical conclusion. 
The Committee, in this backdrop, recommend  the Department  that the Government 
should revisit their decision once more and apprise the Committee of the action taken 
in this regard. 
G. CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PLASTICS ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY (CIPET) 
RECOMMENDATIONS SI.NO.7 
23. Emphasizing the need for adequate funding for CIPET, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee are dismayed to note that a very meagr e sum of Rs. 68.08 Crore has 
been made to CIPET during the year 2017 -18 against the projection of Rs. 314.17 
Crore. This is inspite of the fact that CIPET is an ISO 9001:2008 QMS, NABL, ISO/IEC 
17020 accredited premier national institution and proposed to set up 11 new 
centers. The Committee feel that such a petty amount would not only obstruct the 
road map of setting up new CIPET Centers but also impede R&D work . The 
Committee are of the view that lesser allocation to CIPET at a time when plastic 
waste ma nagement is the need of hour would affect the scheme of Swatch Bharat 
Mission. The Committee observe that the issue of inadequate budget allocation to 
CIPET has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance by the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals on  several occasions but that yielded no result. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals to take up with the Ministry of Finance the issue of fund allocation 
again highlighting the activities of CIPET as an  institute of national importance for 
skill development in its field." 
 

21 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
24. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 "Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has continuously  taken up the issue 
with Ministry of Finance and would continue to follow up. In reply to the letter dated 
09.02.2017 from the Minister (Chemicals & Fertilizers) regarding inadequate budget 
allocation to CIPET,  Minister of State for Finance & Corporate Affairs vide DO letter 
dated 04.04.2017 addressed to Minister (C&F) has informed that allocations to 
Departments are based on the availability of fiscal space and absorptive capacity of 
the Department,etc. However , the Department will follow  up up the matter of 
inadequate budget with Ministry of Finance on regular basis. The Department has 
also taken up with Ministry of Finance for additional  funds to the tune of Rs. 246.09 
crore during 2017-18 for implementation of the approved schemes of CIPET at the 1st 
Supplementary Stage." 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
25. The C ommittee in their recommendation, had noted with grave concern the 
meagre budgetary allocation to CIPET which is a premier national institution 
proposing to set up eleven new centres and which also had an important role in 
plastic waste management.  In this ba ckdrop, the C ommittee had urged the 
Department to again take up the issue of fund allocation with the Ministry of Finance 
by highlighting the activities of CIPET as an institute of national importance.  
The Department, in their Action Taken Replies, had informed the Co mmittee that they 
had continuously taken up the issue with the Ministry of Finance and ,  inter-alia, 
mentioned that additional  funds to the tun e of Rs. 246.09 crore during 20 17-18 for 
implementation of the schemes of CIPET at the first supplementary stage   has been 
taken up with the Ministry of Finance. 
While noting that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals would take up the 
matter of less allocation to CIPET with the Ministry of Finance on regular basis, the 
Committee are apprehensive that the D epartment would obtain additional funds to 
the tune of Rs. 246.09 crore at first supplementary stage of Demands for Grants 2017-
18.  The Committee,  therefore, recommend that the Department should pursue the 
matter vigorously with the Ministry of Finance at  the highest level.  The Committee 
are of the view that keeping in view the past performance of CIPET and its absorptive 
capacity of funds, there should not be any problem in granting additional funds to 
CIPET at the first supplementary stage.  The Committee would like to be informed in 
this regard.  

22 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation No. 1 
EXPORT AND IMPORT OF CHEMICALS 
"The Committee note that the imports of chemicals and products contributed 11.6% 
of the total imports in 2016 -17 (upto September, 2016) in comparison to 10.6% in 
2015-16 (upto September, 2015), whereas the exports contributed same 10.4% of 
total exports both in 2016-17 (upto September, 2016) and 2015-16 (upto September, 
2015). The Committee also observe that most of the chemicals are under open 
general license under the provisions of current foreign trade policy. The Committee 
are of the strong view that increase in the domestic demand  of chemical products 
without commensurate increase in the domestic production has led to increase in 
import and stagnation of export. The Committee, therefore recommend that the 
Department should take prompt steps to increase the indigenous production of 
chemicals and its products. The Committee would also like the Department to take up 
various fiscal measures like rationalization of tax structure, safeguard duty issues, 
anti-dumping measures with concerned authorities. The Committee would like to be 
informed of the action taken in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 "The chemical sector is de -licensed and de -regulated.   The matter regarding 
rationalization / reduction of duties on chemicals and petrochemicals has been taken 
up with Ministry of Finance from time to time.  The Government has taken various 
steps including rationalization of Custom Duties for having a complet e synergy in the 
value chain in the manufacturing process involving building blocks, intermediate and 
final products. The basic custom duty on some of the building blocks/ raw materials 
such as Liquefied Natural Gas has been reduced from 5% to 2.5%, Ortho -Xylene from 
2.5% to Nil, 2 -Ethyl Anthraquinone from 7.5% to 2.5% etc. for the year 2017 -18 
which will help in the growth of the chemical sector. 
 The Govt. has introduced Goods and Services Tax (GST) from 1 st July, 2017. The GST 
in general on chemical items falling under chapter 28, 29, 32 & 38 has been put under 
the category of 18% GST rate." 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SI.NO.7 
 While, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 Emphasizing the need for adequate funding for CIPET, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee are dismayed to note that a very meagre sum of Rs. 68.08 Crore has 
been made to CIPET during the year 2017 -18 against the projection of Rs. 314.17  
Crore. This is inspite of the fact that CIPET is an ISO 9001:2008 QMS, NABL, ISO/IEC 
17020 accredited premier national institution and proposed to set up 11 new 
centers. The Committee feel that such a petty amount would not only obstruct the 
road map of s etting up new CIPET Centers but also impede R&D work . The 
Committee are of the view that lesser allocation to CIPET at a time when plastic 
waste management is the need of hour would affect the scheme of Swatch Bharat 
Mission. The Committee observe that th e issue of inadequate budget allocation to 
CIPET has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance by the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals on several occasions but that yielded no result. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Department o f Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals to take up with the Ministry of Finance the issue of fund allocation 
again highlighting the activities of CIPET as an institute of national importance for 
skill development in its field." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 "Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has continuously  taken up the issue 
with Ministry of Finance and would continue to follo w up. In reply to the letter dated 
09.02.2017 from the Minister (Chemicals & Fertilizers) regarding inadequate budget 
allocation to CIPET, Minister of State for Finance & Corporate Affairs vide DO letter 
dated 04.04.2017 addressed to Minister (C&F) has inf ormed that allocations to 
Departments are based on the availability of fiscal space and absorptive capacity of 
the Department,etc. However, the Department will follow  up up the matter of 
inadequate budget with Ministry of Finance on regular basis. The Dep artment has 
also taken up with Ministry of Finance for additional  funds to the tune of Rs. 246.09 
crore during 2017-18 for implementation of the approved schemes of CIPET at the 1st 
Supplementary Stage." 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.25 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SI. NO.8 
 While, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "As regards the allocation to Institute of Pesticide Formulation and Technology 
(IPFT), as against the proposal of Rs.44.80 Crore of the Department for the year 

24 
 
2017- 18, Rs 9.16 Crore has been allocated . The Committee strongly feel that the 
funds allocated to the Department by the Ministry of Finance is abysmally low with 
reference to their proposals. In the absence of adequate funds available with them, 
the programmes undertaken by the IPFT would be adversely affected. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly f eel that the Ministry of Finance should allocate the 
funds as per the proposed requirement of the Department and would like that the 
Department may strongly take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance. At the 
same time, the Department, on their part, s hould ensure that funds alloca ted to them 
are utilized fully." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
An amount of Rs. 9.16 crore has been allocated to IPFT during 2017-18.   
 "Funds are provided by the Department to each of the schemes / cost centres in BE 
based on the availability of fiscal space and absorptive capacity for the individual 
activities and on the basis of priority accorded by the Department. Wherever, the 
Department witnesses adequate progress in individual activities / schemes, the same 
are augmented through Supplementary Grants or re -appropriations to enable 
completion of the envisaged act ivities to attain the desired outcomes. In case 
additional funds are required by IPFT during 2017 -18, the matter shall be reviewed 
duly and taken up appropriately. 
 The recommendation of Standing Committee has been noted for compliance." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

26 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
RECOMMENDATIONS SI.NO.5 
 Expressing concern on the state of condition of the HOCL and  looking at the decision 
for its revival, the Committee had recommended as under:_ 
  "It is observed that HOCL has been incurring losses since 2011 -12 and as such it has 
been declared a sick company. Though, a structuring plan has been made by the 
Government for revival of HOCL in view of its strategic importance as HOCL is the 
only company to manufacture Nitrogen Tetra Oxide (N2O4) which is supplied to ISRO 
but revival plan has not yet taken off. The Committee are given to understand that in 
view of the poor financial position of HOCL, Rs. 24.61 crore was re -appropriated in 
the first batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2016 -17 by providing non 
plan loan to the company to enable it to pay the interest on the two Government of 
India Guaranteed Bonds of Rs. 100 crore and 150 crore raised by HOCL. As the 
company is not in a position to pay the interest of the Government an allocation of Rs. 
24.61 crore has also been made in BE 2017 -18 for the same purpose. The Committee 
feel that the Company is of strategic importance and therefore recommend the 
Department to finalise the revival plan o f HOCL at the earliest. The Committee hope 
that the restructure plan would soon be implemented and they would be informed 
accordingly.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
"The committee in their recommendation  the company is not in a position to pay the 
interest to the bond holders of the Rs.250 crore Govt. guaranteed bonds raised by 
HOCL. Accordingly  an allocation of Rs.24.61 crore h as been made in BE 2017 -18 for 
payment of the said interest. 
The Government on 17.05.2017 has approved a restructuring plan for HOCL. The 
restructuring plan involves closing down the operations of all the non -viable plants 
at Rasayani unit of HOCL except Di-Nitrogen Tetroxide (N 2O4) plant which is to be 
transferred to ISRO on ‘as is where is’ basis, with about 20 acres of land and 
employees associated with the plant. 'In principle' approval has also been accorded 
for HOCL to be put up for strategic disinve stment through DIPAM after the process 
of disposing land and other unencumbered assets at Rasayani is completed. 
Financial implication of the restructuring plan is Rs.1008.67 crore (cash) which is to 
be met partly from sale of 442 acres HOCL land at Rasaya ni to Bharat Petroleum 
Corporation Ltd. (Rs.618.80 crore) and the balance (Rs.365.26 crore) through bridge 
loan from the Govt.  The funds will be used to liquidate the various liabilities of the 
company, including payment of outstanding salary and statutory  dues of employees 
and repayment of Govt. guaranteed bonds of Rs.250 crore due for redemption in 

27 
 
Aug.-Sept. 2017. The bridge loan amount, along with other Govt. liabilities of the 
company, is proposed to be repaid to the Govt. from the disposal of remainin g 
unencumbered land and other assets of Rasayani unit. 
Necessary action has been initiated by the Department to implement the above 
restructuring plan for HOCL." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.19  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS SI.NO.6 
 Emphasizing the need for a revival plan for the HFL the Committee, in their 
recommendation, had stated as under:- 
 "The Committee note that Hindustan Fluorocarbons Ltd. (HFL) a subsidiary of HOCL. 
has been incurring losses for the last three years. The net worth as on 31.03.2016 is 
(-)Rs. 63.67 crore. The Government has therefore , given in -principle approval of 
strategic disinvestment of HFL with the parent company of HOCL to exit the firm 
completely. The Committee observe that for  revival of HFL, the company has 
diversified into profitable business of fluoro specialty chemicals which has higher 
profit margins than the existing grades of PTFE and adopted the strategy of switching 
over from single product to multiproduct facility to reduce dependency of PTFE. HFL 
has also developed superior grades of PTFE (modified PTFE or MPTFE) and fluoro 
specialty chemicals like TFE -Ether and Telomeres and started commercial facility of 
partial conversion of Telomeres. It has also developed Benzotr ifluoride (BTF) on lab 
scale and sample has been accepted by the customer. The Committee also note that 
during 2016 -17 (upto September, 2016), the company achieved a turnover of Rs. 
17.24 crore and restricted its loss to Rs. 1.48 core, as per the provision al unaudited 
results. 
 The Committee are pained to note that inspite of the efforts made by the company to 
come out of loss by diversifying its various activities and also achieving a turnover of 
Rs. 17.24 crore (upto September 2016) in 2016 -17, the Govern ment has decided for 
strategic disinvestment of HFL. The Committee, therefore, recommend that instead of 
strategic disinvestment of HFL, the Government may make a revival plan for the 
Company keeping in view its diversified activities. The Committee would like to be 
appraised of the progress made in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 "Despite the efforts made by HFL to come out of loss by diversifying its activities, the 
company has been making losses since 2013 -14. For 2016 -17, the loss is estimated at 
Rs.4.89 crore. As on 31.03.2017, the company has accumulated losses of Rs.88.17 crore 
and negative net worth of Rs.68.55 crore. Due to inadequate working capital, HFL is not 
paying 20% salary to its officers/ employees since January, 2015. Statutory dues of 

28 
 
around Rs.15.92 crore remain outstanding as the company does not have sufficient 
funds to clear these dues. Wage revision arrears of approx. Rs.15.05 crore pertaining to 
1997 and 2007 wage revisions have also not been paid due to shortage of funds. It is 
pertinent to mention here that the company is not in a position to generate the 
financial resources required to clear the above liabilities and to address the various 
factors like uneconomical plant capacity, old technology, high manpower cost, high 
interest cost due to outstanding loans, etc. that have been adversely affecting the 
company’s performance over the years. Also, HFL does not manufacture any product of 
strategic interest for the country and can be categorised as a ‘non priority’ CPSE as per 
DPE guidelines dated 29.10.2015. 
The ‘in principle’ approval for strategic disinvestment of HFL has been accorded by the 
Government/Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) based on due 
examination of the matter by and based on the recommendations of the NITI Aayog 
and the Core Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment (CGD). As the decision for strategic 
disinvestment of HFL has been taken by the competent authority in the Government of 
India, further necessary action is being taken by the Department for implementing the 
said decision, in accordance with the guidelines / instructions issued by the 
Department of Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) on disinvestment of 
CPSEs and their subsidiaries / units." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.22 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

29 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE  STILL AWAITED 
RECOMMENDATIONS SI.NO.2 
 Addressing the lack of adequate allocation for various Schemes/Programmes in the 
Budget, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee observe that as against proposal of Rs.480.73 crore the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has been allocated an amount of Rs.298 crore for BE 
2017-18 and out of this Rs.150 crore has been approv ed for Central Sector Scheme, 
Rs.123.39 crore has been approved for other central expenditure and Rs.24.61 crore 
for capital section. The Committee also note that an amount of Rs.100 crore has been 
earmarked for Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP), an amount of Rs.68.08 crore and 
Rs.9.16 crore have been allocated for CIPET and IPFT respectively and under the New 
Schemes of Petrochemicals including the scheme for setting up of Plastic Parks a sum 
of Rs.142.388 crore was sought against which only a sum of Rs.48 crore has been 
allocated as curtailed budget allocation by Ministry of Finance. In view of the 
foregoing the Committee feel that funds allocated to the Department by the Ministry 
of Finance are abysmally low with reference to their proposal. In the absence  of 
adequate funds available to them, the schemes undertaken by the Department would 
be adversely affected. The Committee, are of the view that the schemes of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals are of wide national importance and therefore recommend the 
Department should take up the issue of fund allocation vigorously with the Ministry 
of Finance and impress upon them to allocate funds as per the demand of the 
Department. The Committee, would like to be informed of t he action taken in this 
regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 "The additional requirement of funds for the various schemes/ programmes 
implemented by the Department has bee n sought from the Ministry of Finance at 1 st 
Supplementary stage during 2017 -18. This includes   Rs. 246.09 crore  for 
implementation of the approved schemes of CIPET , Rs. 449.45 crore for balance 
amount of Capital Subsidy for the Assam Gas Cracker project , and Rs. 365.26 crore as 
Bridge loan in connection with the restructuring of the HOCL.   
As regards, additional funds for Setting up of New Plastic Parks, the same shall be 
taken up with Ministry of Finance at the appropriate time." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.10 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 

30 
 
 NEW SCHEMES OF PETROCHEMICALS 
RECOMMENDATIONS SI.NO.3 
 Looking into the new schemes of Petrochemicals the Committee emphasizing the 
setting up of plastic parks and centres of Excellence, the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
"The Committee observe that an amount of Rs. 48.00 crore has been sanctioned for 
New Schemes of the Petrochemicals for the year 2017 -18. Under the Head of New 
Schemes of Petrochemicals there are three schemes, viz. Sche me for Plastic Parks 
(Rs.47.00 crore), Scheme for National Award (Rs.1.00 crore) and Scheme for Centres 
for Excellence in Polymer Technology (CoE) (Rs.0.00 crore). The Committee are of 
the strong view that the allocation of Rs. 48.00 crore for New Schemes of 
Petrochemicals is much less than the requirement of funds." 
PLASTIC PARKS 
 The Committee note that Plastic Parks are the most ambitious schemes which takes 
the lion's share of the allocation. However, as per the Department, even the amount 
of Rs. 47 crore allocated for Plastic Parks is totally inadequate to meet the 
requirement. At present, in the 1st phase, 10 Plastic Parks have been approved, out of 
which, Plastic Parks in Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Assam are under 
implementation. For setting up a Plastic Park at Voyalur Village, Ponneri Taluk, 
Thiruvallur District in Tamil Nadu, the final approval has been accorded in June, 2016 
and the Memorandum of Agreement has been signed on 24th November 2016 with 
the Tamil Nadu Plastic Park agency. 
Further, in -principle approval has been accorded for setting up the remaining 6 
Plastic Parks i) Devipur, District Deoghar in Jharkhand, (ii) Bilaua, District Gwalior in 
Madhya Pradesh, (iii) Khairjhiti, District Rajnandgaon in Chhattisgarh, (iv) Sitarganj, 
District Udham Singh Nagar in Uttarakhand, (v) Industrial Estate, District Panipat in 
Haryana and (vi) Barjora, District Bankura in West Bengal. In addition, keeping in 
view the additional demand from States, setting up 8 more Plastic Parks (in addition 
to 10 Parks already approved) has been accorded in -principle approval. Further, the 
Committee are given to understand that due to infrastructural and budgetary 
constraints, the Department will concentrate only on four parks in Odisha, Madhya 
Pradesh, Assam and Tamil Nadu till 2019. 
 The Committee are of the view that setting up of Plastic Parks will boost ‘Make in 
India’ programme and also generate huge employment. In light of the above, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should ask for the requisite funds at the 
time of Supplementary Demands with proper justification so that the same ma y be 
sanctioned by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress made in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 

31 
 
"The Department is implementing a Plastic Park scheme to support setting up of Plastic 
Parks to promote the domestic downstream plastic processing industry. Govt. of 
India provides grant funding up to 50% of the project cost subject to a ceiling of Rs.40 
crore per project. Ten Plastic Parks have been approved by SFC.  Out of which,  parks 
in Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Assam are presently being set up and are under 
various stages of implementation. Tamil Nadu Plastic Park has been ac corded final 
approval in June 2016.A sum of ` 8.00 crore has been released to the Tamil Nadu 
Plastic Park as first instalment. 
 Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals shall  make necessary efforts to seek 
additional funds from the Ministry of Finance at the  appropriate stage of 
Supplementary Grants (2017 -18) for implementing the 6 Plastic Parks, granted ‘in -
principle’ approval." 
CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE 
The Committee note that the Department has set up five Centres of Excellence (CoE) 
within the premises of reputed educational/research institutes viz (i)National 
Chemicals Laboratory (NCL), Pune – CoE for Sustainable Polymer Industry through 
Research, Innovation & Training (CoE -SPIRIT); (ii)Central Institute of Plastics 
Engineering & Technology (CIPET), Chennai – CoE for Green Transportation Network 
(GREET), (iii) IIT, Delhi – CoE for Advanced Polymeric Materials, (iv) CIPET, 
Bhubaneswar- CoE on Sustainable Green Materials and (v) IIT, Guwahati – CoE for 
Sustainable Polymers. 
The Committee are of the view that the scheme is vital for improving the 
petrochemicals technology and research in the country and to promote development 
of new applications of polymers and plastics. The Committee are dismayed to note 
that no funds have been allocated under the scheme. The Committee, would therefore 
recommend the Department to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance to 
provide funds under the scheme. The Committee would like to be informed of the 
action taken in this regard." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
  BHOPAL GAS LEAK DISASTER  
RECOMMENDATIONS SI.NO.4 
 "Concerning the Bhopal gas Leak Disaster in which after three decades toxic waste of 
300 tonnes remains to be incinerated, the Committee recommended as under:- 
The Committee observe that the Department in their Annual Report 2016 -17 have 
stated that UCIL waste was successfully incinerated at common hazardo us waste 
incineration at pitham pur, District Dhar, Madhya Pradesh by Central Pollution 
Control Board (CPCB) d uring 13-18 August 2015. During the course of evidence the 
Committee has been informed that 300 tonnes of wastes is still lying there and has to 
be incinerated by Government of Madhya Pradesh and it has been taken up with the 

32 
 
Ministry of Environment and po llution control Board because it is to be done under 
their supervision and to their satisfaction. 
The Committee are deeply anguished to note that even after three decades the toxic 
waste of 300 tonnes has not been incinerated so far. The Committee, therefo re, 
recommend that the Department may take immediate action in the matter to ensure 
that toxic waste is incinerated without any further delay by taking up the issue with 
the concerned Departments. The Committee would like to be informed of the action 
taken in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
"Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 24/6/2010 had decided that Govt. of Madhya 
Pradesh would be responsible for undertaking disposal of hazardous wastes and 
remediation of the erstwhile UCIL plant at Bhopal. Union Cabinet also  decided that  an 
Oversight Committee be  constituted in the Ministry of Environment , Forests and Climate 
Change to provide oversight and support to the State Government of Madhya Pradesh. As 
per the directions given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in  the Special Leave Petition ( Civil) 
No. 9874 of 2012 UoI Vs Alok Pratap Singh and Others,  10 MT of erstwhile UCIL waste was 
successfully incinerated at Common Hazardous Waste Incinerator at Pithampur, District 
Dhar, Madhya Pradesh by Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) during August 13 -18, 
2015 and thereafter the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change filed the 
report of incineration of 10 tonnes of UCIL waste to the Hon’ble Supreme Court.  
After successful incineration of 10 MT of UCIL waste, a meeting was taken by Secreta ry, 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals on 17/2/2016 with relevant stake holders 
to workout modalities for disposal of remaining UCIL waste of 337 MT (approximate). It 
was decided in the meeting that State Govt. of Madhya Pradesh and CPCB will co -ordinate 
with each other and prepare technical, financial proposals and schedule for the disposal 
rest of the UCIL waste. The decision was further reiterated in the review meeting taken by 
Secretary, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals on 3/8/2016 wit h the 
representatives of State Govt. of Madhya Pradesh. Further, Govt. of Madhya Pradesh was 
requested to expedite the process of disposal of UCIL waste. Reminders were also issued 
to the Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate Change to expedite the p ending issue 
of disposal of the remaining UCIL waste.   
Chairman, CPCB took a meeting with representatives of Govt. of Madhya Pradesh, 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals and Ministry of Environment, Forests and 
Climate Change on 23/9/2016 to discus s the modalities for disposal of remaining UCIL 
waste at TSDF, Pithampur and also invited Technical and Financial proposals for 
submission of the same to Oversight Committee.  
Thereafter, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change has communicated  the 
following decisions to the State Government of Madhya Pradesh on 9/5/2017: 
(vii) Disposal of the remaining 336 tons of toxic waste at UCIL site, Bhopal and 
remediation of the site thereafter being the exclusive responsibility of the Govt. of 
Madhya Pradesh should be carried out by the State Government itself. 
(viii)  CPCB will provide technical assistance for packaging , loading, transportation, 
unloading incineration, monitoring of the operation and assessment of emissions 
and other scientific requirements to the State Government for disposal of the waste. 

33 
 
(ix) Madhya Pradesh  Govt. should select the facility operator for final disposal of the 
waste. The parameters for technical qualification should remain one and same as 
with the facility during the disposal of the waste at trial stages in Pithampur. 
(x)  The selection process of the facility operator should have an integrated 
procurement offer with two bids, one for technical parameters and another for 
financial bid. 
(xi)  The technical parameters can open the offer to any faci lity operator in the country 
meeting all technical requirements. However, there must be a condition that a 
facility operator having the installation outside the State boundaries of Madhya 
Pradesh  should provide a consent certificate and NOC from the State  Govt. to the 
effect that the state toxic waste would be allowed to enter that State and would be 
permitted to be incinerated on the site located in that State. 
(xii) The final proposal would be forwarded by Madhya Pradesh Govt . to Oversight 
committee in Ministr y of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for  making 
recommendation to Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals and  D/o 
Expenditure for release of the funds to the State Govt. 
The matter is followed up with the State Government of Madhya Pradesh" 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                        ANANDRAO ADSUL 
09 August,  2017                           Chairperson 
18 Shravana, 1939 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on  
                                    Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

34 
 
Appendix – I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
  The Committee sat on  Wednesday, the 09 August, 2017 from 1500 hrs. 
to 1540 hrs. in Room No. 139, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Smt. Veena Devi 
5. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
6. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
7. Shri S. Rajendran 
8. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
9. Dr. Ratna De (Nag) 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
            1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
  2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
 3. Shri R. C. Sharma     - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee.   
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following Draft Action Taken 
Reports on :- 
(i) Demands for Grants 2017-18'  of Department of Fertilizers; 
(ii) Demands for Grants 2017-18' of Department of Pharmaceuticals; 
(iii) Demands for Grants 2017 -18'  of Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals; and 
(iv) Implementation of policy on promotion of city compost of Department of 
Fertilizers.  
4. After some deliberations  the Draft Action Taken Reports were adopted by the 
Committee without any changes. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to make 
consequential changes, if any, arising out of the factual verification of the Action Taken 
Reports by the Department of Fertilizers, Department of Pharmaceuticals and Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
5. The Committee thereafter decided to hold its next meeting on  
23rd August, 2017.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

35 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE THI RTY-THIRD REPORT (SIXTEENTH LO K SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE O N CHEMICALS AND FERTIL IZERS (2016 -17) ON 
‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2017-18)’ OF THE MINISTRY  OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS  (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 8 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1,7 and 8 )   
3 
 
Percentage of Total 37.5% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
NIL 
 
 
0 
 
Percentage of Total    0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:-   
 (Vide Recommendation Nos.  5 and 6 )   
2 
Percentage of Total 25 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos.  2,3 and 4) 
3 
 
Percentage of Total 37.5% 
 
 
 