 
  
 
 
 
 
 
51 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS (2017-18) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Forty Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants 2018-19' of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of   Pharmaceuticals) 
 
 
 
 
 FIFTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
JULY, 2018 /SHRAVANA, 1940 (SAKA) 
 
  


 
  
CC&F.No.51 
 
 
 FIFTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2017-18) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained  
in the  Forty Fifth  Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  on   'Demands for Grants 2018-19' of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of   Pharmaceuticals) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  31 July, 2018 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  31 July 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JULY, 2018 /SHRAVANA, 1940 (SAKA) 
  

 
  
 
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18) 
 
(iv) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
Chapter I Report  
 
1-18 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
19-27 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government' s  
replies 
 
28-29 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee  
30-35 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
36 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of Fourteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2017-18) held on 23.07.2018. 
 
37-38 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Forty fIfth Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers on 'Demands for Grants 2018-19'  pertaining to 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) 
 
39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
  
(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2017-18) 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
7. Dr. Ratna De Nag 
8. Smt. Veena Devi 
9. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
10. Shri Innocent 
11. Prof. A Seetaram Naik # 
12. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
13. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
14. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
15. Shri Rajendran S. 
16. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
17. Dr. Uma Saren 
18. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
19. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
20. 
21 
Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
Shri Sarfaraz Alam* 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad 
25.  Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar@ 
26 Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
27. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
28. Shri Abdul Wahab 
29. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade  
30. Vacant^ 
31. Vacant^ 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi                          Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Srivastava                                  Director 
3. 
4. 
Shri U. C. Bharadwaj                                 Deputy Secretary 
Ms. Sonia Sankhla                                    Committee Assistant 
    
  
 # Prof. A. Seetaram Naik MP, (LS) has been nominated as a Member of the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 3.11.2017   
vice  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy MP, (LS) who ceased to be a Member of the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 3.11.2017 
*Shri Sarfaraz Alam has been nominated as a Member of the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 27.04.2018 
@Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar has been nominated as a Member of the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 02.06.2018 
^Vacant vice Dr. Bhusan Lal Jangade due to his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 02.04.2018. 
^Vacant vice Shri K. Parasaran due to his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 28.06.2018. 
 
 
  

 
  
(v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 (2017-2018) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their 
behalf, present this Fifty-first Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Forty-fifth   
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(2017-18) on  Demands for Grants 2018-19  pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of  Pharmaceuticals) 
      
 
2. The Forty-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to  Lok Sabha on 13.03.2018.  The Action 
Taken replies of Government to all observations / recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 14.06.2018 The Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2017-2018) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
23.07.2018. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Forty-fifth Report  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Comments of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. - Chapter-I
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                    ANANDRAO ADSUL 
 27 July, 2018                                                                                    Chairperson 
05 Shravana 1940 (Saka)                                                Standing Committee on 
                                                                                                            Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER  I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendation s 
contained in the  Forty Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on  the 
Demands for Grants 2018- 19 of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
13.03.2018.  In all, the Committee made  9 Observations / Recommendations in  
the Report. 
2.  Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) were 
requested to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the  Forty Fifth Report within three months from the date of presentation of t he 
Report, i.e., by  12.06.2018. The Action Taken Replies of the Government i n 
respect of all the 9 Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Report have 
been received from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) vide their O.M. No. 23003/1/2018-IFD dated 12.06.20 18. These 
Replies  have been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations  that have been accepted by th e 
Government :- 
 Sl. Nos.  1, 3, 5,7, 8                                      (Total=5)                           
 These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s reply :- 
 Sl. No.  9                                 (Total = 1) 
 This may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report. 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee :- 

 
 
2 
 
 S l. No.  2, 4, 6                    (Total = 3 )  
 This may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited:- 
 Sl. Nos. Nil                           (Total =Nil )  
This may be included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and V of this Report should be  furnished 
expeditiously. 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on a ll the 
Observations/Recommendations which  still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A.  Budgetary Performance of North East Region (NER). 
Recommendation (Sl. No.2) 
5. While stressing that budget for the North East region be increased and 
equitably distributed among 8 states the Committee had recommended as under:- 
  
 "The Committee note that during the year 2017-18 at BE stage Rs. 31 .52 
crores was allocated for North East Region,  which were increased to Rs. 38.87 
crores at RE stage. As on 9.2.2018 the actual expenditure has been Rs. 3 1.50 
crores. The BE for 2018-19 for NER has been estimated at Rs 33.52 crores and 
the entire provision  for NER has been for NIPER Guwahati and the physical targ et 
is to complete the construction of NIPER Guwahati campus on the land allo cated 
by the State Government as well as academic activities. Besides PMBJP Kendra's 
have also been assisted in NER through this fund. 
 
 The Committee note that NIPER Guwahati started its academic session in 
2008 with the help of mentor institute Guwahati Medical College. Foundation stone 
for construction of NIPER Guwahati's own building was laid on May, 2015. 89 
acres land has been allocated and Engineering Projects India Limited (E PIL) has 
been selected as Project Management Consultant (PMC). Construction started in 
June 2015, however due to fund constraints, construction has been delay ed and 
as on date 37% construction has been done in past two and half years. 

 
 
3 
 
 Since the entire allocation of NER is utilized for NIPER Guwahati that 
means from 2015-16 to 2017-18 a total of Rs. 78.77 crores has been spent on this 
and in only one-third of construction of NIPER Guwahati building has b een 
completed. The Committee note that NER comprises of eight underdevelope d 
States Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland , 
Sikkim and Tripura having 46 million population. To address the needs of NER, the 
Committee recommend to increase allocation for NER so that physical targets like 
NIPER Guwahati building project can be completed in a fixed timeframe. Further 
this increased allocation would also help PMBJP Kendra's in NER to receive 
adequate and timely fund assistance to attain business sustainability an d extend 
the benefits of generic drug and medical devices to the common people of North 
East states. The Committee are of the view that the Department must explore the 
feasibility of equitable distribution of allocation meant for development of NER in 
Pharmaceuticals sector in all the 8 states instead of concentrating in one state for 
the inclusive development of this region."  
 
Reply of the Government 
6. In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the  
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:-  
"The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. Allocation 
under Major Head 2552(North Eastern Region) is made as per the instruction  of 
Ministry of Finance. Out of a total budget of Rs. 261.53 Crore , 13 % was  
earmarked for NER amounting to Rs. 33.52 Crore. However, an amount of Rs. 
46.00 crore have been released for construction/purchase of equipment during  
financial year 2017-18 to NIPER Guwahati. It has spent Rs. 26.85 Crore on 
construction activities by 31 st May 2018.  Nearly 47% of construction has been 
completed.  A meeting of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) was held on 26 th 
March 2018 under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary and equipping  ten 
NIPERs. The minutes of the meeting has been submitted for approval of Hon’ble 
Minister (C&F).  It is expected that construction activity of NIPER Guwahati will be 
completed during FY 2018-19 and NIPER Guwahati will start academic sessi on 
2019-20 from its own campus.  
As regards to PMBJP during 2017-18, the Government released Rs. 47.64 
core to BPPI for implementing the scheme throughout the country including ‘North 
Eastern States’.  The increased allocation in the MH 2552 for North Eastern Area 
is no doubt, the additional financial assistance for NE States which will help 
functional PMBJP Kendra ’s in NE States to attain business sustainability by 
fulfilling the main objective of the scheme i.e to make available qua lity generic 
medicines at affordable price to all. 

 
 
4 
 
As on 31.3.2018, 3322 PMBJP Kendras were functional in 33 States/UT s of 
the country out of which 158 were functional in North Eastern States.  A state- wise 
list of 158 functional PMBJP in NE states, is as under: 
Sl. 
No. 
North Eastern States Number of PMBJP 
Kendras 
1 Arunachal Pradesh 24 
2 Assam 52 
3 Manipur 36 
4 Meghalaya   1 
5 Mizoram   8 
6 Nagaland 11 
7 Sikkim   2 
7 Tripura 24 
 Total  158 
 
As on 28.05.2018, 3600 PMBJP Kendras are functional in 34 States/UTs of 
the country out of which 165 PMBJP Kendras are functional in North Eastern 
States.  A State-wise list of 165 PMBJP Kendras in NE States, is as under: 
Sl. 
No. 
North Eastern States Number of PMBJP Kendras 
1 Arunachal Pradesh 24 
2 Assam 59 
3 Manipur 35 
4 Meghalaya   1 
5 Mizoram   9 
6 Nagaland 13 
7 Sikkim   2 
7 Tripura 22 
 Total  165 
   
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. The Committee noted that the entire allocation of NER from 2015-16 to 
2017-18  was Rs. 78.77 crores which was   utilized only for NIPER Guwahati 
and worse the more that only forty seven percent of construction of NIPER 
Guwahati building has been completed. The Committee recommended that 
there is urgent need and there is need to increase allocation for NER so th at 
physical targets like NIPER Guwahati building project can be completed in a 
fixed timeframe.  The increased allocation would also help PMBJP Kendra's 
in NER to receive adequate and timely fund assistance to attain business 
sustainability and extend the benefits of generic drug and medical devices to 

 
 
5 
 
the common people of North East states. The Committee desired that the 
Department must explore the feasibility of equitable distribution of allocation 
meant for development of NER in Pharmaceuticals sector in all the 8 states 
instead of concentrating in one state for the inclusive development of this 
region.  
  The Department in their Action Taken Reply has stated that 
construction activity of NIPER Guwahati will be completed during FY 2018-19 
and NIPER Guwahati will start academic session 2019-20 from its own 
campus. As regards to PMBJP during 2017-18, the Government released Rs. 
47.64 core to BPPI for implementing the scheme throughout the country 
including ‘North Eastern States’. As on 28.05.2018, 3600 PMBJP Kendras are 
functional in 34 States/UTs of the country out of which 165 PMBJP Kendras 
are functional in North Eastern States.  The Committee are distressed to note 
that in the States of Sikkim and Meghalaya, there are only 2 and 1 PMBJP 
Kendras respectively.  The Committee are of the view that in the States of 
Sikkim and Meghalaya where tough terrain exist and it becomes very difficult 
for the rural folk to travel far, it is imperative that more number of PMBJP 
Kendras be opened and made functional in the States. 
  The Committee, therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation that 
there is need to further enhance the funds for North East region so that the 
PMBJP kendras can be further expanded to cover each district of all 8 
States of North East. 
 
B. National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority (NPPA). 
Recommendations No. 3 
8. While stressing on optimal utilization of funds by NPPA and its Consumer 
Awareness Schemes, Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that during 2017-18 National Pharmaceuticals Pricing  Authority 
(NPPA) were allocated Rs. 15 crores at BE stage which slightly got reduced to Rs 
14.42 crores at RE stage and actual expenditure as on 9.2.2018 has been assessed at 
Rs.8.09 crores. In 2018-19 Rs. 11.50 crores have been allocated fo r NPPA. The 
Committee also note that NPPA has convened National Conference on 'Aff ordable 
Medicines' in 2016, prepared a tele-film on 'Affordability of Medici nes'  through DAVP, 
taken e-initiatives like Pharma Jan Samadhan for grievance redressal, Integ rated 
Pharmaceutical Database Management System (IPDMS) for online submission o f 
information by pharmaceutical manufacturers , Mobile Application ‘Pharma SahiDaam’ 
and ‘Search Medicine Price ’ utility to facilitate easy search of the brand name, 
composition, ceiling price and MRP of the formulation.  

 
 
6 
 
 The Committee note that NPPA has under-utilized its allocated fund s in 2017-
18 which might have impacted the outreach of its e-initiatives and other imp ortant 
functions. The Committee therefore recommend the Department to check 
underutilization of allocated funds with NPPA which though is an autonomo us body 
and take sincere steps to optimally utilize the allocated funds. The Committe e further 
recommend  NPPA to monitor the availability and shortage of medicine s in PMBJP 
Kendra's set up in all States/UTs. 
  The Committee also strongly urge upon NPPA to conduct regional conference 
in close coordination with Panchayati Raj and Urban Local Bodies and to arran ge the 
tele-film on 'Affordability of Medicines'  in every PanchayatGhar of t he country so that 
people at grass root level are given firsthand information and knowledge a bout this. 
The Committee further would like the NPPA to include in their awareness campaign  
focus against use of spurious and expired medicines in under-dev eloped States of the 
country." 
9. In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:-  
"National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) is an attached office of Depart ment 
of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. The details of BE, RE an d 
actual expenditure of NPPA during FY 2017-18 are given below: 
 
Establishment Expenditure   
             (Rs In lakh) 
Sl. 
No
. 
Particulars BE  
2017-18 
RE  
2017-18 
Expenditure 
upto 
31.03.18 
BE 2018-
19 
1.  Establishment 
Expenditure 
1100.00 1042.00 953.71 1150.00 
 
 
Scheme of Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring  
                                                                                                                      (Rs In lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Object Head BE  
2017-18 
RE  
2017-18 
Expenditure 
upto 
31.03.18 
1. Office Expenses 400.00 200.00 6.43 
 Total 400.00 200.00 6.43 
 
The scheme of Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring was no t 
approved during 2017-18 and hence funds earmarked under the sch eme remained 
unutilized. 
 

 
 
7 
 
As per detailed Demands for Grants 2018-19, total allocation under various 
heads is as under:  
(Rs. In crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Scheme Name BE 2018-19 
1 Establishment Expenses  11.50 
2 Consumer Awareness Publicity and Price Monitoring (CAPPM) 
a Assistance to Project Monitoring Resource Units 
(PMRUs)  – Grants in Aid General 
2.00 
b Advertising and Publicity for CAPPM  2.00 
 Total  15.50 
 
 
As far as the monitoring of availability and shortage of medicines in PMBJP 
Kendra is concerned, it may be mentioned that PMBJP is being implemented by BPPI.  
 
 In respect of conducting regional conferences and awareness campaigns, th e 
recommendations of the committee have been noted for compliance. In  BE 2018- 19 
specific budgetary allocation have been made for PMRU and Advertisi ng and Publicity 
for CAPPM." 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
10. The Committee noted that during 2017-18 National Pharmaceuticals 
Pricing Authority (NPPA) were allocated Rs.15 crores at BE stage which slightly 
got reduced to Rs.14.42 crores at RE stage and actual expenditure as on 
9.2.2018 has been assessed at Rs.8.09 crores. Hence the Committee noted that 
the NPPA has under-utilized its allocated funds in 2017- 18 and recommended 
that the Department to check underutilization of allocated funds with NPPA and 
take steps to optimally utilize the allocated funds. The Department in their reply 
have stated that the scheme of Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price 
Monitoring was not approved during 2017-18 and hence funds earmarked under 
the scheme remained unutilized. As per detailed Demands for Grants 2018-19, 
total allocation under Establishment expenditure is Rs. 11.50 crores and 
Consumer Awareness Publicity and Price Monitoring (CAPPM) is Rs 4 crores 
which is divided into Rs.2 crores for Assistance to Project Monitoring Resource 
Units (PMRUs)  – Grants in Aid General and Rs.2 crores for Advertising and 
Publicity for Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring (CAPPM).  
 In view of the above the Committee feel that approval of schemes should 
have been the precondition for the allocation of funds so that funds are not 

 
 
8 
 
allowed to be lying unproductive and  dormant and could be utilized for other 
urgent developmental purposes. Thus the Committee hope that the Department 
would take sufficient steps for optimal utilization of funds allocated and prevent 
any underutilization only for want of approval of schemes. 
 The Committee also note that the NPPA is mandated to fix/revise the prices of 
controlled bulk drugs and formulations and enforce prices and availability of the 
medicines in the country. The Department in their reply stated that monitoring of 
availability and shortage of medicines in PMBJP Kendra is function of BPPI 
(Bureau of Pharmaceutical PSUs of India).   However, the Committee are not 
convinced with this reply  as NPPA is  overall regulator to ensure availability of  
medicine in country in general which also cover PMBJP .  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate its earlier recommendation  that    NPPA   to   monitor    the    
availability    of   medicines   at PMBJP Kendras in all States/UTs in close 
coordination with BPPI and Department of Pharmaceuticals to ensure that there 
is no dearth of medicines in PMBJP Kendras. 
 The Committee also hope that specific budgetary allocation for PMRU and 
advertising and publicity of CAPPM would augment awareness campaigns and 
more regional conferences would be held.  The Committee would like to be 
informed in this regard. 
 
C.  Consumer Awareness Publicity and Price Monitoring 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 4) 
11. The Committee while stressing need to set up PMRU in every State and UT  
recommended the Department as under:- 
"The Committee note that in the backdrop of the changing scenario in the pharma 
sector and the recommendations of various committees, the ongoing central sector 
scheme has been re-named as “Scheme of Consumer Awareness & Publicity and 
Price Monitoring” from 2015-16 onwards. As per approval of  the Standing Finance 
Committee this scheme has 2 components, a central component and a state 
component. The central component includes the joint publicity campaign by th e 
NPPA and Department of Consumer Affairs on a 50:50 cost sharing basis. Th e 
state component of the scheme comprises setting up of Price Monitoring  and 
Resource Units (PMRUs).   An amount of Rs. 5.45 crores was provided in BE 
(2016-17) which has been reduced to Rs. 2.87  crores under RE (2016-17) for the 
Scheme and actual expenditure was Rs 2.17 crores. Further the Committee note 
that during the year 2017-18 Rs. 4 crores were allocated at BE stage f or modified 
scheme-Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring, which remained 

 
 
9 
 
unaltered at RE stage however, expenditure could not be incurred due to  issues 
related to opening of a separate Head for the Plan Scheme of Consumer  
Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring with certain sub-heads, and obtainin g 
15 digit numeric head for the Scheme.  
 Now in 2018-19 again Rs.4 crores has been allocated. The Committee not e 
that the objectives of setting up the PMRUs are to provide necessary technical 
assistance to the State Drug Controllers and NPPA towards monitoring the notified  
prices of medicines, detection of violation of the provisions of DPCO, pricing 
compliance and ensuring availability of medicines, monitoring the p rice movement 
of scheduled and non-scheduled formulations, collection and compilation of market 
based data of scheduled and non-scheduled formulations, collection of tes t 
samples of medicines from the retail market whenever required and  con duct of 
training, seminars and workshops at the State and District levels for consumer 
awareness and publicity.  
 The Committee further note that this scheme was modified to cater to the 
requirement of payment for setting up of Price Monitoring and Re source Units 
(PMRU). The Modified scheme under approval envisaged creation of PM RUs in 
seven States viz Maharashtra, Gujarat, Orissa, Haryana, Kerala, Assam and 
Manipur on pilot basis. However, subsequently, this was limited to four State s viz. 
Kerela , Gujarat, Odisha and Maharashtra and as such no time limit has been 
fixed. Under the revised scheme, PMRU is proposed to be a registered society 
under the Chairmanship of the State Drugs Controllers with representatives from 
NPPA, Health Department of the State Government and of Civil Societies.  DO  
letters were sent by Chairman NPPA to Secretary (Health) of Kerala, Gujarat a nd 
Odisha for creation of societies enabling NPPA to release funds to these st ates 
after the approval of the modified scheme from Department of Pharmace uticals.   
The creation of the Society as proposed in the Scheme in the respective  states 
would enable early release of funds by NPPA. 
 The Committee would like the Department to convince each State and UT to 
have PMRU so that they can extend all necessary support to the State  Drug 
Controllers in carrying out monitoring and enforcement activities under the Drug 
Price Control Order, 2013 in their respective jurisdictions, which as on date is not  
up to the mark. As a result of this Indian drug market is adulterated with spurio us 
and expired drugs. PMRUs once established will also ensure that the benef its of 
the DPCO trickle down to the grassroots level, which is the need of the hour. Thus, 
the Committee recommend the Department to work in close coordination with 
NPPA, State Drugs Controllers, State Health Department and likeminded Civil 
society representatives where PMRUs are being implemented on pilot basis. 
Thereafter,  based on the success of these pilot projects the scheme should be 
implemented in other states/UT within a fixed timeframe."  

 
 
10 
 
Reply to the Government 
 
12. In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, th e 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
  "During the year 2017-18, out of the RE of Rs. 2.00 crore, an amo unt of Rs. 
6.43 lakhs was released under central component. No amount could be incu rred 
for setting up of Price Monitoring and Resource Units (PMRU), as there was no 
separate Head for the Scheme of Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Pri ce 
Monitoring.  
 
 For the year 2018-19, Rs. 4.00 crore has been allocated for the schem e. 
Government has since approved the modified scheme ‘Consumer Awareness, 
Publicity and Price Monitoring ’ on 17.04.2018. The scheme will be implemented at 
Central level by NPPA and at the State level by registered societies of Price 
Monitoring & Resource Units (PMRUs). 
Budget head for the scheme has also been opened. The modifica tion in the 
scheme has been done to cater to the requirement of payment for se tting up of 
Price Monitoring and Resource Units (PMRU). Under the revised scheme, PMRUs 
is proposed to be a registered society under the Chairmanship of the State Drugs 
Controllers. NPPA has requested the State Governments of Kerala, Gujarat and 
Odisha for creation of societies.  The creation of the society as proposed in the 
scheme in the respective States would enable early release of funds by NPPA  in 
order to achieve the objectives of the scheme. 
  The committee ’s recommendations in respect of working of DoP in close 
coordination with NPPA and other stakeholders has been noted for compliance." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13. The Committee have noted that Price Monitoring and Resource Units 
(PMRUs) are to be set up in all States and UTs under the state component of 
the Scheme of Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring.  The 
Department during examination of Demand for Grants informed that Rs. 4 
crores were allocated at BE stage during the year 2017- 18 for modified 
scheme-Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring, which 
remained unaltered at RE stage. However, the action taken replies of the 
Department state that during the year 2017-18, out of the RE of Rs. 2.00 
crore, an amount of Rs. 6.43 lakhs was released under Central component. 
Further, the Committee are distressed to know that this allocated amount 
could not be incurred due to issues related to opening of a separate Head 
for the Plan Scheme of Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price 
Monitoring with certain sub-heads. The Committee areof the view that the 
Department has failed in utilizing the allocated amount due to lack of prior 

 
 
11 
 
planning and budgetary mechanism to utilize the allocated amount for the 
welfare of consumers. The amount was kept dormant for whole year 2017-
18, which could have been utilized optimally otherwise. Hence, the 
Committee strongly feel that the Department could have done adequate 
home work first and created proper budgetary mechanism like budget 
Heads so that the fund could have been utilized without any delay. The 
Committee  note that the Budget Head has now been opened and expect 
that the Department will take adequate steps to expeditiously  coordinate 
with State and UT Governments for creation of PMRUs . The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
D. National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER) 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 5) 
14. While expressing  the view that, prompt steps may be taken to give required 
financial handholding to NIPERs and make them the "IITs of the Pharm aceuticals 
sector", the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 "The Committee note that in order to acquire leadership position in drug 
discovery and development and to continue to excel in the formulations, 
Government recognized that human resources/talent pool is very critical. National 
Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research (NIPER) at SAS Nagar (Mohali)  
was set up as a registered society in 1991 under the Societies Registration Act 
1860, Subsequently the Institute was given statutory recognition by an act o f 
Parliament, NIPER Act, 1998 and was declared as an Institute of National 
Importance. Further during 2007-08, six new NIPERs were started at Ahmedabad , 
Guwahati, Hajipur, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Raebareli with the help of Mentor 
Institutes. Subsequently, NIPER at Madurai was approved in the year 2012. During 
2015-16, Finance Minister in his Budget Speech announced 3 new NIPERs for the 
states of Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra and Rajasthan at New Raipur, Nagpur and 
Jhalawar respectively.  
 The Committee note that during the year 2017-18 Rs 96.23 crore s were 
allocated to NIPER at BE stage which increased to Rs 112.81 crores at RE stage. 
However only Rs 88.21 was the actual expenditure. Rs 101.50 crores has bee n 
allocated for the year 2018-19 against the proposed demand of R s 300 crores of 
the Department. Further, Expenditure Finance Committee proposal for 10 NIPERs 
has been sent to Ministry of Finance for seeking Rs. 2048.6 crores for next three 
years (including Rs. 1262.45 crores for 2018-19).The Committee note that on o ne 
hand department is proposing higher amount under this scheme and o n the other 

 
 
12 
 
hand unable to utilize the allocated amount despite of pending con struction work 
and need of new technical instruments in these institutes.  
 The Committee further note that all the existing NIPERs except NIPER 
Mohali, are presently governed by a Steering Committee under the chairma nship 
of Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals. NIPER Mohali has its own Bo ard of 
Governors. All NIPERs, except NIPER Hyderabad and NIPER, Hajipur have 
regular Directors and process for their appointment is at final stages. Since all 
NIPERs except NIPER Mohali are functioning in absence of Board of Governors so 
the Committee recommend that all NIPERs shall be governed by their own B oard 
of Governors. They also recommend to expedite appointment of reg ular Directors 
for NIPER Hyderabad and Hajipur for effective governance and management of 
these institutes. 
 The Committee note that department has not been able to elevate  NIPERs 
as institutes of excellence. All NIPER institutes except Mohali are reeling u nder 
multiple problems- fund crunch, insufficient internal resource generation, pending 
building construction, under paid adhoc and contractual faculty, and run ning 
courses in rented buildings without requisite infrastructure support. All this has 
lowered the prestige and defeated the purpose for which these institutes we re set 
up. Thus, the Committee strongly recommend that all NIPERs shall be accorded  
with statutory status by an act of Parliament at par with NIPER Mohali. The 
Committee also recommend the Department to take prompt steps to give required  
financial handholding to NIPERs so that pending campus construction of all 
NIPERS is completed in a time bound manner and good salary packages can be 
offered to attract best faculty in these institutes. The Committee also endo rse the 
NITI Aayog recommendation that there is need to re-engineer business m odel of 
the NIPERs in order to make them the "IITs of the Pharmaceuticals sector" and 
thus department shall choke out a suitable roadmap for smooth function ing of all 
existing NIPERs as they have to play a pivotal role in developing highly skilled  
human resource for expanding Indian Pharmaceuticals sector." 
Reply to the Government 
15.  In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the  
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
 "Rs. 46.00 crore have been released to NIPER Guwahati for 
construction/purchase of equipment during financial year 2017-18.  NIPER 
Guwahati has spent Rs. 26.85 crore on construction activities by 31 st May 218.  
Nearly 47% of construction has been completed.  A meeting of Expenditu re 
Finance Committee (EFC) was held on 26 th March 218 under the Chairmanship of 
Finance Secretary and equipping ten NIPERs. The minutes of the meeting  has 

 
 
13 
 
been submitted for approval of Hon ’ble Minister (C&F).  It is expected that 
construction activity of NIPER Guwahati will be completed during FY 2018-1 9 and 
NIPER Guwahati will start academic session 2019-20 from its own campus.  
Once sufficient funds are allocated by Ministry of Finance, construction 
activities in NIPERs will be started and they will be equipped with basic 
infrastructure like lab, equipments.  Action will be initiated to create sanctioned  
posts from Department of Expenditure. 
Director, NIPER Hyderabad has been selected and file is under submission 
for approval of Visitor.  Applications for selection of Director NIPER Hajipur have 
been received.  The re-constituted Search cum Selection Committee has been  
requested to expedite the selection process of Director Hajipur. It is expected that  
both posts will be filled up shortly. Action has been taken to constitu te the Board of 
Governors (BoG) for six NIPERs." 
Comments of the Committee 
 
16. The Committee had noted in their original Report that the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals has not been able to elevate NIPERs as institutes of 
excellence. All NIPER institutes except Mohali are reeling under multiple 
problems- fund crunch, insufficient internal resource generation, pending 
building construction, under paid adhoc and contractual faculty, and running 
courses in rented buildings without requisite infrastructure support.  
The  Committee note that the Department in their Action Taken Reply have 
stated that NIPER Guwahati will be completed during FY 2018-19 and NIPER 
Guwahati will start academic session 2019-20 from its own campus. The 
Department has assured that once sufficient funds are allocated by Ministry 
of Finance, construction activities in NIPERs will be started and they will be 
equipped with basic infrastructure like lab, equipments and action will be 
initiated to create sanctioned posts from Department of Expenditure. The re-
constituted Search cum Selection Committee has been requested to expedite 
the selection process of Director Hajipur. It is expected that both posts will 
be filled up shortly. 
 The Committee appreciate  the Department for having taken due note 
of all matters raised by this Committee on functioning of NIPERs. However , 
they are still not fully satisfied and convinced with the stereotyped reply of 
the Department that paucity of funds is stumbling block in the construction 
of NIPERs. The Department/Ministry should have taken the matter with 
Ministry of Finance at the highest level and obtain requisite fund for 
developing all NIPERs. The Committee are of the strong view that piece meal 
measure are not going to empower the existing NIPERs as institutes of 

 
 
14 
 
excellence unless they are supported closely.  They, therefore ,  cannot help 
but reiterate their earlier recommendation and would like to be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
E.  National centre For R&D in Bulk Drug  
 
Recommendations Sl. No. 6 
17. While expressing that the Department to swiftly utilize the funds allo cated 
for Bulk Drug Industry, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 "The Committee note that the Department initiated setting up of National 
Centre for R&D in Bulk Drug (NCRDBD), in order to promote inter-linkages with the 
industry at the allocated site of NIPER-Hyderabad at Genome Valley of M edak 
District. Standing Finance Committee (SFC) has approved Rs.54.20 crores in 2014 
for this purpose. However, Rs. 12 crores was actual utilization under this scheme 
in 2015-16. During the year 2016-17 and 2017-18 only Rs 0.01 crores has been 
allocated but there is nil actual utilization in both the years. In the year 2018-19 as 
well no allocation has been done under this scheme. The Committee no te that the 
first and foremost challenge is availability of cheaper imported Active 
Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) after globalization, which has badly hit the 
indigenous bulk drug development & industry. The Committee further note th at the 
bulk drug industry is highly polluting and its effluents are highly hazardous,  whose 
treatment adds to the cost of production. For this the government has started a 
scheme for assistance to Bulk Drug Parks in which Govt. will fund the common 
facility including Effluent Treatment Plants.  The Standing Finance Committee 
(SFC) has Further approved Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common 
Facilitation Centre on 7.2.2018. The Committee recommend the Department to 
swiftly utilize the allocated funds under this scheme for Bulk Drug industry . The 
Committee also note that inverted duty structure is also adversely impacting the 
bulk drug production sector and  recommend the Department to address the m ajor 
issue of inverted duty structure so that import of bulk drugs can be checked and 
domestic bulk drug industry is made competitive and sustainable." 
Reply of the Government 
18. In reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, th e 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
 "An Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed between National 
Projects Construction Corporation Ltd (NPCC) and NIPER Hyderabad for Setting 

 
 
15 
 
up  National  Centre for R&D in Bulk Drug (NCRDBD) with project outlays for Rs. 
54.20  crore after approval of Standing Finance Committee (SFC). According ly, 
Rs.12.00 crore were released during FY 2015-16. Since the construction of NIPER 
Hyderabad campus has been delayed due to scarcity of funds, the activity for 
establishment of NCRDBD could not be initiated. NIPER Hyderabad has been 
requested to return unutilized funds to Government. 
 Department of  Pharmaceuticals had recommended to Ministry of Finance 
correction of Inverted Duty Structure in Pharmaceuticals Industry. Ministry of 
Finance vide notification No. 6/2016-Customs dated 28.1.2016 withdrew the 
Custom Duty exemptions granted to certain categories of drugs/bulk drugs."  
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
19. The Committee observed that  the Department has initiated setting up 
of National Centre for R&D in Bulk Drug (NCRDBD), in order to promote inter-
linkages with the industry at the allocated site of NIPER-Hyderabad. In their 
Action Taken Reply the Department stated that an Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) was signed between National Projects Construction 
Corporation Ltd (NPCC) and NIPER Hyderabad for Setting up  National  
Centre for R&D in Bulk Drug (NCRDBD) with project outlays for Rs. 54.20  
crore after approval of Standing Finance Committee (SFC). Accordingly, 
Rs.12.00 crore were released during FY 2015-16. Since the construction of 
NIPER Hyderabad campus has been delayed due to scarcity of funds, the 
activity for establishment of NCRDBD could not be initiated. NIPER 
Hyderabad has been requested to return unutilized funds to Government.  
 The Committee seriously find that there is clear cut contradiction in 
version of the action taken reply of the Government wherein the latter has 
stated on one hand that the construction work for NIPER, Hyderabad got 
delayed due to scarcity of funds and on the other hand NIPER Hyderabad is 
directed to return unutilized funds. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that 
the Department  of Pharmaceuticals to take setting up of National Centre for 
R&D in Bulk Drug (NCRDBD) on priority basis alongwith hazardous effluents  
treatment plant. The Committee, would like to be apprised of the action taken 
by the Department in this regard. 
F. Development of Pharmaceuticals Industry 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 7) 
20.   The Committee while stressing on optimal utilization of funds under 
umbrella  Scheme for Development of Pharma Industry Recommended as under:- 

 
 
16 
 
 " The Committee note that ‘Scheme for Development of Pharma industry ’ is 
an Umbrella Scheme comprising of five sub-schemes (i)Assistance to Bulk Drug 
Industry for Common Facilitation Centres, (ii) Assistance to Medical Device 
Industry for Common Facilitation Centres, (iii) Assistance to Pharmaceutical 
Industry (CDP-PS) (iv) Pharmaceuticals Technology Up-gradation Assistance 
Scheme (PTUAS) and (v)  Pharmaceutical Promotion and Development Schem e 
(PPDS). During 2017-18 Rs 17.02 crores were allocated at BE stage which 
reduced to Rs 12.03 crores at RE stage and actual expenditure was just Rs. 0.77 
crores. Now for the current year 2018-19 Rs 12.97 crores have been  allocated. 
The committee note that department has not utilized the allocation  made under 
three ongoing sub-schemes mentioned above at (iii), (iv) and (v) . Two su b-
scheme mentioned above at (i) and (ii) are a fresh initiative of the Depa rtment and 
was considered by the SFC in its meeting held on 7/2/2018 only. 
 
 The Committee also note that the Department Action Plan for 2018- 19 
under ‘Scheme for Development of Pharma industry ’ with budget allocation of Rs 
12.97 crores are- (i) Initiation of Common Facility Centres in 2 Bulk Drug Parks 
under sub scheme Assistance to Bulk Drug Parks for Common Facility Centre 
which needs up to Rs.100 Crores, (ii) Initiation of Common Facility Centres in 2  
Medical Device Parks under sub-scheme Assistance to Medical Device Parks for 
Common Facility Centre which needs up to Rs.25 Crores, (iii) Up-gradation to 
WHO-GMP standards of up to 100 units in private sector under sub-scheme  
Pharmaceuticals Technology Up-gradation Assistance Scheme(PTUAS), (iv) 
Initiation of Common Facilities Centres in 3 Clusters promoted by Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV) under sub-scheme Cluster Development Programme for Pharma 
Sector (CDP-PS) and (v) Conducting  India Pharma and Indian Medical Exp o; 
seminars, exhibitions etc. under Pharmaceutical Promotion & Development 
Scheme (PPDS).The Committee further note that the Cluster Development 
Programme for Pharma Sector (CDP-PS) scheme could not take off despite th e 
best efforts of the Government and Projects and Development India Limited 
(PDIL), the Project Management Consultant (PMC) had called for four expression 
of Interest (EOIs) and the responses were not encouraging in spite of the  
modification in the scheme and only one Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV ) has been 
found suitable.  
 
  The Committee seriously note the gross underutilization of funds during 
2017-18  which has impacted the implementation process of these sub-sche mes. 
The Committee further note that the Department has clubbed these scheme s 
under an umbrella programme which gives flexibility to utilize funds in these sub-
schemes as and when needed. The Committee are of considered view that un less 
and until the problem of underutilization is duly addressed, no effective outco mes 
intended by these sub-schemes will be achieved. Thus the Committee rec ommend 

 
 
17 
 
the Department to take necessary steps to ensure optimum utilization of all ocated 
funds under this Scheme for Development of Pharmaceuticals industry an d 
enhance the allocation at RE stage as the current allocation of Rs12.97  crores at 
BE stage is grossly insufficient for accomplishing the aforesaid Action Plan of th e 
Department for the year 2018-19.  The Committee further recommend the 
Department to take innovative steps to generate pharmaceutical industry att raction 
towards Cluster development programme so as to disseminate benefit of 
economies of scale and increase production of affordable medicines in the country 
at large scale." 
 
Reply of the Government 
21.  In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Departme nt of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
 "It is brought to the notice of the committee that of the five sub-sche mes 
comprising the Scheme for Development of Pharmaceuticals Industry, only  two 
sub schemes viz. CDP- PS & PPDS are ongoing scheme and the other three sub-
schemes are fresh initiatives which were considered by the SFC in the meeting 
held on 07.02.2018.  The draft guidelines for implementing the scheme  have now 
been approved.  All efforts will be made to ensure optimum utilization of allocated 
funds in accordance with the approved guidelines.  
 The recommendation of the Committee to enhance the allocation at RE 
stage has been noted and would be taken up at the appropria te time keeping in 
view the funds requirement at the time.  The Committee ’s recommendation to take 
innovative steps to generate Pharmaceuticals Industry attraction towards Cluster 
Development Programme has been noted for further compliance." 
Comments of the Committee 
 
22. The Committee had noted that  Department allocated Rs 12.97 crores 
for the   Action Plan for 2018-19 under ‘Scheme for Development of Pharma 
industry’  which includes (i) Initiation of Common Facility Centres in 2 Bulk 
Drug Parks under sub scheme Assistance to Bulk Drug Parks for Common 
Facility Centre which needs up to Rs.100 Crores, (ii) Initiation of Common 
Facility Centres in 2 Medical Device Parks under sub-scheme Assistance to 
Medical Device Parks for Common Facility Centre which needs up to Rs.25 
Crores, (iii) Up-gradation to WHO-GMP standards of up to 100 units in private 
sector under sub-scheme Pharmaceuticals Technology Up-gradation 
Assistance Scheme(PTUAS), (iv) Initiation of Common Facilities Centres in 3 
Clusters promoted by Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) under s ub-scheme 

 
 
18 
 
Cluster Development Programme for Pharma Sector (CDP-PS) and (v) 
Conducting  India Pharma and Indian Medical Expo; seminars, exhibitions 
etc. under Pharmaceutical Promotion & Development Scheme (PPDS). 
However during 2017-18 Rs 17.02 crores were allocated at BE stage which 
reduced to Rs 12.03 crores at RE stage but actual expenditure was just Rs. 
0.77 crores.  
 
 The Department in their action taken reply has simply assured 
compliance of the Committee's recommendation on optimal utilization of 
allocated funds, enhance the allocation at RE stage and innovative steps to 
take off Cluster Development Programme.   However, no concrete action plan 
to translate the assurance given into reality has been dwelt upon.  The 
Committee are not satisfied with the stereotyped reply of the Department and 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation  to chalk out a concrete 
action plan for the smooth implementation of the umbrella Scheme for 
Development of Pharma Industry and would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
19 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 1) 
 The Committee note that during the year 2017-18 Rs 247.74 crores was  
allocated to Department of Pharmaceuticals at BE stage, which got increase d to 
Rs 266.09 crores at RE stage but as on 9.02.2018 the actual expen diture of the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has been only Rs 190.17crores which is Rs 7 5.92 
crores short of the allocated budget. This reflects on poor budgetary plan ning and 
dissatisfactory fund utilization capacity of the Department of Pharmaceutica ls, 
which would also result in lowering the pace of implementation of all crucial  
schemes viz. NIPERs, Jan Aushadhi (PMBJP) scheme for Development of 
Pharma Industry and assistance to PSUs. This also further contradicts the fund  
constraint argument given by the Department while explaining their inability to fulfill 
their physical targets under various schemes pending for want of sufficient funds. 
 The Committee also notes that time and again the Department is resorting 
to supplementary grants from Ministry of Finance which has added an addition al 
channel of approval with regard to funds allocation and disbursement apa rt from 
annual allocation. The Committee consider that this could have been avoide d had 
the Department undertaken in-depth assessment of its budgetary requireme nts 
and thereafter had also utilized the allocated funds in a time boun d manner.  
However, poor budgetary planning and delays in utilization of funds has  not only 
affected Department's Budgetary performance but has also impacted its noble 
mandate of providing affordable drugs and medicals devices to the poor pe ople of 
the country. The Committee further note that relatively shorter financial lending 
terms for long gestation research and development projects of pharmaceuticals 
and need for incentivizing innovation activities are major obstacles to the growth of 
pharmaceuticals sector in the country.   
 The Committee therefore, strongly recommend the Department to stress 
upon scientific budgetary planning, effectively utilize allocated funds in time boun d 
manner, enhance efficiency of its internal budgetary analysis, address structural 
and procedural lacunas  coming in way of fund utilization and take up the issue of 
long term financial lending facility for long gestation pharmaceuticals projects  and 
providing more tax incentives for such projects with the Ministry of Finance. 
Reply of the Government 
Details of original allocation under Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and  
Actual expenditure during the last six financial years are given below:  

 
 
20 
 
 
 
(Rs. In crore) 
Schem
e 
BE RE Actual 
Expenditur
e 
% 
actua
l vs 
RE  
Supplementar
y  
2015-
16 
259.0
2 
219.3
9 
212.66 96.93 24.29 
2016-
17 
211.4
0 
211.4
0 
*307.57 145.4
9 
100.02 
2017-
18 
247.7
4 
266.1
1 
252.41 94.85 18.37 
 
*Supplementary Rs.100.00 crores loan to HAL for Salary etc.  
It can be seen that during the last 3 financial years the Department has been 
consistently able to utilize 95 % of the funds allocated to it at the RE  stage by the 
Ministry of Finance.  Suggestions of the Committee have been noted for 
compliance for better utilization of funds in future.  
Recommendations (Sl. No. 3) 
 The Committee note that during 2017-18 National Pharmaceuticals Pri cing 
Authority (NPPA) were allocated Rs. 15 crores at BE stage which slightly go t 
reduced to Rs 14.42 crores at RE stage and actual expenditure as on 9.2.2018 has 
been assessed at Rs.8.09 crores. In 2018-19 Rs. 11.50 crores have been 
allocated for NPPA. The Committee also note that NPPA has convened Nationa l 
Conference on 'Affordable Medicines' in 2016, prepared a tele-film on  'Affordability 
of Medicines'  through DAVP, taken e-initiatives like Pharma Jan Samadh an for 
grievance redressal, Integrated Pharmaceutical Database Management System 
(IPDMS) for online submission of information by pharmaceutical manu facturers , 
Mobile Application ‘Pharma Sahi Daam ’ and ‘Search Medicine Price ’ utility to 
facilitate easy search of the brand name, composition, ceiling price and MRP of the 
formulation.  
 The Committee note that NPPA has under-utilized its allocated funds in 
2017-18 which might have impacted the outreach of its e-initiatives an d other 
important functions. The Committee therefore recommend the Department to 
check underutilization of allocated funds with NPPA which though is an 
autonomous body and take sincere steps to optimally utilize the alloca ted funds. 
The Committee further recommend  NPPA to monitor the availability and shortage 
of medicines in PMBJP Kendra's set up in all States/UTs. 

 
 
21 
 
  The Committee also strongly urge upon NPPA to conduct regional 
conference in close coordination with Panchayati Raj and Urban Local Bodies and 
to arrange the tele-film on 'Affordability of Medicines'  in every Pa nchayat Ghar of 
the country so that people at grass root level are given firsthand informa tion and 
knowledge about this. The Committee further would like the NPPA to include in 
their awareness campaign focus against use of spurious and expired  medicines in 
under-developed States of the country. 
 
Reply of the Goverment 
 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) is an attached office of 
Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. The details 
of BE, RE and actual expenditure of NPPA during FY 2017-18 are given below: 
 
Establishment Expenditure   
             (Rs In lakh) 
Sl.No. Particulars BE  
2017-
18 
RE  
2017-18 
Expend
iture 
upto 
31.03.1
8 
BE 
2018-
19 
1.  Establishment 
Expenditure 
1100.00 1042.00 953.71 1150.00 
 
 
Scheme of Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring  
                                                                                                        (Rs In lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Object Head BE  
2017-
18 
RE  
2017-18 
Expenditure 
upto 
31.03.18 
1. Office Expenses 400.00 200.00 6.43 
 Total 400.00 200.00 6.43 
 
The scheme of Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring was 
not approved during 2017-18 and hence funds earmarked under th e scheme 
remained unutilized. 
 
As per detailed Demands for Grants 2018-19, total allocation under va rious 
heads is as under:  
(Rs. In crore) 
Sl. No Scheme Name BE 2018-19 
1 Establishment Expenses  11.50 
2 Consumer Awareness Publicity and Price Monitoring (CAPPM) 

 
 
22 
 
a Assistance to Project Monitoring Resource 
UnitS (PMRUs)  – Grants in Aid General 
2.00 
b Advertising and Publicity for CAPPM  2.00 
 Total  15.50 
 
 
As far as the monitoring of availability and shortage of medicines in P MBJP 
Kendra is concerned, it may be mentioned that PMBJP is being imple mented by 
BPPI.  
 
 In respect of conducting regional conferences and awareness campaigns, 
the recommendations of the committee have been noted for complianc e. In BE 
2018-19 specific budgetary allocation have been made for PMRU a nd Advertising 
and Publicity for CAPPM.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.10 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 5) 
 The Committee note that in order to acquire leadership position in drug 
discovery and development and to continue to excel in the formulations, 
Government recognized that human resources/talent pool is very critical. National 
Institute of Pharmaceutical Education & Research (NIPER) at SAS Nagar (Mohali)  
was set up as a registered society in 1991 under the Societies Registration Act 
1860, Subsequently the Institute was given statutory recognition by an act of 
Parliament, NIPER Act, 1998 and was declared as an Institute of National 
Importance. Further during 2007-08, six new NIPERs were started at Ahmedab ad, 
Guwahati, Hajipur, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Raebareli with the help of Mentor 
Institutes. Subsequently, NIPER at Madurai was approved in the year 2012. During 
2015-16, Finance Minister in his Budget Speech announced 3 new NIPERs for the 
states of Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra and Rajasthan at New Raipur, Nagpur an d 
Jhalawar respectively.  
 The Committee note that during the year 2017-18 Rs 96.23 crores w ere 
allocated to NIPER at BE stage which increased to Rs 112.81 crores at RE stage. 
However only Rs 88.21 was the actual expenditure. Rs 101.50 crores has bee n 
allocated for the year 2018-19 against the proposed demand of R s 300 crores of 
the Department. Further, Expenditure Finance Committee proposal for 10 NIPERs 
has been sent to Ministry of Finance for seeking Rs. 2048.6 crores for next three 
years (including Rs. 1262.45 crores for 2018-19).The Committee note that on o ne 
hand department is proposing higher amount under this scheme and o n the other 

 
 
23 
 
hand unable to utilize the allocated amount despite of pending con struction work 
and need of new technical instruments in these institutes.  
 The Committee further note that all the existing NIPERs except NIPER 
Mohali, are presently governed by a Steering Committee under the chairma nship 
of Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals. NIPER Mohali has its own Bo ard of 
Governors. All NIPERs, except NIPER Hyderabad and NIPER, Hajipur have 
regular Directors and process for their appointment is at final stages. Since all 
NIPERs except NIPER Mohali are functioning in absence of Board of Governors so 
the Committee recommend that all NIPERs shall be governed by their own B oard 
of Governors. They also recommend to expedite appointment of regu lar Directors 
for NIPER Hyderabad and Hajipur for effective governance and management of 
these institutes. 
 The Committee note that department has not been able to elevate  NIPERs 
as institutes of excellence. All NIPER institutes except Mohali are reeling u nder 
multiple problems- fund crunch, insufficient internal resource generation, pending 
building construction, under paid ad-hoc and contractual faculty, and running  
courses in rented buildings without requisite infrastructure support. All this has 
lowered the prestige and defeated the purpose for which these institutes we re set 
up. Thus, the Committee strongly recommend that all NIPERs shall be accorde d 
with statutory status by an act of Parliament at par with NIPER Mohali. The 
Committee also recommend the Department to take prompt steps to give required  
financial handholding to NIPERs so that pending campus construction of all 
NIPERS is completed in a time bound manner and good salary packages can b e 
offered to attract best faculty in these institutes. The Committee also endo rse the 
NITI Aayog recommendation that there is need to re-engineer business m odel of 
the NIPERs in order to make them the "IITs of the Pharmaceuticals sector" and 
thus department shall choke out a suitable roadmap for smooth function ing of all 
existing NIPERs as they have to play a pivotal role in developing highly skilled  
human resource for expanding Indian Pharmaceuticals sector. 
Reply to the Government 
Rs. 46.00 crore have been released to NIPER Guwahati for construction/pu rchase 
of equipment during financial year 2017-18.  NIPER Guwahati has spent  Rs. 26.85 
crore on construction activities by 31 st May 218.  Nearly 47% of construction has 
been completed.  A meeting of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) was held on 
26th March 218 under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary and equipping ten  
NIPERs. The minutes of the meeting has been submitted for approval of Hon’ble 
Minister (C&F).  It is expected that construction activity of NIPER Guwahati will b e 
completed during FY 2018-19 and NIPER Guwahati will start academic sessi on 
2019-20 from its own campus.  

 
 
24 
 
Once sufficient funds are allocated by Ministry of Finance, construction 
activities in NIPERs will be started and they will be equipped with basic 
infrastructure like lab, equipments.  Action will be initiated to create sanctioned  
posts from Department of Expenditure. 
Director, NIPER Hyderabad has been selected and file is under submission 
for approval of Visitor.  Applications for selection of Director NIPER Hajipur have 
been received.  The re-constituted Search cum Selection Committee has been  
requested to expedite the selection process of Director Hajipur. It is expected that 
both posts will be filled up shortly. 
Action has been taken to constitute the Board of Governors (BoG) for six 
NIPERs. 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.16 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee note that ‘Scheme for Development of Pharma industry ’ is 
an Umbrella Scheme comprising of five sub-schemes (i)Assistance to Bulk Drug 
Industry for Common Facilitation Centres, (ii) Assistance to Medical Device 
Industry for Common Facilitation Centres, (iii) Assistance to Pharmaceutical 
Industry (CDP-PS) (iv) Pharmaceuticals Technology Up-gradation Assistance 
Scheme (PTUAS) and (v)  Pharmaceutical Promotion and Development Schem e 
(PPDS). During 2017-18 Rs 17.02 crores were allocated at BE stage which 
reduced to Rs 12.03 crores at RE stage and actual expenditure was just Rs. 0.77 
crores. Now for the current year 2018-19 Rs 12.97 crores have been a llocated. 
The committee note that department has not utilized the allocation  made under 
three ongoing sub-schemes mentioned above at (iii), (iv) and (v) . Two su b-
scheme mentioned above at (i) and (ii) are a fresh initiative of the Depa rtment and 
was considered by the SFC in its meeting held on 7/2/2018 only. 
 The Committee also note that the Department Action Plan for 2018- 19 
under ‘Scheme for Development of Pharma industry ’ with budget allocation of Rs 
12.97 crores are- (i) Initiation of Common Facility Centres in 2 Bulk Drug Parks 
under sub scheme Assistance to Bulk Drug Parks for Common Facility Centre 
which needs up to Rs.100 Crores, (ii) Initiation of Common Facility Centres in 2  
Medical Device Parks under sub-scheme Assistance to Medical Device Parks for 
Common Facility Centre which needs up to Rs.25 Crores, (iii) Up-gradation to 
WHO-GMP standards of up to 100 units in private sector under sub-scheme  
Pharmaceuticals Technology Up-gradation Assistance Scheme(PTUAS), (iv) 
Initiation of Common Facilities Centres in 3 Clusters promoted by Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV) under sub-scheme Cluster Development Programme for Pharma 

 
 
25 
 
Sector (CDP-PS) and (v) Conducting  India Pharma and Indian Medical Exp o; 
seminars, exhibitions etc. under Pharmaceutical Promotion & Developmen t 
Scheme (PPDS).The Committee further note that the Cluster Development 
Programme for Pharma Sector (CDP-PS) scheme could not take off despite th e 
best efforts of the Government and Projects and Development India Limited 
(PDIL), the Project Management Consultant (PMC) had called for four expression 
of Interest (EOIs) and the responses were not encouraging in spite of the  
modification in the scheme and only one Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV ) has been 
found suitable.  
 
The Committee seriously note the gross underutilization of funds during 
2017-18  which has impacted the implementation process of these sub-sche mes. 
The Committee further note that the Department has clubbed these schemes 
under an umbrella programme which gives flexibility to utilize funds in these sub-
schemes as and when needed. The Committee are of considered view that un less 
and until the problem of underutilization is duly addressed, no effective outco mes 
intended by these sub-schemes will be achieved. Thus the Committee rec ommend 
the Department to take necessary steps to ensure optimum utilization of all ocated 
funds under this Scheme for Development of Pharmaceuticals industry an d 
enhance the allocation at RE stage as the current allocation of Rs12.97 crores at 
BE stage is grossly insufficient for accomplishing the aforesaid Action Plan of the 
Department for the year 2018-19.  The Committee further recommend the 
Department to take innovative steps to generate pharmaceutical industry att raction 
towards Cluster development programme so as to disseminate benefit of 
economies of scale and increase production of affordable medicines in the country 
at large scale. 
 
Reply of the Government 
It is brought to the notice of the committee that of the five sub-sche mes comprising 
the Scheme for Development of Pharmaceuticals Industry, only two sub schem es 
viz. CDP-PS & PPDS are ongoing scheme and the other three sub-scheme s are 
fresh initiatives which were considered by the SFC in the meeting held on 
07.02.2018.  The draft guidelines for implementing the scheme ha ve now been 
approved.  All efforts will be made to ensure optimum utilization o f allocated funds 
in accordance with the approved guidelines.  
The recommendation of the Committee to enhance the allocation at RE stage has 
been noted and would be taken up at the appropriate time keeping  in view the 
funds requirement at the time.  The Committee ’s recommendation to take 
innovative steps to generate Pharmaceuticals Industry attraction towards Cluster 
Development Programme has been noted for further compliance.  

 
 
26 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.22 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 8) 
 The Committee note that Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariy ojana 
(PMBJP) was launched by the Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers, Government of India in November, 2008 across the 
country.  These specific outlets are now called "Pradhan Bhartiya Jana ushadhi 
Pariyojana (PMBJP) Kendra ’s".  The scheme is being implemented through an 
agency namely Bureau of Pharma PSUs of India (BPPI) (the implementing agency 
of PMBJP) which is working under the administrative control of Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals &Fertilizers, Government of India. During 
the year 2017-18, Rs. 74.62 crores have been allocated at RE st age and Rs.47.64 
crores was released to BPPI but only Rs 29.63 crores have been the a ctual 
utilization under this scheme. During the current year 2018-19, the  allocation at BE 
stage has been increased to Rs.84 crores. Further as per the three year plan of the 
PMBJP, 1000 more PMBJP Kendra ’s have been targeted to open in the country in 
each financial year beyond 2017-18 that is 2018-19 and 2019-2020.  
  
 The Committee appreciate that the Department has expanded the outreach 
of PMBJP Kendra’s and as on27.02.2018, 3,195 PMBJP Kendras’ are functional in 
33 States / Union Territories of the country.   Further for smooth supply of 
medicines, surgical and consumables to PMBJP Kendras through Central Ware 
House (CWH) of Bureau of Pharma PSUs of India (BPPI) (the implementing 
agency of PMBJP), 8 Carrying & Forwarding (C&F) Agents and 53 Distributors 
have been appointed in different parts of the country. The product b asket of the 
scheme has also been expanded to cover more than 700 medicine s and 154 
surgical& consumables covering all major therapeutic groups such as Anti-
infective, Anti-diabetics, Cardio vascular, Anti-cancers, Gastro-intestinal medicines, 
etc. However, the Committee observe that the current supply chain mechanism  for  
3195 functional Kendra is not sufficient to provide timely supply of gen eric drugs 
and medical devices to common people. Thus, the Committee recommend the  
Department to explore the feasibility for opening of Regional Warehouses and 
expand its Carrying & Forwarding (C&F) Agents and  Distributors network on need  
basis in areas facing supply side limitations. They also recommend that a 
technology based real time tracking system from CWC to PMBJP Kendra be 
evolved to ensure pilferage free supply of generic medicines and medical devices. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
27 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Jan Aushadhi Scheme has been revised the renamed as ‘Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya 
Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) ’.During 2017-18, Rs. 74.62 crore was allocated 
at BE stage for PMBJP which reduced to Rs. 54.62 crore at RE stage.  During  
2017-18, Rs. 47.64 crore was released to BPPI which was the actual expen diture 
under PMBJP.  Hence, Rs. 6.98 crore remained unspent as on 31.3.2018.  As on 
31.3.2018,  Rs. 44.51 crore was the actual utilization out of Rs. 47.64 cr ore 
released to BPPI under PMBJP and hence, Rs. 3.03 crores remained unspent.   
 
 As on 18.05.2018,  3571 PMBJP Kendra ’s are functional in 33 States/UTs of the 
country.  As per the present supply chain management system of PMBJP, 1  
central ware house (CWH) is established at IDPL Complex, Gurugram, Haryana.   
Besides this, 8 carrying and forward (C&F) Agents and 53 Distributors are also 
appointed in different parts of the country to ensure continuous supply  of 
medicines, surgical and consumables to 3571 PMBJP Kendra ’s across the 
country.  Besides this, an IT enabled end to end supply chain system  has also 
been introduced through a SAP (Systems, Applications, Product in data 
processing) based software for making full range of medicines available at BP PI’s 
Central Ware House (CWH) to all  PMBJP Kendra ’s, through auto ordering and 
dispatching.  This system has a provision for real time recording and tracking the 
receiving and dispatching of medicines form CWH, Gurugram at all physical 
locations. Under this system, a professional agency namely M/s Ethics Infinity P vt. 
Ltd has been appointed by BPPI for providing end to end supply ch ain 
management solution for the scheme wherein medicines and other products will be 
supplied from CWH to PMBJP Kendra ’s directly to save time and cost.  BPPI is 
also in process of opening regional warehouses at Kolkata, Guwahati, Mumbai, 
Nagpur, Indore, Chennai and Bangalore by the end of July 2018 for ensuri ng 
uninterrupted supply of medicines to PMBJP Kendra ’s.  BPPI is also implementing 
‘Point of Sale’ software application at all PMBJP Kendra ’s so that the Kendra’s can 
order medicines on real time basis and can receive medicines directly from Central 
warehouse/regional warehouses.  With the help of such state of art and 
customized IT enabled system, BPPI is looking to reduce its turnaround time  for 
dispatching orders to PMBJP Kendra ’s to 24 hour and for delivering to the 
Kendra’s to 96 hours.  BPPI is committed to ensure smooth and prescribed 
interrupted supply of order  within the minimum turnaround time. 
 
 
 

 
 
28 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 Recommendations (Sl.No. 9) 
 The Committee note that of the five PSUs, thr ee viz. Indian Drug & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL),Hindustan Antibiotic Limited( HAL)&Bengal Chemicals & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) are sick and referred to Board for Industrial & Financial 
Reconstruction(BIFR). Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limit ed (RDPL) has r eported 
losses since 2013-14 and is incipient sick. Karn ataka Antibiotic & Pharmaceuticals Limited 
(KAPL) is the only profit making CPSE. The Committee also note that from 2015-
16the Department has changed its scheme from Project Based Support to  PSU to 
new scheme Assistance to PSUs. Under Assistance to PSUs Scheme during 
2015-16 Rs.0.04 crores were allocated at BE stage which was withdrawn at RE 
stage. During 2016-17 Rs.0.10 crores were allocated at BE and RE stage, 
however actual utilization was nil. During 2017-18 Rs.0.06 crores were all ocated at 
BE and RE  stage with nil actual utilization. For the current year 201 8-19 again 
Rs.0.06 crores have been allocated.  
 Further the Committee note that the Cabinet meeting held on 28.12.2 016 
decided that only that much of surplus land of HAL, IDPL, RDPL and BCPL a s 
would be required to meet the liabilities be sold through open competitive  bidding 
to Government agencies and the outstanding liabilities be cleared from the sale 
proceeds. Voluntary Separation Scheme/ Voluntary Retirement Scheme also be 
implemented in these PSUs to pave way for their closure. Remaining part o f the 
land should be managed in accordance with guidelines of Department of 
Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) and Department of Pu blic 
Enterprises (DPE) in this regard and if need be, vested in a SPV crea ted for this 
purpose. After liabilities have been met, balance sheet cleansed an d the Voluntary 
Separation Scheme/Voluntary Retirement Scheme effected, the Departmen t to 
close IDPL and RDPL and HAL and BCPL be put up for strategic sale. The 
Committee also note that Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its 
meeting held on 1.11.2017 has ‘in principle ’ approved strategic disinvestment of 
100% Government of India equity in Karnataka Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals 
Limited (KAPL), Bengaluru through a two-stage auction process. 
  
 The Committee note that the allocation under Assistance to PSUs is o nly a 
token allocation, the reason is well known that is to keep the head op en and alive 
for seeking more funds in future. However at the same time the Committee 
impress upon the Department to implement the decisions of the Cabine t 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) dated 28.12.2016 and 1.11.2017 

 
 
29 
 
respectively. The Committee further recommend the Department to ensure 
accurate evaluation of PSUs assets before going for strategic sale to private 
players. The Committee also recommend the Department to focuson internal 
administrative streamlining and management reforms in RDPL in the same way as 
BCPL has done in 2017-18, till a final way out is reached. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Department is taking necessary steps for implementation of the 
decision of Cabinet/CCEA dated 28.12.2016 and 01.11.2017 respectively .  It has 
been decided to close IDPL and RDPL and strategically sell BCPL and HAL afte r 
meeting their liabilities from sale of their surplus land. In pursuance of the  Cabinet 
Decision, the Department t has obtained Non objection from the state Government 
concerned, wherever required for sale of land of all four PSUs.  The tend er for the 
land were issued through the authorized Auctioning agency , M/s MSTC. 
In order to achieve better response to the tenders, advertisements were 
issued in newspapers. Further, the Central Government Departments State 
Government and Maharashtra PSUs and Financial institutions are requested to bid 
for the land.  
As IDPL and HAL had huge outstanding with consortium of Banks and 
negotiations at their level did not yield results, the Department held  joint 
negotiation and was able to persuade banks to take substantial  ‘haircuts’ and 
finalized ‘One Time Settlement.  RDPL and HAL have framed voluntary retirement 
schemes (VRS) for their surplus employees.  
As regard valuation of the assets of the companies under strategic sale, the 
same would be done as per the department of investment and public assets 
management (DIPAM) guidelines.   Further, it is informed that production activities 
at RDPL have stopped after fire at its plant in October 2016.   As the Government 
has already taken a decision for its closure, administrative and streamlining 
management reforms at its junction is not required.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
30 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 2) 
 The Committee note that during the year 2017-18 at BE stage Rs. 31. 52 
crores was allocated for North East Region,  which were increased to Rs. 38.87 
crores at RE stage. As on 9.2.2018 the actual expenditure has been Rs. 3 1.50 
crores. The BE for 2018-19 for NER has been estimated at Rs 33.52 crores and 
the entire provision  for NER has been for NIPER Guwahati and the physical targ et 
is to complete the construction of NIPER Guwahati campus on the land allo cated 
by the State Government as well as academic activities. Besides PMBJP Kendra's 
have also been assisted in NER through this fund. 
 
 The Committee note that NIPER Guwahati started its academic session in 
2008 with the help of mentor institute Guwahati Medical College. Foundation stone 
for construction of NIPER Guwahati's own building was laid on May, 2015. 89  
acres land has been allocated and Engineering Projects India Limited (E PIL) has 
been selected as Project Management Consultant (PMC). Construction started in 
June 2015, however due to fund constraints, construction has been delay ed and 
as on date 37% construction has been done in past two and half years. 
 
 Since the entire allocation of NER is utilized for NIPER Guwahati that 
means from 2015-16 to 2017-18 a total of Rs. 78.77 crores has been spent on this 
and in only one-third of construction of NIPER Guwahati building has been 
completed. The Committee note that NER comprises of eight underdevelope d 
States Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, 
Sikkim and Tripura having 46 million population. To address the needs of NER, the 
Committee recommend to increase allocation for NER so that physical targets like 
NIPER Guwahati building project can be completed in a fixed timeframe. Further 
this increased allocation would also help PMBJP Kendra's in NER to receive 
adequate and timely fund assistance to attain business sustainability an d extend 
the benefits of generic drug and medical devices to the common people of North 
East states. The Committee are of the view that the Department must explore the 
feasibility of equitable distribution of allocation meant for development of NER in  
Pharmaceuticals sector in all the 8 states instead of concentrating in one state for 
the inclusive development of this region.   
 
 
 

 
 
31 
 
Reply of the Goverment 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. A llocation 
under Major Head 2552(North Eastern Region) is made as per the instruction  of 
Ministry of Finance. Out of a total budget of Rs. 261.53 Crore , 13 % was  
earmarked for NER amounting to Rs. 33.52 Crore.   However, an amount of Rs. 
46.00 crore have been released for construction/purchase of equipment during  
financial year 2017-18 to NIPER Guwahati. It has spent Rs. 26.85 crore on 
construction activities by 31 st May 2018.  Nearly 47% of construction has been 
completed.  A meeting of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) was held on 26 th 
March 2018 under the Chairmanship of Finance Secretary and equipping  ten 
NIPERs. The minutes of the meeting has been submitted for approval of Hon’ble 
Minister (C&F).  It is expected that construction activity of NIPER Guwahati wil l be 
completed during FY 2018-19 and NIPER Guwahati will start academic sessi on 
2019-20 from its own campus.  
As regards to PMBJP during 2017-18, the Government released Rs. 47.64 
core to BPPI for implementing the scheme throughout the country including ‘North 
Eastern States’.  The increased allocation in the MH 2552 for North Eastern Area 
is no doubt, the additional financial assistance for NE States which will help 
functional PMBJP Kendra ’s in NE States to attain business sustainability by 
fulfilling the main objective of the scheme i.e. to make available quality generic 
medicines at affordable price to all. 
As on 31.3.2018, 3322 PMBJP Kendras were functional in 33 States/UT s of 
the country out of which 158 were functional in North Eastern States.  A state- wise 
list of 158 functional PMBJP in NE states, is as under: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
North Eastern States Number of PMBJP 
Kendras 
1 Arunachal Pradesh 24 
2 Assam 52 
3 Manipur 36 
4 Meghalaya   1 
5 Mizoram   8 
6 Nagaland 11 
7 Sikkim   2 
7 Tripura 24 
 Total  158 
 

 
 
32 
 
As on 28.05.2018, 3600 PMBJP Kendras are functional in 34 States/UTs of 
the country out of which 165 PMBJP Kendras are functional in North Eastern 
States.  A State-wise list of 165 PMBJP Kendras in NE States, is as under: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
North Eastern States Number of PMBJP Kendras 
1 Arunachal Pradesh 24 
2 Assam 59 
3 Manipur 35 
4 Meghalaya 1 
5 Mizoram 9 
6 Nagaland 13 
7 Sikkim 2 
7 Tripura 22 
 Total  165 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendations (Sl. No. 4) 
 The Committee note that in the backdrop of the changing scenario in the 
pharma sector and the recommendations of various committees, the ongo ing 
central sector scheme has been re-named as “Scheme of Consumer Awareness & 
Publicity and Print Monitoring ” from 2015-16 onwards. As per approval of  the 
Standing Finance Committee this scheme has 2 components, a central compone nt 
and a state component. The central component includes the joint publi city 
campaign by the NPPA and Department of Consumer Affairs on a 50:50  cost 
sharing basis. The state component of the scheme comprises setting u p of Price 
Monitoring and Resource Units (PMRUs)  An amount of Rs. 5.45 crores was 
provided in BE (2016-17) which has been reduced to Rs. 2.87  crores und er RE 
(2016-17) for the Scheme and actual expenditure was Rs 2.17 crores. Furthe r the 
Committee note that during the year 2017-18 Rs. 4 crores were allocated at BE 
stage for modified scheme-Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Mon itoring, 
which remained unaltered at RE stage however, expenditure could not be incurred  
due to issues related to opening of a separate Head for the Plan Sc heme of 
Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring with certain sub-heads, and 
obtaining 15 digit numeric head for the Scheme.  
 Now in 2018-19 again Rs.4 crores has been allocated. The Committee not e 
that the objectives of setting up the PMRUs are to provide necessary technical 

 
 
33 
 
assistance to the State Drug Controllers and NPPA towards monitoring the notified  
prices of medicines, detection of violation of the provisions of DPCO, pricing 
compliance and ensuring availability of medicines, monitoring the p rice movement 
of scheduled and non-scheduled formulations, collection and compilation of market 
based data of scheduled and non-scheduled formulations, collection of tes t 
samples of medicines from the retail market whenever required and  con duct of 
training, seminars and workshops at the State and District levels for consumer 
awareness and publicity.  
 The Committee further note that this scheme was modified to cater to the 
requirement of payment for setting up of Price Monitoring and Re source Units 
(PMRU). The Modified scheme under approval envisaged creation of PM RUs in 
seven States v iz. Maharashtra, Gujarat, Orissa, Haryana, Kerala, Assam and 
Manipur on pilot basis. However, subsequently, this was limited to four States viz. 
Kerala , Gujarat, Odisha and Maharashtra and as such no time limit has been 
fixed. Under the revised scheme, PMRU is proposed to be a registered society 
under the Chairmanship of the State Drugs Controllers with representatives from 
NPPA, Health Department of the State Government and of Civil Societies.  DO  
letters were sent by Chairman NPPA to Secretary (Health) of Kerala, Gujarat a nd 
Odisha for creation of societies enabling NPPA to release funds to these st ates 
after the approval of the modified scheme from Department of Pharmace uticals.   
The creation of the Society as proposed in the Scheme in the respective  states 
would enable early release of funds by NPPA. 
 The Committee would like the Department to convince each State and UT to 
have PMRU so that they can extend all necessary support to the State  Drug 
Controllers in carrying out monitoring and enforcement activities under the Drug 
Price Control Order, 2013 in their respective jurisdictions, which as on date is not 
up to the mark. As a result of this Indian drug market is adulterated with spurio us 
and expired drugs. PMRUs once established will also ensure that the benef its of 
the DPCO trickle down to the grassroots level, which is the need of the hour. Thus, 
the Committee recommend the Department to work in close coordination with 
NPPA, State Drugs Controllers, State Health Department and likeminded Civil 
society representatives where PMRUs are being implemented on pilot basis. 
Thereafter based on the success of these pilot projects the scheme should be 
implemented in other states/UT within a fixed timeframe.  
Reply to the Government 
 
 During the year 2017-18, out of the RE of Rs. 2.00 crore, an amou nt of Rs. 
6.43 lakhs was released under central component. No amount could be incu rred 
for setting up of Price Monitoring and Resource Units (PMRU), as there was no 
separate Head for the Scheme of Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price  
Monitoring.  

 
 
34 
 
 
 For the year 2018-19, Rs. 4.00 crore has been allocated for the schem e. 
Government has since approved the modified scheme ‘Consumer Awareness, 
Publicity and Price Monitoring ’ on 17.04.2018. The scheme will be implemented at 
Central level by NPPA and at the State level by registered societies of Price 
Monitoring & Resource Units (PMRUs). 
Budget head for the scheme has also been opened. The modifica tion in the 
scheme has been done to cater to the requirement of payment fo r setting up of 
Price Monitoring and Resource Units (PMRU). Under the revised scheme, PMRUs 
is proposed to be a registered society under the Chairmanship of the State Drugs 
Controllers. NPPA has requested the State Governments of Kerala, Gujarat and 
Odisha for creation of societies.  The creation of the society as proposed in the 
scheme in the respective States would enable early release of funds by NPPA  in 
order to achieve the objectives of the scheme. 
The committee ’s recommendations in respect of working of DoP in close 
coordination with NPPA and other stakeholders has been noted for compliance. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.13 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendations Sl. No. 6 
 The Committee note that the Department initiated setting up of National 
Centre for R&D in Bulk Drug (NCRDBD), in order to promote inter-linkages with the 
industry at the allocated site of NIPER-Hyderabad at Genome Valley of M edak 
District. Standing Finance Committee (SFC) has approved Rs.54.20 crores in 2014 
for this purpose. However, Rs. 12 crores was actual utilization under this scheme 
in 2015-16. During the year 2016-17 and 2017-18 only Rs 0.01 crores has been 
allocated but there is nil actual utilization in both the years. In the yea r 2018-19 as 
well no allocation has been done under this scheme. The Committee no te that the 
first and foremost challenge is availability of cheaper imported Active 
Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) after globalization, which has badly hit the 
indigenous bulk drug development & industry. The Committee further note th at the 
bulk drug industry is highly polluting and its effluents are highly hazardous,  w hose 
treatment adds to the cost of production. For this the government has started  a 
scheme for assistance to Bulk Drug Parks in which Govt. will fund the common 
facility including Effluent Treatment Plants.  The Standing Finance Committee 
(SFC) has Further approved Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common 
Facilitation Centre on 7.2.2018. The Committee recommend the Department to 
swiftly utilize the allocated funds under this scheme for Bulk Drug industry . The 
Committee also note that inverted duty structure is also adversely impacting the 
bulk drug production sector and  recommend the Department to address the m ajor 

 
 
35 
 
issue of inverted duty structure so that import of bulk drugs can be checked and 
domestic bulk drug industry is made competitive and sustainable. 
Reply of the Government 
An Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed between National Projects 
Construction Corporation Ltd (NPCC) and NIPER Hyderabad for Setting up  
National  Centre for R&D in Bulk Drug (NCRDBD) with project outlays for Rs. 
54.20  crore after approval of Standing Finance Committee (SFC). According ly, 
Rs.12.00 crore were released during FY 2015-16. Since the construction of NIPER 
Hyderabad campus has been delayed due to scarcity of funds, the activity for 
establishment of NCRDBD could not be initiated. NIPER Hyderabad has been 
requested to return unutilized funds to Government. 
Department of  Pharmaceuticals had recommended to Ministry of Finance 
correction of Inverted Duty Structure in Pharmaceuticals Industry. Ministry of 
Finance vide notification No. 6/2016-Customs dated 28.1.2016 withdrew the 
Custom Duty exemptions granted to certain categories of drugs/bulk drugs.   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
36 
 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE  STILL AWAITED 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                         ANANDRAO ADSUL 
27 July,  2018                                          Chairperson, 
05 Shravana 1940 (Saka)                                        Standing Committee on         
                                                                            Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

 
 
37 
 
Appendix- I 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2017-18) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 23 July, 2018 from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in  
Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
5. Smt. Veena Devi 
6. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
7. Shri S. Rajendran 
8. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
9. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
10. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma     
11. Dr. Prof. Seetaram Naik 
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
13. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
14 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 

 
 
38 
 
SECRETARIAT 
            1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi   - Joint Secretary 
        2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
            3. Shri U. C. Bharadawaj -            Deputy Secretary  
2. At the outset, the Hon ’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee.   
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the following draft 
Reports: 
(i)  Draft Report on the subject 'Assam Gas Cracker Report' of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
  
 (ii) Draft Report on Action taken Replies by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty First Report of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (16 th Lok Sabha) on the subject 'Freight Subsidy Policy' of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers);  
(iii) Draft Report on Action taken replies by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty Fifth Report of the Standing Committee 
on Chemicals and Fertilizers (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demand for Grants (2018-19)' 
of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
(iv) Draft Report on Action taken replies by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty Fourth Report of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (16th Lok Sabha) on 'Demand for Grants 
(2018-19)' of  the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals). 
4. After deliberations the Draft Reports were adopted by the Committee. without any 
changes/amendments.  
5. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to make consequential changes, if any, 
arising out of the factual verification of the Reports by the Department of Fertilizers, 
Department of Pharmaceuticals and Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 
 
39 
 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY FIFTH REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2018-19) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2018-19)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
S. No. Total No. of Recommendations 9 
I Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1,3,5,7,8 )   
5 
 
Percentage of Total 56 % 
II Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 9 )   
 
1 
 
Percentage of Total    11 % 
III Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
reply of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and which require reiteration:-   
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 2,4,6) 
3 
Percentage of Total 33 % 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Nil 
0 
 
Percentage of Total 0% 
 
 