 
 
P a g e  | 1 
 
27 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS (2016-17) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained  
in the Twenty Second Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on "Demands for Grants 2016-17" of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
 
 TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
NOVEMBER, 2016 /AGRAHAYANA, 1938 (SAKA) 
 
  


 
 
P a g e  | 2 
CC&F.No.27 
 
 
TWENTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained  
in the Twenty Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on "Demands for Grants 2016-17" of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28 November 2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28 November 2016 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
NOVEMBER, 2016 /AGRAHAYANA, 1938 (SAKA) 
  

 
 
P a g e  | 3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) 
 
iii 
INTRODUCTION 
 
v 
Chapter I Report  
 
1 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
19 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government' s  
replies 
 
26 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee  
 
27 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
28 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of third Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2016-17) held on 26.10.2016. 
 
30 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second 
Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2016 -17) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals). 
 
32 
  

 
 
P a g e  | 4 
(iii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Innocent 
9. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
11. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle 
12. Shri Rajendran S. 
13. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
14. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
15. Dr. Uma Saren 
16. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
17. Shri Taslimuddin 
18.  Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
19. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
20. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
21. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27. Shri K Parasaran 
28. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
29. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
30. Shri Abdul Wahab 
31. Smt. Roopa Ganguly 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
  Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
  Shri A.K.Srivastava  - Director 
  Shri H. RamPrakash  - Additional Director 
  Shri Thangkhanlal Ngaihte - Senior Committee Assistant  

 
 
P a g e  | 5 
(v) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2016-2017) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twenty Seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Stan ding Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers on "Demands 
for Grants 2016 -17" of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals).  
 
2. The Twenty Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 28.04.2016. The Action Taken 
replies of Government to all observations/ recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 02.07.2016.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2016 -2017) 
considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 26.10.2016. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience the Comments of the Committee have been 
printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                      ANANDRAO ADSUL 
 22  November, 2016                                                                                   Chairperson 
 01  Agrahayana 1938 (Saka)                                               Standing Committee on 
 
 

 
 
P a g e  | 1 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2016-17) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants  
(2016-17)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 28.4.2016. In all, the Committee made 
10 Observations / Recommendations in the Report. 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
were requested to furnish replies to the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Seventh Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e. by 
29.7.2016. The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 10 Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from  the Minist ry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers  (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals ) vide their O.M. 
No.23003/3/2016-Fin. (Vol. III) dated 2 .7.2016.  These Replies have been examined and 
categorized as follows:-  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government- 
 Rec. Nos. 1, 2, 5, 7 and 9                                                   (Total =5) 
            Chapter-II  
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply-  
Rec. No. Nil         (Total =0) 
             Chapter-III 
  
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration-  
 Rec. No. Nil                         (Total=0) 
              Chapter-IV  
 
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  final replies of the 
Government are still awaited- 
Rec. Nos. 3, 4, 6, 8 and 10                                (Total =5) 
              Chapter-V  
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the  Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report should be furnished 
expeditiously.  
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  

 
 
P a g e  | 2 
A. MID-TERM APPRAISALS  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
5. While recommending that the Department should work with the Niti Aayog and the 
Ministry of Finance for release of required funds for various projects of the Department , the 
Committee had recommended as under:   
 "The Committee observe that the mid -term appraisal of the funding and allocation for 
the schemes/programmes under the Department have shown major problems with 
regard to Plastic Parks, CIPET and Hindustan Fluorocarbons Ltd (HFL). Since the 
existing 12th Plan budgetary allocation for the Plastic Parks sche me is insufficient 
even for the 4 proposals under implementation, the Department is unable to consider 
proposals from  States like Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and Kerala for 
implementing Plastic Parks in their States. As for CIPET, there is a need to i ncrease 
budgetary support given by the Department for capital expenditure from Plan funds as 
CIPET needs substantial additional investment for building up its infrastructure to the 
required level for existing CIPET centres and also for its expansion in oth er States. For 
HOCL, all the budgetary support sanctioned for it from 2013 -14 to 2015 -16 could not 
be released as HOCL has been a defaulter in repayment of its loans to the Government.  
   The Committee further note that the Ministry of Finance vide its or ders dated 
17.2.2016 had reiterated its decision dated 03.02.2015 not to release any loans to 
PSUs, and because of that, the funds that were allocated to the PSUs in the Capital 
Section for 2015-16 could not be released.   
  In view of the above, the Commi ttee recommend that the Department should take 
remedial steps with regard to the problems uncovered during the mid -term appraisal 
of schemes and programmes. As regards HOCL, non -repayment of loans and interests 
which resulted in its being barred from recei ving more funds, will further aggravate 
the crisis in the company. The problems has been there for a long time and needs 
effective intervention from the Department to alleviate the crisis. The Department 
therefore should work with the Niti Aayog and the Mi nistry of Finance so that the 
required funds for PSUs and Plastic Parks may be sanctioned. Infusion of funds to 
refurbish the basic infrastructure of CIPET may also be carried out. The Committee 
expect the Department to take effective measures on the above issues and intimate the 
action taken to the Committee at the earliest." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
6. In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The Department has appraise d Ministry of Finance of requirement of additional 
budgetary allocation in the current year to support under implementation CIPET 
schemes. The projected and additional plan funding requirement of Rs. 96.09 crore 
forCIPET’s infrastructure is central to the mission of strengthening of CIPET’s 
infrastructure & capacities and shall be projected in the supplementary grants of 
2016-17. 
HOCL and HFL are loss -making PSUs and registered with BIFR as sick companies. 
Issues relating to sick, loss -making and non -performing CPSEs are being examined by 

 
 
P a g e  | 3 
the NITI Aayog. Further action on HOCL and HFL will be taken based on the final 
decision of the Government in the matter. 
As regards HIL, a proposal for release of Plan loan of Rs. 10.00 crore, that was available 
in the Dep artment’s budget for 2015 -16, for setting up Multi -product facility of 
capacity of 1000TPA at Rasayani Unit was referred on 11.01.2016 to Ministry of 
Finance for seeking prior approval as HIL has defaulted in the repayment of Govt. 
Loans and interests. However, as the decision/ approval of Ministry of Finance was not 
received in the Department by the end of FY 2015 -16, the Plan provision of Rs. 10 
crore had to be surrendered. 
Subsequently, the proposal was received from M/o Finance on 13.06.2016. DEA, M/o 
Finance, has requested the Department to re -examine the proposal in  terms of M/o 
Finance’s OM dated 03.02.2016 which instructs that the window of investment and 
working capital loan to CPSUs from Govt. Of India, in general, is closed. PSUs in general 
are hardly having debt and hence should raise  debt from market or banks. Only if PSU 
is justified as significant from strategic/ security angle, banks refuse loan to it and it 
has no real assets including land to monetise, would loan be considered at 11% with 
the prior approval of Budget Division. 
In view of the above comments of M/o Finance, the proposal is being re -examined in 
consultation with HIL. In the current FY 2016 -17, Plan loan provision of Rs. 15 crore 
for HIL has been made in the Department’s budget.  Decision on resubmitting the 
proposal to M/o Finance would be taken after re -examination of the proposal is 
completed. 
The Department had the requirement of Rs. 127.41 crore for Plastic Parks in the 2016 -
17, but the allocated amount is Rs. 45.00 crore onl y. Subsequently, the Department 
requested for an additional sum of Rs. 82.41 crore to meet the plan requirement in the 
Supplementary Demands for 2016 -17. The matter has already been taken up with 
Internal Finance Division for allocation of the balance requ isite funds for the Scheme, 
and is being followed up regularly." 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
7.  The Committee, in their recommendation, had asked the Department to  take 
remedial steps with regard to the problems uncovered during the mid -term appraisal 
of schemes and programmes and  desire that the Department should work with the 
Niti Aayog and the Ministry of Finance so that the required funds for PSUs and Plastic 
Parks, etc.  may be sanctioned.  
 In its Action Taken Replies (ATR), the Department had referred to a recent 
note from the Ministry of Finance which stated that the window of investment and 
working capital loan to CPSUs from the Government  of India, in general, is  closed, 
hence necessitating the re-examination of the proposal to release a Plan loan of Rs. 10 
crore for HIL. Decision on resubmitting the proposal to the Ministry of  Finance would 
only be taken after re -examination of the proposal is completed.  As for the Plastic 
Parks, the Department had stated that the request by the Department for an 

 
 
P a g e  | 4 
additional sum of Rs. 82.41 crore in the Supplementary Demands for 2016 -17 has 
already been taken up with the Internal Finance Division and is followed up regularly.  
 In view of the above, the Committee desire that the Department should 
complete the re -examination of the proposal for release of Plan loan for HIL at the 
earliest and then pursue the matter vigorously with the Ministry of Finance. Further, 
the Committee are of the  view that additional funds are urgently required for Plastic 
Parks and desire the Department to pursue the ir request for the same with the 
Ministry of Finance in a proactive manner. The action taken on the matters dealt 
above may be communicated i n detail to the Committee at the time of furnishing 
Action Taken Statements.   
B. BUDGET PROPOSALS AND ACTUAL ALLOCATION 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
8.  Emphasizing the need to regularly appraise the Niti Aayog/Ministry of Finance, 
Government of India, about the projects and schemes  of the Department,  the Committee  had 
recommended as under: 
“Looking at the Budget Estimates of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, 
the Committee are distressed to observe the wide disparity between proposed outlays 
and actual allocations. The Committee observe that for 2015 -16, the Department had 
proposed a Plan outlay of Rs. 1011.50 crore, against which the Ministry of Finance 
allotted Rs. 188.00 crore. Further, against a proposed Plan outlay of Rs. 921.51 Crores 
by the D epartment for 2016 -17, the Ministry of Finance allocated only an amount of 
Rs. 160.00 Crores.  That means, the percentage figure of actual allocation vis -a-vis the 
proposed allocation during 2015 -16 is 18.59 percent and only 17.36 percent of the 
proposed a mount for 2016 -17  is actually allocated. The Committee further observe 
that such a reduction in allocation seriously impede the execution of the projects and 
schemes under the Department. Therefore, the Committee strongly feel that there is a 
pressing need to evolve regular appraisal of projects and schemes of the Department  
with the Niti Aayog / Finance Ministry so that such drastic cuts may be avoided.   
 In light of the huge cuts in actual allocations granted to the Department, the 
Committee recommend that the Department may  propose for the requisite funds in 
the form of supplementary demand for grants with proper justification for the same to 
the Minist ry of Finance/Niti Aayog. The Department should apprise the Committee 
about action taken in this regard."   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
9.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
"An allocation of Rs. 57.67 crore has been made for CIPET’s Schemes for the year 
2016-17 (BE) as against projected requirement of Rs. 181.27 crore. Meanwhile, in 

 
 
P a g e  | 5 
order to strengthen the skill development initiatives, enhance technology support to 
industries, promote entrepreneurs and R&D to develop indigenous technologies, the 
Expenditure Finance Committee recommended establishment of 11 new CIPET 
Centres – (i) 06 High & Other Learning Centres (HLC/OLC), (ii) 04 Vocational Training 
Centres (VTC) and  (iii) Advanced Polymer Design & Development Research 
Laboratory, Bengaluru at a cost of Rs. 562.32 crore over a period of next three year i.e 
during 2016-17 to 2018 -19. EFC has inter -alia recommended budgetary allocation of 
Rs. 153.76 crore for 2016 -17. A ccordingly, Ministry of Finance through IFD, 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has been requested to allocate 
additional amount of Rs. 96.09 crore in 1 st Supplementary Demands for Grants for the 
year 2016-17. 
It is stated that a fund of Rs. 5 cror e has been allocated under CPDS Plan Head of 
Account during the current FY. The allocated budget seems to be sufficient for 
conducting the various seminars/ conferences in association with various industry 
associations. No further funds may be required und er CPDS Plan Head of Account 
during the current financial year. 
The Department had the requirement of Rs. 127.41 crore for Plastic Parks in the 2016 -
17, but the allocated amount is Rs. 45.00 crore only. Subsequently, the Department 
requested for an additional sum of Rs. 82.41 crore to meet the plan requirement in the 
Supplementary Demands for 2016 -17. The matter has already been taken up with 
Internal Finance Division for allocation of the balance requisite funds for the Scheme, 
and is being followed up reg ularly. A proposal for allocation additional funds to the 
tune of Rs. 549.45 crore has been moved to the M/o Finance for the Assam Gas Cracker 
Projects." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
10. The Committee had recommended that the Department should make a proposal 
for allocation of additional funds in the form of supplementary Demands for Grants to 
the Ministry of Finance/Niti Aayog with the aim to offset the huge cuts in actual 
allocation of funds granted to the Department.  
 In its Action Taken Replies (ATR), the Department informed that it had 
requested for an additional allocation of Rs. 96.09 crore for CIPET, Rs. 82.41 crore for 
Plastic Parks and Rs. 549.45 crore for Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP) in t he form of 
Supplementary Demands for Grants for the year 2016-17.  
 In view of the above, the Committee desire the Department to pursue its 
requests to the Ministry of Finance/Niti Aayog vigorously so that additional allocations 
may be made and the affecte d projects and schemes do not suffer. The Action Taken 
Reply is silent about the utilization of the Rs. 45 crore allocated towards Plastic Parks. 
The Committee expect to be apprised about the progress made in this regard at the 
time of furnishing Action Taken Statement by the Department.  

 
 
P a g e  | 6 
C.  PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS (PSUS)  
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
11.  Regarding the issues facing the Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) under the 
Department, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
  “The Committee note that during 2015-16 (up to December, 2015), Hindustan Organic 
Chemicals Ltd (HOCL) achieved a turnover of Rs.97.39 crore and loss of Rs.133.70 
crore. As per the Department, the low turnover and loss is due to the fact that most of 
the pl ants of HOCL at Kochi (Phenol and Acetone) and Rasayani (Nitrobenzene, 
Formaldehyde and Concentrated Nitric Acid) were not operational due to acute 
working capital shortage. As a result, the HOCL was declared sick again on 22 July, 
2015. As per the Departm ent, a new  revival plan for HOCL prepared by the 
consultants (M/s JPS Associates) has been approved by the Board of Directors of HOCL 
and based on the revival plan report, a revival  restructuring plan for HOCL is 
presently under consideration of the Depa rtment. Regarding the Hindustan 
Fluorocarbons Ltd (HFL), a subsidiary of HOCL, as per the Department, during 2015 -
16 (up to December, 2015), the company has achieved a turnover of Rs.25.40 crore 
and loss of Rs.7.00 crore, as per the provisional unaudited r esults. This is mainly due 
to plant shut down for refurbishment / revamping activities. A revival / restructuring 
plan for HFL is also under consideration of the Department for long term and 
sustainable growth of the company. In view of the above, the Comm ittee recommend 
that the Department should take all steps necessary to revive HOCL and its subsidiary 
company, HFL for long-term sustained growth. The sickness of the company have gone 
on for so long and require concrete action to revive it. The Committee desire that the 
latest revival plan for HOCL prepared by M/s JPS Associates may be finalized at the 
earliest and revival measures may be taken on priority. Similarly, restructuring plan 
for HFL may also be implemented expeditiously. The roadmap for revival  may be 
communicated to the Committee at the earliest.    
 II.  As for the Hindustan Insecticides Ltd (HIL),  the Committee appreciate that the 
company has been continuously posting profits since the last 10 years. The Committee 
note that during 2015 -16 (u p to December, 2015), the company has achieved a 
turnover of Rs.132.78 crore and net profit of Rs.0.25 crore, as per the provisional 
unaudited results. The Company has now diversified to decrease its dependence on 
revenue from DDT. The Committee note that HIL proposes to set up a multi -product 
plant facility at a cost of Rs. 11 crore at its Rasayani unit. The proposal has been 
referred to the Ministry of Finance for approval. The Committee desire that the 
approval be expedited. The Committee also recommend that the HIL/Department 
should make earnest efforts to make successful all the initiatives taken by the 
company to increase its profits. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard.    
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
12.  In its two-part action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendations, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 "Issues relating to sick, loss-making and non-performing CPSEs are being examined by 
the NITI Aayog. Further action on HOCL and HFL will be taken based on the final 
decision of the Government in the matter." 

 
 
P a g e  | 7 
"The proposal for release of Plan loan of Rs.10.00 crore, which was available in the 
Department’s budget for 2015 -16, for setting up Multi -product facility of capacity of 
1000TPA at Rasayani Unit was referred on 11.01.2016 to Ministry of Finance since their 
prior approval is required as HIL has defaulted in the repayment of Govt. loans and 
interest. Since the file was not received back in the Department and the FY 2015-16 was 
about to end, a reminder was sent to the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of 
Finance, from the Joint Secretary (Chemicals) on 21.3.2016 and Secretary (C&PC) on 
22.3.2016 for expediting M/o Finance’s approval. However, as the file was not received 
by 31.03.2016, the Plan provision of Rs.10 crore had to be surrendered by the 
Department. 
 Subsequently, the file was received from M/o Finance on 13.6.2016. DEA, M/o Finance, 
has requested the Department to re-examine the proposal in terms of M/o Finance’s OM 
dated 3.2.2016 which instructs that the window of investment and working capit al loan 
to CPSUs from Govt. of India, in general, is closed. PSUs in general are hardly having 
debt and hence should raised debt from market or banks. Only if PSU is justified as 
significant from strategic / security angle, banks refuse loan to it and it h as no real 
assets including land to monetise, would loan be considered at 11% with the prior 
approval of Budget Division. 
 In view of the above comments of M/o Finance, the proposal is being re -examined in 
consultation with HIL. In the current FY 2016 -17, there is a Plan loan provision of Rs.15 
crore for HIL in the Department’s budget. Decision on resubmitting the proposal to M/o 
Finance would be taken after re-examination of the proposal is completed. 
 In addition to the above proposal for setting up a mul ti-product plant facility, some of 
the other measures taken / efforts being made by the Department / HIL to increase the 
company’s turnover and profit are as follows:  
 (i)  HIL has grown from existing 6 numbers of Technicals to total 10 numbers of 
Technicals with the launch of products like Acephate, Imidacloprid, Clorpyriphos etc.. 
Few more products like Acetamiprid, Triazophos, Glyphosate, Thiomethoxam are under 
launch and facility is being put up to manufacture Pendimethalin. 
 
 (ii)  The company has got  recognition as a National Level Seed Agency and has 
ventured into production and marketing of all varieties of seeds and is covered under 
various benefits under the National Food Security Mission (NFSM), National 
Horticulture Mission (NHM) and National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Pulses (NMOOP). 
 (iii) The company has recently ventured into the Fertilizer segment as well and has 
been inducted by the Department of Fertilizers as an agency to import fertilizers. 
Further, Bathinda plant of the company is planne d to be utilized for producing water 
soluble fertilizers. This diversification will enable the company to become a one stop 
shop for the farming community by providing all the three critical agricultural inputs 
viz. seeds, pesticides and fertilizers. 
 (iv) As there is a demand for new generation molecules, the company is also looking 
at strategic tie-ups with multinational companies who own the patents for the same." 
 
. 

 
 
P a g e  | 8 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
13.   The  Committee, in their original report,   recommended that the Department 
should take all steps necessary to revive HOCL and its subsidiary company, HFL for 
long-term sustained growth and specifically desired that the latest revival plan for 
HOCL prepared by M/s JPS Associates be finalized at the earliest. Si milarly, 
restructuring plan for HFL may also be implemented expeditiously. As for HIL, the 
Committee had recommended that the HIL/Department should make earnest efforts 
to make successful all the initiatives taken by the company to increase its profits.  
 In its ATR , the Department stated that issues relating to sick, loss -making and 
non-performing CPSEs are being examined by the NITI Aayog and that further action 
on HOCL and HFL will be taken based on the final decision of the Government in the 
matter. The Department further states that the decision on resubmitting the proposal 
to the Ministry of Finance would be taken after the re -examination is completed. The 
Department also enumerated var ious steps it had taken to increase the profitability 
and viability of HIL.  
 In light of the above, the Committee would like to know the latest  position for  
revival plan for HOCL prepare d by M/s JPS Associates and also revival plan of HFL.  
The Committee therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation on the need to take 
concrete steps in a time -bound manner to revive HOCL and its subsidiary, HFL and 
desire to be apprised of the action taken toward that end.  
D.  NEW SCHEMES OF PETROCHEMICALS 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
14.  Emphasizing the need to institutionalize a proper mechanism for coordination with 
the State Governments for effective implementation of the Plastic Parks, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee observe that the allocated amount of Rs. 48. 00 crore for New 
Schemes for the Petrochemicals for 2016 -17 is proposed to be spent for the three 
schemes, viz. Scheme for Plastic Park (Rs. 45.00 crore), Scheme for National Award 
(Rs.1.00 crore) and Scheme for CoE (Rs.2.00 crore). However, the allocation  of Rs. 
48.00 crore for New Schemes of Petrochemicals is much less than the requirement of 
funds, and the Department informed that it will ask for the balance funds at the time of 
Supplementary Demands.  
 In this regard, the Committee note that Plastic Par ks are the most ambitious schemes 
which takes the lion's share of the allocation. However, as per the Department, even 
the amount of Rs. 45 crore allocated for Plastic Parks is totally inadequate to meet the 
requirements.  At present, three plastic parks a t Tamot Village, Raisen District in 

 
 
P a g e  | 9 
Madhya Pradesh; Siju Village, Kujanga Tehsil, Jagatsinghpur District in Odisha  and 
Gellapukhuri, Tinsukia District in Assam are under various stages of  implementation. 
Government has approved in October, 2015 setting u p of a Plastic Park in Thiruvallur 
District in the State of Tamil Nadu.  Because of the shortfall, progress of the 
implementation of the existing Parks (already under implementation) will be 
adversely affected. Further, it will not be possible to release a ny funds for setting up 
the six new Plastic Parks which have been approved ‘inprinciple’ by the Scheme 
Steering Committee in February, 2016. The six Plastic Parks are to be located in the 
States of Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand, Hary ana,West 
Bengal. Moreover, there are eight additional new Plastic Parks, which have been 
accorded ‘in-principle’ approval and after obtaining financial approval, their locations 
will be decided in consultation with the State Governments. In short, the Depa rtment 
is planning to set up a total of 18 Plastic Parks all over the country.   
 In light of the above, the Committee recommend that the Department should ask for 
the requisite funds at the time of Supplementary Demands with proper justification so 
that the same may be sanctioned. Further, Plastic Parks have been implemented with 
the concerned State Governments on a 50:50 sharing basis subject to a ceiling of Rs. 40 
crore per project. Hence, the success of these projects depend on how well the 
Department works with the concerned State Governments. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should institutionalize a proper mechanism for 
coordination with the State Governments so that there is complete synergy between 
the Department and the States  on the matter for effective implementation of the 
project. The action taken in pursuance of this recommendation may be intimated to 
the Committee at the earliest." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
15.  In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the  Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The Department makes an all out effort for execution of the Plastic parks as per the 
timelines. A mechanism has been put in place for periodically monitoring and 
reviewing the performance of the Plastic Parks for their expeditious implementation in 
a time bound manner. The high level ‘Scheme Steering Committee’ is tasked with the 
responsibilities of reviewing the progress of the projects. The project implementing 
agencies (SPVs) report their performance on a monthly basis to the Department. The 
Scheme also has a mechanism of appointing a Programme Manager, a consulting 
agency with professional expertise. The Programme Manager is required to assist the 
Department, inter -alia, in monitoring the Scheme progress and furnishing regular 
reports based on the monthly progress reports, received from the implementing 
agencies and undertake site visits before release of grant to the SPVs based on 
achievement of milestones along with time lines as approved  by SSC. The Department 
also closely monitors the projects through periodic review meetings and field visits by 
senior officers. 
As regards seeking additional funds at the time of Supplementary Demands, the 
Department has sought an amount of Rs. 130.41 cro re for 2016 -17 but the allocated 
amount is Rs. 48.00 crore only in BE 2016 -17 for the New Schemes of Petrochemicals. 
The matter has already been taken up with Internal Finance Division for allotment of 
balance requisite funds for the Scheme, and is being followed up regularly." 
 

 
 
P a g e  | 10 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
16.  The Committee, in their earlier recommendation, had noted that the success of 
the Plastic Park projects depend on how well the Department work with the 
concerned State Governments who are to contribute 50 percent of the project cost. 
Accordingly, the Committee had recomm ended that the Department should 
institutionalize a proper mechanism for coordination with the State Governments so 
that there is complete synergy between the Department and the States on the matter 
for effective implementation of the Plastic Park projects.  
 In its ATR,  the Department had highlighted the monitoring and reviewing 
system it had evolved regarding Plastic Parks, mainly through the high level Scheme 
Steering Committee, the Project Implementing Agencies and Programme Managers. 
As for need for additional funds  in the form of Supplementary Demands , the 
Department had informed that it had already taken up the matter with the Internal 
Finance Division for allotment of balance requisite funds for the Schemes. In this 
regard, the Committee reiterate that the State Governments are playing a crucial role 
for the success of the Plastic Park projects and therefore the State Governments' role 
in the implementation of the Projects is imperative for the success of the Scheme. 
Since they are the hosts of the P rojects and also have 50 percent share of the Project 
costs, the Committee are of the view that the composition of the Scheme Steering 
Committee (SSC) should have proper and adequate representation of the concerned 
State Government officials.  In view of t he above , the Committee desire that the 
Department should review the structure and composition of the ' Scheme Steering 
Committee' which is the main monitoring and reviewing body of the Plastic Parks 
project and ensure that the State Governments are adequat ely represented in it.  A 
detailed explanation of the monitoring scheme may please be given at the time of 
furnishing Action Taken Statement.  
E.  ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
17.  Strongly arguing for the setting up of effective mechanisms  to monitor all 
environmental concerns in coordination with all the stakeholders and the need to review the 
existing environmental safeguards, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee observe that one of greatest concern arising out of chemical plants 
and industries is the pollution and degradation that it causes to the surrounding 
environment. The Committee are distressed to note that still there is so much wanting 

 
 
P a g e  | 11 
in the  areas of proper effluent treatment plants, preservation of ground water and 
ecological health.   
 The Committee note that the model developed in Maharashtra in which wherever a 
treatment plant in Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation is to be 
developed, a part of infrastructure like Road, electricity, water and transport, etc. will 
be done by the Government and the cost will be taken care of by the industry. It is 
possible in chemical clusters too. The concerned States should be involved in all th ese 
aspects so  that there can be a lasting solution. The Committee desire that the 
Department should seriously study this model and convince other states to follow on 
these lines. The Committee note that since the initial cost for common effluent 
treatment plants are so high and the private companies are often not ready to foot that 
bill in one go, it may be necessary for the Government to come out with the 
investments for common effluent treatment plants and later on collects the money 
from the industries . The Committee seriously view the present situation in which 
there is no proper mechanism or common standard for environmental safety. Common 
effluent treatment plants are an essential component of any chemical/petrochemical 
project and the Government should ensure that the required funds are made available. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the Department may set up a mechanism to 
monitor all environmental concerns in coordination with all stakeholders and should 
also review the existing environmental  safeguards in all projects under its ambit and 
make amends speedily wherever necessary. The action taken on the above points may 
be communicated to the Committee at the earliest." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
18.  In its action taken reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The chemical industry is an important constituent of the growing Indian economy and 
it is the mainstay of industrial and agriculture development of the country, providing 
several building blocks and raw materials for a number of industries, including textile, 
paper, paint, soap and detergent, pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals etc. 
The Industries, particularly small industries, due to their limited size and scale of 
operation d o not find it economically viable to install elaborate pollution control 
equipments. Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs) are considered as one of the 
viable solution to achieve end -of-pipe treatment for effective wastewater treatment 
from Small and Me dium Enterprises (SMEs) and thereby reduce the number of 
discharge points for better enforcement. 
There are 28 CETPs in various states including Andhra Pradesh, Kranataka, Gujarat, 
and Maharashtra catering to the need of Chemical clusters. The financial su pport for 
the construction of CETPs is available under various schemes of central government 
including Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MOEF &CC) for all the 
states in the country. The CETPs are regularly monitored by concerned state pollu tion 
control boards to check their compliance. 
In the scheme of MOEF & CC, which was started in 1991 for funding establishment of 
CETPs, the financial assistance provided to the project proponent was as Central 
Government subsidy- 25% of the project capital cost, State Government subsidy – 25% 
of the project capital cost, Loans from financial institutions – 30% of the project capital 
cost, and Entrepreneurs contribution – 20% of the project capital cost. The scheme 
was revised in 2012 to increase the Centra l subsidy from 25% to 50% retaining the 

 
 
P a g e  | 12 
state subsidy at 25% and lowering down the project proponent’s share from 50% to 
25%. Out of the proponent’s share, at least 40% of contribution has to be from the 
proponent and balance 60% is to be raised through loan to the proponent from Banks/ 
Financial Institutions. 
The Department has been taking up the issues related to chemical sector with MOEF & 
CC in the past based on environmental concerns raised by various Industry 
Associations/ Stakeholders. MOEF &CC is th e Nodal Ministry for Environmental 
standards and their compliance in the Country under the Environmental (Protection) 
Act, 1986." 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
19.  The Committee, in their earlier recommendation, while being concerned about 
the environment, had expressed appreciation of the model developed by the 
Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation in which whenever a treatment 
plant is to be developed, a part of infrastructure like Road, electricity, water and 
transport, etc. will be done by the Gov ernment and the cost will be taken care of by 
the industry and desired the Department to explore ways in which this model may be 
adopted in other States too. The Committee further recommended that the 
Department may set up a mechanism to monitor all enviro nmental concerns in 
coordination with all stakeholders and should also review the existing environmental 
safeguards in all the projects under its ambit and make amends speedily wherever 
necessary. 
 In its ATR, the Department had stated , inter alia,  that the Ministry of 
Environment, Forests  and Climate Change (MOEF &CC) is the Nodal Ministry for 
Environmental standards and their compliance in the Country under the 
Environmental (Protection) Act, 1986 and that the Department is taking up the 
environmental issues related to chemical sector with MOEF & CC in the past based on 
environmental concerns raised by various Industry Associations/ Stakeholders.  
 The Committee, in their recommendation, had  desired to know what role the 
Department can play in matters relating to creating effective environmental 
safeguards in relation to Chemical projects being implemented by them. T he 
Department, in its reply had  simply stated that the MOEF & CC is the nodal Ministr y 
dealing with the matter. In the opinion of the Committee, the Department cannot 
shirk away its responsibility from the environment safety concerns relating to 
industries and projects coming under the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals. The Committee therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation 
that the Department may provide a detailed action plan  on the issue s relating to 

 
 
P a g e  | 13 
environment safeguards taken for the Plants created under their jurisdiction at the 
time of furnishing Action Taken Statements.  
  

 
 
P a g e  | 14 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
STAGNANT GROWTH IN PRODUCTION OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS :- 
 The Committee observe that the major chemicals witnessed very stagnant growth, 
posting overall growth rate of 1.1 percent during 2015-16 (up to September 15, 2015). 
The sector also registered zero growth rate during 2014 -15. Regarding major 
petrochemicals, while the sector saw higher overall growth rate, the group -wise 
growth is very uneven. Polymers, Synthetic Detergent Intermediates and Performance 
Plastics all registered very low and even negative growth rates during 2011-2015.   
  According to the Depar tment, the slowdown of growth in the chemicals sector is a 
reflection of the global trend and other factors like expensive capital, lack of world 
class infrastructure and cheap imports, and reduced global demand, etc. As for the 
petrochemicals, factors like shortage of basic building blocks, policy of free import, the 
worldwide slowdown and other market mechanisms are responsible for slow growth.   
  In this regard, the Committee are of the view that while there are global factors that 
are beyond the contro l of the Government, perennial issues like lack of infrastructure 
and shortage of basic building blocks are domestic issues that need to be addressed 
urgently. The Committee recommend that the Department should take a longterm 
view of the situation and mak e concerted efforts to upgrade the basic infrastructure 
and address the issue of shortage of basic building blocks for rapid growth. The 
Committee also desire that issues of cheap imports should be addressed so that the 
domestic industry should not suffer.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The chemical sector is de -licensed and de -regulated. The chemical units are being set 
up in private sector based on the techno economic feasibility, global demand and 
supply and cost of raw materials/ feedstock etc. The Governme nt has taken various 
steps including rationalization of custom duties for having a complete synergy in the 
value chain in the manufacturing process involving building blocks, intermediates and 
final products. Some of the raw materials/ building blocks are being imported in the 
country for manufacture of further value added chemicals both for domestic 
consumption as well as for exports. Thus there is import led growth also in the 
country. 
 [Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
vide their O.M. No.23003/3/2016-Fin. dated  July 2016] 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS:-  
  The Committee note that the percentage share of chemicals and chemical products in 
total exports has remained more or less constant (9.3% to 9.4%) over the years since 
2011-12 till 2014-15. The percentage share increased from a stagnant figure of 9.3/9.4 
percentage during 2011 -2015 to 10.5 percent during 2015 -16 (up to September 
2015). On the other hand, the export/import data also show a steady increase in the 

 
 
P a g e  | 15 
percentage share of total imports for chemicals and chemical products during the 
same period. Wh ile the contribution of this sector in total imports during 2011 -15 
were 7.5 percent, 7.9 percent, 8.9 percent, 9.6 percent and 9.9 percent respectively, the 
same for the year 2015-16 (up to Sept, 2015) was 10.8 percent.  
 In this regard, the Department ha s informed that one of the important reasons for the 
stagnant export of Chemical and Petrochemical products and the rising imports of 
chemicals and petrochemicals is the increase in the domestic demand of these 
products without commensurate increase in the  domestic production. Further, as per 
the Department, the fact that export / import of chemicals and petrochemicals is freely 
allowed except for a few chemicals attracting the provisions of international 
conventions also contributed to the situation. The Department has stated that schemes 
like Plastic Parks, National Award for Technology Innovation in Petrochemical and 
downstream Plastic Processing Industry, and Centres of Excellence (CoE) are meant to 
increase the production capacity for both chemical and petrochemical industries. 
Further, the PCPIR Policy has been formulated and has been implemented to make 
easy availability of feedstock for the chemicals and petrochemicals in the country.   
  Given the above, the Committee are  concerned that there is no commensurate 
increase in domestic production of chemicals and petrochemicals to cater to the rising 
demand for the same, which resulted in increased imports. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should expedite the ongoing schemes of PCPIRs, 
Plastic Parks and Centres of Excellence (CoE) so as to give fillip to the production 
capacities commensurate with the rising demand for chemicals and petrochemicals 
materials in the country. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  The Department makes an all out effort for execution of the Plastic Parks as per the 
timelines. A mechanism has been put in place for periodically monitoring and 
reviewing the performance of the Plastic Parks for their expeditious implementation in 
time bound manner. A high level ‘Scheme Steering Committee’ is tasked with the 
responsibility of reviewing the progress of the projects. The project implementing 
agencies (Special Purpose Vehicles - SPVs) report their performance on a monthly 
basis to the Department. The Scheme also has a mechanism of appointing a 
Programme Manager, a consulting agency with professional expertise. The Programme 
Manager is required to assist the Department, inter -alia, in monitoring the Scheme 
progress a nd furnishing regular reports based on the monthly progress reports, 
received from the implementing agencies and undertake site visits before release of 
grant to the SPVs, based on achievement of milestones along with timelines as 
approved by SSC. The Depa rtment also closely monitors the projects through periodic 
review meetings and field visits by senior officers. 
 Similarly, in order to review the progress made by the CoEs, a High Level Review 
Committee has been constituted by the Department. The Committe e evaluates the 
performance of CoEs periodically and submits reports to Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals. The report evaluates the performance and also indicates the 
advancements made by the CoEs in their specified areas. The CoEs have, inter alia,  
conducted seminars and published papers in their respective areas. 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
vide their O.M. No.23003/3/2016-Fin. dated  July 2016] 
  
 

 
 
P a g e  | 16 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS AND OTHER SCHEMES  
  (A)  CIPET and IPFT  
  (i)   The Committee observe that there is sharp decrease in the allocation made to  
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology (CIPET) in the year 2016 -17.   
As against   RE 2015-16 of Rs. 98.68 crore, BE 2016-17 have been reduced to Rs. 57.67 
crore. The Committee have also been informed that the Department has sought an 
allocation of Rs. 181.27 crore as Plan assistance for new schemes viz. (i) Capabilities 
and academic activities, (ii) R&D activities and technology support services at CIPET 
Centres and thereby sought  an overall allocation of Rs. 305 crore for CIPET for the 
year 2016-17 which has been curtailed to Rs. 57.67 crore due to overall reduction in 
Department’s outlay.    
  Considering that low allocation of funds would impact various acti vities and 
infrastructure development for CIPET centres, the Committee recommend the 
Department to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance to enhance the 
allocation especially for CIPET so that the progress of this premier institution is  not 
affected  due to meagre allocation of funds.     
  (ii)   As regards the allocation to Institute of Pesticide  Formulation Technology 
(IPFT), Committee note that there is substantial increase in the total allocation to it for 
the year 2016-17.  It was Rs. 5.05 crore in RE 2015 -16 which rose to Rs. 8.32 crore in 
BE 2016-17.  The Committee further note that the Department has plans to utilize the 
allocated funds for the procurement of capital equipment to strengthen the existing 
infrastructure and facilities required for the execution of ongoing and future R&D 
projects of IPFT.   The Committee therefore desire that the Department may ensure 
that the allocated funds are fully utilised.    
 (B) Chemical Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS)  
 The Committee note that the Budgetary allocation for Chemical Promotion and  
Development Scheme (CPDS) has increased from Rs. 3.90 crore in RE 2015 -16 to Rs. 5 
crore in the year 2016-17.    
  The Committee are given to understand that this money shall be utilised for setting up 
Help Desks/PCPIR Facilitation Desk with the objective  to promote investment and 
trade in Chemical and Petrochemical Sector among other things.  The Committee hope 
that an impetus would be given by making the optimum utilization of fund which 
would ultimately promote the Scheme.    
 (C) Lumpsum  provisions to North-Eastern Region  
  The Committee note that Rs. 16 crore has been allocated to North -Eastern Region.  
Out of this amount Rs.2 crore has been allocated for CIPET and Rs. 14 crore has been 
allocated to ‘New Schemes for Petrochemicals’.  The Committee fu rther note that the 
Department has not spelt out  the details of such New Schemes.  
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department may ensure full utilization 
of all the funds allocated for the benefit of the region. The Committee would like to 
know action taken in this regard at the earliest. 
 

 
 
P a g e  | 17 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 CIPET:-  
The Department appreciates the concern expressed by the Committee on the need for 
higher budgetary support for capital expenditure from Plan funds to CIPET for 
upgradation of existing infrastructure and further expansion. Considering the 
potential of the domestic petrochemical industry and the growth opportunities 
provided by the global shift in production and demand coupled with export demand, 
the polymer industry is expec ted to grow at a significant rate. In this context, CIPET is 
required to be equipped with additional infrastructure to meet the impending skill 
development vocational training needs of the sector. 
The Department has appraised Ministry of Finance of require ment of additional 
budgetary allocation in the current year to support under implementation CIPET 
schemes of (i) Scheme for Enhancing the Capabilities in Academic Activities (Skill 
Development Training Programme) at CIPET Centres and (ii) Scheme for Enhanc ing 
capabilities in Research activities at two R&D Centres and Technology Support 
Services at CIPET Centres. The projected plan funding of for CIPET’s infrastructure is 
central to the mission of strengthening of CIPET’s infrastructure and capacities to tak e 
up big stride in skill development targets. 
The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), in its meeting held on 13 th April, 2016, 
while appraising and recommending the proposal for expansion of CIPET centres, 
considered the balance requirement of funds for i mplementation of above schemes 
and recommended an outlay of Rs. 153.76 crore in 2016 -17. In view of crucial 
requirement of funds for ongoing and schemes in CIPET, the balance requirement of 
Rs. 96.09 crore (153.76 - 57.67) shall be projected in the suppleme ntary grants of 
2016-17. 
IPFT: 
IPFT has stated that the allocated funds for 2016 -17 (Plan) will be fully utilized for the 
procurement of capital equipments to strengthen the existing infrastructure and 
facilities required for the execution of ongoing and future R & D projects of IPFT. 
CPDS: 
It is stated that a fund of Rs. 5 crore has been allocated under CPDS Plan Head of 
Account during the current FY. The allocated budget seems to be sufficient for 
conducting the various seminars/ conferences in associatio n with various industry 
associations. No further funds may be required under CPDS Plan Head of Account 
during the current FY. 
Lumpsum provisions to North-Eastern Region:-  
The amount of Rs. 14.00 crore allocated to the Scheme “New Schemes of 
Petrochemicals” is for facilitating release of the amount as IIIrd instalment of the 
contribution of GoI for the Plastic Park being set up in Assam. The amount of Rs. 2.00 
crore allocated for the Scheme “CIPET” in the NER Major Head is for procurement of 
Machinery to be  installed at Guwahati and Imphal under the “Technology Support 
Service” sub scheme of CIPET. 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
vide their O.M. No.23003/3/2016-Fin. dated  July 2016] 
  

 
 
P a g e  | 18 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
ASSAM GAS CRACKER PROJECT :- 
  The Committee observe with satisfaction that the Assam Gas Cracker Project is 
at last completed and commissioned on 2 January, 2016. However, the Department has 
stated that in view of time overrun, foreign exchange fluctuations, price escalation, 
increase in statutory levies etc., further cost and time escalation has occurred and 
therefore, Brahmaputra Crackers and Polymers Ltd. (BCPL) has proposed revised 
project cost of Rs. 9,965 crore as against the approved project cost of Rs.8,920 crore.  
The estimated increase in project cost of Rs. 1045 crore is proposed to be funded by  
capital subsidy of Rs. 549.45 crore, equity of Rs. 148.67 crore and debt of Rs. 346.88 
crore.  The Department has further stated that in order to make the project 
economically viable, BCPL has proposed in-principle approval for feedstock subsidy on 
natural gas with an annual review for 15 years of plant operation for maintaining a 
minimum Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 10% and revenue subsidy of Rs. 26 crore to 
fund the cash deficit during initial one year. The capacity utilization of the Plant is 
envisaged to be gradually be increased to the installed capacity of 2.8 lakh MT over a 
period of next three years. The Department also stated that the project at present 
provides direct empl oyment to 700 personnel and indirect employment to around 
2000-2500 persons inside the project complex.   
   However, still, there are numerous challenges as stated above to make the 
project fully functional. The Committee desire that the Department sort o ut all the 
pending issues and should take all the desired actions and ensure that the project 
should help in the economic development of the entire northeast region through 
production of polymers and other petrochemical products and by opening up 
employment avenues to thousands of youths in the region. The Committee accordingly 
recommend that the Department/AGCP should chalk out a realistic plan to achieve its 
targets in terms of capacity utilization and employment. The Committee expect to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The BCPL Lepetkata Complex has been commissioned on 02.01.2016. Around 13,000 
MT of Polymer has been produced since commissioning (up to 23.06.2016). Presently, 
the Petrochemicals complex is in the phase of stabilization. 
 As regards capacity utilization of BCPL Plant, all efforts are being made to achieve at 
least 60% of the rated production capacity of 2,70,900 Tonnes per Annum (TPA), 
which translates into 1,62,540 TPA for the year 2016 -17. The above has been worked 
out considering the time required for stabilization of operations in such Petrochemical 
Complexes. It is envisaged to build up the capacity utilization to the tune of 80% in the 
year 2017-18 and further increase the same in the year 2018-2019. 
 As per the assessment made at DFR stage, the employment generation of around one 
lakh people is expected through setting up of various downstream plastic processing 
industries & ancillaries over a period of 10 -15 years. In 2013, the NER (North -East 
Region) was having around 136 nos. of plastic processing units. Thereafter 13 new 
units have commenced their operations in the region. The Govt. of Assam, with 
financial assistance from Government of India, is developing an integrated plastic park 
at Tinsukia, Assam (approx. 60 kms. from BCPL). The plastic park is expected to attract 
entrepreneurs to set up downstream plastic processing units to utilize the polymers 
produced at BCPL, Dibrugarh thereby generating avenue for employment generation. 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is closely monitoring the progress of the 

 
 
P a g e  | 19 
plastic park at Tinsukia through periodic review meetings and site visits for expediting 
its early completion. 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
vide their O.M. No.23003/3/2016-Fin. dated  July 2016] 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
BHOPAL GAS LEAK DISASTER  
 On the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster, the Committee note that the work of disbursal of 
pro-rata compensation to the victims is still continuing.  As per the Department, out of 
63,819 claims received by the Office of the Welfare Commissioner for payment of 
exgratia to Bhopal gas victims, 46,046 claims were awarded and 10,831 claims were 
rejected till February, 2016. Thus, the total number of settled cases is 56,877 and 
pending cases is 6942. As for the remaining claims, the Supreme Court had directed to 
amend the  Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Processing of Claims) Act, 1985 and Scheme 
there under with the approval of the Parliament and see that these claims be 
transferred to Judicial or Quasi -Judicial authority for further action in the pending 
claims.  The Committee further note that the various components of rehabilitation, viz. 
Social, medical, economic and clean drinking water are still ongoing.   
 The Committee recommend that the rehabilitation process be speeded up so that  
pending cases may be resolved soon. The Department/Office of Welfare Commissioner 
should try to resolve the  pending 6942 cases for compensation within a stipulated 
time.  Measures taken in this regard may be communicated to the Committee at the 
earliest. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Ex -gratia payments involved legal aspects, as all the compensation related 
payments were awarded by the Judicial Officers. According to the Bhopal Gas Leak 
Disaster Act, 1985, the Hon’ble Judge, Madhya Pradesh High Court is designated as the 
Welfare Commissioner, who vested with powers to make procedures for payment of 
compensation. The Deputy Welfare Commissioner is hearing those Ex -gratia cases, 
which are complicated in nature, involved many legal problems like successors of 
other serious dispute rega rding the recipients of the amount of compensation. 
Naturally, the trial of those cases takes 20 times of the time of cases of simple nature. 
It is mentioned that no cut -off date for receipt of application is set out and State 
Government of Madhya Pradesh,  Bhopal Gas Tragedy Relief & Rehabilitation 
Department is continuously forwarding the applications of the victims along with their 
Verification Certificate for payment of Ex -gratia under Cancer/ TRF Categories. The 
applications for Ex-gratia are being received continuously at an average of 25 to 30 per 
week from victims of Bhopal Gas Tragedy. During the current year, i.e. from 1.04.2016 
to 15.06.2016 such applications numbering 230 cases have been received in the Office 
of the Welfare Commissioner for payme nt of Ex -gratia. The probable receipt of 
applications during the F.Y. 2016-17 is estimated to 1300 nos. 
It is stated that the pendency of Ex-gratia Compensation was reduced to 5,441 cases as 
on 15.06.2016 from 6942 cases reported earlier. During the curren t financial year 
2016-17, a provision of Rs. 20 crores have been provided for payment of Ex -gratia to 
Bhopal Gas Victims. Out of this, an amount of Rs. 3.53 crore has been disbursed till 

 
 
P a g e  | 20 
15.06.2016. Thus, the budget provision will be utilized within this financial year. Every 
effort is being made to disburse the Ex-gratia Compensation in pending cases. 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
vide their O.M. No.23003/3/2016-Fin. dated  July 2016] 
  
  

 
 
P a g e  | 21 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT WANT TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
-- NIL-- 
 
  

 
 
P a g e  | 22 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
  
-- NIL-- 
  

 
 
P a g e  | 23 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
 MID-TERM APPRAISALS:- 
  The Committee observe that the mid -term appraisal of the funding and allocation for 
the schemes/programmes under the Department have shown major problems with 
regard to Plastic Parks, CIPET and Hindustan Fluorocarbons Ltd (HFL). Since the 
existing 12th Pl an budgetary allocation for the Plastic Parks scheme is insufficient 
even for the 4 proposals under implementation, the Department is unable to consider 
proposals from  States like Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and Kerala for 
implementing Plastic Parks i n their States. As for CIPET, there is a need to increase 
budgetary support given by the Department for capital expenditure from Plan funds as 
CIPET needs substantial additional investment for building up its infrastructure to the 
required level for existing CIPET centres and also for its expansion in other States. For 
HOCL, all the budgetary support sanctioned for it from 2013 -14 to 2015 -16 could not 
be released as HOCL has been a defaulter in repayment of its loans to the Government.   
  The Committee fur ther note that the Ministry of Finance vide its orders dated 
17.2.2016 had reiterated its decision dated 03.02.2015 not to release any loans to 
PSUs, and because of that, the funds that were allocated to the PSUs in the Capital 
Section for 2015-16 could not be released.   
  In view of the above, the Committee recommend that the Department should take 
remedial steps with regard to the problems uncovered during the mid -term appraisal 
of schemes and programmes. As regards HOCL, non -repayment of loans and inter ests 
which resulted in its being barred from receiving more funds, will further aggravate 
the crisis in the company. The problems has been there for a long time and needs 
effective intervention from the Department to alleviate the crisis. The Department 
therefore should work with the Niti Aayog and the Ministry of Finance so that the 
required funds for PSUs and Plastic Parks may be sanctioned. Infusion of funds to 
refurbish the basic infrastructure of CIPET may also be carried out. The Committee 
expect the Department to take effective measures on the above issues and intimate the 
action taken to the Committee at the earliest.   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Department has appraised Ministry of Finance of requirement of additional 
budgetary allocation in the current year to support under implementation CIPET 
schemes. The projected and additional plan funding requirement of Rs. 96.09 crore for 
CIPET’s infrastructure is central to the mission of strengthening of CIPET’s 
infrastructure & capacities and shall be p rojected in the supplementary grants of 
2016-17. 
HOCL and HFL are loss -making PSUs and registered with BIFR as sick companies. 
Issues relating to sick, loss -making and non -performing CPSEs are being examined by 
the NITI Aayog. Further action on HOCL and HF L will be taken based on the final 
decision of the Government in the matter. 
As regards HIL, a proposal for release of Plan loan of Rs. 10.00 crore, that was available 
in the Department’s budget for 2015 -16, for setting up Multi -product facility of 

 
 
P a g e  | 24 
capacity of 1000TPA at Rasayani Unit was referred on 11.01.2016 to Ministry of 
Finance for seeking prior approval as HIL has defaulted in the repayment of Govt. 
Loans and interests. However, as the decision/ approval of Ministry of Finance was not 
received in the  Department by the end of FY 2015 -16, the Plan provision of Rs. 10 
crore had to be surrendered. 
Subsequently, the proposal was received from M/o Finance on 13.06.2016. DEA, M/o 
Finance, has requested the Department to re -examine the proposal in  terms of M /o 
Finance’s OM dated 03.02.2016 which instructs that the window of investment and 
working capital loan to CPSUs from Govt. Of India, in general, is closed. PSUs in general 
are hardly having debt and hence should raised debt from market or banks. Only if 
PSU is justified as significant from strategic/ security angle, banks refuse loan to it and 
it has no real assets including land to monetise, would loan be considered at 11% with 
the prior approval of Budget Division. 
In view of the above comments of M/o Fi nance, the proposal is being re -examined in 
consultation with HIL. In the current FY 2016 -17, Plan loan provision of Rs. 15 crore 
for HIL has been made in the Department’s budget. Decision on resubmitting the 
proposal to M/o Finance would be taken after re -examination of the proposal is 
completed. 
The Department had the requirement of Rs. 127.41 crore for Plastic Parks in the 2016 -
17, but the allocated amount is Rs. 45.00 crore only. Subsequently, the Department 
requested for an additional sum of Rs. 82.41 crore to meet the plan requirement in the 
Supplementary Demands for 2016 -17. The matter has already been taken up with 
Internal Finance Division for allocation of the balance requisite funds for the Scheme, 
and is being followed up regularly. 
 [Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
vide their O.M. No.23003/3/2016-Fin. dated  July 2016] 
  
  COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
 BUDGET PROPOSALS AND ACTUAL ALLOCATION:- 
Looking at the Budget Estimates of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, 
the Committee are distressed to observe the wide disparity between proposed outlays 
and actual allocations. The Committee observe that for 2015 -16, the D epartment had 
proposed a Plan outlay of Rs. 1011.50 crore, against which the Ministry of Finance 
allotted Rs. 188.00 crore. Further, against a proposed Plan outlay of Rs. 921.51 Crores 
by the Department for 2016 -17, the Ministry of Finance allocated only a n amount of 
Rs. 160.00 Crores.  That means, the percentage figure of actual allocation vis -a-vis the 
proposed allocation during 2015 -16 is 18.59 percent and only 17.36 percent of the 
proposed amount for 2016 -17  is actually allocated. The Committee further  observe 
that such a reduction in allocation seriously impede the execution of the projects and 
schemes under the Department. Therefore, the Committee strongly feel that there is a 
pressing need to evolve regular appraisal of projects and schemes of the De partment  
with the Niti Aayog / Finance Ministry so that such drastic cuts may be avoided.   
 In light of the huge cuts in actual allocations granted to the Department, the 
Committee recommend that the Department may  propose for the requisite funds in 
the form of supplementary demand for grants with proper justification for the same to 

 
 
P a g e  | 25 
the Ministry of Finance/Niti Aayog. The Department should apprise the Committee 
about action taken in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
An allocation of Rs. 57.67 crore has been made for CIPET’s Schemes for the year 2016 -
17 (BE) as against projected requirement of Rs. 181.27 crore. Meanwhile, in order to 
strengthen the skill development initiatives, enhance technology support to industries, 
promote entrepreneurs and R&D to develop indigenous technologies, the Expenditure 
Finance Committee recommended establishment of 11 new CIPET Centres – (i) 06 
High & Other Learning Centres (HLC/OLC), (ii) 04 Vocational Training Centres (VTC) 
and (iii) Advanced Polymer Design & Development Research Laboratory, Bengaluru at 
a cost of Rs. 562.32 crore over a period of next three year i.e during 2016 -17 to 2018-
19. EFC has inter-alia recommended budgetary allocation of Rs. 153.76 crore for 2016-
17. Accordingl y, Ministry of Finance through IFD, Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has been requested to allocate additional amount of Rs. 96.09 crore in 
1st Supplementary Demands for Grants for the year 2016-17. 
It is stated that a fund of Rs. 5 crore has bee n allocated under CPDS Plan Head of 
Account during the current FY. The allocated budget seems to be sufficient for 
conducting the various seminars/ conferences in association with various industry 
associations. No further funds may be required under CPDS P lan Head of Account 
during the current FY. 
The Department had the requirement of Rs. 127.41 crore for Plastic Parks in the 2016 -
17, but the allocated amount is Rs. 45.00 crore only. Subsequently, the Department 
requested for an additional sum of Rs. 82.41 crore to meet the plan requirement in the 
Supplementary Demands for 2016 -17. The matter has already been taken up with 
Internal Finance Division for allocation of the balance requisite funds for the Scheme, 
and is being followed up regularly. A proposal fo r allocation additional funds to the 
tune of Rs. 549.45 crore has been moved to the M/o Finance for the Assam Gas Cracker 
Projects. 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
vide their O.M. No.23003/3/2016-Fin. dated  July 2016] 
    
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
 Public Sector Undertakings:- 
I.  The Committee note that during 2015-16 (up to December, 2015), Hindustan Organic 
Chemicals Ltd (HOCL) achieved a turnover of Rs.97.39 crore and loss of Rs.133.70 
crore. As per the Department, the low turnover and loss is due to the fact that most of 
the pl ants of HOCL at Kochi (Phenol and Acetone) and Rasayani (Nitrobenzene, 
Formaldehyde and Concentrated Nitric Acid) were not operational due to acute 
working capital shortage. As a result, the HOCL was declared sick again on 22 July, 
2015. As per the Departm ent, a new  revival plan for HOCL prepared by the 
consultants (M/s JPS Associates) has been approved by the Board of Directors of 
HOCL and based on the revival plan report, a revival  restructuring plan for HOCL is 
presently under consideration of the Depa rtment. Regarding the Hindustan 
Fluorocarbons Ltd (HFL), a subsidiary of HOCL, as per the Department, during 2015 -

 
 
P a g e  | 26 
16 (up to December, 2015), the company has achieved a turnover of Rs.25.40 crore 
and loss of Rs.7.00 crore, as per the provisional unaudited r esults. This is mainly due 
to plant shut down for refurbishment / revamping activities. A revival / restructuring 
plan for HFL is also under consideration of the Department for long term and 
sustainable growth of the company. In view of the above, the Comm ittee recommend 
that the Department should take all steps necessary to revive HOCL and its 
subsidiary company, HFL for long -term sustained growth. The sickness of the 
company have gone on for so long and require concrete action to revive it. The 
Committee desire that the latest revival plan for HOCL prepared by M/s JPS 
Associates may be finalized at the earliest and revival measures may be taken on 
priority. Similarly, restructuring plan for HFL may also be implemented 
expeditiously. The roadmap for revival  may be communicated to the Committee at 
the earliest.    
II.   As for the Hindustan Insecticides Ltd (HIL),  the Committee appreciate that the 
company has been continuously posting profits since the last 10 years. The 
Committee note that during 2015 -16 (up to December, 2015), the company has 
achieved a turnover of Rs. 132.78 crore and net profit of Rs.0.25 crore, as per the 
provisional unaudited results. The Company has now diversified to decrease its 
dependence on revenue from DDT. The Committee note that HIL proposes to set up a 
multi-product plant facility at a cost of Rs. 11 crore at its Rasayani unit. The proposal 
has been referred to the Ministry of Finance for approval. The Committee desire that 
the approval be expedited. The Committee also recommend that the HIL/Department 
should make earnest efforts to make succ essful all the initiatives taken by the 
company to increase its profits. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Issues relating to sick, loss -making and non -performing CPSEs are being examined by  
the NITI Aayog. Further action on HOCL and HFL will be taken based on the final 
decision of the Government in the matter. 
The proposal for release of Plan loan of Rs.10.00 crore, which was available in the 
Department’s budget for 2015 -16, for setting up M ulti-product facility of capacity of 
1000TPA at Rasayani Unit was referred on 11.01.2016 to Ministry of Finance since 
their prior approval is required as HIL has defaulted in the repayment of Govt. loans 
and interest. Since the file was not received back i n the Department and the FY 2015 -
16 was about to end, a reminder was sent to the Department of Economic Affairs, 
Ministry of Finance, from the Joint Secretary (Chemicals) on 21.3.2016 and Secretary 
(C&PC) on 22.3.2016 for expediting M/o Finance’s approval.  However, as the file was 
not received by 31.03.2016, the Plan provision of Rs.10 crore had to be surrendered by 
the Department. 
Subsequently, the file was received from M/o Finance on 13.6.2016. DEA, M/o Finance, 
has requested the Department to re-examine the proposal in terms of M/o Finance’s OM 
dated 3.2.2016 which instructs that the window of investment and working capital loan 
to CPSUs from Govt. of India, in general, is closed. PSUs in general are hardly having 
debt and hence should raised debt from m arket or banks. Only if PSU is justified as 
significant from strategic / security angle, banks refuse loan to it and it has no real 
assets including land to monetise, would loan be considered at 11% with the prior 
approval of Budget Division. 
In view of th e above comments of M/o Finance, the proposal is being re -examined in 
consultation with HIL. In the current FY 2016 -17, there is a Plan loan provision of Rs.15 

 
 
P a g e  | 27 
crore for HIL in the Department’s budget. Decision on resubmitting the proposal to M/o 
Finance would be taken after re-examination of the proposal is completed. 
In addition to the above proposal for setting up a multi -product plant facility, some of 
the other measures taken / efforts being made by the Department / HIL to increase the 
company’s turnover and profit are as follows:  
(i) HIL has grown from existing 6 numbers of Technicals to total 10 numbers of 
Technicals with the launch of products like Acephate, Imidacloprid, Clorpyriphos etc.. 
Few more products like Acetamiprid, Triazophos, Glyphosate,  Thiomethoxam are under 
launch and facility is being put up to manufacture Pendimethalin. 
(ii) The company has got recognition as a National Level Seed Agency and has 
ventured into production and marketing of all varieties of seeds and is covered under 
various benefits under the National Food Security Mission (NFSM), National 
Horticulture Mission (NHM) and National Mission on Oilseeds & Oil Pulses (NMOOP). 
(iii)  The company has recently ventured into the Fertilizer segment as well and has 
been inducted by the Department of Fertilizers as an agency to import fertilizers. 
Further, Bathinda plant of the company is planned to be utilized for producing water 
soluble fertilizers. This diversification will enable the company to become a one stop 
shop for the farmi ng community by providing all the three critical agricultural inputs 
viz. seeds, pesticides and fertilizers. 
(iv)  As there is a demand for new generation molecules, the company is also looking 
at strategic tie-ups with multinational companies who own the patents for the same. 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
vide their O.M. No.23003/3/2016-Fin. dated  July 2016] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
New Schemes of Petrochemicals:-  
 The Committee observe that the allocated amount of Rs. 48.00 crore for New 
Schemes for the Petrochemicals for 2016 -17 is proposed to be spent for the three 
schemes, viz. Scheme for Plastic Park (Rs. 45.00 crore), Scheme for National Award 
(Rs.1.00 crore) a nd Scheme for CoE (Rs.2.00 crore). However, the allocation of Rs. 
48.00 crore for New Schemes of Petrochemicals is much less than the requirement of 
funds, and the Department informed that it will ask for the balance funds at the time 
of Supplementary Demands.  
  In this regard, the Committee note that Plastic Parks are the most ambitious schemes 
which takes the lion's share of the allocation. However, as per the Department, even 
the amount of Rs. 45 crore allocated for Plastic Parks is totally inadequate t o meet 
the requirements.  At present, three plastic parks at Tamot Village, Raisen District in 
Madhya Pradesh; Siju Village, Kujanga Tehsil, Jagatsinghpur District in Odisha  and 
Gellapukhuri, Tinsukia District in Assam are under various stages of  implementation. 
Government has approved in October, 2015 setting up of a Plastic Park in Thiruvallur 

 
 
P a g e  | 28 
District in the State of Tamil Nadu.  Because of the shortfall, progress of the 
implementation of the existing Parks (already under implementation) will be 
adversely affected. Further, it will not be possible to release any funds for setting up 
the six new Plastic Parks which have been approved ‘inprinciple’ by the Scheme 
Steering Committee in February, 2016. The six Plastic Parks are to be located in the 
States of  Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand, Haryana,West 
Bengal. Moreover, there are eight additional new Plastic Parks, which have been 
accorded ‘in -principle’ approval and after obtaining financial approval, their 
locations will be decided in consultation with the State Governments. In short, the 
Department is planning to set up a total of 18 Plastic Parks all over the country.   
  In light of the above, the Committee recommend that the Department should ask for 
the requisite funds at the time of Supplementary Demands with proper justification 
so that the same may be sanctioned. Further, Plastic Parks have been implemented 
with the concerned State Governments on a 50:50 sharing basis subject to a ceiling of 
Rs. 40 crore per project. Hence, the s uccess of these projects depend on how well the 
Department works with the concerned State Governments. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should institutionalize a proper mechanism for 
coordination with the State Governments so that the re is complete synergy between 
the Department and the States on the matter for effective implementation of the 
project. The action taken in pursuance of this recommendation may be intimated to 
the Committee at the earliest. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Depa rtment makes an all out effort for execution of the Plastic parks as per the 
timelines. A mechanism has been put in place for periodically monitoring and 
reviewing the performance of the Plastic Parks for their expeditious implementation in 
a time bound ma nner. The high level ‘Scheme Steering Committee’ is tasked with the 
responsibilities of reviewing the progress of the projects. The project implementing 
agencies (SPVs) report their performance on a monthly basis to the Department. The 
Scheme also has a me chanism of appointing a Programme Manager, a consulting 
agency with professional expertise. The Programme Manager is required to assist the 
Department, inter -alia, in monitoring the Scheme progress and furnishing regular 
reports based on the monthly progre ss reports, received from the implementing 
agencies and undertake site visits before release of grant to the SPVs based on 
achievement of milestones along with time lines as approved by SSC. The Department 
also closely monitors the projects through periodi c review meetings and field visits by 
senior officers. 
As regards seeking additional funds at the time of Supplementary Demands, the 
Department has sought an amount of Rs. 130.41 crore for 2016 -17 but the allocated 
amount is Rs. 48.00 crore only in BE 2016 -17 for the New Schemes of Petrochemicals. 
The matter has already been taken up with Internal Finance Division for allotment of 
balance requisite funds for the Scheme, and is being followed up regularly. 
[Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
vide their O.M. No.23003/3/2016-Fin. dated  July 2016] 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
 
P a g e  | 29 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS:- 
 The Committee observe that one of greatest concern arising out of chemical plants and 
industries is the pollution and degradation that it causes to the surrounding 
environment. The Committee are distressed to note that still there is so much wanting 
in the  areas of proper effluent treatment plants, preservation of ground water and 
ecological health.   
  The Committee note that the model developed in Maharashtra in which wherever a 
treatment plant in Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation is to be 
developed, a part of infrastructure like Road, electricity, water and transport, etc. will 
be done by the Government and the cost will be taken care of by the industry. It is 
possible in chemical clusters too. The concerned States should be involved in all t hese 
aspects so  that there can be a lasting solution. The Committee desire that the 
Department should seriously study this model and convince other states to follow on 
these lines. The Committee note that since the initial cost for common effluent 
treatment plants are so high and the private companies are often not ready to foot that 
bill in one go, it may be necessary for the Government to come out with the 
investments for common effluent treatment plants and later on collects the money 
from the industrie s. The Committee seriously view the present situation in which 
there is no proper mechanism or common standard for environmental safety. Common 
effluent treatment plants are an essential component of any chemical/petrochemical 
project and the Government should ensure that the required funds are made available. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the Department may set up a mechanism to 
monitor all environmental concerns in coordination with all stakeholders and should 
also review the existing environmenta l safeguards in all projects under its ambit and 
make amends speedily wherever necessary. The action taken on the above points may 
be communicated to the Committee at the earliest.  
 REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The chemical industry is an important constituent of the growing Indian economy and 
it is the mainstay of industrial and agriculture development of the country, providing 
several building blocks and raw materials for a number of industries, including textile, 
paper, paint, soap and detergent, pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals etc. 
The Industries, particularly small industries, due to their limited size and scale of 
operation do not find it economically viable to install elaborate pollution control 
equipments. Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs) are con sidered as one of the 
viable solution to achieve end -of-pipe treatment for effective wastewater treatment 
from Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and thereby reduce the number of 
discharge points for better enforcement. 
There are 28 CETPs in various state s including Andhra Pradesh, Kranataka, Gujarat, 
and Maharashtra catering to the need of Chemical clusters. The financial support for 
the construction of CETPs is available under various schemes of central government 
including Ministry of Environment, Fores t & Climate Change (MOEF &CC) for all the 
states in the country. The CETPs are regularly monitored by concerned state pollution 
control boards to check their compliance. 
In the scheme of MOEF & CC, which was started in 1991 for funding establishment of 
CETPs, the financial assistance provided to the project proponent was as Central 

 
 
P a g e  | 30 
Government subsidy- 25% of the project capital cost, State Government subsidy – 25% 
of the project capital cost, Loans from financial institutions – 30% of the project capital 
cost, and Entrepreneurs contribution – 20% of the project capital cost. The scheme 
was revised in 2012 to increase the Central subsidy from 25% to 50% retaining the 
state subsidy at 25% and lowering down the project proponent’s share from 50% to 
25%. Out of the proponent’s share, at least 40% of contribution has to be from the 
proponent and balance 60% is to be raised through loan to the proponent from Banks/ 
Financial Institutions. 
The Department has been taking up the issues related to chemical sector with MOEF & 
CC in the past based on environmental concerns raised by various Industry 
Associations/ Stakeholders. MOEF &CC is the Nodal Ministry for Environmental 
standards and their compliance in the Country under the Environmental (Protection) 
Act, 1986. 
 [Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)  
vide their O.M. No.23003/3/2016-Fin. dated  July 2016] 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                          (ANANDRAO ADSUL) 
 NOVEMBER 2016         CHAIRPERSON 
AGRAHAYANA (SAKA) 1938                                             STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
                        CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
  

 
 
P a g e  | 31 
APPENDIX – II 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2016-17) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 26 October, 2016 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room 'C ', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Kulamani Samal-  In the Chair 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B. N. Chandrappa  
5. Smt. Veena Devi 
6. Shri K. Ashok Kumar  
7. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
8. Shri S. Rajendran 
9. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
10. Shri Tasleem Uddin 
11. Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
12. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
13. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
15. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
  1. Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
 3. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Additional Director  
 4. Shri Nishant Mehra  -  Under Secretary 
 
2. As the Chairman could not attend the sitting due to health problem, under Rule 258 
(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business of  Lok Sabha, the Members chose Dr. 
Kulamani Samal, MP an d a Member of the Commi ttee, to act as the Chairman.  The Acting 
Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration and adoption of the Draft Action 
Report on 'Demands for Grants 2016-17' of Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. 
4. After a brief discussion on the contents of the report, the draft Action Taken Report 
was adopted by the Committee without any amendment.   
5. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to make consequential changes, if any, arising 
out of the factual verification of the Report by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals of 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

 
 
P a g e  | 32 
APPENDIX – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
  ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDA TIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY SECOND  REPORT (1 6TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2015 -16) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016 -
2017)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS 
AND PETROCHEMICALS).  
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 10 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 5, 7 and 9)   
5 
Percentage of Total 50% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
(Vide Recommendation  No. Nil)  
0 
Percentage of Total Nil 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:-  
(Vide Recommendation Nos. Nil)  
0 
Percentage of Total Nil  
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are still awaited:-  
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 3, 4, 6, 8 and 10) 
5 
Percentage of Total 50% 
 