SIXTEENTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS)
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2015-2016)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in  the  Fifth Report  of the Standing Committee on
Chemicals and  Fertilizers  (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  on Demands
for Grants (2015-2016) of the Ministry of Chemicals
and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.11.2015
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 27.11.2015
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2015/Kartika, 1937 ( Saka)


C.C.& F. No. 16
Price : R  108.00
© 2015 B Y L OK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by
Jainco Art India, New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2015-16) ................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .......................... 34
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................... 68
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee ......................................... 69
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ... 72
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Standing Committee
on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2015-16) held on
7th October , 2015 .............................................. 77
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Fifth Report
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014-15) on ‘Demands for Grants
(2015-16)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Department of Fertilizers) .................................. 79
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(2015-16)
Shri Anandrao Adsul — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Idris Ali
3. Smt. Anju Bala
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta
6. Smt. Veena Devi
7. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana
8. Shri Innocent
9. Shri K. Ashok Kumar
10. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan
12. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle
13. Shri Rajendran S.
14. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
15. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu
16. Dr. Kulamani Samal
17. Dr. Uma Saren
18. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh
19. Shri Taslimuddin
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma
21. Shri Baker George
#
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary
23. Dr. M.S. Gill 
(iii)
#Nominated w.e.f. 28.9.2015.

(iv)
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade
25. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya
27. Shri K. Parasaran
28. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
29. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy
30. Dr. Sanjay Sinh
31. Shri Abdul Wahab
SECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava — Director
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Nishant Mehra — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers
(2015-16) having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on their behalf, present this Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/
recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2014-2015) on
Demands for Grants (2015-2016) of the Ministry of Chemicals and
Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).
2. The Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 20.4.2015.
The Action Taken Replies of the Government to all observations/
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 21.8.2015.
The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2015-2016)
considered and adopted this ActionTaken Replies at their sitting held on
7.10.2015.
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
   N
EW D ELHI; ANANDRAO ADSUL,
07 October, 2015 Chairperson,
15 Asvina, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) which was presented
to Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on 20.04.2015/23.04.2015. In all, the
Committee made 12 Observations/Recommendations in the Report.
1.2 The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Fertilizers) were requested to furnish replies to the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report within three months
from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e., by 23.07.2015. The
Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the
12 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have been
received from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Fertilizers) vide their O.M. No. F . No. 5(1)/2015-Fin.II dated 21.08.2015.
These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by
the Government:
Sl.Nos. 1, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
(Total=09)
Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the Government ’s reply:
Sl.No. Nil
(Total=Nil)
Chapter III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Sl.No. 2
(Total=01)
Chapter IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Sl.Nos. 4 and 5
(Total=02)
Chapter V

2
1.3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I, Chapter-IV
in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and Chapter-V for which final replies are still
awaited, of this Report, should be furnished expeditiously.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations which
still require reiteration or merit comments.
A. Growth and development of Fertilizer Industry
Recommendation No. 1
1.5 Stressing the need to increase the indigenous production of
fertilizers, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the installed capacity of fertilizer
manufacturing units in the country is 132.58 lakh MT of nitrogen
and 70.60 lakh MT of phosphatic nutrient as on 31.03.2015, making
India the 3rd largest fertilizer producer in the world. At present,
there are 30 urea units in the country manufacturing around
22.7 million MT (MMT) of urea annually, 21 units produce DAP and
complex fertilizers and 2 units manufacture Ammonium Sulphate as
by-product. Besides, there are about 97 medium and small scale
units in operation producing Single Super Phosphate (SSP). The
country is fully dependent on imports in Potassic sector and to the
extent of 90% in Phosphatic sector in the form of either finished
products or its raw material. The current demand of urea (2014-15)
is around 31.8 MMT and the shortfall is met through imports. The
projected demand of urea for 2016-17 will be around 34 MMT and
by 2024-25, the same is expected to be 38 MMT . The total indigenous
production by the end of 2017-18 is likely to be around 31.5 MMT
per annum leaving a gap of nearly 5 MMT between demand and
supply. According to the Department, the said shortfall will be met
partly through import and partly through additional Brownfield/
Greenfield projects under New Investment Policy (NIP)-2012. The
Committee also note that the Department proposes to bring in new
Urea Policy which will encourage domestic production. In this regard,
a draft CCEA note regarding New Urea Policy-2015 has been sent to
concerned Ministries/Departments for inter-ministerial consultations
on 19.02.2015. The Committee desire that concerted and coordinated
efforts may be made by the Department in consultation with
stakeholders to bring the new Urea Policy at the earliest. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in the
matter.

3
Further , due to shortage of domestic gas, many FO/LSHS/Naphtha
based urea plants which have converted to gas recently, are meeting
its requirement of gas by using costly RLNG. Over a period of time
the indigenous P&K fertilizer industry having vintage technology
suffered due to frequent break downs, higher cost of production,
large workforce and financial reserves. Moreover, no incentives are
given to indigenous fertilizer manufacturers in the country in the
form of lower taxes or duty. Customs duty rates for both raw
materials and finished products are at equal level. Importers and
manufacturers are placed at equal footing in tax matters. At times
the cost of finished fertilizers is lower in the international market
as compared to raw materials resulting in lower production in the
country. Inordinate delay in payment of subsidy also adversely affect
the functioning of fertilizer units. Considering the importance of
chemical fertilizers as one of the key inputs for the success of
agriculture in the country, the Committee expect the Department
to take concrete measures to ensure sustained growth and
development of fertilizer sector in the country. Vigorous and
coordinated efforts also need to be made for continuous supply of
adequate quantity of gas for gas based fertilizer units. Further, all
fertilizer units with vintage technology need to be revamped and
upgraded with latest technology to augment production of fertilizer
and to cut down its cost of production. All closed/sick units of
fertilizer companies also need to be revived in a time bound manner.
It is also imperative that the Department may be provided with
adequate funds for effective implementation of its projects and
policies including settlement of huge arrears of subsidy claims of
the fertilizer companies. In this context, Ministry of Finance should
be impressed upon to allocate adequate funds to the Department
as well as incentives may be given to the fertilizer sector in terms
of lower taxes or customs duty. However, on its part, the Department
should also prioritize its action plan for timely execution of its
various projects/schemes and optimum utilization of its allotted
fund. In view of the foregoing, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the various initiatives/measures undertaken by the
Department for attaining self-sufficiency in fertilizer sector.
The Committee also note that the movement of fertilizers is being
decontrolled by the Government from April, 2015. According to the
Department, this will result in competition amongst the fertilizer
companies making the fertilizers more affordable to farmers
increasing consumption and production. However , the Committee
apprehend that decontrolling of movement of fertilizer may incline

4
fertilizer companies to supply fertilizers only in those areas which
are more profitable and accessible in comparison to those areas
which are less profitable and inaccessible and leading to imbalanced
distribution of fertilizers. This would eventually leave the poor
farmers at the mercy of these companies and may add to their
misery. The Committee, therefore, feel that the Department of
Fertilizer, being the nodal authority, can not simply absolve
themselves of their responsibility in the matter. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizer should
built an institutional mechanism to monitor the movement of
fertilizers under the decontrolled regime ensuring timely supply of
adequate quantity of fertilizers at affordable prices to the farmers
even in the remotest areas of the country. Precautionary measures
also need to be taken to check the companies from engaging in evil
practice of undue profiteering under the decontrolled regime. ”
Reply of the Government
1.6 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:—
“The indigenous P&K fertilizer industry was under Government
control under Concession Scheme for a long period prior to
implementation of NBS Scheme. Under the Scheme the difference
of normative delivered price and the statutory MRP was being paid
as concession. Due to low profit and assured sale of their product,
the fertilizer industry did not innovate and keep pace with the
latest technological developments in fertilizer sector and continued
with the existing technology and machinery. Over a period of time,
many fertilizer companies having vintage technology suffered due
to frequent break downs, higher cost of production, large workforce
and financial reserves. Non-availability of domestic gas to many
P&K fertilizer companies/non-creation of infrastructure for making
available natural gas to these companies has affected growth of
P&K fertilizer industry in the country. Delay in payment of subsidy
due to inadequate funds has also affected the functioning of P&K
fertilizer industries in the country affecting their growth.
However , in order to enable the fertilizer companies to do business
as per the market dynamics, the Department has introduced Nutrient
Based Subsidy Scheme w.e.f. 1.4.2010. Under the policy, the
companies are allowed to fix their MRP at reasonable level as per
market dynamics. This enabled the companies to find new markets
and take their own commercial decisions to innovate in new products
etc.

5
There are no incentives to indigenous fertilizer manufacturers in
the country in the form of lower taxes or duty. Customs duty rates
for both raw materials and finished products are at equal level.
Importers and manufacturers are placed at equal footing in tax
matters. At times the cost of finished fertilizers is lower in the
international market as compared to raw materials resulting in
lower production in the country.
For growth of indigenous P&K fertilizer industry in the country, the
Department of Fertilizers had taken up with Ministry of Finance for
reduction in custom on imported raw materials. The Department
has again requested the Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
to consider the proposal.
The movement and distribution of entire 100% of Urea both imported
and indigenous is regulated by Department of Fertilizers (DoF)
through Monthly Supply Plan. The Department also draws Supply
Plan for entire imported and indigenous Phosphatic and Potassic
Fertilizers and conveys the Supply Plan to the respective State
Governments on month to month basis. DoF will regulate the
movement of these Fertilizers to bridge the supplies in underserved
areas. Further , the distribution and movement of fertilizers along
with imports of finished fertilizers, fertilizer inputs and production
by Indigenous units is being monitored through the online web
based “Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS)/ Mobile FMS-Phase-I ”. In
order to monitor and ensure that the subsidized P&K fertilizers
reach throughout the country and its availability is maintained as
per the requirement, the Fertilizer Account Wing will prepare and
furnish the month-wise quantity of P&K fertilizers moved by different
companies to different locations (district-wise) based on the data
submitted in the FMS by P&K fertilizer companies. The respective
State Agriculture Departments will also closely monitor the
availability of P&K fertilizers in consultation with the fertilizer
companies and their respective field units and in consultation with
DAC will ensure availability of these fertilizers in the concerned
States. If shortages/non-availability of these fertilizers is still noticed
in any part of their respective States, the same will be brought to
the notice of DoF for further action.
The Government has notified the New Urea Policy-2015 (NUP-2015)
for existing gas based urea manufacturing units on 25th May, 2015
with the twin objectives of maximizing indigenous urea production
and promoting energy efficiency in urea production while
rationalizing subsidy burden on the Government. It is expected to
prepare the domestic urea sector to become globally competitive
in terms of energy efficiency over a period of three years.

6
The CCEA approved gas pooling for urea sector on 30th March,
2015. After gas pooling, all urea units will get gas at uniform price.
The provisions of gas pooling will ensure that RLNG will be supplied
to urea units at competitive price and urea units are incentivized
to maximize their production beyond reassessed capacity because
of simplified subsidy calculation parameters under the New Urea
Policy, 2015. The DoF has notified NIP—2012 on 2nd January, 2013
and its amendment on 7th October, 2014, to attract fresh investment
in urea sector and reduce import dependency in urea. As a result
of notification, DoF has taken note of these proposals and directed
the project proponents to take necessary action as per the provisions
of NIP—2012 and its amendment. To ensure the availability of
fertilizers in the country, Government has taken following steps:—
(a) The month-wise demand is assessed and projected by the
Department of Agriculture and co-operation (DAC) in
consultation with the State Governments before
commencement of each cropping season.
(b) On the basis of month-wise and state-wise projection given
by Department of Agriculture and Co-operation, Department
of Fertilizers allocates sufficient/adequate quantities of
fertilizers to the States by issuing monthly supply plan and
continuously monitors the availability through following system:—
(i) The movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is being
monitored throughout the country by an online web based
monitoring system (www.urvarak.co.in) also called as
Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS); DoF tracks the
movement of fertilizers upto the district level, this is
extended through mobile Fertilizer Monitoring System
(mFMS), which tracks the receipts of the fertilizer till
the Retailers’ level. This system is in public domain and
anybody can access the system and know availability of
fertilizers upto Retailers ’ level. The list of retailers is
also available in mFMS-www.mfms.nic.in.
(ii) The State Governments are regularly advised to
co-ordinate with manufacturers and importers of
fertilizers for streamlining the supplies through timely
placement of indents for railway rakes through their
State institutional agencies like Markfed etc.
(iii) Regular weekly Video conference is conducted jointly by
Department of Agriculture and Co-operation (DAC),
Department of Fertilizers (DoF), and Ministry of Railways

7
with State Agriculture Officials and corrective actions
are taken to dispatch fertilizer as indicated by the State
Governments.
(iv) The gap in the demand and domestic production of
fertilizer is met through imports. ”
Comments of the Committee
1.7 The Committee noted that no incentives are given to
indigenous fertilizer manufacturers in the country in the form of
lower taxes or duty. Customs duty rates for both raw materials and
finished products are at equal level. Importers and manufacturers
are placed at equal footing in tax matters. At times the cost of
finished fertilizers is lower in the international market as compared
to raw materials resulting in lower production in the country. Further,
in-ordinate delay in payment of subsidy due to inadequate funds has
also adversely affected the functioning and growth of P&K fertilizer
industries in the country. In this regard, the Department in its Action
Taken Replies confirmed the above observations and informed that
the Department of Fertilizers had taken up with Ministry of Finance
for reduction in custom duty on imported raw materials and has sent
a proposal in this regard. The Committee are of the view that for
growth of indigenous P&K fertilizer industry in the country, it is
essential that adequate incentive are provided to fertilizer industry.
The Committee, therefore, expect the Department, to take up the
matter vigorously with the Department of Revenue (Ministry of
Finance) for consideration and finalization of the proposal.
The Committee also noted that the movement of fertilizers is
being decontrolled by the Government from April, 2015. However,
in this regard, the Committee expressed its apprehension that
decontrolling of movement of fertilizer may incline fertilizer
companies to supply fertilizers only in those areas which are more
profitable and accessible in comparison to those areas which are less
profitable and inaccessible and leading to imbalanced distribution of
fertilizers. This would eventually leave the poor farmers at the mercy
of these companies and may add to their misery.
In this regard, the Department in its Action Taken Replies informed
that the movement and distribution of entire 100% of Urea both
imported and indigenous is regulated by Department of Fertilizers
(DoF) through Monthly Supply Plan. DoF will regulate the movement
of these fertilizers to bridge the supplies in underserved areas.
Further, the distribution and movement of fertilizers along with

8
imports of finished fertilizers, fertilizer inputs and production by
Indigenous units is being monitored through the online web based
“Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS)/ Mobile FMS-Phase-I ”. The
respective State Agriculture Departments will also closely monitor
the availability of P&K fertilizers in consultation with the fertilizer
companies and their respective field units. If shortages/non-availability
of these fertilizers is still noticed in any part of their respective
States, the same will be brought to the notice of DoF for further
action. The Committee are of the view that adequate supply of
fertilizer in every corner of the country is the responsibility of the
Department and even after decontrolling the movement of fertilizer,
the Department cannot be absolved with this responsibility. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that just by monitoring the
movement through the online web based “Fertilizer Monitoring System
(FMS)/Mobile FMS-Phase-I ” or monitoring by the State Agriculture
Departments is not enough, the Department should, therefore, apart
from strengthening the fertilizer monitoring system, also prepare
guidelines for the fertilizer companies to ensure that they do not
indulge in undue profiteering and also cater to the fertilizer needs
and requirements of the remote and economically unviable areas as
well. A mechanism for imposing penalty should also be prepared and
strictly enforced. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
action taken in this regard.
B. Plan Allocation and Expenditure
Recommendation No. 2
1.8 Emphasizing the need for allocation of adequate funds to the
Department, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note with deep concern that BE 2013-14 under
Plan allocation was Rs. 269 crore which was reduced drastically to
Rs. 100 crore in BE 2014-15 and the same was further slashed down
to Rs. 50 crore in BE 2015-16 as against the BE proposal of the
Department for Rs. 190.26 crore for the year 2015-16. The Committee
are also distressed to note that BE 2013-14 of Rs. 269 crore was
reduced to Rs. 9 crore at RE stage in 2013-14, out of which only
Rs. 2.32 crore could be spent. Again, out of Rs. 100 crore in
BE 2014-15, actual expenditure was only Rs. 2.04 crore upto
December 2014. The Committee wonder as to how the balance
amount of Rs. 98 crore  i.e. almost 98% of the funds allocated in BE
2014-15 could be spent in the remaining part of the fiscal. The
drastic reduction in allocation of Plan funds clearly shows the

9
Department’s poor budgetary planning and the unrealistic estimation
of funds required by the Department for its various projects/
schemes. This also shows the Department ’s ineffective
implementation or monitoring of the action plan or monitoring of
utilization of budgetary funds. The Plan fund mainly comprises of
financial support to loss making three companies namely
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizers Corporation Limited (BVFCL),
Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) and Madras
Fertilizers Limited (MFL). Under the Plan scheme, budgetary support
in the form of loan is provided to these three loss making fertilizer
companies for Renovation, Replacement and maintenance of critical
equipment to sustain their operations. However , due to financial
restrictions imposed by Ministry of Finance in respect of default in
refund of Government of India loans and payment of interest thereon
by CPSEs, Plan loan could not be released to these companies from
2012-13 onward. Financial restructuring of aforesaid three PSUs is
not being considered under Plan fund. In this regard, the Committee
feel that in the absence of adequate funds under GBS, it would be
difficult for the loss making PSUs to sustain their operations.
The Committee also note that no allocation has been made under
the Plan Head for the 2015-16 for Miscellaneous schemes  i.e.
Management of Information Technology (MIT) and Science &
Technology (S&T). Under MIT scheme, budgetary support is given to
fund need based programme namely Fertilizer Monitoring System
(FMS) and mobile based Fertilizer Monitoring System (mFMS) through
the grants made available as GBS. FMS has been developed and
grown to enable users to monitor availability of fertilizers online on
real time basis. The Committee feel that non allocation of GBS
would adversely affect the effective functioning of FMS and mFMS
which is very essential for the efficient implementation of the
Direct Transfer of Subsidy scheme. The S&T programme of the
Department primarily lays emphasis at Research and Development
of processes and equipment inter alia to lower specific energy
consumption in fertilizer plants. In the absence of adequate funds,
the Committee feel that it would be difficult for technical institutes/
CPSEs to undertake projects related to fertilizer industry which
may, in turn, hamper innovation and technological advancement in
the fertilizer sector.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should
take up the issue vigorously with the Ministry of Finance and impress
upon them to allocate adequate funds as per the demand of the
Department. The Committee may be informed of the steps being
taken by the Department in this regard. ”

10
Reply of the Government
1.9 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:—
“The reason for variation in BE and RE during 2013-14 and 2014-15
is the reduction of outlay by Ministry of Finance at RE stage. The
main reasons for variation in RE and Actual expenditure were:
1. Provision of Budgetary support is made by Department of
Fertilizers for three loss making CPSEs namely Brahmaputra
Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL), Fertilizers and
Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) and Madras Fertilizers
Limited (MFL), keeping in view the overall allocation made by
the Planning Commission and also considering the requirements
of the companies. Due to financial restrictions imposed by
Ministry of Finance vide its letter dated September 20, 2012,
in respect of default in refund of Government of India loans
and payment of interest thereon by CPSEs, Plan loan could
not be released to these Fertilizer companies from 2012-13
onward.
2. Under Management of Information Technology (MIT) Head,
the major portion of the budget was kept for mFMS scheme.
Due to non-completion of the 2nd phase of the mFMS, the
fund provided could not be utilized.
3. Under S&T Head, due to non-receipt of quality proposals,
allocated fund could not be utilized in its totality.
Department of Fertilizers has sought an amount of Rs. 2.80 crore
under Plan expenditure for MIT under First Supplementary Demand
for 2015-16 vide O.M. No. 5(2)/2015-Fin.I dated 01.07.2015. ”
Comments of the Committee
1.10 The Committee in its recommendation stressed the need to
vigorously pursue with the Ministry of Finance and also to impress
upon them to allocate adequate funds as per the demand of the
Department under the plan head for the year 2015-16 for
Miscellaneous Schemes i.e. Management of Information Technology
(MIT) and Science & Technology (S&T) and also for the loss making
PSUs namely Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizers Corporation Limited
(BVFCL), Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) and
Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) in order to sustain their operations.

11
In its Action Taken Report, the Department stated that due to
financial restrictions imposed by Ministry of Finance, in respect of
default in refund of Government of India loans and payment of
interest thereon by CPSEs, Plan loan could not be released to these
Fertilizer companies from 2012-13 onwards. Further, the fund
provided could not be utilized under Management of Information
Technology (MIT) Head, due to non-completion of the 2nd phase of
the mFMS. The Department has sought an amount of Rs. 2.80 crore
for MIT under first supplementary Demand for 2015-16. In respect
of Science and Technology Head, allocated fund could not be utilized
in its totality due to non-receipt of quality proposals as a reason of
which funds could not be released for these two schemes.
In this regard, the Committee regret to note that the Department
has not made any provision for the allocation of funds for three loss
making PSUs and had simply repeated the same status as was stated
during the examination of the Demands for Grants 2015-16. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate its earlier recommendation and would
also like the Department to take some concrete steps towards
operationalising loss making PSUs and also ensuring adequate
allocation of funds to them. The Committee further would also like
the Department to make earnest efforts to get supplementary Demand
sought for the purpose and make optimum utilisation of the funds
and complete the 2nd phase of mFMS on priority basis. As regards
S&T Head, the Department should make efforts to get some quality
proposal for release of funds. The Committee would like the
Department to apprise the Committee of the action taken in this
regard.
C. Direct Subsidy to Farmers
Recommendation No. 4
1.11 Stressing the need for expeditious implementation of Direct
Benefits Transfer Scheme, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the Department is following a phased
approach for direct disbursement of fertilizer subsidy to the intended
beneficiaries. The implementation of Phase-I has already been made
operational from 1st November, 2011 and is approaching stabilization
and Phase-II of mFMS which capture the retailer sales of fertilizers
to farmers in pilot stage, was rolled out in 6 districts (Nawanshahar-
Punjab, East Godavari-Andhra Pradesh, Sonipat-Haryana, Bilaspur-
Himachal Pradesh, Ajmer-Rajasthan, and Madurai-Tamil Nadu) on

12
1st August 2013. The pilot project is being implemented with the
help of the 6 Lead Fertilizer Suppliers (LFS) of the concerned States.
However , since feedback from Lead Fertilizers Suppliers (LFS) on
Phase-II implementation is not positive, the Department is considering
implementing a part of phase-II as an interim step i.e. capturing
retailer’s sale only and not the buyer’s data. As regards to subsequent
phases of project i.e. Phase-III and Phase-IV , the Committee were
informed that it was discussed and decided on 6.5.2013 that DBT
in fertilizers is complex matter as there are problems in targeting,
determining entitlements and preparing beneficiary databases,
therefore, for the moment it would be better to keep DBT away
from fertilizers. According to the Department, there is no database
of the beneficiary presently available in the State who buys the
Fertilizers. There are also issues like as to whether the direct
subsidy has to be paid to the land owner or to the filler. There are
variables such as type of soil, type of crop produced and rainfall
etc., which determines the type and amount of a particular type
of fertilizers used by the farmers. Thus, assessing the entitlement
of fertiliser is a very difficult task. Further , there are different
subsidy regimes operational for Urea and P&K Fertilizers. For Urea,
the subsidy is on cost plus basis but in P&K Fertilizers, subsidy is
fixed. Therefore, in the present scenario, the product based subsidy
is only possible for P&K fertiliser sector and not feasible in case of
Urea which covers at least 70% of subsidy expenditure.
Notwithstanding the position stated above, the Department agreed
with the concerns raised by the Committee on the issue and was
forthright in his approach that ultimately the Government has to
endeavour to directly transfer the subsidy to the farmers instead of
routing it through the company. According to them, DBT to the
farmers can be done in case of P&K fertilizers on which fixed
subsidy is being given like in the case of LPG. It was also informed
to the Committee that DBT is being implemented as a mission in
30 districts of the country. Needless to say, the Committee have
time and again emphasized the need for payment of subsidy direct
to the farmers. The Committee are of the strong view that transfer
of the benefits of direct subsidy to the farmers would check the
corruption, close the loopholes and profligacy in subsidies. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make
earnest efforts to implement the DBT scheme in the 30 districts as
a mission and on the basis of its evaluation, a mechanism should
be worked out in consultation with all stakeholders to address the
problems in targeting, determining entitlements and preparing
beneficiary databases so that the benefit of subsidy is disbursed
directly to the farmers without further delay. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department
and the progress made in this regard. ”

13
Reply of the Government
1.12 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:—
“This Department is taking necessary steps to implement DBT in
fertilizers and is working in close co-ordination with Office of Mission
Director , DBT under Ministry of Finance. A preliminary consultation
was held with two States of Odisha and Gujarat on 06.04.2015, as
they have shown interest for a pilot project in DBT . State
Governments of Odisha and Gujarat were requested to indicate
pilot districts. Response from both of the States have been received
and the same is being examined.
Further , Mission Director [DBT) has forwarded a proposal given by
National Institute of Smart Governance (NISG) to assist the
department in preparing a roadmap for DBT in fertilizers. In this
regard, NISG has submitted a proposal for Consultancy and Project
Management for DBT in fertilizers in two (2) pilot districts of Odisha
and Gujarat which was discussed in a meeting chaired by JS (Fert.)
on 27th April, 2015. The proposal of National Institute of Smart
Governance is under consideration of Department which would
provide Detailed Project Report (DPR) in first three (3) months.
A meeting was also chaired by Mission Director (DBT) on 1st May
2015 in presence of senior representatives of NISG with Joint
Secretary (Fert.) and Director (FA) from Department of Fertilizers.
The various steps to be taken for roadmap of DBT in fertilizers was
discussed in detail.
Further action is being planned to start the pilot project after due
approvals of the Competent Authority of the Department of
Fertilizers.”
Comments of the Committee
1.13 Noting the need for expeditious implementation of Direct
Benefits Transfer Scheme, the Committee recommended that the
Department should make earnest efforts to implement the DBT
scheme in the 30 districts as a mission and on the basis of its
evaluation, a mechanism should be worked out in consultation with
all stakeholders to address the problems in targeting, determining
entitlements and preparing beneficiary databases so that the benefit
of subsidy is directly disbursed to the farmers without further delay.

14
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated that State
Governments of Odisha and Gujarat indicated the names of pilot
districts and the same is being examined. Further, Mission Director
(DBT) has forwarded a proposal given by National Institute of Smart
Governance (NISG) to assist the department in preparing a roadmap
for DBT in fertilizers. In this regard, NISG has submitted a proposal
for Consultancy and Project Management for DBT in fertilizers in
two (2) pilot districts of Odisha and Gujarat which was discussed in
a meeting chaired by JS (Fert.) on 27th April, 2015. The proposal
of National Institute of Smart Governance is under consideration of
Department which would provide Detailed Project Report (DPR) in
first three (3) months. Further action would be planned to start the
pilot project after due approvals of the Competent Authority of the
Department of Fertilizers.
In view of the above, the Committee would expect the
Department to expedite the pilot project and thereafter draft a
roadmap for effective and efficient implementation of the DBT scheme
so that benefits of subsidy is disbursed to the farmers without any
further delay. The Department may apprise the Committee of the
action taken in this regard.
D. Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy
Recommendation No. 5
1.14 Stressing the need to control price rise in P&K fertilizers, the
Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) policy is
being implemented by the Department for P&K fertilizers
w.e.f. 1.4.2010 under which a fixed rate of subsidy, decided on
annual basis, is provided on each grade of subsidized P&K fertilizers
depending on their nutrient content. The NBS rates for P&K fertilizers
are fixed by the Government after taking into consideration all
relevant factors including the likely impact of these rates on total
subsidy payout. The Committee observed in its earlier reports that
since the introduction of NBS policy, there has been an increasing
trend in prices of P&K Fertilizer , gradual decline in subsidy on
decontrolled fertilizers, due to reducing per kg subsidy on each
Nutrient covered under NBS and also due to lower consumption of
P&K Fertilizers. As a result thereof, the consumption of controlled
fertilizer i.e. urea has increased leading to imbalanced use of
fertilizers and deterioration of soil health. The small and marginal
farmers are worst affected as they are not able to afford the high

15
cost of decontrolled fertilizers. In this regard, the Committee were
informed that in order to study the impact of NBS Policy, the
Government had appointed M/s Ernst & Young (EY), which has since
submitted its report in the matter. The Department has also accepted
the report and is now examining the report. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the findings in the report of M/s EY
should be examined thoroughly and expeditiously and on the basis
of its analysis and evaluation, the NBS policy should be suitably
modified so as to control the rising prices of P&K fertilizers, which
would in turn encourage farmers to utilize balanced fertilizers for
their crops. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken by the Department in this regard. ”
Reply of the Government
1.15 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:—
“The report submitted by M/s Ernst & Young on the performance of
NBS Policy has been examined.
The findings of the report show that the objectives of the NBS
Policy namely, availability of P & K fertilizers throughout the country,
reduction in subsidy burden, promotion of competition etc. have
been achieved after implementation of the policy.
However , in respect of balanced fertilization of soil, the report says
that significant low prices of Nitrogen has led to increase in gap
between prices of N vis-a-vis P & K over last 3 years and this led
to significant distortion of fertilization ratio post NBS.
As distortion of fertilization ratio is mainly due to over consumption
of urea due to its low MRP fixed statutorily as compared to high
price on N in P & K fertilizers, the Department felt that distortion
in fertilization ratio is to be addressed in the form of review of
Urea policy. Accordingly, the Department of Fertilizers is considering
the issue in consultation with Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation.
Recommendations of M/s Ernst & Young:—
(i) Reasonableness of MRP: The report has recommendations
relating to reasonability of MRP . It has suggested determination
of reasonableness of MRP in two different criteria. In this
regard it may be stated that the Department has already put

16
in place a mechanism/procedure for finding out reasonableness
of MRP of P & K fertilizers. In the procedure, it has been
made mandatory for the fertilizer companies to furnish cost
data of all subsidized P&K fertilizers produced/imported by
them for release of subsidy from 2012-13 onwards and Cost
Accountants have been appointed to scrutinize the cost data
submitted by the fertilizer companies and based on the cost
accountants’ reports the reasonableness of MRPs of subsidised
P&K fertilizers is being found out.
(ii) Securing supplies of P&K Fertilizers: The study report states
that for securing supplies of P&K fertilizers the Government
should encourage strategic investments by Indian players in
mines abroad by creating ‘sovereign fund ’ for the same and
creation of consortium of Indian players to bargain volume
discounts. In this regard it is stated that the Government is
already facilitating to secure supplies of Phosphatic and
Potassic fertilizers and their raw materials and encouraging
companies to set up joint ventures and long term supply
agreements abroad to ensure continuous availability of finished
fertilizers/raw materials in the country.
The above findings show that the Department has already taken
various steps to implement the recommendations of M/s Ernst &
Young.”
Comments of the Committee
1.16 The Committee recommended that the findings in the report
of M/s Ernst & Young should be examined thoroughly and expeditiously
and on the basis of its analysis and evaluation, the NBS policy should
be suitably modified so as to control the rising prices of P&K
fertilizers, which would in turn encourage farmers to utilize balanced
fertilizers for their crops.
In its Action Taken Replies, the Department has stated that it has
examined the Report and has already started taking various steps to
implement the recommendations of M/s Ernst & Young. However, in
respect of balanced fertilization of soil, the report says that significant
low prices of Nitrogen has led to increase in gap between prices of
N vis-a-vis P&K fertilizer over last 3 years and this led to significant
distortion of fertilization ratio post NBS. In this regard, the Department
in consultation with the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
is considering this issue and trying to address it in the form of
review of the Urea Policy.

17
In view of the above, the Committee would expect the
Department to expedite the process of implementation of the
recommendations of M/s Ernst & Young so that adverse impact of
price rise of decontrolled fertilizers especially on the small and
marginalized farmers can be minimized. The Department may inform
the Committee of the action taken in this regard.
E. New Investment Policy 2012
Recommendation No. 6
1.17 Stressing the need to increase the production of indigenous
production of fertilizers, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that the New Investment Policy 2012 (NIP-
2012) was notified by the Government on 2nd January, 2013 in
order to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector to reduce India ’s
import dependency in urea production. In this regard, the
Department has also notified the amendment to NIP-2012 on
7th October 2014 substituting the phrase “guaranteed buyback ”
with the expression that subsidies will be given only upon domestic
sale as at present with proper safeguards. Based on the amendment
to NIP-2012, the Department has received 12 proposals for setting
up of Revamp, Expansion, Revival and Greenfield plants. These
proposals are being examined by the Department in the light of the
provisions of the NIP-2012 and amendments thereof and according
to them the same is likely to finalized soon. The Committee hope
that proposals received under NIP-2012 would be finalised
expeditiously with in a fixed time line so that projects are set up
as early as possible which would, in turn, give great boost to
production of urea in the country. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the progress made in this regard. ”
Reply of the Government
1.18 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:—
“On 21st April, 2015 the DoF issued letter to all project proponents
stating that DoF has taken note of their proposals and further
directed them to take necessary steps as per the provisions of
NIP-2012 notified on 2nd January, 2013 and its amendment on
7th October, 2014. ”

18
Comments of the Committee
1.19 The Committee noted that based on the amendment to
New Investment Policy 2012 (NIP-2012), the Department has received
12 proposals for setting up of Revamp, Expansion, Revival and
Greenfield plants. These proposals are being examined by the
Department in the light of the provisions of the NIP-2012 and
amendments thereof and according to them the same is likely to be
finalized soon. The Committee, therefore, recommended that
proposals received under NIP-2012 be finalized expeditiously with in
a fixed time line so that projects are set up as early as possible
which would, in turn, give great boost to production of urea in the
country.
However, in its Action Taken Replies, the Department has simply
taken note of the proposals received under NIP-2012 and further
directed them to take necessary steps as per the provisions of
NIP-2012 and its amendment but the Department has not given any
timeline for the action to be taken on the proposals.
In view of the above, the Committee would like to reiterate its
earlier recommendation regarding expeditious finalization of these
proposals, within a fixed time line so that projects are set up as
early as possible.
F. Revival of Closed/Sick PSUs
Recommendation No. 7
1.20 Emphasizing the need for expeditious revival of closed/sick
fertilizer units, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee have time and again emphasized the need for
expeditious revival of closed/sick units of fertilizer companies
particularly in the context of augmenting indigenous production of
fertilizers and to make the country self reliant in fertilizer sector.
Out of 9 public sector fertilizer companies under administrative
control of the Department of Fertilizers, 3 companies viz. Fertilizers
and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT), Madras Fertilizers Limited
(MFL) and Brahmputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL)
are sick and 2 companies viz. Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited
(FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFCL) are lying
closed since 2002. Government is considering proposals for financial
restructuring of three sick companies namely MFL, FACT and BVFCL,
which inter-alia involves write off of Government of India loan and

19
the interest thereon. BVFCL is incurring losses since inception due
to low capacity utilization and high energy consumption. BRPSE has
recommended the financial restructuring plan to the Government.
Based on the recommendations of BRPSE, a cabinet note has been
forwarded to the Cabinet Secretariat for placing it before Cabinet
for approval. MFL started incurring losses in the year 2003-04 and
declared sick in 2009. Recently, a financial restructuring proposal
has been submitted to Department of Public Enterprises (DPEs) for
placing the same before Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector
Enterprises (BRPSE) which has been returned as the posts of
Chairman, BRPSE, Secretary, BRPSE and two other non-official
members of BRPSE are vacant. The constitution of the Board is
awaited. FACT has started incurring losses since 1988-99 and is a
sick unit. Recently, BRPSE has recommended financial relief for
infusion of funds and waivers of GoI loans and interest. A proposal
seeking approval of CCEA for sanction of financial reliefs to FACT
has been submitted to Cabinet Secretariat. Department of
Expenditure has raised some issues on the matter and the same is
being discussed by the Department of Fertilizers to resolve the
issues.
Apart from these 3 sick PSUs, there are 8 fertilizer units lying
closed at present. Out of these closed units, 5 are of FCIL and 3
are of HFCL. The Committee were informed that the pre-project
activities for revival of Talcher and Ramagundam units of FCIL are
in progress and these units are likely to become functional after 36
months from the date of Award to the technology suppliers. As
regards Sindri, and Barauni units, the Government is considering
exploring the feasibility of revival through the ‘bidding route ’. As
regards Gorakhpur unit, the Government is considering exploring
the feasibility of revival through ‘nomination route’ instead of the
‘bidding route’. However , the revival of Korba unit would be taken
up later on. As a result of revival of these closed units, the estimated
increase in production of urea in the country will be of 1.30 Million
Tonnes per annum per unit. In view of the foregoing, the Committee
are of the view that expeditious revival of sick and closed fertilizer
units is essential for making India self-sufficient in the fertilizer
sector and to reduce its imports dependency. However , the
Committee regret to note the slow pace of progress made by the
Government in the revival of these sick units so far. The Committee
also feel that the delay in the revival of closed and sick units leads
to time and cost overruns. Keeping in view the significant role
which is expected to be played by these sick units after their
revival, the Committee reiterate its recommendation that the process

20
of revival of closed/sick units of fertilizers be expedited within a
fixed timeframe. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress made in this regard. ”
Reply of the Government
1.21 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:—
“Revival of closed units of HFCL/FCIL
At present none of the units of Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited
(FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFCL) are
operational as all the units of these companies are lying closed.
Detail on the closed fertilizer plants are as under:
Name of the PSU Unit   State
Fertilizer Corporation of Sindri Jharkhand
India Limited (FCIL) Gorakhpur Uttar Pradesh
Talcher Odisha
Ramagundam Andhra Pradesh
Korba Chhattisgarh
Hindustan Fertilizer Barauni Bihar
Corporation Limited (HFCL) Haldia West Bengal
Durgapur West Bengal
Revival of closed units of HFCL/FCIL
In 2008, Cabinet approved to revive Fertilizer Corporation of India
Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFCL)
units subject to non-recourse to Government funding and to consider
write off of GoI Loan & interest to the extent required, subject to
submission of fully tied up proposals for final decision on waiver.
The revival of these closed units would be through nomination
route by PSUs and through bidding route by private sector. Sindri,
Talcher and Ramagundam Units of FCIL to be revived on nomination
basis. Gorakhpur and Korba units of FCIL and Durgapur, Haldia,
Barauni of HFCL to be revived through bidding route.
In August, 2011, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA)
had approved the Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) for revival of

21
all the Units of FCIL and HFCL. DRS envisaged revival of Talcher
Unit by the consortium of M/s Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers
Limited (RCF), M/s Coal India Limited (CIL) and M/s Gas Authority
of India Limited (GAIL), revival of Ramagundam Unit by
M/s Engineers India Limited (EIL) and M/s National Fertilizers  Limited
(NFL) and revival of Sindri unit by M/s Steel Authority of India
Limited (SAIL).
In its meeting held on 9.5.2013, CCEA, inter alia, approved waiver
of Government of India loan and interest to facilitate FCIL to arrive
at positive net worth. This enabled FCIL to get de-registered from
the purview of Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction
(BIFR). Proposal/action plan on revival of HFCL units to be taken up
once revival of FCIL units is on track.
Unit-wise status of revival is as follows
Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited (FCIL)
Talcher Unit of FCIL
• Talcher unit of FCIL to be revived on nomination basis by
consortium of PSUs namely, Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers
Limited (RCF), Coal India Limited (CIL), Gas Authority of India
Limited (GAIL) & FCIL by forming Joint Venture.
• The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) among consortium
PSUs i.e.  CIL, RCF , GAIL and FCIL, has been signed on
05.09.2013.
• Joint Venture (JV) agreement amongst the consortium partners
signed on 24.12.2014
• Selection and finalization of coal gasification technology is in
process.
• Further necessary actions are being taken in this regard.
Ramagundam Unit
• Ramagundam unit of FCIL to be revived on nomination basis
by consortium of PSUs namely Engineers India Limited (EIL),
National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) and FCIL.
• The pre-project activities for revival of Ramagundam Unit
(Telangana) are in progress to set-up a gas-based fertilizer
plant.

22
• The Joint Venture agreement signed on 14.1.2015.
• EIL & NFL are having discussions with the Technology providers.
• JV Company named “Ramagundam Fertilizers & Chemicals
Limited” formed on 17.2.2015
• The JV Company would operate the plant and EIL would take
up the detailed Engineering Procurement of equipment and
Construction (EPC) of the plant.
• The project likely to be commissioned by 30.9.2018
Sindri unit
• Sindri unit of FCIL was to be revived on nomination basis by
SAIL and FCIL
• SAIL-Sindri Projects Ltd. (SSPL), a wholly owned subsidiary of
SAIL, had been incorporated in November, 2011 for the purpose
of revival of Sindri Unit of FCIL.
• However, not much progress has been made due to
non-availability of around 3000 Acres of contiguous piece of
land for the Steel Plant due to encroachment.
• In the meantime SAIL has informed that the scenario for SAIL
has undergone change, a massive modernization and expansion
plan of SAIL is currently under implementation, with capital
expenditure (CAPEX) commitment of Rs. 72,000 crore. SAIL
has drawn a vision plan 2025 to expand to 50 MTPA Hot Metal
capacity by 2025. This requires a commitment around
Rs. 2.02 lakh crore. In view of the above, SAIL Board has
taken a view not to pursue the Sindri Revival project further.
• Sindri unit is en-route of the proposed Jagdishpur-Haldia
Pipeline (JHPL) of GAIL. DoF while exploring the feasibility of
fast tracking the revival of Sindri unit and for utilizing the gas
and to leverage the existing infrastructure of Sindri unit,
considered the alternative route for revival, i.e. through the
‘bidding route ’.
• Cabinet in its meeting held on 21.05.2015 approved revival of
Sindri unit through ‘bidding route ’.
Gorakhpur unit
• Gorakhpur unit of FCIL was to be revived through ‘bidding
route’ as per CCEA approval in 2011.
• M/s GAIL is planning to lay a gas pipeline from Jagdishpur
(Uttar Pradesh) to Haldia (West Bengal). To make this gas
pipeline financially viable, there is a need of anchor units
en-route the pipeline for utilizing the gas.

23
• Therefore, it was decided that revival of Gorakhpur unit of
FCIL, which is en-route of Jagdishpur-Haldia Pipeline (JHPL)
should be fast tracked by providing land on lease basis to
facilitate obtaining loan by the investor, instead of providing
the land on ‘right to use ’ basis as approved earlier by the
CCEA in 2011.
• Cabinet in its meeting held on 31.3.2015 approved revival of
Gorakhpur unit through ‘bidding route ’ on revised terms.
Korba unit
• The revival of Korba (Chhattisgarh) unit of FCIL would be
taken up later on.
• Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFCL).
• Three closed units of HFCL to be revived through ‘bidding
route’ as per CCEA approval in 2011.
• In terms of CCEA approval in May 2013 proposal/action plan
on revival of HFCL to be taken up once revival of FCIL units
is on track.
• However , in the context of the recent announcement of the
proposed Jagdishpur-Haldia Pipeline of GAIL, DoF explored
the feasibility of fast tracking the revival of Barauni unit of
HFCL.
Barauni unit
• M/s. Gas Authority of India Limited (GAIL) is planning to lay
a gas pipeline from Haldia (West Bengal) to Jagdishpur (Uttar
Pradesh) (HBJ). This pipeline would be passing around 70 km
away from Barauni Unit.
• To make the gas pipeline financially viable, there is a need
of anchor units en-route the pipeline for utilizing the gas.
• Therefore, it has been decided that revival of Barauni Unit of
HFCL, which is en-route of HBJ pipeline through the ‘bidding
route’ by providing land on lease basis to facilitate obtaining
loan by the investor , instead of providing the land on ‘right
to use ’ basis as approved earlier by the CCEA in 2011.
• The Cabinet in its meeting held on 31.3.2015 approved revival
of Barauni unit through ‘bidding route ’ on revised terms.

24
Haldia and Durgapur units
At present Department has no plan to revive Haldia and Durgapur
units of HFCL keeping the following in view:
• HFCL has no land lease agreements for land of its units at
Haldia and Durgapur.
• ADDA at Durgapur and Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT) at Haldia,
have earlier raised objections against floating of Expression
of Interest (EoI) in respect of Durgapur and Haldia respectively
till the land disputes are settled.
• The lease of most of the land leased to HFCL at Haldia by
Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT) expired in 2004.
• KoPT issued an eviction notice to HFCL in the year 2005
which was challenged by HFCL in Kolkata High Court, but the
court declined to give stay order. BIFR directed KoPT to
maintain status quo. KoPT has also raised a claim of more
than Rs. 200 crore towards rental charge, penalties etc.
• HFCL Haldia unit also has lots of contingent liabilities.
Revival of Sick PSUs
There are three fertilizers Public Sector Undertakings which are
sick. These PSUs are Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL), The Fertilizers
And Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) and Brahmaputra Valley
Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL). Government is considering
proposals for financial restructuring of above these three PSUs,
which inter alia, involves, write off of GoI loan and interest on GoI
loan. Brief of proposed financial restructuring are as below:
(a) Financial restructuring of BVFCL and Setting up of Namrup IV
i. BVFCL is incurring financial losses since inception due to low
capacity utilization and high energy consumption. The plants were
underperforming due to obsolete technology, equipment failures
and shortage of natural gas. For financial restructuring of BVFCL a
proposal was sent to Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector
Enterprises (BRPSE). The BRPSE in Feb., 2014 discussed the financial
restructuring proposal of BVFCL. The Board, after having taken into
account all the relevant factors on the proposal, recommended to
the Government the following financial restructuring plan. Based
on the recommendations of BRPSE, following financial relief to
BVFCL were proposed for consideration/approval of the Cabinet:
• Waiver of total cumulative interest till date on GoI loans
(updated amount as on 31.03.2013 is Rs. 566.20 crore).

25
• Waiver of loan of Rs. 21.96 crore taken for revamp of Namrup-I,
as the Namrup-I plant has permanently been stopped.
• Conversion of GoI loans provided to the company to interest
free loan. The company on attaining profit will service the
GoI loans from 2014-15 onwards.
• For Namrup-III, the capital expenditure of Rs. 79.62 crore
incurred beyond 31.03.2003 for revamp of the project to be
recognized by Government of India for calculating the
concession rate of urea under NPS-III.
• BVFCL to implement 2007 pay scales as per DPE guidelines.
• BVFCL to scrap and dispose-off the remaining unusable assets
of closed Namrup-I plant on ‘as is where is ’ basis.
ii. Setting up of Namrup IV
The process technology and engineering of the existing Namrup-II
and Namrup-III Plants are of 1960 ’s and 70 ’s, which are considered
old and obsolete against the latest new generation plants. Both the
plants failed to sustain desired operational efficiency from the
beginning and deteriorated rapidly and were required to be
strengthened with systematic investment on renovation. Accordingly,
Namrup Revamp Project of BVFCL was sanctioned by Government.
Though revamp could bring in reasonable reliability of operation in
Namrup-II and Namrup-III, it failed to uplift energy efficiency, mainly
due to obsolete energy intensive technology. Relentless effort on
maintenance and renewal and replacement action in the recent
past has brought some positive result and company has been able
to generate reasonable operating profit even though, specific energy
consumption of end-product urea for both the Namrup-II and
Namrup-III plants turns out to be very high, compared to modern,
large capacity gas based plants.
A proposal was sent for consideration/approval of the Cabinet for
Setting up a new ammonia urea complex of minimum 8.646 Lakh
Metric Tonne Per Annum (LMTPA )at a estimated cost of Rs. 4400 crores
at Namrup within the existing premises of BVFCL on Public Private
Partner (PPP) basis which subsequently replace the existing two
uneconomical operating ammonia-urea plants, Namrup II and III.
The project will be developed by a Joint Venture (JV) consisting of
BVFCL, Government of Assam (GoA), Oil India Limited (OIL) and
private/public entity. BVFCL (11%), GoA (11%) and OIL (26%) will be
awarded equity in the project on nomination basis while private/

26
public parties(52%) will be inducted through competitive bidding.
BVFCL’s share on equity shall be by way of transferring the useful
and equivalent tangible assets to the proposed JV . The remaining
Assets of BVFCL shall remain with BVFCL.
The Cabinet in its meeting held 21.5.2015 approved financial
restructuring of BVFCL and setting up of Namrup-IV .
(b) Financial Restructuring of MFL
MFL started incurring losses in the year 2003-04 and declared Sick
in 2009. Recently, DoF submitted a financial restructuring proposal
to Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) for placing the same
before Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE)
seeking the following:
Waiver of liabilities
Outstanding loan worth Rs. 554.24 Crore (as on 31st March 2014)
i. Outstanding interest worth Rs. 331.66 Crore along with penal
interest thereon (as on 31st March 2014)
Liberal and flexible Government Policy
i. Continuation of special dispensation in pricing mechanism
under NPS stage III upto conversion to Natural Gas.
ii. Continuation of additional subsidy for sourcing “N” through
Naphtha based Captive Ammonia Under NBS upto conversion
to Natural Gas.
However, DPE has returned the proposal stating that posts of
Chairman, BRPSE, Secretary, BRPSE and two other non official
members of BRPSE are vacant. The constitution of the Board is
awaited.
(c) Financial Restructuring of FACT
FACT has started incurring losses since 1998-99 and is a sick unit.
Recently Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises
(BRPSE) has recommended the following financial relief:
Infusion of funds
i. Approval for sanction of an Interest free loan of Rs. 300 crore
repayable in 10 years after a moratorium of 2 years to pay
extra bank borrowings.
ii. Approval for sanction of grant of Rs. 250 crore to pay suppliers
and LIC on account of Gratuity.

27
Waivers of Gol Loans and Interest
(i) Approval for write off of outstanding loans of Rs 282.73 crore
as on 31.03.2013.
(ii) Approval for write off of outstanding interest of Rs. 159.17
crore as on 31.03.2013.
Accordingly, a proposal seeking approval of CCEA for sanction of
above financial reliefs to FACT submitted to Cabinet Secretariat.
Department of Expenditure has raised some issues on the matter.
Department of Fertilizers held discussion with Department of
Expenditure to resolve these issues. Accordingly, the proposal of
financial restructuring of FACT has been modified as per discussion.
Now, a revised draft Cabinet Note has been circulated for
inter-ministerial consultation. ”
Comments of the Committee
1.22 The Committee noted that expeditious revival of sick and
closed fertilizer units is essential for making India self-sufficient in
the production of fertilizers and to reduce its import dependency.
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the process of revival
of closed/sick units of fertilizers be expedited within a fixed
timeframe.
In its Action Taken Replies, the Department has stated the progress
made with regard to revival of three sick fertilizer companies i.e.
Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT), Madras
Fertilizers Limited (MFL) and Brahmputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation
Limited (BVFCL). With regards BVFCL, the Cabinet in its meeting
held on 21.5.2015 has approved financial restructuring of BVFCL
and setting up of Namrup-IV. With regard to MFL, Department of
Public Enterprises (DPE) has returned the proposal stating that posts
of Chairman, Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises
(BRPSE), Secretary, BRPSE and two other non official members of
BRPSE are vacant. The constitution of the Board is awaited. With
regards FACT, a revised draft Cabinet Note has been circulated for
inter-ministerial consultation as per the discussion held between
Department of Fertilizers and Department of Expenditure.
The Department further stated the progress made regarding
revival of closed units of Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited
(FCIL) and mentioned that in Talcher unit of FCIL, selection and
finalization of coal gasification is in progress. With regard to

28
Ramagundam unit of FCIL, the project is likely to be commissioned
by 30.09.2018. With regard to Gorakhpur and Sindri units of FCIL,
Cabinet in its meeting held on 30.03.2015 approved its revival through
‘bidding route ’ on revised terms.
After analyzing the action taken replies furnished by the
Department, the Committee are pleased to note the progress made
in the revival of closed and sick units. However, there is no change
in status in case of MFL and Korba unit of FCIL. The Committee
would, therefore, expect the Department to further expedite the
process of revival of sick and closed PSUs and particularly with
regards to MFL and Korba unit of FCIL. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
G. Feedstock Policy/Allocation of Gas
Recommendation No. 8
1.23 Emphasizing the need to ensure supply of gas to the fertilizer
manufacturing units, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note with concern that the availability of gas is
one of the major limiting factors to the growth of urea industry in
the country. Presently, the availability of domestic natural gas is
not even sufficient to meet the demand of existing gas based urea
units in the country. Further , due to shortage of domestic gas, many
FO/LSHS/Naphtha based urea plants which have converted to gas
recently, are meeting its requirement of gas by using costly RLNG.
In this context, the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) on Gas
Pricing and Commercial Utilization of gas in their meeting held on
23.08.2013 decided to maintain at 31.5 MMSCMD the level of supplies
of domestic gas to the Fertilizer sector and give the sector first
priority in meeting the requirements of any shortfall below the
level of 31.5 MMSCMD from any additional production of NELP gas.
The Committee also note that six naphtha based plants namely,
Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (CFCL) Gadepan-II, Zuari
Agro Chemicals Limited (ZACL), Shriram Fertilizers & Chemicals
Limited (SFCL), Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF)—
Trombay V , Indian Farmers Fertilizers & Cooperative Limited (IFFCO)
Phulpur-I&II have converted to Natural Gas. Further , four Furnace
Oil (FO)/Low Sulphur Heavy Stock (LSHS) based urea plants namely,
Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilizers Company Limited (GNVFC),
National Fertilizers Limited (NFL)-Nangal, Panipat and Bhatinda have
also converted to gas. The remaining three urea units,  viz., Madras

29
Fertilizers Limited (MFL)-Manali, Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers
Limited (MCFL)-Mangalore and Southern Petrochemicals Industries
Limited (SPIC)-Tuticorin are producing urea using Naphtha in absence
of gas allocation and pipeline connectivity. The Department of
Fertilizers vide its notification dated 7tn January, 2015 has allowed
the operation of all the three units to produce urea using existing
feedstock Naphtha for a period of 100 days from the date of
notification. If no alternative arrangement is being made before
the expiry of the aforesaid period then these urea units would be
virtually closed unless it is extended by another notification to
allow use of naphtha. The Committee were informed that various
options of supplying of gas to these Naphtha based urea units were
discussed with all stakeholders  i.e. gas producing and transporting
agencies viz. IOCL, Petronet LNG Limited, GAIL, ONGC and Naphtha
based urea units. But the supply of gas either through Floating
Storage & Regasification Unit (FSRU)/Gas tankers or gas pipeline is
not feasible before 18-24 months from the start date of project
after all clearances. Supply of gas through pipeline is the only long
term option and also techno economically viable. During the course
of evidence, the Secretary of the Department informed the
Committee that in China 72 to 75 % of urea production is based on
coal gasification technology. In India, the next urea plant which is
being set up after 15 years, is going to be commissioned in
West Bengal based on coal gasification technology. Since India has
lot of coal reserves, more urea could be produced on coal based
technology.
In view of the forgoing, the Committee expect the Department to
play a proactive role and take up the matter vigorously with all
stakeholders including the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
and explore all possible options to supply gas to these urea units
and till no viable option is found, all the aforesaid three units may
be allowed to continue to produce urea which are using naphtha as
feedstock under the present arrangement. The Committee would
also like the Department to ensure that adequate quantity of natural
gas is supplied without any hindrance to all the existing gas based
urea units. The Committee also reiterate its earlier recommendation
contained in its 3rd Report pertaining to DFGs 2014-15 that the
Department should also impress upon the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas to work out a pricing mechanism for Naphtha/FO/LSHS
based units so that non-gas based units could become cost efficient.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in
this regard. ”

30
Reply of the Government
1.24 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:—
“GAIL had floated an EOI on 23.06.2014 for Pre-qualification of
licensors of Coal gasification technology having proven capability to
process. After scrutiny of seven offers received in response to EOI,
it was observed that Air Liquid and SES Technology meet the criteria
partially. Finally, it has been recommended that Air Liquid technology
may be tried for first of its coal gasification project in India.
The CCEA approved gas pooling for urea sector on 31st March,
2015. After gas pooling, all urea units will get gas at uniform rate
irrespective of their gas allocation to the unit. It will ensure better
utilization of available domestic gas to urea sector. It also envisage
the constitution of a Committee (EPMC) to monitor implementation
of gas pooling and procurement of RLNG through a competitive and
transparent manner.
The CCEA in its meeting on 27th August, 2014, approved the
operations of these three Naphtha based urea plants in the Southern
States, from 1st July, 2014 to 30th September, 2014 and subsequently
in its meeting on 10th December , 2014 for 100 days from date of
notification of its decision i.e. 7th January, 2015. Subsequently, the
CCEA in its meeting held on 10th June, 2015 approved the proposal
for continuation of production of these three unit with Naphtha as
feedstock till these plants get assured supply of gas either by pipeline
or by any other means. The necessary notification has been issued
on 17th June, 2015. ”
Comments of the Committee
1.25 The Committee noted that the three urea units which have
not yet converted to Natural Gas, viz., Madras Fertilizers Limited
(MFL)-Manali, Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (MCFL)-
Mangalore and Southern Petrochemicals Industries Limited (SPIC)-
Tuticorin are producing urea using Naphtha in absence of gas
allocation and pipeline connectivity. These units were however
allowed to produce urea for 100 days w.e.f. 7 January, 2015 using
Naphtha as a fuel. As it was not possible to dispense with the use
of Naphtha as a feedstock in the absence of assured supply of gas
after the above deadline, the Committee, therefore, recommended
that till no viable option to provide gas is found, all the aforesaid

31
three units may be allowed to continue to produce urea which are
using naphtha as feedstock under the present arrangement. The
Committee are glad to note that the Department has accepted its
recommendation and has approved the proposal for continuation of
production of these three unit with Naptha as feedstock till these
plants get assured supply of gas either by pipeline or by any other
means. Meanwhile, the Committee would like to reiterate its earlier
recommendation that the Department should play a proactive role
and take up the matter vigorously with all stakeholders including
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and explore all possible
options to supply gas to these urea manufacturing units at the earliest.
The Committee would like to know the action taken in this regard.
H. Black Marketing and Hoarding of Fertilizers
Recommendation No. 11
1.26 Stressing the need to curb the instances of black marketing,
hoarding, diversion, the Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are dismayed to note that though the Department
of Fertilizers has a well established system of assessing the
requirement and availability of fertilizers and monitoring mechanism
to track the movement of Fertilizers to the last point of sale i.e.
retailer but still there are rampant instances of black marketing,
artificial scarcity of fertilizers being created by the hoarders and
illegal sale of Fertilizers across the country particularly in
neighbouring countries i.e. Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan. According
to the Department, the distribution of fertilizers to the farmers is
the responsibility of the concerned State Government and State
Governments are adequately empowered to conduct search, make
seizers and take punitive action against any person violating
provisions of Fertilizers Control Order-1985. When the Central
Government gets the information regarding black marketing and
artificial scarcity, such information is passed on to the State
Government and it is the State Government’s responsibility to enforce
action against such cases. However , the Committee are not convinced
with the explanation given by the Department on the issue and
strongly feel that the Department cannot shirk from its responsibility
since huge funds are being incurred by the Central Government on
imports of Fertilizers and on subsidy on indigenous and imported
Fertilizers being paid to the fertiliser companies. It is, therefore,
imperative for the Department to take stringent steps in
co-ordination with State Governments to curb the instances of black

32
marketing, hoarding, diversion etc. The Committee also feel that
fertilizer companies should also be vested with powers to check
such mal-practices by cancelling of dealerships of individuals involved
in black-marketing and hoarding of fertilizers so as to deter them
to indulge in such activities. The Committee would further like the
Department to regularly take up the matter with the Border Security
Force (BSF), customs and organizations responsible for stopping
smuggling of urea across the country. The Committee expect that
Department of Fertilizers will take more proactive steps in this
regard.
The Committee note that Department of Fertilizers has approved
the removal of cap/restriction to produce Neem Coated Urea, which
will now allow the indigenous producers of urea to produce Neem
Coated urea up to maximum of their total production of subsidized
urea. Neem Coated urea is not only an excellent soil conditioner
and bio-pesticide but also discourages the use of urea for other
industrial purposes. The Committee feel that as a result of production
of neem coated urea, illegal diversion of subsidized urea to
non-agricultural use will be discouraged. The Committee recommend
that the Department may earnestly monitor the production of neem
coated urea and also establish systems to educate the farmers
about the benefits of the neem coated urea in the production of
their crops. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken in this regard. ”
Reply of the Government
1.27 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee,
the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:—
“The CCEA in its meeting dated 13th May, 2015 has directed the
urea unit to produce 100% (entire production) neem coated urea.
The companies have been directed to educate through different
media and interaction etc. to enhance the use of neem coated
urea.
Fertilizers are under Essential Commodities Act (ECA), 1955. Under
Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985, issued in exercise of the powers
conferred under the ECA, the State Governments are empowered
to take all necessary steps for ensuring equitable and effective
distribution of all subsidized fertilizers to prevent hoarding of
fertilizers and thereby creating artificial scarcity.
Department of Fertilizers has written to the Chief Secretaries of
the States to activate the enforcement agencies under their
jurisdiction as they have the local machinery and wherewithal to

33
keep strict vigil to check diversion of fertilizers for non-agriculture
use. Similarly, Department of Fertilizers has also written to Ministry
of Home Affairs and Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance to
activate the enforcement agencies under their jurisdiction to keep
strict vigil to check diversion and smuggling of Urea. Department
of Fertilizers has made it mandatory for all the indigenous producers
of Urea to produce 100% of their total production of subsidized
Urea as Neem Coated Urea as it will enhance the availability,
economize the quantity of Urea requirement for crops and will also
help in increasing crop yield. All producers of urea have also been
instructed to supply Neem Coated Urea (NCU) to the States. ”
Comments of the Committee
1.28 The Committee note that there are rampant instances of
black marketing, artificial scarcity of fertilizers being created by the
hoarders and illegal sale of Fertilizers across the country particularly
in neighbouring countries i.e. Bangladesh, Nepal and Pakistan.
In its action taken replies, the Department stated that it has
written to the Chief Secretaries of the States to activate the
enforcement agencies under their jurisdiction as they have the local
machinery and wherewithal to keep strict vigil to check diversion of
fertilizers for non-agriculture use. Similarly, Department of Fertilizers
has also written to Ministry of Home Affairs and Department of
Revenue, Ministry of Finance to activate the enforcement agencies
under their jurisdiction to keep strict vigil to check diversion and
smuggling of Urea. Department of Fertilizers has made it mandatory
for all the indigenous producers of Urea to produce 100% of their
total production of subsidized Urea as Neem Coated Urea and also
all the producers of urea have been instructed to supply Neem
Coated Urea (NCU) to the States.
After analyzing the action taken replies, the Committee are
dismayed to note the apart from writing to Chief Secretaries of the
States and other agencies, the Department has not taken any
proactive measures to curb the instances of black marketing,
hoarding, diversion, etc. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate
its recommendation and would also like the Department to take
stringent steps in co-ordination with State Governments to curb such
instances. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
made in this regard.

34
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation No. 1
The Committee note that the installed capacity of fertilizer
manufacturing units in the country is 132.58 lakh MT of nitrogen and
70.60 lakh MT of phosphatic nutrient as on 31.03.2015, making India
the 3rd largest fertilizer producer in the world. At present, there are
30 urea units in the country manufacturing around 22.7 Million MT
(MMT) of urea annually, 21 units produce DAP and complex fertilizers
and 2 units manufacture Ammonium Sulphate as by-product. Besides,
there are about 97 medium and small scale units in operation producing
Single Super Phosphate (SSP). The country is fully dependent on imports
in Potassic sector and to the extent of 90% in Phosphatic sector in the
form of either finished products or its raw material. The current demand
of urea (2014-15) is around 31.8 MMT and the shortfall is met through
imports. The projected demand of urea for 2016-17 will be around
34 MMT and by 2024-25, the same is expected to be 38 MMT . The total
indigenous production by the end of 2017-18 is likely to be around
31.5 MMT per annum leaving a gap of nearly 5 MMT between demand
and supply. According to the Department, the said shortfall will be met
partly through import and partly through additional Brownfield/Green
field projects under New Investment Policy (NIP)-2012. The Committee
also note that the Department proposes to bring in new Urea Policy
which will encourage domestic production. In this regard, a draft CCEA
note regarding New Urea Policy-2015 has been sent to concerned
Ministries/Departments for inter- ministerial consultations on 19.02.2015.
The Committee desire that concerted and coordinated efforts may be
made by the Department in consultation with stakeholders to bring the
new Urea Policy at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the progress made in the matter.
Further , due to shortage of domestic gas, many FO/LSHS/Naphtha
based urea plants which have converted to gas recently, are meeting
its requirement of gas by using costly RLNG. Over a period of time the
indigenous P&K fertilizer industry having vintage technology suffered
due to frequent break downs, higher cost of production, large workforce
and financial reserves. Moreover, no incentives are given to indigenous
fertilizer manufacturers in the country in the form of lower taxes or

35
duty. Customs duty rates for both raw materials and finished products
are at equal level. Importers and manufacturers are placed at equal
footing in tax matters. At times the cost of finished fertilizers is lower
in the international market as compared to raw materials resulting in
lower production in the country. Inordinate delay in payment of subsidy
also adversely affect the functioning of fertilizer units. Considering the
importance of chemical fertilizers as one of the key inputs for the
success of agriculture in the country, the Committee expect the
Department to take concrete measures to ensure sustained growth and
development of fertilizer sector in the country. Vigorous and coordinated
efforts also need to be made for continuous supply of adequate quantity
of gas for gas based fertilizer units. Further , all fertilizer units with
vintage technology need to be revamped and upgraded with latest
technology to augment production of fertilizer and to cut down its cost
of production. All closed/sick units of fertilizer companies also need to
be revived in a time bound manner. It is also imperative that the
Department may be provided with adequate funds for effective
implementation of its projects and policies including settlement of
huge arrears of subsidy claims of the fertilizer companies. In this context,
Ministry of Finance should be impressed upon to allocate adequate
funds to the Department as well as incentives may be given to the
fertilizer sector in terms of lower taxes or customs duty. However , on
its part, the Department should also prioritize its action plan for timely
execution of its various projects/schemes and optimum utilization of
its allotted fund. In view of the foregoing, the Committee would like
to be apprised of the various initiatives/measures undertaken by the
Department for attaining self- sufficiency in fertilizer sector.
The Committee also note that the movement of fertilizers is being
decontrolled by the Government from April, 2015. According to the
Department, this will result in competition amongst the fertilizer
companies making the fertilizers more affordable to farmers increasing
consumption and production. However , the Committee apprehend that
decontrolling of movement of fertilizer may incline fertilizer companies
to supply fertilizers only in those areas which are more profitable and
accessible in comparison to those areas which are less profitable and
inaccessible and leading to imbalanced distribution of fertilizers. This
would eventually leave the poor farmers at the mercy of these companies
and may add to their misery. The Committee, therefore, feel that the
Department of Fertilizer , being the nodal authority, can not simply
absolve themselves of their responsibility in the matter. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizer should built an
institutional mechanism to monitor the movement of fertilizers under
the decontrolled regime ensuring timely supply of adequate quantity of

36
fertilizers at affordable prices to the farmers even in the remotest
areas of the country. Precautionary measures also need to be taken to
check the companies from engaging in evil practice of undue profiteering
under the decontrolled regime.
Reply of the Government
The indigenous P&K fertilizer industry was under government control
under Concession Scheme for a long period prior to implementation of
NBS Scheme. Under the Scheme the difference of normative delivered
price and the statutory MRP was being paid as concession. Due to low
profit and assured sale of their product, the fertilizer industry did not
innovate and keep pace with the latest technological developments in
fertilizer sector and continued with the existing technology and
machinery. Over a period of time, many fertilizer companies having
vintage technology suffered due to frequent break downs, higher cost
of production, large workforce and financial reserves. Non-availability
of domestic gas to many P&K fertilizer companies/non-creation of
infrastructure for making available natural gas to these companies has
affected growth of P&K fertilizer industry in the country. Delay in
payment of subsidy due to inadequate funds has also affected the
functioning of P&K fertilizer industries in the country affecting their
growth.
However , in order to enable the fertilizer companies to do business
as per the market dynamics, the Deptt. has introduced Nutrient Based
Subsidy Scheme w.e.f. 1.4.2010. Under the policy, the companies are
allowed to fix their MRP at reasonable level as per market dynamics.
This enabled the companies to find new markets and take their own
commercial decisions to innovate in new products etc.
There are no incentives to indigenous fertilizer manufacturers in
the country in the form of lower taxes or duty. Customs duty rates for
both raw materials and finished products are at equal level. Importers
and manufacturers are placed at equal footing in tax matters. At times
the cost of finished fertilizers is lower in the international market as
compared to raw materials resulting in lower production in the country.
For growth of indigenous P&K fertilizer industry in the country, the
Deptt. of Fertilizers had taken up with Ministry of Finance for reduction
in custom on imported raw materials.
The Department has again requested the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue to consider the proposal.

37
The movement and distribution of entire 100% of Urea both imported
and indigenous is regulated by Department of Fertilizers (DoF) through
Monthly Supply Plan. The Department also draws Supply Plan for entire
imported and indigenous Phosphatic and Potassic Fertilizers and conveys
the Supply Plan to the respective State Governments on month to
month basis. DoF will regulate the movement of these Fertilizers to
bridge the supplies in underserved areas. Further, the distribution and
movement of fertilizers along with imports of finished fertilizers,
fertilizer inputs and production by Indigenous units is being monitored
through the online web based “Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS)/ Mobile
FMS-Phase-I”. In order to monitor and ensure that the subsidized P&K
fertilizers reach throughout the country and its availability is maintained
as per the requirement, the Fertilizer Account Wing will prepare and
furnish the month-wise quantity of P&K fertilizers moved by different
companies to different locations (district-wise) based on the data
submitted in the FMS by P&K fertilizer companies. The respective State
Agriculture Departments will also closely monitor the availability of
P&K fertilizers in consultation with the fertilizer companies and their
respective field units and in consultation with DAC will ensure availability
of these fertilizers in the concerned States. If shortages/non-availability
of these fertilizers is still noticed in any part of their respective States,
the same will be brought to the notice of DoF for further action.
The Government has notified the New Urea Policy-2015 (NUP-2015)
for existing gas based urea manufacturing units on 25th May, 2015 with
the twin objectives of maximizing indigenous urea production and
promoting energy efficiency in urea production while rationalizing subsidy
burden on the Government. It is expected to prepare the domestic urea
sector to become globally competitive in terms of energy efficiency
over a period of three years.
The CCEA approved gas pooling for urea sector on 30th March,
2015. After gas pooling, all urea units will get gas at uniform price. The
provisions of gas pooling will ensure that RLNG will be supplied to urea
units at competitive price and urea units are incentivized to maximize
their production beyond reassessed capacity because of simplified subsidy
calculation parameters under the New Urea Policy, 2015. The DoF has
notified NIP-2012 on 2nd January, 2013 and its amendment on
7th October , 2014, to attract fresh investment in urea sector and reduce
import dependency in urea. As a result of notification, DoF has taken
note of these proposals and directed the project proponents to take
necessary action as per the provisions of NIP-2012 and its amendment.

38
To ensure the availability of fertilizers in the country, Government has
taken following steps:-
(a) The month-wise demand is assessed and projected by the
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) in consultation
with the State Governments before commencement of each
cropping season.
(b) On the basis of month-wise & State-wise projection given by
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation, Department of
Fertilizers allocates sufficient/adequate quantities of fertilizers
to the States by issuing monthly supply plan and continuously
monitors the availability through following system:
(i) The movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is being
monitored throughout the country by an on-line web based
monitoring system (www.urvarak.co.in) also called as Fertilizer
Monitoring System (FMS); DoF tracks the movement of
fertilizers upto the district level, this is extended through
Mobile Fertilizer Monitoring System (MFMS), which tracks the
receipts of the fertilizer till the Retailers ’ level. This system
is in public domain and anybody can access the system and
know availability of fertilizers upto Retailers ’ level. The list
of retailers is also available in MFMS-www.mfms.nic.in.
(ii) The State Governments are regularly advised to coordinate
with manufacturers and importers of fertilizers for streamlining
the supplies through timely placement of indents for railway
rakes through their State institutional agencies like Markfed
etc.
(iii) Regular weekly video conference is conducted jointly by
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Department
of Fertilizers (DoF), and Ministry of Railways with State
Agriculture Officials and corrective actions are taken to
dispatch fertilizer as indicated by the State Governments.
(iv) The gap in the demand and domestic production of fertilizer
is met through imports.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),
OM No. F .No. 5(1)/2015-Fin.II (Vol. II), dated 21.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report)

39
Recommendation No. 3
The Committee note that the projected requirement of the
Department under Non-plan section for the year 2012-13 was
Rs. 90249.26 crore against which RE allocation for the year 2012-13 was
Rs. 70,618.00 crore and the actual expenditure was Rs. 70618.65 crore,
although the actual requirement was much higher as the Department
had to carry over liabilities of Rs. 22200.62 crore relating to the year
2011-12. As a result the Department has to roll over an amount of
Rs. 26414.88 crore to the next year as carry over liabilities. For the
year 2013-14, against the projected requirement of Rs. 97050.96 crore,
RE allocation was Rs. 71,962.00 crore (RE) and the actual expenditure
during the year was Rs. 71300.68 crore. The Department has to roll
over the arrears of unpaid subsidy of Rs. 40340.78 crore to the next
year. Against the projected requirement of Rs.1,56,420.48 crore for the
year 2014-15, the Department was allocated an amount of Rs. 74092.73
crore at RE stage. Thus, the Committee are distressed to note that the
Department did not get the budgetary allocation over the past few
years commensurate with the projected requirement under non-plan
head. As a matter of fact, the Committee note that non-plan budgetary
allocation to the Department has remained almost stagnant over the
past 2-3 years. As a result, a huge amount of subsidy continues to
remain unpaid to the fertilizer companies. These companies have to
raise funds from the banks with 8% interest thereon. Even for non-plan
budgetary allocation for the year 2015-16 at BE stage is only Rs. 72997.80
crore which is more or less at par with BE 2014-15. During the course
of evidence, the Secretary of the Department had accepted the fact
that the urea manufacturing companies have not been paid subsidy
since August 2014. Under huge financial constraints, the fertilizer
companies could not be expected to grow and make the country self-
reliant in the field of fertilizer sector which is very vital for the
development of the agriculture sector and over all economy of the
country. The Committee are of the view that unpaid arrears of subsidy
should not roll over year after year as the same affects the functioning
and growth of the fertilizer industries in the country. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the non-plan budgetary allocation of the
Department be augmented so as to clear all the unpaid subsidy of the
past. The Department should vigorously pursue its case with the Ministry
of Finance and urge them to increase its non-plan budgetary allocation
commensurate with its requirement At the same time the Department
needs to take some concrete measures to contain the ever increasing
subsidy bill. The Committee are of the view in order to reduce the
subsidy bill, it is imperative that indigenous production of fertilizer
may be augmented and its production cost may be reduced by optimum
utilization of technology and by reducing consumption of energy. The
Committee would like the Department to address this issue seriously
and intimate the initiatives taken by them in this regard.

40
Reply of the Government
The New Urea Policy-2015, aims to achieve twin objectives of
maximizing indigenous urea production and promoting energy efficiency
in urea production and at the same time rationalizing subsidy burden
on the government. It is expected to prepare the domestic urea sector
to become globally competitive in terms of energy efficiency over a
period of three years.
On the basis of actual energy consumption and preset norms, the
units have been divided into three groups and revised energy consumption
norms have been fixed for next three financial years and target energy
norms have been fixed for 2018-19. It will drive urea units to select
better technology and different measure to reduce energy consumption.
The higher energy efficiency due to aforesaid measure will reduce
subsidy bill. It is expected that there would be reduction in the subsidy
burden of the government in two ways — reduction in specific energy
consumption norms and import substitution on account of higher domestic
production.
Department of Fertilizers has sought an amount of Rs. 16,500 crore
for Indigenous urea and Freight Subsidy, under Non-Plan expenditure in
the 1st batch of Supplementary Demand for 2015-16 vide O.M. No.
5(2)/2015-Fin.I dated 01.07.2015.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),
OM No. F .No. 5(1)/2015-Fin. II (Vol. II), dated 21.08.2015]
Recommendation No. 6
The Committee note that the New Investment Policy 2012 (NIP-
2012) was notified by the Government on 2nd January, 2013 in order
to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector to reduce India ’s import
dependency in urea production. In this regard, the Department has also
notified the amendment to NIP-2012 on 7th October 2014 substituting
the phrase “guaranteed buyback ” with the expression that subsidies
will be given only upon domestic sale as at present with proper
safeguards. Based on the amendment to NIP-2012, the Department has
received 12 proposals for setting up of Revamp, Expansion, Revival and
Greenfield plants. These proposals are being examined by the
Department in the light of the provisions of the NIP-2012 and
amendments thereof and according to them the same is likely to finalized
soon. The Committee hope that proposals received under NIP-2012
would be finalised expeditiously with in a fixed time line so that projects
are set up as early as possible which would, in turn, give great boost
to production of urea in the country. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the progress made in this regard.

41
Reply of the Government
On 21st April, 2015 the DoF issued letter to all project proponents
stating that DoF has taken note of their proposals and further directed
them to take necessary steps as per the provisions of NIP-2012 notified
on 2nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7th October, 2014.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),
OM No. F .No. 5(1)/2015-Fin. II (Vol. II), dated 21.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation No. 7
The Committee have time and again emphasized the need for
expeditious revival of closed/sick units of fertilizer companies particularly
in the context of augmenting indigenous production of fertilizers and
to make the country self reliant in fertilizer sector. Out of 9 public
sector fertilizer companies under administrative control of the
Department of Fertilizers, 3 companies viz. Fertilizers and Chemicals
(FACT), Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) and Brahmputra Valley Fertilizer
Corporation Limited (BVFCL) are sick and 2 companies viz. Fertilizer
Corporation of India Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation
Limited (HFCL) are lying closed since 2002. Government is considering
proposals for financial restructuring of three sick companies namely
MFL, FACT and BVFCL, which inter-alia involves write off of Government
of India loan and the interest thereon. BVFCL is incurring losses since
inception due to low capacity utilization and high energy consumption.
BRPSE has recommended the financial restructuring plan to the
Government. Based on the recommendations of BRPSE, a cabinet note
has been forwarded to the Cabinet Secretariat for placing it before
Cabinet for approval. MFL started incurring losses in the year 2003-04
and declared sick in 2009. Recently, a financial restructuring proposal
has been submitted to Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) for placing
the same before Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises
(BRPSE) which has been returned as the posts of Chairman, BRPSE,
Secretary, BRPSE and two other non official members of BRPSE are
vacant. The constitution of the Board is awaited. FACT has started
incurring losses since 1988-99 and is a sick unit. Recently, BRPSE has
recommended financial relief for infusion of funds and waivers of GoI
loans and interest. A proposal seeking approval of CCEA for sanction of
financial reliefs to FACT has been submitted to Cabinet Secretariat.
Department of Expenditure has raised some issues on the matter and
the same is being discussed by the Department of Fertilizers to resolve
the issues.

42
Apart from these 3 sick PSUs, there are 8 fertilizer units lying
closed at present. Out of these closed units, 5 are of FCIL and 3 are
of HFCL. The Committee were informed that the pre-project activities
for revival of Talcher and Ramagundam units of FCIL are in progress and
these units are likely to become functional after 36 months for the
date of Award to the technology suppliers. As regards Sindri, and Barauni
units, the Government is considering exploring the feasibility of revival
through the ‘bidding route’. As regards Gorakhpur unit, the Government
is considering exploring the feasibility of revival through ‘nomination
route’ instead of the ‘bidding route’. However , the revival of Korba unit
would be taken up later on. As a result of revival of these closed units,
the estimated increase in production of urea in the country will be of
1.30 Million Tons per annum per unit. In view of the foregoing, the
Committee are of the view that expeditious revival of sick and closed
fertilizer units is essential for making India self-sufficient in the fertilizer
sector and to reduce its imports dependency. However, the Committee
regret to note the slow pace of progress made by the Government in
the revival of these sick units so far. The Committee also feel that the
delay in the revival of closed and sick units leads to time and cost
overruns. Keeping in view the significant role which is expected to be
played by these sick units after their revival, the Committee reiterate
its recommendation that the process of revival of closed/sick units of
fertilizers be expedited with in a fixed time frame. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Revival of closed units of HFCL/FCIL
At present none of the units of Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited
(FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation limited (HFCL) are operational
as all the units of these companies are lying closed. Details on the
closed fertilizer plants are as under:
Name of the PSU Unit   State
Fertilizer Corporation of Sindri Jharkhand
India Limited (FCIL) Gorakhpur Uttar Pradesh
Talcher Odisha
Ramagundam Andhra Pradesh
Korba Chhattisgarh
Hindustan Fertilizer Barauni Bihar
Corporation Limited (HFCL) Haldia West Bengal
Durgapur West Bengal

43
Revival of closed units of HFCL/FCIL
In 2008, Cabinet approved to revive Fertilizer Corporation of India
Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Limited (HFCL)
units subject to non-recourse to Government funding and to consider
write off of GoI Loan & interest to the extent required, subject to
submission of fully tied up proposals for final decision on waiver. The
revival of these closed units would be through nomination route by
PSUs and through bidding route by private sector. Sindri, Talcher and
Ramagundam Units of FCIL to be revived on nomination basis. Gorakhpur
& Korba units of FCIL and Durgapur , Haldia, Barauni of HFCL to be
revived through bidding route.
In August, 2011, the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA)
had approved the Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) for revival of all
the Units of FCIL and HFCL. DRS envisaged revival of Talcher Unit by
the consortium of M/s. Rashtriya Chemical & Fertilizers Limited (RCF),
M/s. Coal India Limited (CIL) and M/s. Gas Authority of India Limited
(GAIL), revival of Ramagundam Unit by M/s. Engineers India Limited
(EIL) and M/s. National Fertilizers (NFL) Limited and revival of Sindri
unit by M/s. Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL).
In its meeting held on 9.5.2013, CCEA, inter-alia, approved waiver
of Government of India loan and interest to facilitate FCIL to arrive at
positive net worth. This enabled FCIL to get de-registered from the
purview of Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR).
Proposal/action plan on revival of HFCL units to be taken up once
revival of FCIL units is on track.
Unit-wise status of revival is as follows
Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited (FCIL)
Talcher Unit of FCIL
• Talcher unit of FCIL to be revived on nomination basis by
consortium of PSUs namely, Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers
Limited (RCF), Coal India Limited (CIL), Gas Authority of India
Limited (GAIL) & FCIL by forming Joint Venture.
• The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) among consortium
PSUs i.e. CIL, RCF , GAIL and FCIL, has been signed on
05.09.2013.
• Joint Venture (JV) agreement amongst the consortium partners
signed on 24.12.2014

44
• Selection & finalization of coal gasification technology is in
process.
• Further necessary actions are being taken in this regard.
Ramagundam Unit
• Ramagundam unit of FCIL to be revived on nomination basis
by consortium of PSUs namely Engineers India Limited (EIL),
National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) and FCIL.
• The pre-project activities for revival of Ramagundam Unit
(Telangana) are in progress to set-up a gas-based fertilizer
plant.
• The Joint Venture agreement signed on 14.1.2015.
• EIL & NFL are having discussions with the Technology providers.
• JV Company named “Ramagundam Fertilizers & Chemicals
Limited” formed on 17.2.2015
• The JV Company would operate the plant and EIL would take
up the detailed Engineering Procurement of equipment and
Construction (EPC) of the plant.
• The project likely to be commissioned by 30.9.2018.
Sindri unit
• Sindri unit of FCIL was to be revived on nomination basis by
SAIL and FCIL
• SAIL-Sindri Projects Ltd. (SSPL), a wholly owned subsidiary of
SAIL, had been incorporated in November, 2011 for the purpose
of revival of Sindri Unit of FCIL.
• However, not much progress has been made due to non-
availability of around 3000 Acres of contiguous piece of land
for the Steel Plant due to encroachment.
• In the meantime, SAIL has informed that the scenario for SAIL
has undergone change, a massive modernization and expansion
plan of SAIL is currently under implementation, with Capital
Expenditure (CAPEX) commitment of Rs. 72,000 crore. SAIL
has drawn a vision plan 2025 to expand to 50 MTPA Hot Metal
capacity by 2025. This requires a commitment around
Rs. 2.02 lakh crore. In view of the above, SAIL Board has
taken a view not to pursue the Sindri Revival project further.

45
• Sindri unit is en-route of the proposed Jagdishpur-Haldia
Pipeline (JHPL) of GAIL. DoF while exploring the feasibility of
fast tracking the revival of Sindri unit and for utilizing the gas
and to leverage the existing infrastructure of Sindri unit,
considered the alternative route for revival,  i.e. through the
‘bidding route ’.
• Cabinet in its meeting held on 21.05.2015 approved revival of
Sindri unit through ‘bidding route ’.
Gorakhpur unit
• Gorakhpur unit of FCIL was to be revived through ‘bidding
route’ as per CCEA approval in 2011.
• M/s. GAIL is planning to lay a gas pipeline from Jagdishpur
(Uttar Pradesh) to Haldia (West Bengal). To make this gas
pipeline financially viable, there is a need of anchor units
en-route the pipeline for utilizing the gas.
• Therefore, it was decided that revival of Gorakhpur unit of
FCIL, which is en-route of Jagdishpur-Haldia pipeline(JHPL)
should be fast tracked by providing land on lease basis to
facilitate obtaining loan by the investor, instead of providing
the land on ‘right to use ’ basis as approved earlier by the
CCEA in 2011.
• Cabinet in its meeting held on 31.3.2015 approved revival of
Gorakhpur unit through ‘bidding route ’ on revised terms.
Korba unit
• The revival of Korba (Chhattisgarh) unit of FCIL would be
taken up later on.
• Hindustan Fertilizer Company Limited (HFCL).
• Three closed units of HFCL to be revived through ‘bidding
route’ as per CCEA approval in 2011.
• In terms of CCEA approval in May, 2013 proposal/action plan
on revival of HFCL to be taken up once revival of FCIL units
is on track.
• However , in the context of the recent announcement of the
proposed Jagdishpur-Haldia Pipeline of GAIL, DoF explored
the feasibility of fast tracking the revival, of Barauni unit of
HFCL.

46
Barauni unit
• M/s. GAIL India Limited (GAIL) is planning to lay a gas pipeline
from Haldia (West Bengal) to Jagdishpur (Uttar Pradesh) (HBJ).
This pipeline would be passing around 70 km away from Barauni
Unit.
• To make the gas pipeline financially viable, there is a need
of anchor units en-route the pipeline for utilizing the gas.
• Therefore, it has been decided that revival of Barauni Unit of
HFCL, which is en-route of HBJ pipeline through the ‘bidding
route’ by providing land on lease basis to facilitate obtaining
loan by the investor , instead of providing the land on ‘right
to use ’ basis as approved earlier by the CCEA in 2011.
• The Cabinet in its meeting held on 31.3.2015 approved revival
of Barauni unit through ‘bidding route ’ on revised terms.
Haldia & Durgapur units
At present, Department has no plan to revive Haldia & Durgapur
units of HFCL keeping the following in view:
• HFCL has no land lease agreements for land of its units at
Haldia and Durgapur.
• ADDA at Durgapur and Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT) at Haldia,
have earlier raised objections against floating of Expression
of Interest (EOI) in respect of Durgapur and Haldia respectively
till the land disputes are settled.
• The lease of most of the land leased to HFCL at Haldia by
Kolkata Port Trust (KoPT) expired in 2004.
• KoPT issued an eviction notice to HFCL in the year 2005
which was challenged by HFCL in Kolkata High Court, but the
court declined to give stay order. BIFR directed KoPT to
maintain status quo. KoPT has also raised a claim of more
than Rs. 200 crores towards rental charge, penalties etc.
• HFCL Haldia unit also has lots of contingent liabilities.
Revival of Sick PSUs
There are three fertilizer Public Sector Undertakings which are
sick. These PSUs are Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL), The Fertilizers
And Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) and Brahmaputra Valley
Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL). Government is considering

47
proposals for financial restructuring of above these three PSUs, which
inter-alia, involves, write-off of GOI loan and interest on GOI loan.
Brief of proposed financial restructuring are as below:
(a) Financial restructuring of BVFCL & Setting up of Namrup-IV
(i) BVFCL is incurring financial losses since inception due to low
capacity utilization & high energy consumption. The plants were
underperforming due to obsolete technology, equipment failures and
shortage of natural gas. For financial restructuring of BVFCL, a proposal
was sent to Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE).
The BRPSE in Feb., 2014 discussed the financial restructuring proposal
of BVFCL. The Board, after having taken into account all the relevant
factors on the proposal, recommended to the Government the following
financial restructuring plan. Based on the recommendations of BRPSE,
following financial relief to BVFCL were proposed for consideration/
approval of the Cabinet:
(a) Waiver of total cumulative interest till date on GOI loans
(updated amount as on 31.03.2013 is Rs. 566.20 crore).
(b) Waiver of loan of Rs. 21.96 crore taken for revamp of Namrup-I,
as the Namrup-I plant has permanently been stopped.
(c) Conversion of GOI loans provided to the company to interest
free loan. The company on attaining profit will service the
GOI loans from 2014-15 onwards.
(d) For Namrup-III, the capital expenditure of Rs. 79.62 crore
incurred beyond 31.03.2003 for revamp of the project to be
recognized by Government of India for calculating the
concession rate of urea under NPS-III.
(e) BVFCL to implement 2007 pay scales as per DPE guidelines.
(f) BVFCL to scrap and dispose-off the remaining unusable assets
of closed Namrup-I plant on ‘as is where is ’ basis.
(ii) Setting up of Namrup-IV
The process technology and engineering of the existing Namrup-II
and Namrup-III Plants are of 1960 ’s and 70 ’s, which are considered old
& obsolete against the latest new generation plants. Both the plants
failed to sustain desired operational efficiency from the beginning and
deteriorated rapidly and were required to be strengthened with
systematic investment on renovation. Accordingly, Namrup Revamp
Project of BVFCL was sanctioned by Government. Though revamp could

48
bring in reasonable reliability of operation in Namrup-II and Namrup-III,
it failed to uplift energy efficiency, mainly due to obsolete energy
intensive technology. Relentless effort on maintenance and renewal &
replacement action in the recent past has brought some positive result
and company has been able to generate reasonable operating profit
even though, specific energy consumption of end-product urea for both
the Namrup-II and Namrup-III plants turns out to be very high, compared
to modern, large capacity gas based plants.
A proposal was sent for consideration/approval of the Cabinet for
Setting up a new ammonia urea complex of minimum 8.646 Lakh Metric
Tonne Per Annum (LMTPA) at an estimated cost of Rs. 4400 crores at
Namrup within the existing premises of BVFCL on Public Private
Partnership (PPP) basis which subsequently replace the existing two
uneconomical operating ammonia-urea plants, Namrup-II and III. The
project will be developed by a Joint Venture (JV) consisting of BVFCL,
Government of Assam (GoA), Oil India Limited (OIL) and private/public
entity. BVFCL (11%), GoA (11%) and OIL (26%) will be awarded equity
in the project on nomination basis while private/public parties (52%)
will be inducted through competitive bidding. BVFCL ’s share on equity
shall be by way of transferring the useful & equivalent tangible assets
to the proposed JV. The remaining Assets of BVFCL shall remain with
BVFCL.
The Cabinet in its meeting held on 21.5.2015 approved financial
restructuring of BVFCL & setting up of Namrup-IV .
(b) Financial Restructuring of MFL
MFL started incurring losses in the year 2003-04 and declared Sick
in 2009. Recently, DoF submitted a financial restructuring proposal to
Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) for placing the same before
Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSEs) seeking
the following:
Waiver of liabilities
(i) Outstanding loan worth Rs. 554.24 crore (as on 31st March,
2014).
(ii) Outstanding interest worth Rs. 331.66 crore along with penal
interest thereon (as on 31st March, 2014).
Liberal and flexible Government Policy
(i) Continuation of special dispensation in pricing mechanism
under NPS stage-III upto conversion to Natural Gas.
(ii) Continuation of additional subsidy for sourcing “N” through
Naphtha based Captive Ammonia under NBS upto conversion
to Natural Gas.

49
However, DPE has returned the proposal stating that posts of
Chairman, BRPSE, Secretary, BRPSE and two other non-official members
of BRPSE are vacant. The constitution of the Board is awaited.
(c) Financial Restructuring of FACT
FACT has started incurring losses since 1998-99 and is a sick unit.
Recently Board for Reconstruction of Public Sector Enterprises (BRPSE)
has recommended the following financial relief:
Infusion of funds
(i) Approval for sanction of an interest free loan of Rs. 300 crore
repayable in 10 years after a moratorium of 2 years to pay
extra bank borrowings.
(ii) Approval for sanction of grant of Rs. 250 crore to pay suppliers
and LIC on account of Gratuity.
Waivers of GoI Loans & Interest
(i) Approval for write-off of outstanding loans of Rs. 282.73 crore
as on 31.03.2013.
(ii) Approval for write-off of outstanding interest of Rs. 159.17
crore as on 31.03.2013.
Accordingly, a proposal seeking approval of CCEA for sanction of
above financial reliefs to FACT submitted to Cabinet Secretariat.
Department of Expenditure has raised some issues on the matter.
Department of Fertilizers held discussion with Department of Expenditure
to resolve these issues. Accordingly, the proposal of financial
restructuring of FACT has been modified as per discussion. Now, a
revised draft Cabinet Note has been circulated for inter-ministerial
consultation.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),
OM No. F .No. 5(1)/2015-Fin. II (Vol. II), dated 21.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation No. 8
The Committee note with concern that the availability of gas is one
of the major limiting factors to the growth of urea industry in the

50
country. Presently, the availability of domestic natural gas is not even
sufficient to meet the demand of existing gas based urea units in the
country. Further, due to shortage of domestic gas, many FO/LSHS/
Naphtha based urea plants which have converted to gas recently, are
meeting its requirement of gas by using costly RLNG. In this context,
the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) on Gas Pricing and Commercial
Utilization of gas in their meeting held on 23.08.2013 decided to maintain
at 31.5 MMSCMD the level of supplies of domestic gas to the Fertilizer
sector and give the sector first priority in meeting the requirements of
any shortfall below the level of 31.5 MMSCMD from any additional
production of NELP gas. The Committee also note that Six naphtha
based plants namely, Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (CFCL)
Gadepan-II, Zuari Agro Chemicals Limited (ZACL), Shriram Fertilizers &
Chemicals Limited (SFCL), Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited
(RCF)-Trombay-V , Indian Farmers Fertilizers & Cooperative Limited
(IFFCO) Phulpur-I & II have converted to Natural Gas. Further , four
Furnace Oil (FO)/Low Sulphur Heavy Stock (LSHS) based urea plants
namely, Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilizers Company Limited (GNVFC),
National Fertilizers Limited (NFL)—Nangal, Panipat & Bhatinda have
also converted to gas. The remaining three urea units, viz., Madras
Fertilizers Limited (MFL)—Manali, Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers
Limited (MCFL)—Mangalore and Southern Petrochemicals Industries
Limited (SPIC)—Tuticorin are producing urea using Naphtha in absence
of gas allocation and pipeline connectivity. The Department of Fertilizers
vide its notification dated 7th January, 2015 has allowed the operation
of all the three units to produce urea using existing feedstock Naphtha
for a period of 100 days from the date of notification. If no alternative
arrangement is being made before the expiry of the aforesaid period
then these urea units would be virtually closed unless it is extended by
another notification to allow use of naphtha. The Committee were
informed that various options of supplying of gas to these Naphtha
based urea units were discussed with all stakeholders i.e. gas producing
and transporting agencies viz. IOCL, Petronet LNG Limited, GAIL, ONGC
and Naphtha based urea units. But the supply of gas either through
Floating Storage & Regasification Unit (FSRU)/Gas tankers or gas pipeline
is not feasible before 18-24 months from the start date of project after
all clearances. Supply of gas through pipeline is the only long term
option and also techno economically viable. During the course of
evidence, the Secretary of the Department informed the Committee
that in China 72 to 75% of urea production is based on coal gasification
technology. In India, the next urea plant which is being set up after
15 years, is going to be commissioned in West Bengal based on coal
gasification technology. Since India has lot of coal reserves, more urea
could be produced on coal based technology.

51
In view of the forgoing, the Committee expect the Department to
play a proactive role and take up the matter vigorously with all
stakeholders including the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and
explore all possible options to supply gas to these urea units and till
no viable option is found, all the aforesaid three units may be allowed
to continue to produce urea which are using naphtha as feedstock
under the present arrangement. The Committee would also like the
Department to ensure that adequate quantity of natural gas is supplied
without any hindrance to all the existing gas based urea units. The
Committee also reiterate its earlier recommendation contained in its
3rd Report pertaining to DFGs 2014-15 that the Department should also
impress upon the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to work out a
pricing mechanism for Naphtha/FO/LSHS based units so that non-gas
based units could become cost efficient. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
GAIL had floated an EOI on 23.06.2014 for pre-qualification of
licensors of Coal gasification technology having proven capability to
process. After scrutiny of seven offers received in response to EOI, it
was observed that Air Liquide and SES Technology meet the criteria
partially. Finally, it has been recommended that Air Liquide technology
may be tried for first of its coal gasification project in India.
The CCEA approved gas pooling for urea sector on 31st March,
2015. After gas pooling, all urea units will get gas at uniform rate
irrespective of their gas allocation to the unit. It will ensure better
utilization of available domestic gas to urea sector. It also envisage the
constitution of a committee (EPMC) to monitor implementation of gas
pooling and procurement of RLNG through a competitive and transparent
manner.
The CCEA in its meeting on 27th August, 2014, approved the
operations of these three Naphtha based urea plants in the Southern
States, from 1st July, 2014 to 30th September, 2014 and subsequently
in its meeting on 10th December , 2014 for 100 days from date of
notification of its decision  i.e.  7th January, 2015. Subsequently, the
CCEA in its meeting held on 10th June, 2015 approved the proposal for
continuation of production of these three units with Naptha as feedstock
till these plants get assured supply of gas either by pipeline or by any
other means. The necessary notification has been issued on 17th June,
2015.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),
OM No. F .No. 5(1)/2015-Fin. II (Vol. II), dated 21.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.25 of Chapter-I of the Report)

52
Recommendation No. 9
The Committee note that due to constraints in the availability of
gas which is the preferred feedstock for production of nitrogenous
fertilizers, a near total dependence on imports for Phosphatic fertilizers
and its raw materials and full import dependence for MoP , the
Government has been encouraging Indian Companies to establish Joint
Ventures abroad in countries which are rich in fertilizer resources for
production facilities with buy back arrangements and to enter into long
term agreement for supply of fertilizers and fertilizer inputs to India.
Further , the Department is also working with the goal of having access
to acquisition of the fertilizer raw materials abroad. The Committee
also note that the Department has undertaken Joint Ventures (JVs)
abroad with 5 countries in P&K Sector in the previous years and
significant part of the demand for P & K fertilizers are being met with
the assured supply of fertilizers through these Joint Ventures/long term
offtake agreements. In addition to the above, talks are in advanced
stages with other countries for establishing Joint Ventures with long
term offtake agreements. The Committee would, therefore, like the
Department, being the nodal authority, to make concerted efforts in
coordination with Indian diplomatic missions abroad to expedite the
process of talks for establishing JVs with other countries. The Committee
also expect the Department to explore the possibilities of new JVs
abroad or to acquire fertilizer raw materials abroad which would help
in assuring continuous supply of P & K fertilizers. The Committee hope
that as a result of these efforts adequate quantity of P & K Fertilizers
would be available to the farmers in the country. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
India’s dependency on import at present is to the extent of 25% of
our requirement of Urea, 90% in case of Phosphates, either as raw
material or finished fertilizers (DAP/MAP/TSP) and 100% in case of
Potash. The Government has been encouraging Indian Companies to
establish Joint Ventures abroad in countries which are rich in fertilizer
resources for production facilities with buy back arrangements and to
enter into long term agreement for supply of fertilizers and fertilizer
inputs to India. Further, the Department is also working with the goal
of having access to acquisition of the fertilizer raw materials abroad.
During the year 2014-15, no joint venture with any country was
signed by this Department but during the said year a number of major
developments took place with the following countries:—

53
Russia: An offer of 30% stake in the fertilizer project being
undertaken by M/s ACRON to develop the Talitsky Potassium Magnesium
deposit in Perm, Russia has been received. From Indian side, NMDC has
confirmed its firm interest in the project and has now sent a draft
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) of exclusivity for initiating
comprehensive due diligence. In the Sub group meeting on fertilizers
between India and Russia held on 08.10.2014, the outstanding issues
were discussed and it was decided to send a delegation of the Indian
consortium to Russia in early November, 2014 to finalize the MoU. A
team of representatives from RCF , NMDC, NFL and M/o Steel visited
Russia in first week of December , 2014 and a MoU between ACRON and
Indian consortium has been signed on 11th December , 2014 during the
visit of Russian President.
Iran: A Urea/Ammonia Joint Venture project with RCF , GNFC and
GSFC, as Indian entities, has been proposed to be set up in Iran. Iranian
Government has indicated gas price of $2.9/MMBTU for the project
which is cheaper than the price prevailing in Indian market. For
identification of Iranian partners for the Joint ventures and location of
plant for the project, SBI Cap has been appointed by RCF and GNFC as
consultant who is expected to give its report shortly. After receipt of
the report from SBI Cap, further action to negotiate gas supply agreement
and MoU with the Iranian partners would be taken. The annual Urea
production from the Joint venture is expected to be 1.3 million MT
which would be imported in India. Hon ’ble Minister (C&F) has written
to the Iranian Oil Minister highlighting the issue of gas price and its
availability for this project. He has also requested for according national
treatment to this project at par with domestic projects. D/o Fertilizers
has instructed Indian entities for expeditious finalization of the project.
Canada: M/s Encanto Potash Corporation, Canada has submitted a
proposal in August, 2012 for a long-term off-take supply of potash for
2.5 million MTPA for 15 years with 8% discount on the ruling market
price. The price was subject to floor and ceiling prices and equity
participation was not a condition for this off-take agreement. A group
of Indian public as well as private sector companies led by RCF , which
included FACT , MFL, NFL, GNVFC, GSFC, Deepak Fertilizers and
Coromondal decided to form a consortium to jointly negotiate the deal
for supply of 1.8 million MTPA as per terms and conditions and price
formula mutually agreed between M/s Encanto and the proposed
consortium for a period of 17 years beginning from 2017. M/s Price
Waterhouse Cooper was appointed to carry out the scrutiny and due
diligence of this project. The floor price was at US$ 370 CFR India and

54
ceiling price of US$ 625 which is much higher than the prevailing
international potash prices of US$275/MT . However , with the changed
scenario of potash availability and decreasing trend of potash prices in
the world, Consortium members felt a need for re-negotiation with
M/s Encanto as per revised terms and conditions. As of now, the project
has been kept in abeyance.
Ghana: For the proposed Ammonia/Urea JV in Ghana, an MoU was
signed on 6th July, 2010 at the Government level between the two
countries, followed by several visits of Indian delegation to Ghana to
discuss issues relating to finalisation of draft JV agreement and price
of Gas. It has now been informed that Gas being offered by Ghanaian
authorities for the project is not available. Therefore, project would be
pursued after some time.
Turkmenistan: Possibility of setting up of Urea-Ammonia Joint Venture
plant in Turkmenistan is also being explored. A delegation consisting of
officers from DoF along with representatives from major fertilizer
companies visited Turkmenistan in April, 2015 to assess JV/long term
offtake possibilities. The project is in initial stages of discussion at
present.
Further , talks are also being held with countries like Iraq, Belarus,
Saudi Arabia, Qatar etc. regarding Joint Venture possibilities and Long
Term Offtake Agreement.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),
OM No. F .No. 5(1)/2015-Fin. II (Vol. II), dated 21.08.2015]
Recommendation No. 10
The Committee note that the month-wise demand is assessed and
projected by the Department of Agriculture & Co-operation (DAC) in
consultation with the State Governments before commencement of
each cropping season. On the basis of month-wise & State-wise
projection, the Department of Fertilizers allocates sufficient/adequate
quantities of fertilizers to States by issuing monthly supply plan and the
movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is being monitored
throughout the country by an on-line web based monitoring system also
called as Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS). The State Governments
are regularly advised to coordinate with manufacturers and importers
of fertilizers for streamlining the supplies through timely placement of
indents for railway rakes through their State institutional agencies like
Markfed etc. Regular Weekly Video Conference is conducted jointly by

55
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Department of
Fertilizers (DoF), and Ministry of Railways with State Agriculture Officials
and corrective actions are taken to dispatch fertilizer as indicated by
the State Governments. The gap between demand (requirement) and
production is met through import. Further , fertilizers have been declared
as essential commodities under the Essential Commodities Act (ECA),
1955. In order to ensure adequate availability of fertilizers at reasonable
price to the farmers the Government of India under Section 3 of the
Essential Commodities Act has promulgated the Fertilizer Control Order
(FCO) 1985. FCO empowers the State Governments to take appropriate
action to make available fertilizers in their States at reasonable prices.
Department of Fertilizers (DoF) ensures availability for all the fertilizers
upto State level, within State distribution of fertilizers is the
responsibility of State Governments. Almost all the State Governments
prepare block level projection as well as supply plan but monitor up to
district level. Notwithstanding the position stated above, the fact remains
that adequate quantity of fertilizers is not being supplied to the farmers
as per their requirement during the sowing season. The Committee
apprehend that the statistics relating to requirement/availability/sales
are completely contrary to the ground realities. The Committee strongly
feel that the Department can not overlook their responsibility altogether
in the matter. With the kind of technology now available, the Committee
feel that it would be feasible to monitor the movement of fertilizer till
it reaches to the end user i.e. the farmer. In case of any scarcity of
fertilizer, immediate corrective measures could be taken by the
Department. The Committee, therefore, desire that the system to
monitor the movement of fertilizers be made more effective in
co-ordination with State Governments in order to check any scarcity of
fertilizers even at the local level in any part of the country. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
The demand of fertilizers for a State is assessed in advance before
the commencement of the season on the basis of consumption during
previous seasons, area proposed to be sown, forecast for rainfall etc.
The seasonal demand is further projected month-wise. The assessed
demand for fertilizers is based on ideal conditions whereas due to
changes in actual sown area, pattern of rainfall and other conditions
prevailing during the season, the demand changes.
As the session progresses, the demand for actual consumption is
revealed gradually and the suppliers of fertilizers have also to redraw
their supply schedule to cope up with the emerging demand scenario.
As a result, fertilizers are moved according to demand and sometimes
supply exceeds the quantity indicated in plan.

56
In other words, it is stated that actual sales is a reflection of actual
demand during the month, whereas the month-wise projection is merely
an assessment. Department of Fertilizers ensures the availability of
fertilizers as per demand projected by the various State Governments.
If it is viewed from the season ’s perspective, the seasonal availability
and sales always remain at satisfactory level.
The Department of Fertilizers ensures the availability of fertilizers
at the State level and tracks the availability throughout the country
upto district level by an on-line web based monitoring system
(www.urvarak.co.in) also called as Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS)
and this is extended through mobile Fertilizer Monitoring System (mFMS),
which tracks the receipts of the fertilizer till the Retailers ’ level. This
system is in public domain and anybody can access the system and
know availability of fertilizers upto Retailers’ level. The list of retailers
is also available in mFMS-www.mfms.nic.in.
The State Governments are regularly advised to coordinate with
manufacturers and importers of fertilizers for streamlining the supplies
through timely placement of indents for railway rakes through their
State institutional agencies like Markfed etc. as the distribution within
the State is the responsibility of the respective State Government as
they have the local machinery and wherewithal to ensure adequate
availability of fertilizers upto farmers level.
Regular weekly Video conference is conducted jointly by Department
of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Department of Fertilizers (DoF),
and Ministry of Railways with State Agriculture Officials and corrective
actions are taken to dispatch fertilizer as indicated by the State
Governments. It is also informed that in the event of occurrence of any
undesirable situation in the fertilizer distribution process, DoF is taking
all possible corrective steps with the cooperation of State Governments.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),
OM No. F .No. 5(1)/2015-Fin. II (Vol. II), dated 21.08.2015]
Recommendation No. 11
The Committee are dismayed to note that though the Department
of Fertilizers has a well established system of assessing the requirement
and availability of fertilizers and monitoring mechanism to track the
movement of Fertilizers to the last point of sale i.e. retailer but still
there are rampant instances of black marketing, artificial scarcity of
fertilizers being created by the hoarders and illegal sale of Fertilizers

57
across the country particularly in neighbouring countries i.e. Bangladesh,
Nepal, Pakistan. According to the Department, the distribution of
fertilizers to the farmers is the responsibility of the concerned State
Government and State Governments are adequately empowered to
conduct search, make seizers and take punitive action against any
person violating provisions of Fertilizers Control Order, 1985. When the
Central Government gets the information regarding black marketing
and artificial scarcity, such information is passed on to the State
Government and it is the State Government ’s responsibility to enforce
action against such cases. However, the Committee are not convinced
with the explanation given by the Department on the issue and strongly
feel that the Department can not shirk from its responsibility since
huge funds are being incurred by the Central Government on imports
of Fertilizers and on subsidy on indigenous and imported Fertilizers
being paid to the fertiliser companies. It is, therefore, imperative for
the Department to take stringent steps in co-ordination with State
Governments to curb the instances of black marketing, hoarding,
diversion etc. The Committee also feel that fertilizer companies should
also be vested with powers to check such malpractices by cancelling of
dealerships of individuals involved in black-marketing and hoarding of
fertilizers so as to deter them to indulge in such activities. The
Committee would further like the Department to regularly take up the
matter with the Border Security Force (BSF), customs and organizations
responsible for stopping smuggling of urea across the country. The
Committee expect that Department of Fertilizers will take more proactive
steps in this regard.
The Committee note that Department of Fertilizers has approved
the removal of cap/restriction to produce Neem Coated Urea, which
will now allow the indigenous producers of urea to produce Neem
Coated urea up to maximum of their total production of subsidized
urea. Neem Coated urea is not only an excellent soil conditioner and
bio pesticide but also discourages the use of urea for other industrial
purposes. The Committee feel that as a result of production of neem
coated urea, illegal diversion of subsidized urea to non-agricultural use
will be discouraged. The Committee recommend that the Department
may earnestly monitor the production of neem coated urea and also
establish systems to educate the farmers about the benefits of the
neem coated urea in the production of their crops. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The CCEA in its meeting dated 13th May, 2015 has directed the urea
unit to produce 100% (entire production) neem coated urea. The
companies have been directed to educate through different media and
interaction etc. to enhance the use of neem coated urea.

58
Fertilizers are under Essential Commodities Act (ECA), 1955. Under
Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985, issued in exercise of the powers
conferred under the ECA, the State Governments are empowered to
take all necessary steps for ensuring equitable and effective distribution
of all subsidized fertilizers to prevent hoarding of fertilizers and thereby
creating artificial scarcity.
Department of Fertilizers has written to the Chief Secretaries of
the States to activate the enforcement agencies under their jurisdiction
as they have the local machinery and wherewithal to keep strict vigil
to check diversion of fertilizers for non-agriculture use. Similarly,
Department of Fertilizers has also written to Ministry of Home Affairs
& Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance to activate the
enforcement agencies under their jurisdiction to keep strict vigil to
check diversion & smuggling of Urea. Department of Fertilizers has
made it mandatory for all the indigenous producers of Urea to produce
100% of their total production of subsidized Urea as Neem Coated Urea
as it will enhance the availability, economize the quantity of Urea
requirement for crops and will also help in increasing crop yield. All
producers of urea have also been instructed to supply Neem Coated
Urea (NCU) to the States.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),
OM No. F .No. 5(1)/2015-Fin. II (Vol. II), dated 21.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.28 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation No. 12
The Committee note with deep concern that indiscriminate and
imbalanced use of fertilizers by the farmers in the country is resulting
in deterioration of the soil health and its productivity. During the
aforesaid study visit of the Committee to Srisailam, Andhra Pradesh,
the Committee were briefed that majority of farmers use only urea for
their crops which is adversely affecting soil health of their land. The
Committee feel that this is primarily due to lack of awareness amongst
the farmers community about the balanced use of fertilizers to boost
the productivity of the soil without affecting its health. As the urea
price, which is the main source of nitrogen, is highly subsidised, farmers
are using it in place of phosphorous and potassic fertilizers which are
very costly to be afforded by the farmers, leading to unbalanced
fertilisation in soil. During the evidence, the Secretary of the Department
informed the Committee that Soil Health Card Scheme is being

59
implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture which indicates what kind
of fertilizer and in what proportion to be used for maximum production
of their crops. Some of the fertilizer companies are conducting
demonstration and soil testing for the benefit of farmers. However, the
Committee cannot remain satisfied with this and feel that there is an
imperative need to check the declining productivity and degradation of
soil health and to take remedial steps to improve the soil health and
its productivity by proper use of fertilizers. The fertilizer companies
should also be impressed upon to use certain percentage of their funds
under CSR to educate the farmers in coordination with Ministry of
Agriculture and other stakeholders for proper and balanced use of
fertilizers for their crops. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the action taken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The efforts made by Fertilizer PSUs in this regard are as under:—
1. MFL
In order to alleviate the indiscriminate and imbalanced use of
fertilizers, Madras Fertilizers Limited as a responsible PSU, is organising
various Agro Service Programmes to educate the farmers to promote
soil health, balanced use of fertilizers and advanced farming techniques
for improved yields.
During the year 2014-15, MFL organised various development/
promotional programmes and planned to organise programmes during
2015-16 as detailed below:—
Sl. Name of the Description 2014-15 2015-16
No. programme Nos. Expenditure Nos. Budget
(Rs.) (Rs.)
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Farmers contact Each programmes conducted for 18 1,55,000 30 2,24,000
Programmes a period of 5 days wherein
MFL’s field personnel contacted
50 farmers per day and
educated them.
2. Exhibitions MFL participates in Krishi 6 10,090 11 33,000
Melas organised in States
with a vivid display of
promotional materials.

60
3. Soil Samples Soil samples are collected 6,099 38,065 6,000 1,21,000
and analysed for N,P ,K and
micro-nutrients.
4. Bio MFL conducts Bio-fertilizer 71 19,274 72 43,200
Demonstrations demonstrations with a motive
to promote the concept of
organic farming.
5. Individual Our marketing personnel 33,602 — 33,000 —
Farmers contacts contact farmers on site
and educate them during
routine tours.
6. Farmers contact Programme conducted for — — 56 22,40,000
programmes a period of ten days
through third employing field assistants.
party
7. Field Demonstrations on a single — — 56 2,24,000
Demonstrations crop with package of practices.
8. Point of purchase Flex promotional material, — — 2,750 4,12,500
materials banners etc.
2. FACT
FACT being a PSU under the DoF/Government of India, is actively
involved in the promotion of balanced fertilizer application. FACT has
been organizing various activities for promotion of balanced fertilizer
application with the full co-operation of the State Agriculture
Departments and the Universities of Agriculture in the four Southern
States. The activities conducted in the year 2014-15 are as under:—
SI.No. Name of the activities conducted No.
1. Field Demonstration Plots 12
2. Agricultural Seminars 25
3. Soil Samples analysed (in own labs.) 10,005
4. Training programmes for dealers 09
5. Soil Samples analysed for micro-nutrients 110
6. Soil Samples analysed through State Govt. Labs. 1460
7. Exhibition 06
8. Meetings with State Agriculture Deptt. Offices 16
1 2 3 4 5 6     7

61
All these activities are taken up to impress upon the farmers the
need for balanced fertilizer application. Agriculture Department of the
States, agriculture scientists from the research farms and the State
Agriculture Universities are involved in these programmes.
Besides, FACT has been encouraging the sales of bio-fertilizers and
Organic manure (Compost based and product based on animal and plant
bio-mass). The sales of these products is as below:—
Sales during 2014-15
SI.No. Product Qty. in MTs
1. Bio-Fertilizers 66.000
2. Organic Manure 6480.000
3. FCIL
As per the decision of GoI of July/September 2002, all fertilizer
plants of FCIL were closed and most of the employees were released
on VSS, except few. Considering the demand-supply gap of fertilizer in
the country, GoI approved revival of closed units of FCIL. The revival
of these closed units of FCIL is in progress by other companies. Hence,
there is no production of fertilizer in FCIL units. In view of this, FCIL
is unable to educate farmers to take remedial steps to improve the soil
health and its productivity by proper use of fertilizers.
4. HFCL
As per the decision of GoI of July/September 2002, all fertilizer
plants of HFCL were closed and most of the employees were released
on VSS, except few. Considering the demand-supply gap of fertilizer in
the country, GoI approved revival of closed units of HFCL. The revival
of these closed units of HFCL is in progress. Hence, there is no production
of fertilizer in HFCL units. In view of this, HFCL is unable to educate
farmers to take remedial steps to improve the soil health and its
productivity by proper use of fertilizers.
5. PDIL
PDIL is an Engineering Consultancy Organization mainly in the field
of fertilizers, and it neither manufactures nor distributes fertilizers to
farmers. Hence, no activity in this regard has been done by PDIL.
6. BVFCL
BVFCL is the lead fertilizer supplier for North-Eastern States. Playing
proactive roles in imparting education/creating awareness to its

62
customers/farmers for maintaining the soil health by balanced
fertilization and increasing crop production. Following activities are
undertaken by BVFCL:—
(1) Farmer ’s training programme.
(2) Dealer ’s training programme.
(3) Mass campaign programme.
(4) Village adoption programme.
(5) Providing support in soil sample testing and distributing
literature on methods of soil sample collection.
(6) Distribution of technical literature (package of practices) and
posters on balanced use of fertilizers.
(7) Participation in exhibition/Kisan melas.
7. FAGMIL
FAGMIL is in the business of mining of mineral gypsum only in the
State of Rajasthan and presently have not undertaken Fertilizer Education
Programme in any part of the country. However, we are testing soil
nutrients free of cost through one Mobile Soil Testing Laboratory in the
Sriganganagar district of Rajasthan in mutual agreement with the
Department of Agriculture, Government of Rajasthan since 11.09.2010
for a period of three years and the agreement was renewed for a
period of another three years on 14.06.2014. The expenditure incurred
and no. of samples analyzed from 2010-11 to till date are as under:—
Year No. of Samples Expenditure Incurred
2010-11 2006 18629
2011-12 4642 70365
2012-13 3780 133452
2013-14 1400 93953
2014-15 559 65658
2015-16 (till date) 350 57788
Total 12737 439845
Through the Mobile Soil Testing Laboratory (MSTL), the company
have analyzed 12,737 soil samples till date and issued Soil Health cards
free of cost to the respective Land owners/farmers in the Sriganganagar

63
district of Rajasthan at the total cost of Rs. 4.40 Lakhs. However , the
expenditure incurred on operation of MSTL did not form a part of CSR
activities as per approved policy of the company.
8. NFL
National Fertilizers Limited right since its inception has played a
sheet anchor role in not only providing quality fertilizers to the farmers
but educating them on balanced & judicious use of fertilizers along
with the total know-how on improved and scientific methods of
cultivation to help them in getting bumper harvest and profits. For
this, NFL lays great importance on technology transfer and value added
services to the farmers like soil testing service, demonstrations, adoption
of villages, farmers trainings, crop seminars and other advisory services,
as a part of its Agriculture Extension Activities.
At National level there is growing concern about low and declining
fertilizer use efficiency which is affecting crop productivity. The depletion
in soil fertility due to imbalanced and unscientific use of fertilizers is
one of the major reasons of declining fertilizer use efficiency and low
crop productivity. The company has taken initiative to address the issue
by upgrading its soil testing facilities and educating the farmers about
efficient use of fertlizers based on soil test to improve crop productivity.
The company understands there is a wide gap between the best
practices in agriculture to the actual practices adopted by the farmers.
Thus, proliferation of education at all levels is necessary to reduce the
existing gap. Keeping this objective in view, NFL undertakes following
programmes so that the agriculture community can be benefitted:—
1. Soil Testing Services — At NFL ’s Static Labs. & Mobile Soil
Testing Labs., at Farmers ’ Door Step—
(i) Both Macro & Micro Nutrients Analysis
(ii) Distribution of Soil Health Card
(iii) Preparation of Soil Fertility Map of the village/area
2. Field Demonstrations — Showing benefits of use of balanced
& efficient use of fertilizers based on soil analysis report.
3. Farmers ’ Training—
(i) At Agriculture Universities/Krishi Vigyan Kendras
(ii) At Farmers ’ Fields by Agriculture Experts
(iii) At NFL ’s Training Centres

64
4. Kisan Melas — Participating in various Kisan Melas organized
by Central/State/Distt. Agricultural Deptt. & various agencies.
5. Publicity Programme — NFL adopts various methods to educate
the farmers like:
(i) Distribution of Crop Literature
(ii) Showing Video films
During the last 3 years NFL has spent the following amount on
educating the farmers’ in their area of operation:
 Year Expenditure (Rs. in Lakhs) No. of Beneficiary Farmers
2012-13 47.24 2,81,280
2013-14 45.45 3,68,075
2014-15 51.17 3,89,015
During 2015-16, NFL has made a provision of Rs. 1.00 crore (app.)
for expenditure on Farmers ’ Education Programmes. The guidelines of
various activities and budget expenditure have already been
communicated to the field staff for implementation.
9. RCF
The normal recommendation for balanced use of fertilizers is in the
ratio of 4:2:1 of NPK respectively. The NPK use ratio during the year
2011-2012 was 6.7:3.1:1 and in 2012-2013 the ratio was 8.2 : 3.2:1. In
2013-2014 the NPK use ratio had been 8.0:2.7:1, which is alarming
when compared to an ideal ratio of 4:2:1. This is mainly because of
price imparity between P and K fertilizers in comparison to N fertilizers
(urea). This price imparity has resulted in decline usage of particularly
P fertilizer (2013-14) by 15% whereas N usage has increased by 1.20%.
RCF is having a long tradition of educating & guiding the farming
community Pan-India basis. Since RCF ’s market share in Maharashtra
being substantial, most of the extensive educational programmes are
tailor made for the farming community of the State.
1. RCF has taken steps to educate the farmers through its Farmers
Training Centres located at Nagpur & Thal, apart from
conducting subject specific training programmes in association
with local KVKs throughout the year.
2. The Company ’s dedicated training facilities are manned by
professionally qualified faculty stationed there, as well as

65
visiting faculty which includes eminent research scientists
from agricultural institutions. The curriculum at a typical
training session covers broader aspects of farm management
and specifics of farm technology, with special reference to
regional needs. These are supplemented by training with regard
to subsidiary occupations and the lucrative futuristic option
of food processing. The regional agricultural universities take
an active part in the farmers’ training process and case studies
with regard to area specific situations, cropping pattern, socio-
economic problems etc. are discussed regularly. Field visits to
research centres, agricultural institutes and subsidiary
occupation centres are also organized. Farmers are advised
to use the fertilizer as per the health of the field soil, which
can be analyzed either in Government soil testing laboratories
or RCF soil testing laboratories, situated in different parts of
the country. The locations of RCF ’s soil testing laboratories
with capacities are attached.
3. Soil health cards are distributed to the farmers which indicate
their soil fertility status and fertilizer requirements for the
crops to be grown by the farmers. Application of fertilizers
in a balanced way, based on soil analysis ensures the supply
of needed nutrients in right proportion and also cures poor
soil fertility for optimum productivity. In view of this, farmers
need to be persuaded to get the soils of their fields analysed
once in 3 years.
4. RCF ’s has dedicated itself in participating & adapting “Centrally
Sponsored Scheme on National Project on Management of Soil
Health & Fertility ” (2010-2012) & established state of the art
Six Static & Six Mobile Soil Testing Laboratories at Pan-India
locations (details given in the Annexure).
5. From the earlier analysis of Soil sample capacity (NPK) of
35000, at present RCF is having the capacity to analyse 125000
soil samples for NPK analysis and 27000 soil samples for Micro-
nutrient analysis.
6. RCF is printing a farmer dedicated agricultural magazine titled
“RCF’s Sheti-Patrika”. This Patrika is in circulation since last
44 years & has played a significant role in popularizing our
products/services & advising the farmers on Agricultural
technology, Cropping pattern, Pests, etc. This Patrika has
grown from strength to strength over the years. In fact it is
now competing with the popular Agriculture Magazines
published in Maharashtra.

66
7. RCF takes utmost care to cover latest & current topics in
Agriculture in Sheti Patrika. At present RCF is Printing &
Distributing 55000 copies/month on complimentary basis to
the farmers. Even with a conservative estimate RCF ’s Sheti-
Patrika is having a readership of over 1.50 lakh.
8. During this year 2015/2016, RCF has initiated a 10 minute
educative programme capsule in the farmer ’s preferred
program “Aamchi Mati Aamchi Manase ” (telecasted on
Doordarshan) titled “Krushi Samrriur dhi chi Guru Killi ”. In
this capsule, RCF is addressing to the queries of the farmers
on the subjects of common interests. This capsule will be
telecasted for 52 weeks.
9. RCF has also offered a toll free call facility to the farming
community of Maharashtra, border districts of Telangana &
Karnataka. This facility is available for the farming community
from December 2012. This service is available to the farmers
free of charge from morning 9 am to 6 pm, six days a week.
This facility has been titled “RCF Kisan Care ”.
10. RCF ’s Kisan Care number is: 1800-22-3044.
11. On an average RCF receives 70 to 80 calls per day.
12. RCF received around 32219 calls during December 2012 to
April 2015. Out of these calls around 35 % are repeat calls.
These calls have been identified as loyal farmers.
In addition to the above RCF conducts or undertakes the following
activities on regular basis to educate the farmers through the following:
• Farmer meetings
• Practical demonstrations
• Soil Testing days
• Krishi Melas
• Facebook (www.facebook.com/rcfkisanmanch).
These activities are being conducted apart from RCF ’s regular CSR
activities. Department of Agriculture & Cooperation also has taken
following steps to improve the soil health and its productivity:—
(i) Government is advocating soil test based balanced use of
fertilizers in conjunction with organic sources of plant nutrients
like Farm Yard Manure (FYM), Compost, Bio-fertilizers and
green manuring.

67
(ii) Soil Health Management (SHM) programme under National
Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) assists State
Governments for following activities to promote soil test based
balanced and judicious use of fertilizers:—
(a) Setting up of static/mobile Soil Testing Laboratories
(STLs).
(b) Strengthening static/mobile Soil Testing Laboratories
(STLs).
(c) Training and demonstrations on balanced use of fertilizers.
(iii) Soil Health Card scheme is introduced to assist State
Governments to issue Soil Health Card to all farmers in the
country. Soil Health Card will provide information to farmers
on nutrients status of their soil along with recommendation
on appropriate dosage on nutrients to be applied for improving
soil health and its fertility. Soil status will be assessed regularly
in cycle of 3 years so that nutrient deficiencies are identified
and amendments applied.
(iv) Fertilizer Companies organise Kishan Melas regularly to educate
the farmers about the blanced use of fertilizers.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),
OM No. F .No. 5(1)/2015-Fin. II (Vol. II), dated 21.08.2015]

68
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT ’S REPLY
—NIL—

69
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
A. Plan Allocation and Expenditure
Recommendation No. 2
The Committee note with deep concern that BE 2013-14 under Plan
allocation was Rs. 269 crore which was reduced drastically to
Rs. 100 crore in BE 2014-15 and the same was further slashed down to
Rs. 50 crore in BE 2015-16 as against the BE proposal of the Department
for Rs. 190.26 crore for the year 2015-16. The Committee are also
distressed to note that BE 2013-14 of Rs. 269 crore was reduced to
Rs. 9 crore at RE stage in 2013-14, out of which only Rs. 2.32 crore
could be spent. Again, out of Rs. 100 crore in BE 2014-15, actual
expenditure was only Rs. 2.04 crore upto December 2014. The Committee
wonder as to how the balance amount of Rs. 98 crore i.e. almost 98%
of the funds allocated in BE 2014-15 could be spent in the remaining
part of the fiscal. The drastic reduction in allocation of Plan funds
clearly shows the Department ’s poor budgetary planning and the
unrealistic estimation of funds required by the Department for its various
projects/schemes. This also shows the Department ’s ineffective
implementation or monitoring of the action plan or monitoring of
utilization of budgetary funds. The Plan fund mainly comprises of
financial support to loss making three companies namely Brahmaputra
Valley Fertilizers Corporation Limited (BVFCL), Fertilizers and Chemicals
Travancore Limited (FACT) and Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL). Under
the Plan scheme, budgetary support in the form of loan is provided to
these three loss making fertilizer companies for Renovation, Replacement
and maintenance of critical equipment to sustain their operations.
However , due to financial restrictions imposed by Ministry of Finance in
respect of default in refund of Government of India loans and payment
of interest thereon by CPSEs, Plan loan could not be released to these
companies from 2012-13 onward. Financial restructuring of aforesaid
three PSUs is not being considered under Plan fund. In this regard, the
Committee feel that in the absence of adequate funds under GBS, it
would be difficult for the loss making PSUs to sustain their operations.
The Committee also note that no allocation has been made under
the Plan Head for the 2015-16 for Miscellaneous schemes i.e. Management

70
of Information Technology (MIT) and Science & Technology (S&T). Under
MIT scheme, budgetary support is given to fund need based programme
namely Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) and mobile based Fertilizer
Monitoring System (mFMS) through the grants made available as GBS.
FMS has been developed and grown to enable users to monitor availability
of fertilizers online on real time basis. The Committee feel that non-
allocation of GBS would adversely affect the effective functioning of
FMS and mFMS which is very essential for the efficient implementation
of the Direct Transfer of Subsidy scheme. The S&T programme of the
Department primarily lays emphasis at Research and Development of
processes and equipment inter-alia to lower specific energy consumption
in fertiliser plants. In the absence of adequate funds, the Committee
feel that it would be difficult for technical institutes/CPSEs to undertake
projects related to fertiliser industry which may, in turn, hamper
innovation and technological advancement in the fertiliser sector.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should
take up the issue vigorously with the Ministry of Finance and impress
upon them to allocate adequate funds as per the demand of the
Department. The Committee may be informed of the steps being taken
by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The reason for variation in BE and RE during 2013-14 & 2014-15 is
the reduction of outlay by Ministry of Finance at RE stage. The main
reasons for variation in RE and Actual Expenditure were:
1. Provision of Budgetary support is made by Department of
Fertilizers for three loss making CPSEs namely Brahmaputra
Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL), Fertilizers &
Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) and Madras Fertilizers
Limited (MFL), keeping in view the overall allocation made by
the Planning Commission and also considering the requirements
of the companies. Due to financial restrictions imposed by
Ministry of Finance vide its letter dated September 20, 2012,
in respect of default in refund of Government of India loans
and payment of interest thereon by CPSEs, Plan loan could
not be released to these Fertilizer companies from 2012-13
onward.
2. Under Management of Information Technology (MIT) Head,
the major portion of the budget was kept for mFMS scheme.
Due to non-completion of the 2nd phase of the mFMS, the
fund provided could not be utilized.

71
3. Under S&T Head, due to non-receipt of quality proposals,
allocated fund could not be utilized in its totality.
Department of Fertilizers has sought an amount of Rs. 2.80 crore
under Plan expenditure for MIT under First Supplementary Demand for
2015-16 vide O.M.No. 5(2)/2015-Fin.I dated 01.07.2015.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),
OM No. F .No. 5(1)/2015-Fin. II (Vol. II), dated 21.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report)

72
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
A. Direct Subsidy to Farmers
Recommendation No. 4
The Committee note that the Department is following a phased
approach for direct disbursement of fertiliser subsidy to the intended
beneficiaries. The implementation of Phase-I has already been made
operational from 1st November, 2011 and is approaching stabilization
and Phase-II of mFMS which capture the retailer sales of fertilizers to
farmers in pilot stage, was rolled out in 6 districts (Nawanshahar-
Punjab, East Godavari-Andhra Pradesh, Sonipat-Haryana, Bilaspur-
Himachal Pradesh, Ajmer-Rajasthan, and Madurai-Tamil Nadu) on
1st August, 2013. The pilot project is being implemented with the help
of the 6 Lead Fertilizer Suppliers (LFS) of the concerned States. However,
since feedback from Lead Fertilizer Suppliers (LFS) on Phase-II
implementation is not positive, the Department is considering
implementing a part of Phase-II as an interim step i.e. capturing retailer’s
sale only and not the buyer’s data. As regards to subsequent phases of
project i.e. Phase-III and Phase-IV , the Committee were informed that
it was discussed and decided on 6.5.2013 that DBT in fertilizers is
complex matter as there are problems in targeting, determining
entitlements and preparing beneficiary databases, therefore, for the
moment it would be better to keep DBT away from fertilizers. According
to the Department, there is no database of the beneficiary presently
available in the State who buys the Fertilizers. There are also issues
like as to whether the direct subsidy has to be paid to the land owner
or to the filler. There are variables such as type of soil, type of crop
produced and rainfall etc., which determines the type and amount of
a particular type of Fertilizers used by the farmers. Thus, assessing the
entitlement of fertiliser is a very difficult task. Further, there are
different subsidy regimes operational for Urea and P & K Fertilizers.
For Urea, the subsidy is on cost plus basis but in P & K Fertilizers,
subsidy is fixed. Therefore, in the present scenario, the product based
subsidy is only possible for P & K fertiliser sector and not feasible in
case of Urea which covers at least 70% of subsidy expenditure.
Notwithstanding the position stated above, the Department agreed with
the concerns raised by the Committee on the issue and was forthright

73
in his approach that ultimately the Government has to endeavour to
directly transfer the subsidy to the farmers instead of routing it through
the company. According to them, DBT to the farmers can be done in
case of P &K fertilizers on which fixed subsidy is being given like in the
case of LPG. It was also informed to the Committee that DBT is being
implemented as a mission in 30 districts of the country. Needless to say,
the Committee have time and again emphasized the need for payment
of subsidy direct to the farmers. The Committee are of the strong view
that transfer of the benefits of direct subsidy to the farmers would
check the corruption, close the loopholes and profligacy in subsidies.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should
make earnest efforts to implement the DBT scheme in the 30 districts
as a mission and on the basis of its evaluation, a mechanism should be
worked out in consultation with all stakeholders to address the problems
in targeting, determining entitlements and preparing beneficiary
databases so that the benefit of subsidy is disbursed directly to the
farmers without further delay. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the initiatives undertaken by the Department and the progress made
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
This Department is taking necessary steps to implement DBT in
fertilizers and is working in close co-ordination with Office of Mission
Director , DBT under Ministry of Finance. A preliminary consultation was
held with two States of Odisha and Gujarat on 06.04.2015, as they have
shown interest for a pilot project in DBT . State Governments of Odisha
and Gujarat were requested to indicate pilot districts. Response from
both of the States have been received and the same is being examined.
Further , Mission Director (DBT) has forwarded a proposal given by
National Institute of Smart Governance (NISG) to assist the department
in preparing a roadmap for DBT in fertilizers. In this regard, NISG has
submitted a proposal for Consultancy and Project Management for DBT
in fertilizers in two (2) pilot districts of Odisha and Gujarat which was
discussed in a meeting chaired by JS (Fert.) on 27th April, 2015. The
proposal of National Institute of Smart Governance is under consideration
of Department which would provide Detailed Project Report (DPR) in
first three (3) months.
A meeting was also chaired by Mission Director (DBT) on 1st May
2015 in presence of senior representatives of NISG with Joint Secretary
(Fert.) and Director (FA) from Department of Fertilizers. The various
steps to be taken for roadmap of DBT in fertilizers was discussed in
detail.

74
Further action is being planned to start the pilot project after due
approvals of the Competent Authority of the Department of Fertilizers.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),
OM No. F .No. 5(1)/2015-Fin. II (Vol. II), dated 21.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report)
B. Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy
Recommendation No. 5
The Committee note that Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) policy is
being implemented by the Department for P&K fertilizers w.e.f. 1.4.2010
under which a fixed rate of subsidy, decided on annual basis, is provided
on each grade of subsidized P&K fertilizers depending on their nutrient
content. The NBS rates for P&K fertilizers are fixed by the Government
after taking into consideration all relevant factors including the likely
impact of these rates on total subsidy payout The Committee observed
in its earlier reports that since the introduction of NBS policy, there has
been an increasing trend in prices of P&K Fertilizer , gradual decline in
subsidy on decontrolled fertilizers, due to reducing per KG Subsidy on
each Nutrient covered under NBS and also due to lower consumption of
P&K Fertilizers. As a result thereof, the consumption of controlled
fertilizer i.e. urea has increased leading to imbalanced use of fertilizers
and deterioration of soil health. The small and marginal farmers are
worst affected as they are not able to afford the high cost of decontrolled
fertilizers. In this regard, the Committee were informed that in order
to study the impact of NBS Policy, the Government had appointed
M/s Ernst & Young (EY), which has since submitted its report in the
matter. The Department has also accepted the report and is now
examining the report. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
findings in the report of M/s EY should be examined thoroughly and
expeditiously and on the basis of its analysis and evaluation, the NBS
policy should be suitably modified so as to control the rising prices of
P&K fertilizers, which would in turn encourage farmers to utilize balanced
fertilizers for their crops. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the action taken by the Department in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The report submitted by M/s Ernst & Young on the performance of
NBS Policy has been examined.

75
The findings of the report show that the objectives of the NBS
Policy namely, availability of P & K fertilizers throughout the country,
reduction in subsidy burden, promotion of competition etc. have been
achieved after implementation of the policy.
However , in respect of balanced fertilization of soil, the report says
that significant low prices of Nitrogen has led to increase in gap between
prices of N vis-a-vis P&K over last 3 years and this led to significant
distortion of fertilization ratio post NBS.
As distortion of fertilization ratio is mainly due to over consumption
of urea due to its low MRP fixed statutorily as compared to high price
on N in P&K fertilizers, the Department felt that distortion in fertilization
ratio is to be addressed in the form of review of Urea policy. Accordingly,
the Department of Fertilizers is considering the issue in consultation
with Department of Agriculture and Cooperation.
Recommendations of M/s Ernst & Young:
iii. Reasonableness of MRP: The report has recommendations
relating to reasonability of MRP . It has suggested determination
of reasonableness of MRP in two different criteria. In this
regard it may be stated that the Department has already put
in place a mechanism/procedure for finding out reasonableness
of MRP of P&K fertilizers. In the procedure, it has been made
mandatory for the fertilizer companies to furnish cost data of
all subsidized P & K fertilizers produced/imported by them
for release of subsidy from 2012-13 onwards and Cost
Accountants have been appointed to scrutinize the cost data
submitted by the fertilizer companies and based on the cost
accountants’ reports the reasonableness of MRPs of subsidised
P&K fertilizers is being found out.
iv. Securing supplies of P&K Fertilizers: The study report states
that for securing supplies of P&K fertilizers the Government
should encourage strategic investments by Indian players in
mines abroad by creating ‘sovereign fund’ for the same and
creation of consortium of Indian players to bargain volume
discounts. In this regard it is stated that the Government is
already facilitating to secure supplies of Phosphatic and
Potassic fertilizers and their raw materials and encouraging
companies to set up joint ventures and long term supply
agreements abroad to ensure continuous availability of finished
fertilizers/raw materials in the country.

76
The above findings show that the Department has already taken
various steps to implement the recommendations of M/s Ernst & Young.
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),
OM No. F .No. 5(1)/2015-Fin. II (Vol. II), dated 21.08.2015]
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report)
   N EW D ELHI; ANANDRAO ADSUL,
07 October, 2015 Chairperson,
15 Asvina, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Chemicals and Fertilizers.

77
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2015-16)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 07 October, 2015 from 1500
hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Anandrao Adsul— Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anju Bala
3. Shri B.N. Chandrappa
4. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta
5. Shri K. Ashok Kumar
6. Shri S. Rajendran
7. Dr. Kulamani Samal
8. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh
9. Shri Tasleemuddin
10. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Narayan Lai Panchariya
12. Shri K. Parasaran
13. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao
14. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy
15. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya
16. Shri Abdul Wahab
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava — Director

78
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the members
of the Committee.
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following
draft Reports:—
(a) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Fertilizers); and
(b) Action Taken Report on the subject “Jan Aushadhi Scheme” of
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Pharmaceuticals).
4. Both the draft Action Taken Reports were adopted by the
Committee without any amendment.
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to make
consequential changes, if any, arising out of the factual verification of
the Reports by the Department of Fertilizers and the Department of
Pharmaceuticals of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers and present
the same to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

79
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT (16TH LOK SABHA)
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(2014-15) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-2016) ’ OF THE MINISTRY OF
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS)
I. Total No. of Recommendations 12
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been 09
accepted by the Government:—
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11 and 12)
Percentage of Total 75%
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 0
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
reply:—
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil)
Percentage of Total 0%
IV . Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 1
reply of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:—
(Vide Recommendation No. 2)
Percentage of Total 8%
V . Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 2
replies of the Government are still awaited:—
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 4 and 5)
Percentage of Total 17%