1 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
25 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS (2015-16) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained  
in the Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject,  
"Petroleum, Chemicals, Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs)" of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
 
 TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2016 / SHRAVANA, 1938 (SAKA) 
 
  


2 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
CC&F.No.25 
 
 
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained  
in the Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject,  
"Petroleum, Chemicals, Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs)" of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11 August 2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11 August 2016 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2016 / SHRAVANA, 1938 (SAKA) 
  

3 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-16) 
 
ii 
INTRODUCTION 
 
iii 
Chapter I Report  
 
1-17 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
18-22 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government' s  
replies 
 
23 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
reply  of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee and which require reiteration 
 
24 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
25-33 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2015-16) held on 09.08.2016. 
 
34 
II. Analysis of Action Taken b y the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2015 -16) on ‘Petroleum, Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Investment Regions ( PCPIRS)' of the 
Ministry of Chemical s and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
 
35 
  

4 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
(ii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Idris Ali 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Innocent 
9. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi 
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle 
13. Shri Rajendran S. 
14. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
15. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
16. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
17. Dr. Uma Saren 
18.  Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
19. Shri Taslimuddin 
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
21. Shri George Baker 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Shri Ram Vichar Netam 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
26. Shri K Parasaran 
27. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao 
28. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
29. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
30. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
31. Shri Abdul Wahab 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
  Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
  Shri A.K.Srivastava  - Director 
  Shri RamPrakash  - Additional Director 
  Shri Thangkhanlal Ngaihte - Senior Committee Assistant  

5 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2015 -
2016) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, 
present this Twenty Fif th Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Seventeenth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committe e on the subject, "Petroleum, Chemicals 
and  Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs)" of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
2. The Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee o n 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 25.02.2016. The Action 
Taken replies of Government to all observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 1 5.07.2016.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (201 5-2016) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
09.08.2016.  
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to 
the Committee.  
5.  For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                    ANANDRAO ADSUL 
09 August, 2016                                                                                             Chairperson 
18 Ashravana 1938 (Saka)                                            Standing Committee on 
                                                                                                         Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 

1 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2015-16) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Seventeenth Report (Six teenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject, 
"Petroleum, Chemicals, Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs) " of the Ministr y of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 25.2.2016. In all, the Committee made 10 Observations / 
Recommendations in the said Report. 
 
2. The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Departm ent of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish replies to the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Seventeenth Report within three months from the date of presentation of 
the Report, i.e. by 25.5.2016. The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 
10 Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from  the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals vide their 
O.M. No.25017/6/2015-PCPIR (FTS:8442)  dated 13.7.2016 after a long delay .  Accordingly, 
the Replies have been examined and categorized as follows:-  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government -
Rec. No. 3, 6, 7, 8 and 10                                                     (Total=5) 
            Chapter-II  
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply-  
Rec. No. Nil         (Total =0) 
            Chapter-III  
 
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration-  
      Rec. No. Nil                   (Total=0) 
            Chapter-IV  
 
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  final replies of the 
Government are still awaited- 
Rec. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5 and 9              (Total=5) 
             Chapter-V  

2 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the  Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter - I (including Chapter V) of this Report should 
be furnished expeditiously.  
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
A. Budgetary support for the PCPIR projects.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1 
5. Emphasizing the need for adequate budgetary support to the PCPIRs to take care of 
infrastructure, etc, the Committee had recommended as under:   
 “During the course of the examination of the subject the Committee observed that 
there is lack of budgetary support for the PCPIRs by the Central Government and no 
provisions have been made in the Demands for grants specifically for the 
implementation of PC PIRs. The Department in this regard informed the Committee 
that State Government such as Odisha, Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh are seeking some 
kind of financial incentives and handholding in the form of budgetary support from 
the Central Government. When the  Committee enquired about the Viability Gap 
Funding (VGF), the Secretary of the Department of Chemical and Petrochemical stated 
that the 20 percent contribution towards Viability Gap Funding could be diverted as  
budgetary contribution either towards State  Public Sector undertakings (PSUs) or the 
State Government implementing the PCPIR project. Further, the Department has 
stated that a minimum amount of Rs. 1000 crore should be the amount for each PCPIR 
from the Government of India. 
 
 The Committee therefor e, recommend that the required budgetary allocation 
preferably the demand of the minimum of Rs. 1000 crore to take care of 
infrastructure, etc. for each PCPIR should be explored. The Department must take up 
the matter earnestly with the Ministry of Finance for allocation. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
6. In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The Department acknowledges the concern of the Committee to make the PCPIRs 
fully operational. The Department, based on the requests received from PCPIR States, 
has proposed the provision of Budgetary Allocation not exceeding Rs. 1000 Cro re for 
each PCPIR to be made in the proposed amendment in PCPIR Policy 2007, to  take 
care of the requirements of internal infrastructure, Common Utility Infrastructure, 
technical assistance etc in the PCPIRs. This budgetary allocation is in addition to th e 
earlier approvals granted by the CCEA for VGF for external linkages, utilities etc. The 
above amendment in the PCPIR Policy has been included in the draft note proposed 
for consideration of Committee of Secretaries (COS)." 
   

3 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
7.  In their report, the Committee had recommended a budgetary contribution of 
Rs. 1000 crore for each PCPIR from the Government.  
 In its Action Taken Reply (ATR), the Department stated that it had proposed 
the provision of Budgetary Allocation not exceed ing Rs. 1000 crore for each PCPIR in 
the proposed amendments in the PCPIR Policy 2007 which is being put up for the 
consideration of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS). This proposed allocation will be 
in addition to the earlier approvals granted by the Ca binet Committee on Economic 
Affairs (CCEA) for Viability Gap Funding (VGF) for external linkages, utilities, etc.  
 The Committee are satisfied  that the Government had proposed for a 
budgetary allocation not exceeding Rs. 1000 crore for each PCPIR in the draft note of 
proposed amendment in the PCPIR Policy 2007 for the consideration of the 
Committee of Secretaries (CoS) of the Government of India. As the proposal is yet to 
be accepted and implemented, the Committee would like to await for the outcom e 
but desire that the Department should pursue the matter so that the same may be 
accepted and implemented soon.  
 
B.      Issues relating to Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
 
8.  While expressing deep concern about the lack of private funding under the PPP mode 
of the PCPIRs, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 “The Committee observed that there is lack of response from investors to participate 
in the PCPIR projects under the Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. In this  regard, 
the Department has stated that the private firm who is a developer or co -developer 
has to invest large amount of funds beforehand and there is long gestation period 
between the time money would be invested and repayment time for the investors. 
Also the slow creation of infrastructure acts as a disincentive. Therefore, not many 
private firms are interested in investing in projects and many are reluctant to come on 
board. 
 
 The Committee are deeply concerned about the lack of private funding under th e PPP 
mode in the project. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Government of 
India should mull over giving some kind of incentives or concessions may be in terms 
of easing the formalities for these projects and tax concessions, etc. to the priva te 
forms to invest in the PCPIR projects so that the PCPIRs are developed to its full 
capacity. The Committee hope that the Department will seriously consider these 
issues and come out with a comprehensive plan to address the problem at the 
earliest." 
 

4 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
 REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
9.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 “The Department agrees with the observations of the Committee regarding 
lackadaisical response by private investors in PCPIRs and to give some kind of 
incentives or concessions to the private forms to invest in the PCPIR projects so that 
the PCPIRs are developed to its full capacity. Taking into consideration of these facts/ 
scenario, some incentives t o ease the formalities and a proposal for providing tax 
concessions have been included by the Department in the amendments proposed in 
the PCPIR Policy 2007. The proposed amendments for incentives by the Governments, 
Central & State, like on Excise duty, p roposed GST, Tax holidays, according priority 
status etc. will go a long way in attracting investors. The amendments proposed in the 
PCPIR Policy 2007 are under consideration of CoS. 
  
Government of Odisha  has also come up with Industrial Policy Resolution – 2015 
which identifies the Petroleum, Chemicals & Petrochemicals as the focus sector for the 
next 5 years and the sector has been categorized under the Priority sector for 
extending various incentives to  the investors. The developers / investors would avail 
incentives for land rate concessions, stamp duty exemption, interest subsidy, VAT and 
entry tax reimbursement, green energy subsidy and environmental protection 
infrastructure subsidy, employment cost subsidy etc. 
 
The PCPIRs will be able to attract investment from private parties once these 
incentives or concessions are announced for PCPIRs by the Government." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
10.  In their Report, the Committee had recommended that  the Government of 
India should consider giving to the private firms participating  in the PCPIRs, some 
kind of incentives or concessions, may be in terms of easing the formalities for these 
projects and tax concessions, etc.  
 In its ATR, the Department st ated that it is in agreement with the 
recommendations of the Committee regarding lackadaisical response by private 
investors in the PCPIRs and to give them some kind of incentives or concessions so 
that they may have the incentive to invest in these projec ts. The Department further 
informed that some incentives to ease the formalities and a proposal for providing 
tax concessions in the form of excise duty, proposed GST, Tax holidays, according 
priority status etc. have already been included by the Departmen t in the 
amendments proposed in the PCPIR Policy 2007. These amendments proposed in the 
PCPIR Policy 2007 are under consideration of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS). 
 The Committee after considering the Reply, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that the Department should scrupulously pursue the 

5 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
matter so that the proposed amendments to the PCPIR Policy 2007 are accepted and 
implemented. The Committee desire to be apprised of the progress in this regard.  
 
C.  Master Plan, Environmental Clearance and Disaster Management  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
 
11.  Regarding the issues relating to Master Plan, Environmental Clearance and Disaster 
Management of each of the PCPIR projects, the Committee's recommendations and the 
Government's replies have been reproduced as under:-   
 (a)   “The Committee noted that the Development Plan/ Master Plan of Dahej 
PCPIR, Gujarat has been sanctioned in September, 2012 and town planning schemes 
are being implemented. The master Plans of Paradip PCPIR, Odisha and 
Visakhapatnam – Kakinada PCPIR, Andhra Pradesh are in process. Master Plan 
activity for the PCPIR in Tamil Nadu would be initiated by the State government after 
notification of PCPIR and formation of the Management Board. The Committee in this 
regard recommend that the Master Plans for Paradip PCPIR, Visakhapatnam – 
Kakinada PCPIR and Cuddalore – Nagapattinam PCPIRs may be finalized 
expeditiously in a time bound manner." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 12(a) “As has been intimated by the concerned PCPIR implementing States, the Draft 
Master Plan for Andhra Pradesh PCPIR was published on 5.8.2013 and the Final 
Master Plan was prepared duly addressing the objections/suggestions received from 
the public and were submitted to the Municipal Administration & Urban Development 
Department of Government of And hra Pradesh on 23.5.2014 for approval. The 
Municipal Administration & Urban Development Department has called for objections 
from the public and has advised the PCPIR Special Development Authority (SDA) to 
examine these objections and to resubmit the Maste r Plan duly incorporating the 
revisions. Final incorporation of suggestions and objections to the Draft Master Plan is 
in progress. Once the Anchor unit is finalized, based on its location, size and 
configuration, Master Plan would be finalized. 
 In case o f Odisha PCPIR (Paradeep), draft Master Plan was prepared in 2010 
indicating the tentative zoning plans and the associated expenses. Agencies for 
undertaking detailed Master Planning & Zoning Plans for the region; water 
assessment study for the region and development of road from Bhubaneswar to 
Paradeep PCPIR have also been engaged. DPR, comprehensive master plan and zonal 
plan are underway through these consultant / agencies and expected to be completed 
by October, 2017. 
 As regards Tamil Nadu PCPIR, the Master Plan will be prepared by the Local Planning 
Authority that is to be constituted under the Tamil Nadu Town and Country Planning 
Act, 1971. Draft Master Plan is likely to complete by June 2017. 
 The Department has requested Governments of Andhra Prades h, Odisha and Tamil 
Nadu to finalize the Master Plans of PCPIRs in a time bound manner." 
 
 (b)  The Department has assured the Committee that safeguards relating to the 
Environment and Chemical hazards will not be compromised, but concrete action 
would be taken to ensure the same. The Committee noted that the environmental 
clearance with regard to the Dahej PCPIR is in its final stages but the Coastal 
Regulatory Zone recommendations are still awaited as the CRZ Committee have not 

6 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
yet been constituted by the  State Government. The Committee were informed that 
concerns relating to air and water pollution are being taken care of by the companies 
concerned established in the region who have their own standards or by the Common 
Effluent treatment Plant (CETP). As regards Andhra Pradesh PCPIR, the Committee 
observed with concern that the public hearing regarding the Andhra Pradesh 
Pollution Control Board through the district authorities of two districts i.e. 
Visakhapatnam and East Godavari (Kakinada). The Committee were given to 
understand that once the anchor unit is finalized and accordingly the public hearing 
will be conducted. Regarding Odisha PCPIR, the Department has informed that the 
Industrial Development Corporation of Odisha, Government of Odisha has taken up 
with Environmental Protection Training and Research Institute to carry out detailed 
Environmental Impact Assessment and Environment Management Plan. Further, 
during the evidence it was also informed that environment clearance is in the final 
stages and is with the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change for 
clearance. 
 
 The Department has accepted that chemical industries are very polluting industries.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that there should not be any compromises or laxity 
on the  safety safeguards as far as environmental pollution is concerned.  The 
Committee are happy to note the positive developments for environment clearances 
relating to the Dahej PCPIR. As regards the constitution of CRZ Committee, the 
Committee recommend the D epartment to take up the matter with the State 
Government of Gujarat vigorously to expedite its recommendations. The Committee 
further desire that the Department/State Government should not leave the question 
of enforcing strict environmental cleanliness s tandards on the investors and 
companies alone. There should be a strict oversight mechanism so that the 
environment and public health do not suffer because of the project. The Committee 
observe that Environment Impact Assessment studies of Paradip PCPIR an d 
Visakhapatnam-Kakinada PCPIR are at different stages and in respect of  Tamil Nadu 
PCPIR, EIA is yet to be undertaken. The Committee feel that Environmental Clearance 
is the main issue in the Master Plan and as such cannot be isolated from the Master 
Plan. The success of a PCPIR project depends upon the expeditious environmental 
clearance. The Committee, therefore, recommend that t he Department should actively 
coordinate with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Central 
Pollution Control Board and the concerned State Pollution Control Boards to ensure 
that environmental safeguards do not suffer due to inter -Ministry and inter -Agency 
wrangles or duplication of functions and that  environmental safety is not 
compromised in anyway. While app reciating the efforts made in respect of Paradip 
PCPIR and Visakhapatnam-Kakinada PCPIR, the Committee recommend that synergic 
efforts should be made to settle the issue of environmental clearance in a time bound 
manner. The Committee also recommend that t he Department must ensure that the 
Tamil Nadu PCPIR should not lag behind on this crucial issue.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
 12(b)  "The underlying concept of PCPIR is to promote petroleum, chemical and 
petrochemical industries in an integrated and enviro nmental friendly manner, where 
in environmental safety & safe guards are not to be comprised. The Governments of 
Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat have been requested to ensure that 
environmental safety is not compromised while implementing PC PIRs. As regards, 
Environmental clearance, Governments of Andhra Pradesh has intimated that the 
draft EIA report was submitted to the Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Broad 
(APPCB) on 03.11.2014. The public hearing is to be taken up by the APPCB through 
District Authorities of two Districts Visakhapatnam and East Godavari (Kakindada). 

7 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
Whereas Government of Odisha has engaged Environmental Protection Training and 
Research Institute (EPTRI) for undertaking the study for the project and the 
environmental clearance is expected to be obtained by October, 2017.  
 
 The State Governments have been requested to expedite the EIA study and get the 
clearance from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC). 
They have also been requested to follow the  safety standards meticulously so that the 
environment and public health do not suffer because of the project. The Steering 
Committee on PCPIR monitors the progress of PCPIRs and a representative from the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has been included in the 
Committee." 
 
 (c)  For addressing any event of disaster or natural calamity occurring in any of the 
PCPIR zones, the Committee further recommend that the Department and the 
investing companies should prepare a Disaster management p lan as part of the 
Master Plan. There should be a rigorous oversight mechanism in the Master Plan so 
that public health and marine life is not endangered at the time of disasters. The need 
for a good disaster management plan is highlighted by the “Thane” cyclone that hit the 
Tamil Nadu PCPIR project by about five years now. Since the PCPIRS are situated in 
the coastal areas, they are susceptible to cyclones, floods, tsunami, etc. The Committee 
desire the Department to take expeditious necessary measures in this regard and 
establish the Disaster management Plan as part of the Master Plan. Further, the 
Committee desire that the detailed plan, including the composition and power, for the 
National Chemical Safety Board, which is an institution to be set up for t he purpose as 
part of the proposed National Chemical Policy may be finalized at the earliest. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 12(c)  "The State Governments of the PCPIR States have confirmed inclusion of 
Disaster Management Plan in the Master Plan of respective PCPIR, keeping in view the 
vulnerable & environment sensitive location of PCPIRs in coastal areas.  The 
Department is in the pr ocess of preparation of “National Chemical Policy”, which, 
inter-alia, include setting up of National Chemical Safety Council. The Draft Cabinet 
Note on ‘National Chemical Policy’ was circulated to D/o Expenditure (M/o Finance), 
NITI Aayog and PMO for their comments. The comments / views received under inter-
departmental consultation are under examination in the Department." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
13.  (a)  In their Report, the Committee had recommended that  the Master Plans 
of all the four PCPIRs be finalized expeditiously in a time-bound manner.  
 In reply to the above recommendation, the Department has stated that with 
regard to the Andhra Pradesh PCPIR, the final incorporation of suggestions and 
objections to the Draft Master Plan is in progress. O nce the Anchor unit is finalized, 
based on its location, size and configuration, Master Plan would be finalized. 
Regarding Odisha PCPIR, the Detailed Project Report (DP R), comprehensive Master 
Plan and zonal plan are underway and these are expected to be c ompleted by 

8 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
October, 2017.  As for Tamil Nadu PCPIR, the draft Master Plan is likely to be 
completed by June 2017.  
 In light of the above, the Committee desire that no efforts be spared to achieve 
the targets within the stipulated time -lines. The Committee are, however, distressed 
to note that the anchor tenant for the Andhra Pradesh PCPIR has not been finalized 
so far and recommend that expeditious action be taken on the matter so as to quickly 
finalize the same. The progress made with regard to finalizati on of the Master Plans 
of the three PCPIRs as stated above, or problems encountered, if any, may be 
intimated to the Committee at the time of furnishing  the Action Taken Statements by 
the Department.  
(b)  In their Report, the Committee categorically state d that the re should not be 
any compromise  or laxity as far as environmental safeguards are concerned. The 
Committee accordingly recommended that there should be a strict oversight 
mechanism for possible environmental lapses and that  the Department should 
actively coordinate with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, 
Central Pollution Control Board and the concerned State Pollution Control Boards to 
ensure that environmental safeguards do not suffer due to inter - Ministry and inter -
Agency w rangles or duplication of functions and that environmental safety is not 
comprised in anyway. 
 In its Action Taken Reply ( ATR), the Department has stated that it had 
requested the Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat to 
ensure that  environmental safety is not compromised while implementing PCPIRs . 
The Department had also requested these four State Governments to expedite the 
EIA study and get the clearance from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change (MoEFCC). Further , a representative from the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change has been included in the Steering Committee on PCPIR 
which monitors the progress of PCPIRs.  
 The Committee observe that while there are some visible actions by the 
Andhra Prade sh and Odisha Governments with regard to getting environmental 
clearances, no such actions taken by the Governments of Gujarat and Tamil Nadu 
have been highlighted by the Department in its ATR. In light of the above, the 
Committee reiterate their recommend ation on the absolute need to adhere to all 
environmental safety standards and to work actively with the State Governments, 
Anchor Tenants and other concerned Ministries like  the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) to ensure the sa me. The Committee therefore 

9 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
desire to be apprised of the progress made with regard to environmental clearances, 
in-house effluent treatment plants, etc. for all the four PCPIRs in detail at the earliest.  
(c)  The Committee had further recommended that the  Department and the 
investing companies should prepare a Disaster management plan as part of the 
Master Plan with a view to addressing any event of disaster or natural calamity 
occurring in any of the PCPIR zones. In its ATR, the Department had stated that all the 
PCPIR States have confirmed inclusion of Disaster Management Plan in the Master 
Plan of respective PCPIR, keeping in view the vulnerable and environment sensitive 
location of PCPIRs in coastal areas.  Howe ver, the Department had informed that it is 
still examining inputs regarding the draft National Chemical Policy (NCP), which, 
inter alia, includes the idea of setting up the National Chemical Safety Council (NCSC).  
 The Committee are dismayed to note that  the Department is still examining 
the inputs regarding the National Chemical Policy which is a prerequisite for setting 
up the National Chemical Safety Council. In view of the above, the Committee desire 
that the Department should expedite the process of preparation of the National 
Chemical Policy (NCP) and finalize the same at the earliest. The progress made in this 
regard may be communicated to the Committee at the time of furnishing the Action 
Taken Statements by the Department.   
  
D.  Issues relating to implementation of PCPIR projects.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
 
14.  Regarding the issues affecting the implementation of each of the PCPIR projects , the 
Committee's recommendations and the Government's replies have been reproduced as 
under:-  
 “Gujarat PCPIR: 
The Committee noted that regarding Dahej PCPIR in Gujarat, the Development Plan or 
Master Plan of Dahej PCPIR has been sanctioned in September, 2012 and town 
planning schemes are being implemented. Environmental clearances are at their final 
stages. Processes of rehabilitation and compensation of the affected people are going 
well. The Committee hope that all components of the project of Dahej PCPIR will be 
completed soon and recommend that the Department should coordinate with the 
State Government a nd the anchor tenant so that the PCPIR may be completed as per 
schedule." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 (15(a) "The implementation on Dahej PCPIR is progressing well with sanctioning of 
Development Plan and progressive approval of Town Planning schemes. The f inal 
Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) report for Dahej PCPIR has been uploaded on 
MoEF website in September 2015.  The comprehensive component -wise status report 

10 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
is awaited from the Government of Gujarat and the Dahej PCPIR Anchor Tenant, 
OPAL. 
 
 Odisha PCPIR: 
 
As for the Paradip PC PIR in Odisha, the Committee observed that commissioning of 
the refinery at Paradip  has started and Polypropylene plant will be commissioned in 
2017. According to the Department, one problem encountered is that Naphtha is not 
available for cracking and no commitment to set up Naphtha cracker can be made at 
present. In future gas and othe r options may be explored. Currently there is no 
availability of Natural Gas in Paradip. The Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (IOCL) which is 
the Anchor Tenant in Paradip, is making modifications to make propylene from the 
Fluidized Catalytic Cracking (FCC) unit  which will be converted into Polypropylene 
and can be utilized in the proposed Plastic Park In the same PCPIR location. The 
Department further stated that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, had 
informed that currently IOCL is having difficulty in putting up of Naphtha cracker at 
Paradip.  
 
In light of the above, the Committee recommend that the Department should sort out 
the problems relating to feedstock non -availability at Paradip  PCPIR in coordination 
with the Anchor Tenant and the State Government at the earliest. The Committee are 
concerned that problems such as stated above were not recognized earlier by the 
Department. Given the huge importance of the project for the overall d evelopment of 
the Paradip region, it is essential that all problems are sorted out and the project 
commissioned as per schedule. The Committee desire to be apprised of the measures 
taken in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 15(b)   In order to facili tate availability of feed stock for petrochemical complex, LNG 
import by IOCL through Dhamra port is being planned. In addition, a bi -directional 
gas pipeline from Surat to Paradeep is being implemented by GAIL. The Anchor unit of 
IOCL is preparing downstr eam petrochemical units based on the products of the 
refinery in addition to polypropylene e.g. MEG, Paraxylene etc. Subject to Techno 
Commercial feasibility. 
 
 Andhra Pradesh PCPIR: 
 
The Committee is distressed and displeased to note that the Andhra Prade sh PCPIR, 
which was approved in February 2009 is not progressing well. The Department has 
informed that the Anchor Tenant, Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd (HPCL)’s 
greenfield project to establish a refinery could not materialize due to lack of feasibility 
and that they are in the process of taking up the feasibility study for establishing 
petrochemical complex without a refinery. The Department stated that feasibility 
study for anchor unit is expected to be completed by June 2016 and then it would be 
placed before the Board of HPCL and Gas Authority of India Ltd (GAIL) for approval. 
After approval, HPCL has informed that the construction of Anchor unit will take four 
years from commencement of the work. 
 
The Committee are of the opinion that the Departme nt had not put in concrete efforts 
to accelerate the process. Since the Anchor client is not finalized, the rest of the 
process, viz. master plan, environmental study, public hearing, etc. cannot be 
concluded. 

11 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
 
 The Committee therefore strongly recommend t hat the Central Government should 
take immediate steps to promote the project as it is meant to lead to the development 
of the region and give employment to lakhs of people. The Committee desire that the 
Department should monitor the progress of the project constantly and ensure that the 
feasibility study of the anchor unit is completed by 2016 without any further time and 
cost overruns.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 15(c)  HPCL, GAIL and Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP ) are in process of 
setting up of imported Ethane based Petrochemical complex without a refinery in 
Andhra Pradesh PCPIR. The likely location of the complex is Kakinada, however, 
formal decision of GoAP is awaited. GAIL and HPCL have started the process fo r 
feasibility study. The proposed complex would be either gas based or dual feed (Gas + 
Naphtha). In the past, project configuration for anchor units were finalized by the 
anchor tenants, without considering the requirements of downstream industries. In 
order to avoid the same situation in AP PCPIR, the promoters organized a workshop 
to collate the views / expectations of Industries before finalizing the configuration for 
the proposed petrochemical complex in AP PCPIR. The concurrent development of 
downstream industries would lead to substantial investment and employment 
generation in the region. The configuration of the proposed petrochemical complex 
and the feasibility study shall be completed expeditiously, after completion of this 
consultation process wi th prospective downstream partners / industries.  The 
Department is actively involved in the process. 
 
 Tamil Nadu PCPIR: 
 
The Committee are distressed to note that not much progress have been made with 
regard to Tamil Nadu PCPIR which was approved way back in July 2012. The 
Department has informed that the construction works of the project were disrupted 
by “Thane” cyclone in December 2011. Only preservation work is going on since then. 
Restart of the construction work of NOCL’s refinery is expected only in early 2016. 
The Phase-1 of the project is to be commissioned in 2017 -18 and Phase -2 which has 
the full capacity of 12 mil lion tonnes per year is to be commissioned in 2019. As of 
now, the PCPIR area has not been notified and the PCPIR Management Board is yet to 
be constituted. Further, the Master Plan is yet to be prepared and the Environmental 
Impact Assessment is yet to be undertaken. 
 
The Committee therefore desire that the Department should actively coordinate with 
the State Government of Tamil Nadu and the anchor tenant, viz. Nagarjuna Oil 
Corporation Ltd (NOCL) so that the project is commissioned as scheduled by 2017 -18. 
Further, given that the onus of notifying the PCPIR area, constitution of the PCPIR 
Management Board, etc. lies with the State Government, the Department should 
proactively pursue the matter with the State Government so that no further delay 
occurs.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 15(d)  The Tamil Nadu PCPIR has been notified in January, 2016 vide Tamil Nadu 
Govt. Gazette Notifications dated 13.01.2016.  As informed by the State Government, 
the Management Board will be constituted for the TNPCPIR shortly, aft er constitution 
of the Local Planning Authority by the State Govt. 

12 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
 
 Concluding remarks: 
 
The Committee observe from the status of implementation of the four PCPIRs 
mentioned in the preceding paragraphs that the level of progress for the four PCPIRs 
is qui te uneven. There are problems and challenges specific to the location, etc. 
However, a proper coordination by the Department through a strong oversight 
mechanism at the Centre and State level will accelerate the progress of the PCPIRs. 
The Committee desire that the Department may take necessary measures toward this 
end. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 15(e)  The Steering Committee at the Centre and the Management Boards at the State 
level are monitoring and coordinating the progress and implementation of the PCP IR 
projects. The latest meeting of the Steering Committee to review implementation of 
PCPIR Policy in the present form and interventions required to make the PCPIRs 
successful was held on 17.06.2016. In the meeting, all these relevant issues were 
discussed and detailed review of the progress of the implementation of PCPIRs was 
undertaken.  The states have been advised to take proactive & collated action, in 
concert with Anchor Tenants, to accelerate the progress of the PCPIRs.  
   
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
16.  (a)  Regarding Dahej  PCPIR, the Committee had recommended that the 
Department should coordinate with the State Government and the anchor tenant so 
that the PCPIR may be completed as per schedule. In its ATR, the Department had 
stated that the implementation of Dahej PCPIR is progressing well but the 
comprehensive component -wise status report is awaited from the Government of 
Gujarat and the Dahej PCPIR Anchor Tenant, OPAL.  
 In this regard, the Committee are disappointed that the comprehensive 
component-wise status report of the Dahej PCPIR is still awaited . The Committee 
note that as per the schedule provided by the Department  in the original Report of 
the Committee, the Anchor project was sched uled to be commissioned by the first 
quarter of 2016. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
for completion of all the aspects of the Dahej PCPIR as per schedule and desire the 
Department to intimate them about the progress in this regard.  
 
(b)  Regarding the problems encountered at the Paradip PCPIR because of the non -
availability of feedstock, the Committee had recommended that the Department 
should sort out the problems in coordination with the Anchor Tenant and the State 
Government at the earliest  and commission the Project as per schedule. In its ATR, 
the Department had stated that various steps have been taken to ensure availability 

13 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
of feed stock for petrochemical complex, including by planning to import LNG 
through Dhamra  port by IOCL. Further, the Department had informed that a bi -
directional gas pipeline from Surat to Paradip is being implemented by GAIL.  
In this regard, the Committee note with concern that though the Department is taking 
steps to ensure the availabilit y of feedstock at Paradip PCPIR , but these are still at 
planning stage .  T he Committee therefore desire that the Department may 
proactively monitor implementation of availability of feedstock and inform the 
Committee of the progress made at the earliest.  
 
(c)  In their Report, the Committee came down very hard on the Department for 
lapses regarding the Visakhapatnam -Kakinada PCPIR and observed that since the 
Anchor client is not finalized, the rest of the process, viz. master plan, environmental 
study, pub lic hearing, etc. cannot be concluded.  The Committee had strongly 
recommended that the Government should take concrete steps to promote the 
project and monitor the progress of the project constantly and ensure that the 
feasibility study of the anchor unit is completed by 2016 without any further time 
and cost overruns. In its ATR, the Department had stated that the HPCL, GAIL and 
Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) are in the process of setting up of imported 
Ethane based Petrochemical complex without a ref inery in Andhra Pradesh PCPIR at 
Kakinada. Feasibility studies for the same have already started and assured that the 
Department is actively involved in the process.  
 In this regard, the Committee note that the Government of Andhra Pradesh is 
yet to take a decision on the location of the planned petrochemicals complex. The 
Complex will be without refinery and the feasibility  study is ongoing. The Committee 
are distressed that there are still so many issues to be resolved to make the Andhra 
Pradesh PCPIR a reality. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department 
should actively oversee the project and intimate the Committee of the progress made 
in that regard.  
 
(d)  In their Report, the Committee note that Phase -1 of the Cuddalore -
Nagapattinam PCPIR pr oject is to be commissioned only in 2017 -18 and Phase -2 
which has the full capacity of 12 million tonnes per year is to be co mmissioned in 
2019. The PCPIR area had  not been notified a nd the PCPIR Management Board was  
yet to be constituted.  Taking a serious  view of the matter, the Committee had 
recommended that the Department should actively coordinate with the State 
Government of Tamil Nadu and the anchor tenant, viz. Nagarjuna Oil Corporation Ltd 
(NOCL) so that the project is commissioned as scheduled by 2017-18.  

14 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
 In its ATR, the Department had informed that the  Tamil Nadu PCPIR had 
already been notified in January, 2016  and that the Management Board will be 
constituted shortly, after constitution of the Local Plann ing Authority by the State 
Government.  
 In this regard, the Committee are of the view that to make the Tamil Nadu 
PCPIR a success, time-bound deadlines may be set and every effort should be made to 
adhere to them. The Committee therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation  
that maximum visib le efforts must be made to ensure that the project is 
commissioned as per schedule by 2017 -18. The Committee desire to be apprised of 
all actions taken  toward this end.  
 
(e)  The Committee had lastly observed that the level of progress of the four 
PCPIRs is quite uneven and emphasized the need for a strong oversight mechanism at 
the Centre and State levels to accelerate the progress of each of the PCPIRs. In its 
ATR, the Department had stated that the Steering Committee at the Centre and t he 
Management Boards at the State level are monitoring and coordinating the progress 
and implementation of the PCPIR projects. The Department had also informed that 
the states have been advised to take proactive and collated action, in concert with 
Anchor Tenants, to accelerate the progress of the PCPIRs. 
 The Committee appreciate  the role of the Department in coordinating all 
activities relating to PCPIRs and note that the projects are  implemented at the State 
level. The Committee are of the view that the PCPIRs planned in different parts of the 
Country will contribute to the growth of the industry and therefore, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should work in close coordination with the Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas at the central lev el and State Governments at the 
regional level towards making these flagship projects successful.   
 
E.  Review of policy on PCPIRs.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
 
17.  Noting that the Government is proposing a review of the PCPIR policy ,  the 
Committee had recommended as under:-   
 “The Committee noted that the Government is proposing a review of the PCPIR 
policy. One idea is to reduce the size of PCPIRs from the existing 250 sq. Kms  to 50 
square kilometers depending upon the utility area. Second, there should be a single 
window clearance where all the statutory authorities should have participation both 
from the Government of India, State Governments and the local Governments. That 

15 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
will allow industrialists to take clearance only from one body. The Department has 
informed that on both these issues, the Committee of Secretaries has already agreed 
to the proposal. 
 
In this regard, the Committee is of the opinion that the prescribed size  of the PCPIR 
area need to be made flexible. If the prescribed size of the PCPIRs is reduced to 50 sq. 
kms, the size of investments required and infrastructural needs will also accordingly 
come down and that will allow smaller companies also to take part. More States may 
also be able to join the concept. The Committee desire that the Department may take 
proactive action to finalize and implement these measures. 
 
Regarding the proposal for Single Window Clearance, the Committee are skeptical 
about the feasib ility of the idea as PCPIRs encompass such a huge variety of issues 
ranging from environmental clearances, feedstock issues, infrastructure, marketing, 
etc. However, the Committee desire that the Department may explore various options 
toward this end on pr iority. Decisions taken in this regard may be communicated to 
the Committee at the earliest." 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
18.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 “The proposal to reduce the prescribed size of PCPIR area in special cases from 250 
sq. km to 50 sq. km has been incorporated in the amendments proposed in the PCPIR 
Policy. The Central Government may relax the condition of land requirement in 
special cases based on the factors of population density, environmental constraints, 
fertile agricultural land and contiguity of area. In no case the minimum land shall be 
less than 50 sq. km. with 40 % (i.e. 20 sq.km.) of processing area. 
 Single Window Clearance Mecha nism at State level would help and facilitate the 
industries in investment and management of PCPIRs. Government of  Odisha has also 
intimated that Single Window Clearance mechanism is followed in Odisha PCPIR. The 
other State Governments have been requested  to implement the Single Window 
Clearance Mechanism at the earliest." 
   
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
19.  In their recommendation, the Committee had supported the Department's 
proposal to reduce the prescribed size of PCPIRs from the existing 250 sq. Kms  to 50 
square kilometers depending upon the utility area. The Committee had, however, 
expressed skepticism about the Department's proposal for Single Window Clearance, 
given that the idea of PCPIR encompasses such a huge variety of issues. In its ATR, the 
Department  had stated that the proposal to reduce the prescribed size of PCPIR area 
in special cases from 250 sq. km to 50 sq. km has already been incorporated in the 
amendments proposed in the PCPIR Policy 2007. Regarding the idea of Single 
Window Cleara nce, the Department had indicated that the idea is feasible and that 
the same has already  been implemented in the case of Odisha PCPIR and other 
PCPIRs were instructed to follow the same.  

16 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
In view of the above, the Committee hope that these amendments wil l be 
implemented soon and they will yield positive results for the PCPIR projects. The 
Committee desire to be apprised of the latest status of the above proposed 
amendments to the PCPIR Policy during the time of furnishing Action Taken 
Statement by the Department.  
 
F.  Promotional activities relating to PCPIRs  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
 
20.  Expressing the need to step up promotional activities of PCPIRs to attract more 
investors from the private sector, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
  “The Committee observe that for the promotion of PCPIRs there should be enough 
publicity so that more investors specially the private firms are interested to invest in 
the PCPIR. The Department in this regard stated that PCPIRs are being marketed and 
publicized both at the domestic and international level along with the State 
Governments, Anchor tenants and industrial bodies through industry interactions, 
road shows, exhibitions, seminars, conferences etc. The Committee also note that the 
Department and other ag encies are taking steps to promote PCPIRs on large scale 
through Newspaper Advertisements, Presentations, brochures and other marketing 
material. 
 
However, while Dahej PCPIR, Gujarat and Paradip PCPIR, Odisha have organized 
various promotional activities and road – shows to market and promote PCPIRs, there 
seems to be no such specific promotional activities taken up by the Visakhapatnam – 
Kakinada PCPIR, Andhra Pradesh and Cuddalore – Nagapattinam PCPIR, Tamil Nadu. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that  the Department and the state 
Governments should step up the promotional activities and also more innovative 
measures should be taken up to promote PCPIRs projects to attract more investors 
from international and local industrial firms. The Department shou ld pay special 
attention to Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu PCPIRs in this regard so that there is no 
laxity on their part to promote the PCPIRs. 
 
The Committee would like to be informed about the steps taken in this regard."  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
21.  In its action taken  reply to the aforesaid recommendation, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 “The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals takes up various activities to 
promote and attract investments in the PCPIRs, as under:  
 Updated status of implementation of PCPIRs is uploaded on the Departmental 
website. 
 . 
 Department organizes events like P olyIndia, India Chem wherein PCPIR Policy is 
publicized.  
 PCPIR Policy is also promoted through bilateral forums, participation in International 
Conferences like K-Fair, Chinaplas and Plastivision Arabia.  

17 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
Promotion of PCPIR Policy is also undertaken at the State level such as: 
 Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) of the Odisha PCPIR is conducting various activities like 
road shows, participation in industry fairs / seminars etc. 
 Global Investors Meet was conducted by the Tamil Nadu Govt. in September, 2015 in 
which more than 3000 delegates participated seminars were conducted on key 
infrastructure projects in the state, including the TN PCPIR. 
 Road shows were conducted by the Tamil Nadu Govt. in state capitals to promote 
major infrastructure projects of the state, including the TN PCPIR. 
 ‘Vision Tamil Nadu – 2023’ document was released by Chief Minister, Tamil Nadu, in 
which PCPIR is identified as one of the key projects. 
 Interactive workshops / seminars by the respective State Governments to promote 
investment by downstream industries in PCPIR zones."   
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
22.  In their Report, t he Committee had noted that while Dahej PCPIR, Gujarat and 
Paradip PCPIR, Odisha  have organized various promotional activities and road – 
shows to market and promote PCPIRs, there seems to be no such specific promotional 
activities taken up by the Visakhapatnam – Kakinada PCPIR, Andhra Pradesh and 
Cuddalore – Nagapattinam PCPIR, Tamil  Nadu. Accordingly, the Committee had 
recommended that the Department and the state Governments should step up the 
promotional activities with more innovative measures so as to attract more investors 
from international and local industrial firms. The Committee further asked the 
Department to pay special attention to Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu PCPIRs. In its 
ATR, the Department listed the various events organized and other initiatives it had 
taken to promote PCPIRs at the Central and State levels . However, it did not mention 
any promotional activities being undertaken with regard to Andhra Pradesh PCPIR. 
Therefore, the Committee, while reiterating their earlier recommendation for 
stepping up promotional activities for the PCPIR project s, desire th at the Department 
should work in close liaison with the concerned State Governments and other 
stakeholders, especially the Government of Andhra Pradesh, to promote and advertise 
the PCPIR projects so that the projects may generate e nough investments from t he 
private corporations and investors.  
  

18 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
MONITORING 
The Committee noted that at the Central level a Monitoring Committee headed by 
Secretary (Chemicals and Petrochemicals) used to monitor the progress of 
implementation of PCPIR periodically prior to 2014. The Committee were further 
informed that in the meeting called by Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers to review 
the progress of PCPIR on 10 .07.2014, it was decided to constitute Steering Committee 
for PCPIR project under the chairmanship of Secretary (Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) in order to expedite the implementation of PCPIRs. The Steering 
Committee, consisting of representatives from con cerned central Ministries, State 
Governments and Anchor Tenants have so far held seven meetings. Further, as per 
PCPIR policy at the State level, a Management Board would monitor the project. 
In this regard, the Committee are  of the opinion that proper coo rdination of the 
PCPIRs at the Central and State level is lacking. Under the present arrangement, there 
seem to be no rules regarding the frequency of the sit ting of the Steering Committee. 
The wide disparities relating to implementation of the four PCPIRs  is reflective of this 
lack of coordination at the Central and State levels. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should review the monitoring mechanism followed 
for implementation of PCPIRs and ensure proper coordination amongst the Anch or 
Tenants, State Government and the Center so that issues can be sorted out 
expeditiously. The Committee further urges that while expediting the establishment 
of Management Board in each PCPIR, the Department may also explore the feasibility 
of setting up Management Boards for each PCPIR both at the Center and State level so 
that the implementation of the projects can be further accelerated. The Committee 
expects to be apprised of action taken in this regard.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 There are provisions incorporated in the PCPIR Policies, 2007 for proper Monitoring 
of implementation of PCPIR.  The implementation of all PCPIRs is monitored regularly 
by the PCPIR Steering Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, C&PC. The 
Committee also examines the PCPIR Policy and its implementation in the present 
form and to recommend interventions / actions required to be taken to make the 
PCPIRs successful. The disparities relating to implementation of the four PCPIRs is 
mainly because of indu strial status of these areas at the time of approval, according 
the approvals in different years and state specific issues relating to Master Planning & 
Environmental Impact Assessment Studies.  
 As regards setting up of a Management Body at Center level i s concerned, it intimated 
that a management body constituted by the State Government for each PCPIR, under 
the relevant legislation, is responsible for the development and management of the 
PCPIR. The Management Board is also empowered to issue/expedite st ate level 
approvals. To facilitate transparent and smooth development and implementation of 
PCPIRs, Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) is to be created by the Management Board of 
each PCPIR. All the tasks are related to the State level functions and are perform ed by 
the Management Board at State level. Therefore, having a Management Board at 
Central level may not be feasible. 

19 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 25017/6/2015-PCPIR DATED 13.07.2016 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
 FEEDSTOCK FOR DOWNSTREAM COMPANIES FOR PCPIRs 
The Committee were given to understand that the anchor tenants of the PCPIR 
projects, or the refineries, are willing to give only the granules, or dana  in the market, 
but they are not willing to give the feedstock in liquid and gaseous form, saying that 
doing so will lead to losses for them. On the other hand, the Department has informed 
that the downstream industry is dependent on feedstock that is gase ous and liquid in 
form. If the downstream industries are not provided with the feedstock in gaseous 
and liquid form, no downstream industry can ever come up. This is a critical issue 
involving two ministries, viz. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers and the 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. The Department has stated that it is presently 
seized with the matter and that discussions have already been initiated to resolve the 
issue with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. 
The Committee are distressed that this problem was realized at this late stage and not 
earlier when Anchor Tenants were selected. In light of the above, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should take up immediate steps to resolve the 
problem at the earliest so as to e nable PCPIR projects or refineries to provide 
feedstock to downstream industries as per their requirements. The proposal to obtain 
feedstock from outside India to offset domestic scarcity should be expedited. 
Meanwhile, other issues like rates of import du ty, etc. should be examined and 
decisions taken in consultation with all the stakeholders. Measures taken in this 
regard may be intimated to the Committee at the earliest.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The issue of providing feedstock to the downstream industr ies by the Anchor Unit 
(Refinery / Petrochemicals Feedstock Company) was deliberated at the meetings of 
Committee of Secretaries held on 01.05.2015 to consider the proposed amendments 
in the PCPIR Policy, 2007.  In the meeting, it was agreed that Departmen t of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals and M/o of Petroleum and Natural Gas will finalize 
modalities for provision / reservation of building blocks / feedstock for downstream 
industry by Anchor Tenants. Accordingly, the Department held detailed discussion 
with the units concerned and representatives from relevant industry to discuss and 
finalize the modalities for provision / reservation of building blocks / feedstock for 
downstream industry by Anchor Tenants on 10.8.2015.  After detailed deliberations, a 
Technical working Group (TWG) was constituted to discuss and finalize / recommend 
the modalities. Based on the recommendations received from the TWG, following 
provisions have been incorporated in the proposed amendment of the PCPIR policy, 
2007 for making provision / reservation of building blocks by Anchor Tenants: 
 Reservation of Building Blocks for downstream by Anchor Tenants in new PCPIRs. 
 State Govt. to identify Anchor Tenant and coordinate finalisation of product profile 
and project configuration including the setup of downstream industry. 
 Reservation of minimum 20% building blocks for downstream by Anchor Tenants in 
new PCPIRs. 
 Agreement with explicit commitments and responsibilities of each of the parties to be 
signed by State Govt., Anchor Tenants and downstream units. 

20 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
 The existing Anchor Tenants would also explore providing feedstock / building blocks 
to downstream units based on the business model agreed with these units in order to 
promote value addition and ensure maximum realization of the petrochem ical value 
chain.  As mentioned in reply to Recommendation no. 5 above, the Greenfield Anchor 
unit promoters in AP PCPIR are exploring requirement of downstream industry 
before finalization of configuration of the petrochemical complex.  
  MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 25017/6/2015-PCPIR DATED 13.07.2016 
  
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
EMPLOYMENT 
The Committee observed that the PCPIR projects are the most ambitious projects ever 
undertaken under the aegis of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. They 
involve monetary investments in terms of thousands of crores of rupees. The four 
PCPIR pr ojects already approved, vis. Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and Tamil 
Nadu are together envisaged to provide direct and indirect employment opportunities 
to 33,96000 people. Therefore, the success of these projects is of vital importance for 
the country’s development as whole. 
As per the Department, till now, 1,28,000 people have found employment (both direct 
and indirect) in the Gujarat PCPIR, 37,960 people in Odisha PCPIR, 29,420 in Andhra 
Pradesh PCPIR and 13,950 people in Tamil Nadu PCPIR. The Committ ee is given to 
understand that on completion, the Dahej PCPIR will give employment to 8 lakh 
people. While appreciating the progress made in the Gujarat PCPIR, the Committee 
hope that other PCPIR would also generate employment on the lines of Gujarat PCPIR. 
In this regard, the Committee desire that local people be given preference for 
employment in the PCPIR projects. In areas where technical knowledge is required, 
the Department may undertake skills training programmes in coordination with the 
State Govern ment and Anchor Tenants as done in Dahej PCPIR. Action taken in this 
regard may be communicated to the Committee at the earliest.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The State Governments have informed that the local people are given preference for 
employment in PCPIR projects in the four PCPIR states. The Department provides the 
Skill Development Training to the people through Central Institute of Plastics 
Engineering & technology (CIPET) Training centers in all the four PCPIR states. CIPET 
has centers in the follow ing cities – Ahmedabad & Valsad (Gujarat), Bhubaneshwar & 
Balasore (Odisha), Hyderabad & Vijayawada (Andhra Pradesh), Chennai & Madurai 
(Tamil Nadu) to technically equip local people for downstream plastic processing 
industries.  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 25017/6/2015-PCPIR DATED 13.07.2016 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
COMPENSATION AND WELFARE 

21 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
The Committee are pleased to observe that displacement of people is at the minimal 
level in some PCPIR projects  as the project can co -exist with existing settlements. As 
for Paradip PCPIR, the Department had informed that the displacement anticipated 
during the land acquisition in the area for Phase – I of the Processing Area would be 
around 105 families. The actua l displacement details shall be ascertained after detail 
socio-economic survey of the area is made.  
In this regard, the Committee desire that the actual displacement details of people 
affected by all the PCPIR project be ascertained at the earliest and ad equate 
compensation and rehabilitation accorded to them. The Committee express their 
satisfaction over the fact that land aggregation policy and welfare measures adopted 
by Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation (GIDC) had been quite successful with 
minimum number of complaints and 90 percent of land was acquired through consent 
procedure. The Committee therefore recommend that the successful model of 
rehabilitation and compensation followed in the case of Dahej PCPIR be replicated as 
far as possible in  all the remaining PCPIRs. Action taken in this regard may be 
communicated to the Committee at the earliest. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The State Governments have been requested to ascertain the displacement details of 
people affected by the entire PCPIR pro ject at the earliest and provide adequate 
compensation and rehabilitation to them. The State Governments have also been 
requested to follow the successful model of rehabilitation and compensation followed 
in the case of Dahej PCPIR. 
 As per the information received from the State Government, the Draft Master Plan for 
AP PCPIR is prepared in such a way that the displacement of people is at the minimum 
level. For the existing Industrial areas like Pharma City and AP SEZ at Vizag, 100% 
rehabilitation and compe nsation was accorded. The rehabilitation and compensation 
in the AP PCPIR will be through a similar process.  
 In case of TN PCPIR, the compensation payable to the owners of the land, if and when 
any lands are acquired for the PCPIR will be as per the provisions of the Central Act 30 
of 2013 relating to Determination of Compensation in accordance with the First 
Schedule and Rehabilitation and Resettlement specified in the Second and Third 
Schedules and in accordance with the G O Ms No. 251, Industries (SIPCOT -LA), dated 
31.12.2014 of Government of Tamil Nadu.  
 The exact assessment of displacement during the land ac quisition for Paradip PCPIR 
will be taken up during the socio -impact study under the Environment Clearance 
Study. The compensation and Rehabilitation will be taken up as per the Guidelines of 
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement (LARR) Act, 20 13 and Odisha 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R & R) Policy, 2006. 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 25017/6/2015-PCPIR DATED 13.07.2016 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
 
PROMOTIONAL ACTIVITIES  
The Committee observe that for the promotion of PCPIRs there should be enough 
publicity so that more investors specially the private firms are interested to invest in 
the PCPIR. The Department in this regard stated that PCPIRs are being marketed and 

22 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
publicized both at the domestic and international level along with the State 
Governments, Anchor tenants and industrial bodies through industry interactions, 
road shows, exhibitions, seminars, conferences etc. The Committee also note that the 
Department and othe r agencies are taking steps to promote PCPIRs on large scale 
through Newspaper Advertisements, Presentations, brochures and other marketing 
material. 
However, while Dahej PCPIR, Gujarat and Paradip PCPIR, Odisha have organized 
various promotional activities and road – shows to market and promote PCPIRs, there 
seems to be no such specific promotional activities taken up by the Visakhapatnam – 
Kakinada PCPIR, Andhra Pradesh and Cuddalore – Nagapattinam PCPIR, Tamil Nadu. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend th at the Department and the state 
Governments should step up the promotional activities and also more innovative 
measures should be taken up to promote PCPIRs projects to attract more investors 
from international and local industrial firms. The Department sh ould pay special 
attention to Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu PCPIRs in this regard so that there is no 
laxity on their part to promote the PCPIRs. 
The Committee would like to be informed about the steps taken in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The Dep artment of Chemicals and Petrochemicals takes up various activities to 
promote and attract investments in the PCPIRs, as under:  
 Updated status of implementation of PCPIRs is uploaded on the Departmental 
website. 
 . 
 Department organizes events like PolyIndi a, India Chem wherein PCPIR Policy is 
publicized.  
 PCPIR Policy is also promoted through bilateral forums, participation in International 
Conferences like K-Fair, Chinaplas and Plastivision Arabia.  
Promotion of PCPIR Policy is also undertaken at the State level such as: 
 Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) of the Odisha PCPIR is conducting various activities like 
road shows, participation in industry fairs / seminars etc. 
 Global Investors Meet was conducted by the Tamil Nadu Govt. in September, 2015 in 
which more  than 3000 delegates participated seminars were conducted on key 
infrastructure projects in the state, including the TN PCPIR. 
 Road shows were conducted by the Tamil Nadu Govt. in state capitals to promote 
major infrastructure projects of the state, including the TN PCPIR. 
 ‘Vision Tamil Nadu – 2023’ document was released by Chief Minister, Tamil Nadu, in 
which PCPIR is identified as one of the key projects. 
 Interactive workshops / seminars by the respective State Governments to promote 
investment by downstream industries in PCPIR zones.  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 25017/6/2015-PCPIR DATED 13.07.2016 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)  

23 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
  
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT WANT TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
-- NIL-- 
 
  

24 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
  
--Nil-- 
   
  

25 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
  
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
BUDGETARY PROVISIONS 
 During the course of the examination of the subject the Committee observed that 
there is lack of budgetary support for the PCPIRs by the Central Government and no 
provisions have been made in the Demands for grants specifically for the 
implementation of PC PIRs. The Department in this regard informed the Committee 
that State Government such as Odisha, Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh are seeking some 
kind of financial incentives and handholding in the form of budgetary support from 
the Central Government. When the  Committee enquired about the Viability Gap 
Funding (VGF), the Secretary of the Department of Chemical and Petrochemical stated 
that the 20 percent contribution towards Viability Gap Funding could be diverted as  
budgetary contribution either towards State  Public Sector undertakings (PSUs) or the 
State Government implementing the PCPIR project. Further, the Department has 
stated that a minimum amount of Rs. 1000 crore should be the amount for each PCPIR 
from the Government of India. 
 The Committee therefore , recommended that the required budgetary allocation 
preferably the demand of the minimum of Rs. 1000 crore to take care of 
infrastructure, etc. for each PCPIR should be explored. The Department must take up 
the matter earnestly with the Ministry of Finance for allocation. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken by the Government in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  The Department acknowledges the concern of the Committee to make the PCPIRs 
fully operational. The Department, based on the requests received from PCPIR States, 
has proposed the provision of Budgetary Allocation not exceeding Rs. 1000 Crore for 
each PCPIR  to be made in the proposed amendment in PCPIR Policy 2007, to  take 
care of the requirements of internal infrastructure, Common Utility Infrastructure, 
technical assistance etc in the PCPIRs. This budgetary allocation is in addition to the 
earlier approvals granted by the CCEA for VGF for external linkages, utilities etc. The 
above amendment in the PCPIR Policy has been included in the draft note proposed 
for consideration of Committee of Secretaries (COS). 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 25017/6/2015-PCPIR DATED 13.07.2016 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS (PPP) 
 The Committee observed that there is lack of response from investors to participate in 
the PCPIR projects under the Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. In this regard, 
the Department has stated that the private firm who is a developer or co -developer 

26 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
has to invest large amount of funds beforehand and there is long gestation period 
between the time money would be invested and repayment time for the investors. 
Also the slow creation of infrastructure acts as a disincentive. Therefore, not many 
private firms are interested in investing in projects and many are reluctant to come on 
board. 
 The Committee are deeply concerned about the lack of private funding under the PPP 
mode in the project. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Government of 
India should mull over giving some kind of incentives or concessions may be in terms 
of easing the formalities for these projects and tax concessions, etc. to the private 
forms to invest in the PCPIR projects so that the PCPIRs are developed to its full 
capacity. The Committee hope that the Department will seriously consider these 
issues and come out with a comprehensive plan to address the problem at the earliest. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The Department agrees with the observations of the Committee regarding 
lackadaisical response by private investors in PCPIRs and to give some kind of 
incentives or concessions to the private forms to invest in the PCPIR projects so that 
the PCPIRs are developed to its full capacity. Taking into consideration of these facts/ 
scenario, some incentives to ease the formalities and a proposal for providing tax 
concessions have been included by the Department in the amendments proposed in 
the PCPIR Policy 2007. The proposed amendments for incentives by the Governments, 
Central & State, like on Excise duty, proposed GST, Tax holidays, according priority 
status etc. will go a long way in attracting investors. The amendments proposed in the 
PCPIR Policy 2007 are under consideration of CoS. 
 Government of Odisha has also come up with Industr ial Policy Resolution – 2015 
which identifies the Petroleum, Chemicals & Petrochemicals as the focus sector for the 
next 5 years and the sector has been categorized under the Priority sector for 
extending various incentives to the investors. The developers  / investors would avail 
incentives for land rate concessions, stamp duty exemption, interest subsidy, VAT and 
entry tax reimbursement, green energy subsidy and environmental protection 
infrastructure subsidy, employment cost subsidy etc. 
 The PCPIRs will be able to attract investment from private parties once these 
incentives or concessions are announced for PCPIRs by the Government. 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 25017/6/2015-PCPIR DATED 13.07.2016 
 
    
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
MASTER PLAN, ENVIRONMENTAL CLEARANCE AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
(a) The Committee noted that the Development Plan/ Master Plan of Dahej  PCPIR, 
Gujarat has been sanctioned in September, 2012 and town planning schemes are 
being implemented. The master Plans of Paradip PCPIR, Odisha and Visakhapatnam – 
Kakinada PCPIR, Andhra Pradesh are in process. Master Plan activity for the PCPIR in 

27 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
Tamil Nadu would be initiated by the State government after notification of PCPIR and 
formation of the Management Board. The Committee in this regard recommend that 
the Master Plans for Paradip PCPIR, Visakhapatnam – Kakinada PCPIR and Cuddalore 
– Nagapattinam PCPIRs may be finalized expeditiously in a time bound manner. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 As has been intimated by the concerned PCPIR implementing States, the Draft Master 
Plan for Andhra Pradesh PCPIR was published on 5.8.2013 and the Final Master Plan 
was prepared duly addressing the objections/suggestions received from the public 
and were submitted to the Municipal Administration & Urban Development 
Department of Government of Andhra Pradesh on 23.5.2014 for approval. The 
Municipal Administration & Urban Development Department has called for objections 
from the public and has advised the PCPIR Special Development Authority (SDA) to 
examine these objections and to resubmit the Master Plan duly incorporating the 
revisions. Final incorporation of suggestions and objections to the Draft Master Plan is 
in progress. Once the Anchor unit is finalized, based on its location, size and 
configuration, Master Plan would be finalized. 
 In case of Odisha PCPIR (Paradeep), draft Master Plan was prepared in 2010 
indicating the tentative zoning plans and the associated expenses. Agencies for 
undertaking detailed Master Planning & Zoning Plans for the region; water 
assessment study for the region and development of road from Bhubaneswar to 
Paradeep PCPIR have also been engage d. DPR, comprehensive master plan and zonal 
plan are underway through these consultant / agencies and expected to be completed 
by October, 2017. 
 As regards Tamilnadu  PCPIR, the Master Plan will be prepared by the Local Planning 
Authority that is to be constituted under the Tamil Nadu Town and Country Planning 
Act, 1971. Draft Master Plan is likely to complete by June 2017. 
 The Department has requested Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and Tamil 
Nadu to finalize the Master Plans of PCPIRs in a time bound manner. 
 
(b) The Department has assured the Committee that safeguards relating to the 
Environment and Chemical hazards will not be compromised, but concrete action 
would be taken to ensure the same. The Committee noted that the environmental 
clearance with regard to the Dahej PCPIR is in its final stages but the Coastal 
Regulatory Zone recommendations are still awaited as the CRZ Committee have not 
yet been constituted by the State Government. The Committee were informed that 
concerns relating to air and water pollution are being taken care of by the companies 
concerned established in the region who have their own standards or by the Common 
Effluent treatment Plant (CETP ). As regards Andhra Pradesh PCPIR, the Committee 
observed with concern that the public hearing regarding the Andhra Pradesh 
Pollution Control Board through the district authorities of two districts i.e. 
Visakhapatnam and East Godavari (Kakinada). The Comm ittee were given to 
understand that once the anchor unit is finalized and accordingly the public hearing 
will be conducted. Regarding Odisha PCPIR, the Department has informed that the 
Industrial Development Corporation of Odisha, Government of Odisha has taken up 
with Environmental Protection Training and Research Institute to carry out detailed 
Environmental Impact Assessment and Environment Management Plan. Further, 
during the evidence it was also informed that environment clearance is in the final 
stages and is with the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change for 
clearance. 

28 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
 The Department has accepted that chemical industries are very polluting industries. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that there should not be any compromises or laxity 
on the safety safeguards as far as environmental clearances relating to the Dahej 
PCPIR. As regards the constitution of CRZ Committee, the Committee recommends the 
Department to take up the matter with the State Government of Gujarat vigorously to 
expedite i ts recommendations. The Committee further desire that the 
Department/State Government should not leave the question of enforcing strict 
environmental cleanliness standards on the investors at companies alone. There 
should be a strict oversight mechanism so  that the environment and public health do 
not suffer because of the project. The Committee observe that Environment Impact 
Assessment studies of Paradip PCPIR and Visakhapatnam -Kakinada PCPIR are at 
different stages and in respect of Tamil Nadu PCPIR, EIA  is yet to be undertaken. The 
Committee feel that Environmental Clearance is the main issue in the Master Plan and 
as such cannot be isolated from the Master Plan. The success of a PCPIR project 
depends upon the expeditious environmental clearance. The Com mittee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department should actively coordinate with the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Central Pollution Control Board and the 
concerned State Pollution Control Boards to ensure that environmental safeguar ds do 
not suffer due to inter- Ministry and inter-Agency wrangles or duplication of functions 
and that environmental safety is not comprised in anyway. While appreciating the 
efforts made in respect of Paradip PCPIR and Visakhapatnam -Kakinada PCPIR, the 
Committee recommend that synergic efforts should be made to settle the issue of 
environmental clearance in a time bound manner. The Committee also recommends 
that the Department must ensure that the Tamil Nadu PCPIR should not lag behind on 
this crucial issue. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  The underlying concept of PCPIR is to promote petroleum, chemical and 
petrochemical industries in an integrated and environmental friendly manner, where 
in environmental safety & safe guards are not to be comprised. The Governm ents of 
Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat have been requested to ensure that 
environmental safety is not compromised while implementing PCPIRs. As regards, 
Environmental clearance, Governments of Andhra Pradesh has intimated that the 
draft EIA  report was submitted to the Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Broad 
(APPCB) on 03.11.2014. The public hearing is to be taken up by the APPCB through 
District Authorities of two Districts Visakhapatnam and East Godavari (Kakindada). 
Whereas Government of Od isha has engaged Environmental Protection Training and 
Research Institute (EPTRI) for undertaking the study for the project and the 
environmental clearance is expected to be obtained by October, 2017.  
 The State Governments have been requested to expedite  the EIA study and get the 
clearance from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC). 
They have also been requested to follow the safety standards meticulously so that the 
environment and public health do not suffer because of the proj ect. The Steering 
Committee on PCPIR monitors the progress of PCPIRs and a representative from the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has been included in the 
Committee.  
(c) For addressing any event of disaster or natural calamity occurring in any of the 
PCPIR zones, the Committee further recommend that the Department and the 
investing companies should prepare a Disaster management plan as part of the 
Master Plan. There should be a rigorous oversight mechanism in the Master Plan so 
that public health and marine life is not endangered at the time of disasters. The need 

29 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
for a good disaster management plan is highlighted by the “Thane” cyclone that hit the 
Tamil Nadu PCPIR project by about five years now. Since the PCPIRS are situated in 
the coastal areas, they are susceptible to cyclones, floods, tsunami, etc. The Committee 
desire the Department to take expeditious necessary measures in this regard and 
establish the Disaster management Plan as part of the Master Plan. Further, the 
Committee desire that the detailed plan, including the composition and power, for the 
National Chemical Safety Board, which is an institution to be set up for the purpose as 
part of the proposed National Chemical Policy may be finalized at the earliest. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The State Governments of the PCPIR States have confirmed inclusion of Disaster 
Management Plan in the Master Plan of respective PCPIR, keeping in view the 
vulnerable & enviro nment sensitive location of PCPIRs in coastal areas.  The 
Department is in the process of preparation of “National Chemical Policy”, which, 
inter-alia, include setting up of National Chemical Safety Council. The Draft Cabinet 
Note on ‘National Chemical Pol icy’ was circulated to D/o Expenditure (M/o Finance), 
NITI Aayog and PMO for their comments. The comments / views received under inter-
departmental consultation are under examination in the Department. 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 25017/6/2015-PCPIR DATED 13.07.2016 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
IMPLEMENTATION 
 Gujarat PCPIR: 
The Committee noted that regarding Dahej PCPIR in Gujarat, the Development Plan or 
Master Plan of Dahej PCPIR has been sanctioned in September, 2012 and town 
planning schemes are being implemented. Environmental clearances are at their final 
stages. Processes of rehabilitation and compensation o f the affected people are going 
well. The Committee hope that all components of the project of Dahej PCPIR will be 
completed soon and recommend that the Department should coordinate with the 
State Government and the anchor tenant so that the PCPIR may be c ompleted as per 
schedule. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  The implementation on Dahej PCPIR is progressing well with sanctioning of 
Development Plan and progressive approval of Town Planning schemes. The final 
Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) report for Dahej  PCPIR has been uploaded on 
MoEF website in September 2015.  The comprehensive component -wise status report 
is awaited from the Government of Gujarat and the Dahej PCPIR Anchor Tenant, 
OPAL. 
 Odisha PCPIR: 

30 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
As for the Paradip PCIPR in Odisha, the Committee observed that commissioning of 
the refinery at Paradip has started and Polypropylene plant will be commissioned in 
2017. According to the Department, one problem encountered is that Naphtha is not 
available for cracking and no commitment to set up Naphtha cracker can be made at 
present. In future gas and other options may be explored. Currently there is no 
availability of Natural Gas in Paradip. The Indian Oil Corporation Ltd (IOCL) which is 
the Anchor Tenant in Paradip, is making modifications to make prop ylene from the 
Fluidized Catalytic Cracking (FCC) unit which will be converted into Polypropylene 
and can be utilized in the proposed Plastic Park In the same PCPIR location. The 
Department further stated that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, had  
informed that currently IOCL is having difficulty in putting up of Naphtha cracker at 
Paradip.  
 
In light of the above, the Committee recommend that the Department should sort out 
the problems relating to feedstock non -availability at Paradip PCPIR in coo rdination 
with the Anchor Tenant and the State Government at the earliest. The Committee are 
concerned that problems such as stated above were not recognized earlier by the 
Department. Given the huge importance of the project for the overall development of  
the Paradip region, it is essential that all problems are sorted out and the project 
commissioned as per schedule. The Committee desire to be apprised of the measures 
taken in this regard. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  In order to facilitate availability of f eed stock for petrochemical complex, LNG import 
by IOCL through Dhamra port is being planned. In addition, a bi -directional gas 
pipeline from Surat to Paradeep is being implemented by GAIL. The Anchor unit of 
IOCL is preparing downstream petrochemical unit s based on the products of the 
refinery in addition to polypropylene e.g. MEG, Paraxylene etc. Subject to Techno 
Commercial feasibility. 
 Andhra Pradesh PCPIR: 
The Committee is distressed and displeased to note that the Andhra Pradesh PCPIR, 
which was approved in February 2009 is not progressing well. The Department has 
informed that the Anchor Tenant, Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd (HPCL)’s 
greenfield project to establish a refinery could not materialize due to lack of feasibility 
and that they are in the process of taking up the feasibility study for establishing 
petrochemical complex without a refinery. The Department stated that feasibility 
study for anchor unit is expected to be completed by June 2016 and then it would be 
placed before the Board of HPCL and Gas Authority of India Ltd (GAIL) for approval. 
After approval, HPCL has informed that the construction of Anchor unit will take four 
years from commencement of the work. 
The Committee are of the opinion that the Department had not put in concrete efforts 
to accelerate the process. Since the Anchor client is not finalized, the rest of the 
process, viz. master plan, environmental study, public hearing, e tc. cannot be 
concluded. 
 The Committee therefore strongly recommend that the Central Government 
should take immediate steps to promote the project as it is meant to lead to the 
development of the region and give employment to lakhs of people. The Committe e 
desire that the Department should monitor the progress of the project constantly and 

31 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
ensure that the feasibility study of the anchor unit is completed by 2016 without any 
further time and cost overruns.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 HPCL, GAIL and Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) are in process of setting up of 
imported Ethane based Petrochemical complex without a refinery in Andhra Pradesh 
PCPIR. The likely location of the complex is Kakinada, however, formal decision of 
GoAP is awaited. GAIL and HPCL hav e started the process for feasibility study. The 
proposed complex would be either gas based or dual feed (Gas + Naphtha). In the 
past, project configuration for anchor units were finalized by the anchor tenants, 
without considering the requirements of downstream industries. In order to avoid the 
same situation in AP PCPIR, the promoters organized a workshop to collate the views 
/ expectations of Industries before finalizing the configuration for the proposed 
petrochemical complex in AP PCPIR. The concurrent  development of downstream 
industries would lead to substantial investment and employment generation in the 
region. The configuration of the proposed petrochemical complex and the feasibility 
study shall be completed expeditiously, after completion of this  consultation process 
with prospective downstream partners / industries.  The Department is actively 
involved in the process. 
 Tamil Nadu PCPIR: 
The Committee are distressed to note that not much progress have been made with 
regard to Tamil Nadu PCPIR whic h was approved way back in July 2012. The 
Department has informed that the construction works of the project were disrupted 
by “Thane” cyclone in December 2011. Only preservation work is going on since then. 
Restart of the construction work of NOCL’s refin ery is expected only in early 2016. 
The Phase-1 of the project is to be commissioned in 2017 -18 and Phase -2 which has 
the full capacity of 12 million tonnes per year is to be commissioned in 2019. As of 
now, the PCPIR area has not been notified and the PCP IR Management Board is yet to 
be constituted. Further, the Master Plan is yet to be prepared and the Environmental 
Impact Assessment is yet to be undertaken. 
The Committee therefore desire that the Department should actively coordinate with 
the State Gover nment of Tamil Nadu and the anchor tenant, viz. Nagarjuna Oil 
Corporation Ltd (NOCL) so that the project is commissioned as scheduled by 2017 -18. 
Further, given that the onus of notifying the PCPIR area, constitution of the PCPIR 
Management Board, etc. lie s with the State Government, the Department should 
proactively pursue the matter with the State Government so that no further delay 
occurs.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The Tamil Nadu PCPIR has been notified in January, 2016 vide Tamil Nadu Govt. 
Gazette Noti fications dated 13.01.2016.  As informed by the State Government, the 
Management Board will be constituted for the TNPCPIR shortly, after constitution of 
the Local Planning Authority by the State Govt. 
 Concluding remarks: 
The Committee observe from the st atus of implementation of the four PCPIRs 
mentioned in the preceding paragraphs that the level of progress for the four PCPIRs 
is quite uneven. There are problems and challenges specific to the location, etc. 
However, a proper coordination by the Departmen t through a strong oversight 

32 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
mechanism at the Centre and State level will accelerate the progress of the PCPIRs. 
The Committee desire that the Department may take necessary measures toward this 
end. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The Steering Committee at the Ce ntre and the Management Boards at the State level 
are monitoring and coordinating the progress and implementation of the PCPIR 
projects. The latest meeting of the Steering Committee to review implementation of 
PCPIR Policy in the present form and intervent ions required to make the PCPIRs 
successful was held on 17.06.2016. In the meeting, all these relevant issues were 
discussed and detailed review of the progress of the implementation of PCPIRs was 
undertaken.  The states have been advised to take proactive  & collated action, in 
concert with Anchor Tenants, to accelerate the progress of the PCPIRs.  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 25017/6/2015-PCPIR DATED 13.07.2016 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
REVIEW OF POLICY ON PCPIRs 
The Committee noted that the Government is proposing a review of the PCPIR policy. 
One idea is to reduce the size of PCPIRs from the existing 250 sq. Kms to 50 squa re 
kilometers depending upon the utility area. Second, there should be a single window 
clearance where all the statutory authorities should have participation both from the 
Government of India, State Governments and the local Governments. That will allow 
industrialists to take clearance only from one body. The Department has informed 
that on both these issues, the Committee of Secretaries has already agreed to the 
proposal. 
In this regard, the Committee is of the opinion that the prescribed size of the PCPI R 
area need to be made flexible. If the prescribed size of the PCPIRs is reduced to 50 sq. 
kms, the size of investments required and infrastructural needs will also accordingly 
come down and that will allow smaller companies also to take part. More States may 
also be able to join the concept. The Committee desire that the Department may take 
proactive action to finalize and implement these measures. 
Regarding the proposal for Single Window Clearance, the Committee are skeptical 
about the feasibility of the idea as PCPIRs encompass such a huge variety of issues 
ranging from environmental clearances, feedstock issues, infrastructure, marketing, 
etc. However, the Committee desire that the Department may explore various options 
toward this end on priority. Decis ions taken in this regard may be communicated to 
the Committee at the earliest.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 The proposal to reduce the prescribed size of PCPIR area in special cases from 250 sq. 
km to 50 sq. km has been incorporated in the amendments proposed in the PCPIR 
Policy. The Central Government may relax the condition of land requirement in 

33 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
special cases  based on the factors of population density, environmental constraints, 
fertile agricultural land and contiguity of area. In no case the minimum land shall be 
less than 50 sq. km. with 40 % (i.e. 20 sq.km.) of processing area. 
 Single Window Clearance Mech anism at State level would help and facilitate the 
industries in investment and management of PCPIRs. Government of  
 Odisha has also intimated that Single Window Clearance mechanism is followed in 
Odisha PCPIR. The other State Governments have been reques ted to implement the 
Single Window Clearance Mechanism at the earliest. 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
O.M. NO. 25017/6/2015-PCPIR DATED 13.07.2016 
 
   
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 (Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
New Delhi;           Anandrao Adsul 
 09  August  2016                              Chairperson  
18 Ashadha, 1938 (Saka)         Standing Committee on  
         Chemicals and Fertilizers   

34 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
APPENDIX – I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 09 August, 2016 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Anju Bala 
3. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
4. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
5. Shri K. Ashok Kumar  
6. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
7. Shri S. Rajendran 
8. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu  
9. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
10. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
11. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
12. Shri George Baker 
Rajya Sabha 
13. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
14. Shri K. Parasaran 
15. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
16. Shri Ram Vichar Netam 
17 Shri Abdul Wahab 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee.  
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
a) Draft Action Taken Report on the  subject "Petroleum, Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs)" of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals); and 
b) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
4. The draft Reports were adopted by the Committee without any amendment.   
5. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to make consequential changes, if any, 
arising out of the factual verification of the Reports by the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals and Department of Fertilizers of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament on 11.08.2016. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
XXXX  Matters not related to this Report.  

35 
 
C:\Users\DEV-003\Desktop\Report No.25 ATR (Doc&PC).Docx 
APPENDIX – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
  
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDA TIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH REPORT (1 6TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2015 -16) ON ‘PETROLEUM, CHEMICALS AND 
PETROCHEMICALS INVESTMENT REGIONS (PCPIRs)'  OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS 
AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS).  
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 10 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 3, 6, 7, 8 and 10)   
5 
Percentage of Total 50% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation  No. Nil)  
 
0 
Percentage of Total 0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil)  
0 
Percentage of Total 0%  
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are still awaited:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5 and 9) 
 
5 
Percentage of Total 50% 
 