Page 1 
 
    
18 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  the  Subject  Functioning of National Institutes of 
Pharmaceuticals Education and Research (NIPER) 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
 
 REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
FEBRUARY, 2016/     PHALGUNA , 1937 (SAKA) 


Page 2 
 
CC&F No18.  
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Twelfth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  the  Subject  Functioning of National Institutes of Pharmaceuticals 
Education and Research (NIPER)Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Department of Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25.02.2016 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  25.02.2016 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2016/  PHALGUNA, 1937 (SAKA)


Page 3 
 
CONTENTS 
Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-16) ………………………………... 4 
Introduction. …………………………………………………..………………………… 5 
Chapter I Report ……………….………………………………………………….. 6-18 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
19-21 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desi re 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
22 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
23-24 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final  replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
25-27 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of Eighth  Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2015-16) held on  28  January, 2016 
28 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2014 -15) on of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).  
29 
 

Page 4 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(2015-16)  
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava  - Director 
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa   - Deputy Secretary 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Idris Ali 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Innocent 
9. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi 
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle 
13. Shri Rajendran S. 
14. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
15. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
16. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
17. Dr. Uma Saren 
18.  Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
19. Shri Taslimuddin 
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
21. Shri   Baker George  
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Dr. M.S. Gill 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
26. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
27. Shri K. Parasaran 
28.   Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao 
29.  Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
30.  Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
31. Shri Abdul Wahab 

Page 5 
 
  
                                                                
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2015-16) having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their behalf, present this Eighteenth  Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (2014 -15) on  the subject Functioning of National Institutes of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research (NIPER)   of the Ministry of Chemicals and  Fert ilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals). 
 
2. The Twelfth Report  (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on  12.8.2015.  The Action Taken replies of Government to 
all observations/recommendati ons contained in the Report were received on 4.1.2016.  The 
Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  (2015-2016) considered and adopted this 
Report on Action Taken Replies at their sitting held on  28 January, 2016.. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the  comments of the Committee have  been 
printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
     
 
                                             
   NEW DELHI;               (ANANDRAO ADSUL) 
    17   FEBRUARY,  2016             Chairperson 
    28 PHALGUNA ,  1937 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on  
                                  Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 

Page 6 
 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER  I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contai ned in the  Twelfth  
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject Functioning of National Institutes of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research  of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 12.8 .2015.   In all, the Committee made  6 
Observations / Recommendations in the Report. 
 
2.  Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) were requested to 
furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations  contained in the  Twelfth  Report within 
three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e., by  12.11. 2015  The Action Taken 
Replies of the Gov ernment in respect of all the 6  Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received from the Ministry of Ch emicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) vide their O.M. No.  F.No.50012/2/2012-NIPER (Vol.I)  dated 4.1.2016 . These  
Replies  have been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government :- 
 Sl.Nos.  1 and 2                        (Total =2 )                                                     
                                                                                                              Chapter II  
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations w hich the Committee do not desire to pursue i n 
view of the Government’s replies :- 
 Sl.No.Nil                                       (Total =Nil)  
                                                                                                            Chapter III 
  
(iii) Recommendations / Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
 Sl.No. 3 and 5                                          (Total = 2 )  
         Chapter IV  
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited :- 
 Sl.Nos.   4 and 6                             (Total =2)  
                                                                                                            Chapter V  
 
3. The Co mmittee desire that the Action Tak en Notes on the  Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and the Final Replies in respect of 
Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter IV and V for which have not been accepted 
or  replies are still awaited should be furnished expeditiously. 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by t he Government on all the  
Observations/Recommendations which  still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 

Page 7 
 
A. Need for optimum allocation of funds for NIPERs 
 
Recommendation No.1 
 
5. While noting significantly less allocation of funds to NIPERS , the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee observed that the total budgetary allocation for NIPERs under BE 2012-13, 
2013-14 and 2014 -15 was Rs.121.55 crore, Rs.112.07 crore and Rs.124.03 crore, 
respectively. But the allocation was significantly reduced to Rs.80.77 crore, Rs.64.84 crore 
and Rs.56.42 crore, respectively at RE stage. The Committee also note that for the year 
2015-16, as against t he demand of the Department for Rs.1075.41 crore, the Ministry of 
Finance has provided only Rs.169.44 crore which is not at all sufficient for the NIPERs. 
Thus, the Committee are distressed to note that the Department is not getting the 
budgetary allocatio n commensurate with the projected requirement for the NIPERs. 
According to the Department, non -starting of construction of activities for NIPER Campus, 
non-creation of regular posts in new NIPERs and complex fund releasing system, are the 
reasons for reduction in allocation of funds to NIPERs at RE stage. The Committee also note 
that the Budget Speech for 2015 -16 proposes three new NIPERs in Maharashtra, Rajasthan 
and Chhattisgarh but no budget provision has been made for them. The Committee are 
apprehensive that in the absence of adequate funds, it will be difficult for the Department 
to set up adequate and strong infrastructure for smooth running and functioning of NIPERs 
and to achieve its avowed objectives to nurture and promote quality and excellence in  
pharmaceutical education and research. The Committee are of the strong view that it is the 
responsibility of the Department to convince the Ministry of Finance ensuring optimum 
allocation of funds and to prepare a roadmap, in coordination with all stakeho lders, for 
smooth execution of its projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Department should strongly place its case before the Ministry of Finance to allocate 
budgetary allocation commensurate with the requirement for NIPERs. The Committee  also 
recommend that the Department should also make concerted and coordinated efforts to 
address the constraints which are impeding the effective execution of NIPER projects and 
set up an institutional mechanism to monitor rigorously the progress of proje cts. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department and 
the progress made in this regard”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
6. In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“The Department has taken a number of measures both to streamline Fund release system 
and to start construction projects of all new NIPERs and renovation of NIPER -Mohali. 
Under the new fund release system, this year till November, 2015 Rs.95 .632 Cr was 
released against Rs.35.41 Cr during 2014 -15 & Rs.45.07 Cr during 2013 -14 illustrating the 
success of new initiative. 
 2. During the financial year 2015 -16 an amount of Rs.210.00 Cr was allocated to the 
Department. However, there is a drastic cu t of Rs.60.00 Cr and at RE stage only Rs.150.38 
Cr has been allocated. As far as NIPER Division is concerned Rs.95.632 Cr has been released 
against allocation of Rs.141.96 Cr at BE stage. Request for allocation of additional funds will 
be demanded at 3rd Supplementary stage. 
 3. On optimum  allocation:- 
 -DOP has been requesting for adequate allocation considering construction of NIPERs & 
faulty allocation but the actual budgetary allocation are very low. 
  -For 2016-17, Department submitted a proposal of Rs.1464.203 Cr. under Plan head. 

Page 8 
 
4.     Regarding new projects construction, NIPER -Guwahati project’s foundation was laid 
on 30thMay, 2015. Minimum annual requirement for NIPER -Guwahati is Rs.100 Cr. Short of 
funds badly affected Guwahati project. Similarly, NIPER-Ahmedabad foundation was laid on 
16th December, 2015. Foundation for other NIPERs are in pipeline. Besides, SFC has 
approved Rs.249.00 Cr. Project for NIPER -Mohali but no money could be released for want 
of funds. The Finance Ministry has been repe atedly impressed about the serious situation. 
It is afraid that non -provision of adequate budgetary allocation & release is badly affecting 
the credibility of systems”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. The Committee had noted that the Department is not gettin g the budgetary 
allocation commensurate with the projected requirement for the NIPERs.   The Committee 
also noted that the Budget Speech for 2015 -16 proposes three new NIPERs in Maharashtra, 
Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh but no budget provision has been made for them.  The 
Committee, had therefore, recommended that the Department should strongly place its 
case before the Ministry of Finance to allocate budgetary allocation commensurate with the 
requirement for NIPERs. The Committee also recommended that the De partment should 
also make concerted and coordinated efforts to address the constraints which are impeding 
the effective execution of NIPER projects and set up an institutional mechanism to monitor 
the progress of projects rigorously.  The Department in its  Action Taken Reply stated that a 
number of measures has been taken  both to streamline Fund release system and to start 
construction projects of all new NIPERs and renovation of NIPER -Mohali.  Minimum annual 
requirement for NIPER -Guwahati is Rs.100 Cr. Sh ortage of funds badly affected Guwahati 
project. Similarly, NIPER -Ahmedabad foundation was laid on 16 th December, 2015. 
Foundation for other NIPERs are in pipeline. Besides, SFC has approved Rs.249.00 Cr. 
Project for NIPER -Mohali but no money could be rele ased for want of funds .   The  
Department has further stated that t he Finance Ministry has been repeatedly impressed 
about the serious situation  as non-provision of adequate budgetary allocation & release is 
badly affecting the credibility of systems.    The Committee therefore, recommend to take 
up the matter with the Ministry of Finance at the highest level to get adequate budget for 
NIPER.   The Committee  would also recommend to improve the performance of NIPERs and  
optimum utilisation of funds so that   there may be no ground for less allocation of funds for 
NIPERs. 
 
B. Need for regular staff for academic and non-academic posts in all NIPER Institutes. 
 
Recommendation No.2 
 
8. While stressing the need for  regular staff for  academic and non -academic sta ff,  the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that NIPERs offer courses to students in the Post Graduate level and 
PhD level in various disciplines like Biotechnology, Medicinal chemistry, Pharmaceutics, 

Page 9 
 
Pharmacy Practice, Pharmacology & Toxicology etc. and the degrees offered by the NIPERs 
are well accepted in the pharmaceutical industries and institutions. A large number of 
passed out students are absorbed in companies and research institutes across the country 
as well as in abroad. W hile a number of these students are placed in responsible positions 
by the pharmaceutical industries through campus placements, others are pursuing higher 
education in reputed national and international institutions. However, the Committee are 
deeply distr essed to note that except NIPER, Mohali and NIPER, Ahmedabad, all other 
NIPERs do not have regular/permanent/sanctioned faculty and staff and these NIPERs are 
running with the faculty and staff either on contractual basis or faculties invited from 
mentor i nstitutes or other reputed institutes like PGI, Chandigarh, Guwahati University, 
Dibrugarh University etc. Even in NIPER, Mohali which has a complement of 73 sanctioned 
posts for non -academic side, only 46 posts are filled up and the remaining 27 posts rig ht 
from the top level of Director to the lowest level of Assistant or Clerk/Typist are vacant. 
Similarly as per the information furnished to the Committee, 2 posts of Professor, 9 posts of 
Associate Professor and 23 posts of Assistant Professor are vacant in NIPER, Mohali. The 
Committee strongly feel that in the absence of regular staff, academic or non -academic, 
NIPERs could not be expected to attain excellence and quality in the field of pharmaceutical 
education and research. It is, therefore, imperative that all the regular/sanctioned posts are 
filled up without further delay. During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals had accepted that inadequate man power is one of the 
major constraints or critical issue which has hindered the growth of these institutions and 
needs to be decided. In this context, the Committee were informed that the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has constituted an Academic Standard Committee on 27 th March 2015 
which is mandated to recommend the numb er of faculties and staff for creation of posts for 
all NIPERs except NIPER, Mohali. During the course of evidence, the Committee were  
informed that the Committee has finalized the report and they will be handing over the 
report within a week. On the basis  of the report, the Department will create a number of 
teaching as well as non-teaching posts for all NIPERs and thereafter, the Department would 
be empowered to fill up the vacancies. It has also been committed that all these NIPERs will 
have required teaching as well as non-teaching staff with in a period of six months. Further, 
the Department has constituted a Search-cum-Selection Committee for selecting candidates 
for the post of Directors in NIPER, Mohali; NIPER, Hajipur; NIPER, Hyderabad; NIPER, 
Guwahati and NIPER, Raibareli. An advertisement seeking applications for the post of 
Directors has been issued on 01.07.2015 and the last date was 31.07.2015. According to the 
Department, the process of selection is expected to be completed in 3 months. It was also 
informed to the Committee that in case of NIPER, Mohali, a High Level committee has been 
constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary (Pharma) which is examining the 
appointment of each employee and the whole exercise is expected to be completed by  the 
end of August 2015. In case of other NIPERs, once posts are created recruitment of regular 
faculty will be taken up. In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that the 
process of selection for the post of Directors in NIPER, Mohali; NIPER, Haj ipur; NIPER, 
Hyderabad; NIPER, Guwahati and NIPER, Raibareli  and for creation of requisite number of 
posts for all NIPERs except NIPER, Mohali and subsequent recruitment of suitable 
candidates to man these posts may be expedited within a fixed time frame.  The Committee 
hope and trust that once these posts are filled up, NIPERs will be able to augment its 
efficiency to attain academic excellence and achieve its avowed objectives in the field of 
pharmaceutical education and research for which they were established in the country. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
9. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation  of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 “Department of Pharmaceuticals has been taking up a number of measures to fully 
operationalize NIPERs viz., 

Page 10 
 
 
(i) Constituted Search -cum-Selection Committee for the appointment of Directors at 
NIPER-Mohali, Guwahati, Hajipur, Hyderabad &Raebareli and it is expecte d that work is 
completed by January, 2016. The matter is being pursued with Search -cum-Selection 
Committee to expedite the process. Already regular Directors are there at NIPER -
Ahmedabad & Kolkata. 
(ii) Constituted Academic Standing Committee to set norms for o pening Departments 
and on number of faculty & other posts in NIPERs. It is expected that the committee will 
submit its report within the month of December, 2015. There upon Department will submit 
proposals to Ministry of Finance for creation of sanction posts immediately. 
(iii) Regarding NIPER-Mohali regularization of employees, the matter is being expedited 
in consultation with other Departments.”. 
   
Comments of the Committee 
 
10. The Committee were  distressed to note that except NIPER, Mohali and NIPER, 
Ahmedabad, all other NIPERs do not have regular/permanent/sanctioned faculty and staff 
and these NIPERs are running with the faculty and staff either on contractual basis or 
faculties invited from mentor institutes or other reputed institutes.    The Committee 
strongly felt that in the absence of regular staff, academic or non -academic, NIPERs could 
not be expected to attain excellence and quality in the field of pharmaceutical education 
and research .  The Committee were  earlier informed that the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has constituted an Academic Standard Committee on 27 th March 2015 
which is mandated to recommend the number of faculties and staff for creation of posts for 
all NIPERs except NIPER, Mohali.   It was also informed that the Committee has finaliz ed the 
report and they will be handing over the report within a week. On the basis of the report, 
the Department will create a number of teaching as well as non -teaching posts for all 
NIPERs and thereafter, the Department would be empowered to fill up the vacancies. It has 
also been committed that all these NIPERs will have required teaching as well as non -
teaching staff with in a period of six months. Further, the Department has constituted a 
Search-cum-Selection Committee for selecting candidates for the post of Directors in NIPER, 
Mohali; NIPER, Hajipur; NIPER, Hyderabad; NIPER, Guwahati and NIPER, Raibareli. An 
advertisement seeking applications for the post of Directors has been issued on 01.07.2015 
and the last date was 31.07.2015. According to the Dep artment, the process of selection is 
expected to be completed in 3 months. It was also informed to the Committee that in case of 
NIPER, Mohali, a High Level committee has been constituted under the chairmanship of 
Secretary (Pharma) which is examining the appointment of each employee and the whole 
exercise is expected to be completed by the end of August 2015. In case of other NIPERs, 
once posts are created , recruitment of regular faculty will be taken up. In view of the 
foregoing, the Committee  had recommended that the process of selection for the post of 
Directors in NIPER, Mohali; NIPER, Hajipur; NIPER, Hyderabad; NIPER, Guwahati and NIPER, 
Raibareli  and for creation of requisite number of posts for all NIPERs except NIPER, Mohali 

Page 11 
 
and subsequent recruitm ent of suitable candidates to man these posts may be expedited 
within a fixed time frame. 
 In this regard, the Department  i n their Action taken Reply, stated that it  has  been 
taking up a number of measures to fully operationalize NIPERs viz., Constituted  Search-
cum-Selection Committee for the appointment of Directors at NIPER -Mohali, Guwahati, 
Hajipur, Hyderabad and  Raebareli and it is expected that work is completed by January, 
2016.   The Department of Pharmaceuticals have  also Constituted Academic Stan ding 
Committee to set norms for opening Departments and on number of faculty and other posts 
in NIPERs and  the committee will submit its report within the month of December, 2015.    
Thereupon Department will submit proposals to Ministry of Finance for cre ation of 
sanction posts immediately. Regarding NIPER - Mohali regularization of employees, the 
matter is being expedited in consultation with other Departments .  While appreciating the 
efforts made by Department of Pharmaceuticals , the Committee observe that by now the 
work relating  to s earch cum selection Committee should have been finalized and the 
Academic standing C ommittee Report should also have been submitted to Ministry  of 
Finance for sanctioning of the post .  T he Committee , therefore,  stress that a ll out effort 
should be made to expedite the process. The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
latest status in this regard. 
 
C. Need for Recognition M.S. Pharma Degree Course  of NIPER by UGC 
Recommendation No.3 
 
11. While  stressing  for need for  recognition of M.S. Pharma Degree course by  UGC ,  the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee note that NIPER has been given statutory recognition by an act of 
Parliament and declared as an Institute of National Importance. NIPERs are awardi ng 
degrees under NIPER Act, 1998. These degrees awarded by NIPERs are recognized by the 
Indian and foreign universities and students passed out from these institutes are well 
placed in Indian and foreign Pharmaceuticals industries. However, the Committee a re 
distressed to note that M.S.Pharma degree awarded by NIPERs is not recognized by the 
University Grants Commission (UGC). The Committee are of the view that the courses 
offered by NIPERs are of wide importance and non -recognition of degrees vizM.S.Pharma  
degree by UGC, will adversely affect the career prospects of the students holding the 
degree. Non -recognition of the degree would also raise suspicion on the quality of 
education being imparted by NIPERs and may in turn affect the quantum of package being  
given to the passed out students on their placements by the companies. However, the 
Committee were informed that the Department has taken up the matter with UGC and 
Ministry of HRD and the same is expected to be resolved very soon. Notwithstanding the 
position stated above, the Committee would like to recommend that the Department should 
vigorously pursue the case and impress upon UGC and Ministry of HRD to grant recognition 
to degree awarded by NIPER under NIPER Act, 1998 without further loss of time to s ave 
the career prospects of several students passed out from these institutes. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard”. 
  

Page 12 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
12. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation  of the Committee, th e Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 “To sort out  the matter a meeting   under the Chairmanship of  Secy (P) was held on 
6.8.2015. Secretary  UGC attended  the meeting but could not assure UGC recognition 
despite the fact the M.S degrees   are being awarded by IISERs & IITs.  Pharmacy Council of 
India has already recognized the degree and uploaded at their website. AICTE has already 
been requested to issue an advisory  on NIPERs degree  to be honoured  by AICTE approved 
Institutes”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13.  The Committee are distressed to note that M.S.Pharma degree awarded by NIPERs is 
not recognized by the University Grants Commission (UGC). The Committee are of the view 
that the courses offered by NIPERs are of wide importance an d non-recognition of degrees 
viz M.S.Pharma degree by UGC, will adversely affect the career prospects of the students 
holding the degree. Non-recognition of the degree would also raise suspicion on the quality 
of education being imparted by NIPERs and may in turn affect the quantum of package 
being given to the passed out students on their placements by the companies.    The 
Committee were  earlier informed that the Department has taken up the matter with UGC 
and Ministry of HRD and the same is expected to b e resolved very soon.  But  in their Action 
Taken Reply, the Department  has stated that a meeting under the Chairmanship of  Secy 
(P) was held on 6.8.2015.  Secretary  UGC attended  the meeting but could not assure UGC 
recognition despite the fact the M.S  degrees  are being awarded by IISERs & IITs.   The 
Committee would therefore like to know the reason for this anamoly and  reiterate  that the 
Department should vigorously pursue the case and impress upon UGC and Ministry of HRD 
to grant recognition to de gree awarded by NIPER s under NIPER Act, 1998 without further 
loss of time to save the career prospects of several students passed out from these 
institutes. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
D. Need for Infrastructure Facility at NIPER Institutes. 
 
Recommendation No.4 
 
14 While observing that  the Department  should vigorously pursue  with respective State 
Governments  to allocate land for construction of campuses , the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
 “The Committee are deeply anguished to know that except NIPER -Mohali, presently all the 
six New NIPERs are still functioning with the assistance of Mentor Institutes even after a 
lapse of more than 7 years since 2007 -2008. The Committee note that while the 
construction work of NIPER, Guwahati campus has since started from 30.05.2015, the 
construction work of NIPER, Ahmedabad is likely to start shortly. For NIPER, Hyderabad, 
the land has been given by the State Government in Genome Valley but a decision is yet to 

Page 13 
 
be taken as to whether the institute be set up in Genome Valley or in the IDPL complex 
itself where the institute is presently functioning. In the context of NIPER, Hajipur, the 
Committee note that the Institute is running under the mentorship of Rajendra M emorial 
Research Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna. The State Government of Bihar was 
requested for allotment of 100 acre land free of cost, for setting up NIPER at Hajipur. 
However, in spite of the matter being followed up with the State Government at Chief 
Minister and Chief Secretary level, the land has not been allotted for setting up full -fledged 
NIPER Campus at Hajipur. It was advised by the State that the institution may proceed with 
vertical construction on 12.43 acres of land already in possessi on of NIPER, Hajipur, along 
with 3 buildings. However, the existing area of land was not found sufficient for the 
purpose. The matter has again been taken up at the highest level but the issue is yet to be 
settled satisfactorily. As regards, NIPER, Kolkata , the State Government has allotted about 
35 acres of land, free of cost for construction of NIPER Kolkata but demanded Rs.30.10 
crores as development charges which can not be paid by the Ministry as the same is against 
the mandate of Cabinet Note. The matter is being pursued by the Department with the State 
Government at Chief Minister level and the same is yet to be resolved. In the context of 
NIPER, Raebareli, the Committee note that approximately 50 acres Land has been 
transferred in the institute's nam e. The Committee were also apprised by the Department 
during the course of oral evidence that State Government of Tamil Nadu has provided 100 
acres of land for NIPER Institute at Madurai and the Department of Pharmaceuticals has 
immediately taken over the land and the process of construction of NIPER is being started. 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee are not satisfied with the snail's pace progress in 
the construction of campuses for New NIPERs. The very fact that even after a lapse of more 
than 7 ye ars, these institutions do not have their own campuses clearly reflects the failure 
of the Department for timely acquisition of land for construction of campuses. Needless to 
say, in the absence of requisite infrastructure facilities, it would be difficult  for NIPERs to 
achieve the quality and capability in the field of pharma education and research. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should vigorously pursue with the 
respective State Governments to allocate land of requisite dimension within a fixed time 
frame and for this purpose the Department may consider to create a Special Cell to monitor 
and pursue vigorously with the States for acquisition of land. The Committee also 
recommend that the process of construction work in respect of N IPERs for which land has 
already been acquired should be expedited and be completed with in a fixed time frame. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this 
regard”. 
Reply of the Government 
 
15. In reply to the  afore-mentioned recommendation  of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 1. NIPER-Raebareli -Government of U.P has allocated 50 acres of land for NIPER, 
Raebareli. 
 
 2.  NIPER-Kolkata -Government of West Bengal has been req uested to allocate 100 
acres of land free of cost without encumbrance. The matter has been followed up 
vigorously with the State Government. However, response from the State Government is 
yet to be received.  Both Union Minister & Secretary have taken up t he matter with Chief 
Minister of West Bengal & Chief Secretary respectively. Regrettably, the Government of 
West Bengal earlier allocated 35 acres and now offers only 30 acres. The 30 acres is totally 
insufficient. Recently, Union Minister (C&F) has writte n a letter dated 10.12.2015 to the 
Chief Minister, Government of West Bengal and similarly Secretary(Pharma) has also 
written to the Chief Secretary of West Bengal to allocate 100 acres of land at Kalyani. The 
matter is being pursued with State Government. 
 3.  NIPER, Hajipur (Bihar) 

Page 14 
 
 I. Based on the firm assurances given in writing by the State Government of Bihar for 
allotment of 100 acre land free of cost, vide letter No. dated 29/5/2006 and 28/8/2006 by 
the Industrial Development Commissioner Govt. of Bi har this Department set up NIPER  at 
Hajipur in 2007 under the mentorship of Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical 
Sciences (RMRIMS), Patna. Since, 2007, NIPER is functioning in the EPIP Campus, BIADA 
Industrial Area, Hajipur. State Govt. has, ho wever, not yet allotted the land for setting up 
full-fledged NIPER Campus at Hajipur, in spite of the matter being followed up with the 
State Govt. at Chief Minister and Chief Secretary level.   
 
 II In the Eastern Zonal Council meeting held on 16.01.2015 chaired by Union Home 
Minister, the matter was taken up and State Government reiterated their view that 50 acre 
of land around Patna is not available and that the NIPER campus at the present site may be 
constructed vertically. However, Director, NIPER, Haj ipur pleaded that the existing area of 
land will be insufficient as staff quarters and research programs, sports facility etc need 
more space. 
 
 III. Establishment of NIPER will be a great addition to the educational infrastructure of 
any State. However, s ince 2007 NIPER, Hajipur is functioning from the premise of its 
mentor institute, and facing acute shortage of accommodation and is unable to plan 
construction of full -fledged campus for providing inter -alia all essential infrastructure 
facilities essential for quality education at Post Graduate level and Ph.D in Pharmaceutical 
Sciences.  
 
 IV.  DO letters have also been written on 29.6.2015 and 8 th September, 2015 by Hon'ble 
 Minister (C&F) to the Chief Minister of Bihar. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
16. Expressing concern over the delay in construction of NIPER Campuses, the 
Committee had noted that all six new NIPERs are still functioning with the assistance of  
Mentor Institutes.  The Committee, therefore stress ed and recommend ed that the 
Department should vigorously and relentlessly pursue the matter  with the respective Stat e 
Governments for allotment of land for construction of NIPER campuses in their States. The 
Committee note while Government of Uttar Pradesh  has allocated 50 acre s of land for 
NIPER Raebareli, the Government of Bihar is yet to allocate la nd for NIPER Hajipur despite 
their initial firm assurance for 100 acre s of land.  In respect of NIPER K olkata the land 
allocated is quite insufficient.  The Committee have also been apprised that matter has been 
taken up at the highest level both with the Government  of Bihar  and West Bengal .  The 
Committee, also note  that in Madurai 100 acres of land has been made available by the 
Government of Tamil Nadu  but the Action Taken Reply i s silent about the prog ress of 
construction of NIPER Campus in Madurai.   The Action Taken Reply is also silent about the 
latest status of NIPER Hyderabad and NIPER Ahmadabad. 
  From the foregoing the Committee observe that though the land has been allocated 
for NIPER Raebareli a nd NIPER Madurai but the work is yet to start.  While in case of Bih ar 
and West Bengal matter is still being pursued with respective S tate Go vernments for 
allocation of land.   The Committee , therefore, recommend that work regarding the 
construction of NIPE R Raebareli and Madurai should be started without any del ay and in 

Page 15 
 
respect of Bihar and West Bengal matter may again be sorted out  for early allocation of 
land.  In case of NIPER Hyderabad, the Committee recommend that final decision of location 
of NIPER c omplex should be taken at the earliest and preferably, it may be continued at 
IDPL campus and accordingly the construction work be  started .  For NIPER Ahmedabad, 
the Committee , hope that work would have been started  by now .  The Committee would  
therefore like to be apprised of the initiatives taken or being undertaken by the 
Department and the progress made in this regard. 
 
E. Need for Good and Standard Hostel facilities at NIPER institutes. 
 
Recommendation No.5 
 
17. While  emphasizing the need for good and  standard hostel facilities to the students of 
NIPER  Institutes,  the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The Committee are distressed to note that most the NIPERs do not have adequate hostel 
facilities. In NIPER, Ahmedabad, separate hostel facility on  double sharing basis to both 
boys and girls is hired as the mentor institute also does not have the hostel facility. In 
respect of NIPER -Guwahati, hostel facility on double sharing basis to both boys and girls 
has been provided on temporary basis. NIPER, Raebareli is operating in two places and 
therefore, hostels on sharing basis have been provided in rented accommodations. During 
the course of evidence, the Secretary of the Department has accepted the fact that the 
hostel facilities are not up to the stan dard and unless new buildings are constructed, it 
would be difficult to address the problem immediately. Further, due to lack of standard 
hostel facilities, NIPERs are not able to increase intake of students for admission in various 
disciplines run by the institutes. In this regard the committee are not convinced with the 
explanation of the Department on the issue. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
good and standard hostel facilities should be provided to the students who intend to 
pursue their highe r education in various disciplines offered by NIPERs. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this matter”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
18. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation  of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
          “At present except NIPER, Mohali all NIPERs are functioning  under  mentor Institutes using  
temporary hostel facility.  Nevertheless, all the NIPERs are directed to provide good and 
standard hostel facilities within the limitations. NIPER -Hyderabad is using old IDPL 
students hostel for its own students”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
19. The Committee are distressed to note that most the NIPERs do not have adequate 
hostel facilities.    During the course of evidence, the Se cretary of the Department has 
accepted the fact that the hostel facilities are not up to the standard and unless new 
buildings are constructed, it would be difficult to address the problem immediately. 
Further, due to lack of standard hostel facilities , NIPERs are not able to increase intake of 
students for admission in various disciplines run by the institutes.  The Committee, 

Page 16 
 
therefore, recommended that good and standard hostel facilities should be provided to the 
students who intend to pursue their highe r education in various disciplines offered by 
NIPERs.    In their Action Taken Reply the Department has stated that all the NIPERs are 
directed to provide good and standard hostel facilities within t he limitations.   The 
Committee are distressed with the g eneralized reply. The Committee are of the view that 
simply directing NIPER to provide good and standard hostel facilities  would not suffice but 
strong monitoring backed by financial support can only upgrade the standard of hostel 
facilities.   The Committee, therefore, recommend, that  the Department should vigorously 
pursue the matter of  construction of  hostel  facilities and would like to be apprised of the 
initiatives taken or being undertaken by the Department and the progress made in this 
regard. 
 
F. Research and Development Programme 
Recommendation No.6 
 
20. With the objective  of improving the quality of research activity carried out  by NIPER 
Institutes, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 “The committee note that NIPERs conduct regular education programmes for academia and 
industry in various disciplines and help the Indian Pharmaceutical Industry in solving 
Research & Development (R&D) related requirements. NIPER, Mohali has identified certain 
diseases which are neglected by the Western world but are of immense importance in India 
and the rest of the developing world, as its thrust areas. These are tuberculosis, malaria, 
kalaazar and the lifestyle disease diabetes. Besides, NIPER, Mohali also carries out research 
in the areas of drug developmen t, delivery and formulations, natural products and 
traditional medicine, etc. In NIPER, Ahmedabad more than 200 new chemical entities of 
leads are designed, synthesized and screened for diabetes, tuberculosis and anti -cancer 
potential. NIPER-Guwahati conducts research in different areas of pharmaceutical sciences 
keeping in view the national and local leads in the fields of Biotechnology, Pharma Practice 
and Pharmacology. In NIPER Hajipur research work is being carried out in the fields of 
Biotechnology, Ph armacoinformatics and Biostatistics. In NIPER, Hyderabad the research 
activities are mainly focused on Integrated Drug Discovery Programmes aimed at 
discovering new drug candidates in Cancer, Inflammatory Diseases, Metabolic disorders 
and Infectious diseases, Computer Aided Drug Design to support the medicinal chemistry in 
designing new chemical entities, development of various in vitro and in vivo biological 
screens for evaluating the synthesized new chemical entities, Drug Metabolism and 
Pharmacokinetic s tudies (DMPK), Development of novel process technologies for bulk 
drugs, Intermediate and APIs and Novel drug Delivery Systems: Nanotechnologies. NIPER, 
Mohali has also published 1950 research papers. Similarly, NIPER, Ahmedabad has 
published 58 and NIPER,  Guwahati has published 50 research papers. NIPER Hajipur, 
NIPER Hyderbad, NIPER Kolkata and NIPER Raebareli have published 13, 150, 16 and 14 
research papers respectively. Notwithstanding the position stated above, the fact remains 
that that most of the N IPER institutes lack state of the art infrastructure for undertaking 
research work. Research infrastructure in NIPER, Mohali has become obsolete and needs 
comprehensive overhauling/innovation. In NIPER, Ahmedabad infrastructure i.e. 
laboratory, equipment e tc., require augmentation. NIPER,Guwahati lacks basic 
infrastructure for research such as animal house, biotechnology laboratory and students 
are using library and other infrastructural facilities of Mentor Institution and the same is 
the case in NIPER, Ko lkata and NIPER, Rae Bareli where no research activity is being 

Page 17 
 
carried out. The Committee also note that not a single patent has been filed/approved by 
NIPERs with the exception of NIPER, Mohali. This clearly shows that the quality of research 
work being undertaken by NIPERs in pharma sector is not upto to mark. The Committee 
feel that the research in medicine and Pharmaceuticals sector is critical for developing 
country like India where qualitative and economical  drug availability is important for 
common people. The Committee, therefore, recommend, that all NIPERs should be 
equipped with state of the art research infrastructure and facilities so that they could 
undertake research work in areas of drug development, and formulations, etc. resulting in 
high quality drugs and medicines which are affordable to the common man. The Committee 
would like to apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard”. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
21. In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation  of the C ommittee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 “Except Mohali all NIPERs operated from Mentor Institutes. Besides, inadequate  budgetary 
allocations is affecting the R&D of NIPERs in their construction & manpower. The matter 
has been rigorously pursued with Ministry of Finance. For 2016 -17 Department submitted 
a proposal of Rs.1464.203 Cr for NIPER”. 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
22. The Committee noted that NIPERs conduct regular education programmes for 
academia and industry in various disciplines and help the Indian Pharmaceutical Industry 
in solving Research & Development (R&D) related requirements.   NIPER, Mohali has 
identified certain diseases which are neglected by the Western world but are of immense 
importance in India and the re st of the developing world, as its thrust areas.  NIPER -
Guwahati conducts research in different areas of pharmaceutical sciences keeping in view 
the national and local leads in the fields of Biotechnology, Pharma Practice and 
Pharmacology. In NIPER Hajipur  research work is being carried out in the fields of 
Biotechnology, Pharmaco informatics and Biostatistics. In NIPER, Hyderabad the research 
activities are mainly focused on Integrated Drug Discovery Programmes aimed at 
discovering new drug candidates in C ancer, etc.   The Committee also observed that most of 
the NIPER institutes lack state of the art infrastructure for undertaking research work. 
Research infrastructure in NIPER, Mohali has become obsolete and needs comprehensive 
overhauling/innovation. In NIPER, Ahmedabad infrastructure i.e. laboratory, equipment 
etc., require augmentation. NIPER,Guwahati lacks basic infrastructure for research such as 
animal house, biotechnology laboratory and students are using library and other 
infrastructural facilities  of Mentor Institution and the same is the case in NIPER, Kolkata 
and NIPER, Rae Bareli where no research activity is being carried out. The Committee also 
noted that not a single patent has been filed/approved by NIPERs with the exception of 
NIPER, Mohali.  In their Action Taken Reply the Department  has stated  that in addition to 
not having their own building in all NIPERs except Mohali , inadequate  budgetary 
allocations is also affecting the R&D of NIPERs  and their manpower . The matter has b een 

Page 18 
 
rigorously pursued by Department of Pharmaceuticals  with Ministry of Finance.  For 2016-
17 Department submitted a proposal of Rs.1464.203 Cr for NIPERs. The Committee , 
therefore, desire that the Department should vigorously pursue the issue with the Ministry 
of Finance with facts and figure to bring it to  logical conclusion.   The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
 

Page 19 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No.1 
 
 The Committee observed that the total budgetary allocation for NIPERs under BE 2012 -13, 
2013-14 and 2014-15 was Rs.121.55 crore, Rs.112.07 crore and Rs.124.03 crore, respectively. But 
the allocation was significantly reduced to Rs.80.77 c rore, Rs.64.84 crore and Rs.56.42 crore, 
respectively at RE stage. The Committee also note that for the year 2015 -16, as against the 
demand of the Department for Rs.1075.41 crore, the Ministry of Finance has provided only 
Rs.169.44 crore which is not at al l sufficient for the NIPERs. Thus, the Committee are distressed to 
note that the Department is not getting the budgetary allocation commensurate with the projected 
requirement for the NIPERs. According to the Department, non -starting of construction of 
activities for NIPER Campus, non -creation of regular posts in new NIPERs and complex fund 
releasing system, are the reasons for reduction in allocation of funds to NIPERs at RE stage. The 
Committee also note that the Budget Speech for 2015 -16 proposes three n ew NIPERs in 
Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh but no budget provision has been made for them. The 
Committee are apprehensive that in the absence of adequate funds, it will be difficult for the 
Department to set up adequate and strong infrastructure for smooth running and functioning of 
NIPERs and to achieve its avowed objectives to nurture and promote quality and excellence in 
pharmaceutical education and research. The Committee are of the strong view that it is the 
responsibility of the Department t o convince the Ministry of Finance ensuring optimum allocation 
of funds and to prepare a roadmap, in coordination with all stakeholders, for smooth execution of 
its projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should strongly place it s 
case before the Ministry of Finance to allocate budgetary allocation commensurate with the 
requirement for NIPERs. The Committee also recommend that the Department should also make 
concerted and coordinated efforts to address the constraints which are im peding the effective 
execution of NIPER projects and set up an institutional mechanism to monitor rigorously the 
progress of projects. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by the 
Department and the progress made in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
"1. The Department has taken a number of measures both to streamline Fund release 
system and to start construction projects of all new NIPERs and renovation of NIPER -
Mohali. Under the new fund release system, this year till Novem ber, 2015 Rs.95.632 Cr was 
released against Rs.35.41 Cr during 2014 -15 & Rs.45.07 Cr during 2013 -14 illustrating the 
success of new initiative. 
2. During the financial year 2015 -16 an amount of Rs.210.00 Cr was allocated to the 
Department. However, there i s a drastic cut of Rs.60.00 Cr  and at RE stage only Rs.150.38 
Cr has been allocated. As far as NIPER Division is concerned Rs.95.632 Cr has been released 
against allocation of Rs.141.96 Cr at BE stage. Request for allocation of additional funds will 
be demanded at 3rd Supplementary stage. 
3. On optimum  allocation:- 
-DOP has been requesting for adequate allocation considering construction of NIPERs & 
faulty allocation but the actual budgetary allocation are very low. 
-For 2016-17, Department submitted a proposal of Rs.1464.203 Cr. under Plan head. 
4.     Regarding new projects construction, NIPER -Guwahati project’s foundation was laid 
on 30thMay, 2015. Minimum annual requirement for NIPER -Guwahati is Rs.100 Cr. Short of 
funds badly affected Guwahati project. Similarly, NIPER-Ahmedabad foundation was laid on 
16th December, 2015. Foundation for other NIPERs are in pipeline. Besides, SFC has 
approved Rs.249.00 Cr. Project for NIPER -Mohali but no money could be released for want 

Page 20 
 
of funds. The Finance Ministry has  been repeatedly impressed about the serious situation. 
It is afraid that non -provision of adequate budgetary allocation & release is badly affecting 
the credibility of systems." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.2 
 
 The Committee note that NIPERs offer courses to students in the Post Graduate level and 
PhD level in various disciplines like Biotechnology, Medicinal chemistry, Pharmaceutics, Pharmacy 
Practice, Pharmacology & Toxicology etc. and  the degrees offered by the NIPERs are well accepted 
in the pharmaceutical industries and institutions. A large number of passed out students are 
absorbed in companies and research institutes across the country as well as in abroad. While a 
number of these  students are placed in responsible positions by the pharmaceutical industries 
through campus placements, others are pursuing higher education in reputed national and 
international institutions. However, the Committee are deeply distressed to note that exc ept 
NIPER, Mohali and NIPER, Ahmedabad, all other NIPERs do not have 
regular/permanent/sanctioned faculty and staff and these NIPERs are running with the faculty 
and staff either on contractual basis or faculties invited from mentor institutes or other rep uted 
institutes like PGI, Chandigarh, Guwahati University, Dibrugarh University etc. Even in NIPER, 
Mohali which has a complement of 73 sanctioned posts for non -academic side, only 46 posts are 
filled up and the remaining 27 posts right from the top level of Director to the lowest level of 
Assistant or Clerk/Typist are vacant. Similarly as per the information furnished to the Committee, 
2 posts of Professor, 9 posts of Associate Professor and 23 posts of Assistant Professor are vacant 
in NIPER, Mohali. The Committee strongly feel that in the absence of regular staff, academic or 
non-academic, NIPERs could not be expected to attain excellence and quality in the field of 
pharmaceutical education and research. It is, therefore, imperative that all the regular/s anctioned 
posts are filled up without further delay. During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals had accepted that inadequate man power is one of the major 
constraints or critical issue which has hindered the growth of  these institutions and needs to be 
decided. In this context, the Committee were informed that the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
has constituted an Academic Standard Committee on 27 th March 2015 which is mandated to 
recommend the number of faculties and st aff for creation of posts for all NIPERs except NIPER, 
Mohali. During the course of evidence, the Committee wereinformed that the Committee has 
finalized the report and they will be handing over the report within a week. On the basis of the 
report, the Dep artment will create a number of teaching as well as non -teaching posts for all 
NIPERs and therafter, the Department would be empowered to fill up the vacancies. It has also 
been committed that all these NIPERs will have required teaching as well as non -teaching staff 
with in a period of six months. Further, the Department has constituted a Search -cum-Selection 
Committee for selecting candidates for the post of Directors in NIPER, Mohali; NIPER, Hajipur; 
NIPER, Hyderabad; NIPER, Guwahati and NIPER, Raibareli . An advertisement seeking applications 
for the post of Directors has been issued on 01.07.2015 and the last date was 31.07.2015. 
According to the Department, the process of selection is expected to be completed in 3 months. It 
was also informed to the Com mittee that in case of NIPER, Mohali, a High Level committee has 
been constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary (Pharma) which is examining the 
appointment of each employee and the whole exercise is expected to be completed by the end of 
August 2015. In case of other NIPERs, once posts are created recruitment of regular faculty will be 
taken up. In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend that the process of selection for the 
post of Directors in NIPER, Mohali; NIPER, Hajipur; NIPER, Hyderabad; NIPER, Guwahati and 
NIPER, Raibareli  and for creation of requisite number of posts for all NIPERs except NIPER, 
Mohali and subsequent recruitment of suitable candidates to man these posts may be expedited 
within a fixed time frame. The Committee hope and trust that once these posts are filled up, 
NIPERs will be able to augment its efficiency to attain academic excellence and achieve its avowed 
objectives in the field of pharmaceutical education and research for which they were established 
in the country. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 

Page 21 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 "Department of Pharmaceuticals has been taking up a number of measures to fully 
operationalize NIPERs viz., 
 
(i)  Constituted Search -cum-Selection Committee for the appointment of 
Directors at NIPER -Mohali, Guwahati, Hajipur, Hyderabad &Raebareli and it is 
expected that work is completed by January, 2016. The matter is being pursued with 
Search-cum-Selection Committee to expedite the process. Already regular D irectors 
are there at NIPER-Ahmedabad & Kolkata. 
 
(ii)   Constituted Academic Standing Committee to set norms for opening 
Departments and on number of faculty & other posts in NIPERs. It is expected that 
the committee will  submit its report within the month of D ecember, 2015. There 
upon Department will submit proposals to Ministry of Finance for creation of 
sanction posts immediately. 
 
(iii) Regarding NIPER-Mohali regularization of employees, the matter is being expedited 
in consultation with other Departments." 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.10  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 

Page 22 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 23 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
  
Recommendation No.3 
 
 The Committee note that NIPER has been given statutory recognition by an act of 
Parliament and declared as an Institute of National Importance. NIPERs are awarding degrees 
under NIPER Act, 1998. These degrees awarded by NIPERs are recognized by the Indian and 
foreign universities and students passed out from these institutes are well placed in Indian and 
foreign Pharmaceuticals industries. However, the Committee are distressed to note that 
M.S.Pharma degree awarded by NIPERs is not recognized by the University Grants Commission 
(UGC). The Committee are of the view that the courses offered by NIPERs are of wide importance 
and non -recognition of degrees vizM.S.Pharma degree by UGC, will adversely affect the career 
prospects of the students holding the degree . Non -recognition of the degree would also raise 
suspicion on the quality of education be ing imparted by NIPERs and may in turn affect the 
quantum of package being given to the passed out students on their placements by the companies. 
However, the Committee were informed that the Department has taken up the matter with UGC 
and Ministry of HRD and the same is expected to be resolved very soon. Notwithstanding the 
position stated above, the Committee would like to recommend that the Department should 
vigorously pursue the case and impress upon UGC and Ministry of HRD to grant recognition to 
degree awarded by NIPER under NIPER Act, 1998 without further loss of time to save the career 
prospects of several students passed out from these institutes. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 "To sort out  the matter a meeting   under the Chairmanship of  Secy (P) was held on 
6.8.2015. Secretary  UGC attended  the meeting but could not assure UGC recognition 
despite the fact the M.S degrees  are being awarded by IISERs & IITs.  Pharmacy Council of 
India has already recognized the degree and uploaded at their website. AICTE has already 
been requested to issue an advisory  on NIPERs degree  to be honoured  by AICTE approved 
Institutes." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.13  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 The Committee are distressed to note that most the NIPERs do not have adequate hostel 
facilities. In NIPER, Ahmedabad, separate hostel facility on double sharing basis to both boys and 
girls is hi red as the mentor institute also does not have the hostel facility. In respect of NIPER -
Guwahati, hostel facility on double sharing basis to both boys and girls has been provided on 
temporary basis. NIPER, Raebareli is operating in two places and therefore , hostels on sharing 
basis have been provided in rented accommodations. During the course of evidence, the Secretary 
of the Department has accepted the fact that the hostel facilities are not up to the standard and 
unless new buildings are constructed, it would be difficult to address the problem immediately. 
Further, due to lack of standard hostel facilities, NIPERs are not able to increase intake of students 
for admission in various disciplines run by the institutes. In this regard the committee  are not 
convinced with the explanation of the Department on the issue. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that good and standard hostel facilities should be provided to the students who intend 

Page 24 
 
to pursue their higher education in various disciplines offered by NIPE Rs. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in this matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 "At present except NIPER, Mohali all NIPERs are functioning  under  mentor Institutes using  
temporary hostel facility.  Nevertheless, all the NIPERs are directed to provide good and 
standard hostel facilities within the limitations. NIPER -Hyderabad is using old IDPL  
students hostel for its own students." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.19  of Chapter- I of the Report) 

Page 25 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE  
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No.4 
 
 The Committee are deeply anguished to know that except NIPER -Mohali, presently all the 
six New NIPERs are still function ing with the assistance of Mentor Institutes even after a lapse of 
more than 7 years since 2007 -2008. The Committee note that while the construction work of 
NIPER, Guwahati campus has since started from 30.05.2015, the construction work of NIPER, 
Ahmedabad is likely to start shortly. For NIPER, Hyderabad, the land has been given by the State 
Government in Genome Valley but a decision is yet to be taken as to whether the institute be set 
up in Genome Valley or in the IDPL complex itself where the institute i s presently functioning. In 
the context of NIPER, Hajipur, the Committee note that the Institute is running under the 
mentorship of Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna. The State 
Government of Bihar was requested for allotment o f 100 acre land free of cost, for setting up 
NIPER at Hajipur. However, in spite of the matter being followed up with the State Government at 
Chief Minister and Chief Secretary level, the land has not been allotted for setting up full -fledged 
NIPER Campus at Hajipur. It was advised by the State that the institution may proceed with 
vertical construction on 12.43 acres of land already in possession of NIPER, Hajipur, along with 3 
buildings. However, the existing area of land was not found sufficient for the purpose. The matter 
has again been taken up at the highest level but the issue is yet to be settled satisfactorily. As 
regards, NIPER, Kolkata, the State Government has allotted about 35 acres of land, free of cost for 
construction of NIPER Kolkata but dem anded Rs.30.10 crores as development charges which can 
not be paid by the Ministry as the same is against the mandate of Cabinet Note. The matter is being 
pursued by the Department with the State Government at Chief Minister level and the same is yet 
to be resolved. In the context of NIPER, Raebareli, the Committee note that approximately 50 acres 
Land has been transferred in the institute's name. The Committee were also apprised by the 
Department during the course of oral evidence that State Government of Tamil Nadu has provided 
100 acres of land for NIPER Institute at Madurai and the Department of Pharmaceuticals has 
immediately taken over the land and the process of construction of NIPER is being started. In view 
of the foregoing, the Committee are not sa tisfied with the snail's pace progress in the construction 
of campuses for New NIPERs. The very fact that even after a lapse of more than 7 years, these 
institutions do not have their own campuses clearly reflects the failure of the Department for 
timely acquisition of land for construction of campuses. Needless to say, in the absence of requisite 
infrastructure facilities, it would be difficult for NIPERs to achieve the quality and capability in the 
field of pharma education and research. The Committee, th erefore, recommend that the 
Department should vigorously pursue with the respective State Governments to allocate land of 
requisite dimension within a fixed time frame and for this purpose the Department may consider 
to create a Special Cell to monitor and  pursue vigorously with the States for acquisition of land. 
The Committee also recommend that the process of construction work in respect of NIPERs for 
which land has already been acquired should be expedited and be completed with in a fixed time 
frame. The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken by the Department in this 
regard. 
  
Reply of The Government 
 
1.  NIPER-Raebareli -Government of U.P has allocated 50 acres of land for NIPER, 
Raebareli. 
 
2.  NIPER-Kolkata -Government of West Be ngal has been requested to allocate 100 
acres of land free of cost without encumbrance. The matter has been followed up 
vigorously with the State Government. However, response from the State 

Page 26 
 
Government is yet to be received.  Both Union Minister & Secretar y have taken up 
the matter with Chief Minister of West Bengal & Chief Secretary respectively. 
Regrettably, the Government of West Bengal earlier allocated 35 acres and now 
offers only 30 acres. The 30 acres is totally insufficient. Recently, Union Minister  
(C&F) has written a letter dated 10.12.2015 to the Chief Minister, Government of 
West Bengal and similarly Secretary(Pharma) has also written to the Chief Secretary 
of West Bengal to allocate 100 acres of land at Kalyani. The matter is being pursued 
with State Government. 
3.  NIPER, Hajipur (Bihar) 
 
I. Based on the firm assurances given in writing by the State Government of Bihar for 
allotment of 100 acre land free of cost, vide letter No. dated 29/5/2006 and 
28/8/2006 by the Industrial Development Commissi oner Govt. of Bihar this 
Department set up NIPER  at Hajipur in 2007 under the mentorship of Rajendra 
Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences (RMRIMS), Patna. Since, 2007, 
NIPER is functioning in the EPIP Campus, BIADA Industrial Area, Hajipur. Sta te Govt. 
has, however, not yet allotted the land for setting up full -fledged NIPER Campus at 
Hajipur, in spite of the matter being followed up with the State Govt. at Chief 
Minister and Chief Secretary level.   
 
II In the Eastern Zonal Council meeting held  on 16.01.2015 chaired by Union Home 
Minister, the matter was taken up and State Government reiterated their view that 
50 acre of land around Patna is not available and that the NIPER campus at the 
present site may be constructed vertically. However, Direc tor, NIPER, Hajipur 
pleaded that the existing area of land will be insufficient as staff quarters and 
research programs, sports facility etc need more space. 
 
III. Establishment of NIPER will be a great addition to the educational infrastructure of 
any State. However, since 2007 NIPER, Hajipur is functioning from the premise of its 
mentor institute, and facing acute shortage of accommodation and is unable to plan 
construction of full -fledged campus for providing inter -alia all essential 
infrastructure facil ities essential for quality education at Post Graduate level and 
Ph.D in Pharmaceutical Sciences.  
 
IV.  DO letters have also been written on 29.6.2015 and 8 th September, 2015 by Hon'ble 
Minister (C&F) to the Chief Minister of Bihar. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.16 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.6 
 
 The committee note that NIPERs conduct regular education programmes for academia and 
industry in various disciplines and help the Indian Pharmaceutical Industry in solving R esearch & 
Development (R&D) related requirements. NIPER, Mohali has identified certain diseases which are 
neglected by the Western world but are of immense importance in India and the rest of the 
developing world, as its thrust areas. These are tuberculosi s, malaria, kalaazar and the lifestyle 
disease diabetes. Besides, NIPER, Mohali also carries out research in the areas of drug 
development, delivery and formulations, natural products and traditional medicine, etc. In NIPER, 
Ahmedabad more than 200 new che mical entities of leads are designed, synthesized and screened 
for diabetes, tuberculosis and anti -cancer potential. NIPER -Guwahati conducts research in 
different areas of pharmaceutical sciences keeping in view the national and local leads in the fields 
of Biotechnology, Pharma Practice and Pharmacology. In NIPER Hajipur research work is being 
carried out in the fields of Biotechnology, Pharmacoinformatics and Biostatistics. In NIPER, 

Page 27 
 
Hyderabad the research activities are mainly focused on Integrated Drug Discovery Programmes 
aimed at discovering new drug candidates in Cancer, Inflammatory Diseases, Metabolic disorders 
and Infectious diseases, Computer Aided Drug Design to support the medicinal chemistry in 
designing new chemical entities, development of va rious in vitro and in vivo biological screens for 
evaluating the synthesized new chemical entities, Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetic studies 
(DMPK), Development of novel process technologies for bulk drugs, Intermediate and APIs and 
Novel drug Delivery Systems: Nanotechnologies. NIPER, Mohali has also published 1950 research 
papers. Similarly, NIPER, Ahmedabad has published 58 and NIPER, Guwahati has published 50 
research papers. NIPER Hajipur, NIPER Hyderbad, NIPER Kolkata and NIPER Raebareli have 
published 13, 150, 16 and 14 research papers respectively. Notwithstanding the position stated 
above, the fact remains that that most of the NIPER institutes lack state of the art infrastructure for 
undertaking research work. Research infrastructure in NIPER, M ohali has become obsolete and 
needs comprehensive overhauling/innovation. In NIPER, Ahmedabad infrastructure i.e. 
laboratory, equipment etc., require augmentation. NIPER,Guwahati lacks basic infrastructure for 
research such as animal house, biotechnology l aboratory and students are using library and other 
infrastructural facilities of Mentor Institution and the same is the case in NIPER, Kolkata and 
NIPER, Rae Bareli where no research activity is being carried out. The Committee also note that 
not a single patent has been filed/approved by NIPERs with the exception of NIPER, Mohali. This 
clearly shows that the quality of research work being undertaken by NIPERs in pharma sector is 
not upto to mark. The Committee feel that the research in medicine and Pharmac euticals sector is 
critical for developing country like India where qualitative and economical  drug availability is 
important for common people. The Committee, therefore, recommend, that all NIPERs should be 
equipped with state of the art research infrast ructure and facilities so that they could undertake 
research work in areas of drug development, and formulations, etc. resulting in high quality drugs 
and medicines which are affordable to the common man. The Committee would like to apprised of 
the initiatives undertaken by the Department in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Except Mohali all NIPERs operated from Mentor Institutes. Besides, inadequate  budgetary 
allocations is affecting the R&D of NIPERs in their construction & manpower. The matter 
has been rigorously pursued with Ministry of Finance. For 2016 -17 Department submitted 
a proposal of Rs.1464.203 Cr for NIPERs. 
 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 22  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
  
 
   
   NEW DELHI;                             (ANANDRAO ADSUL) 
 17   February,  2016                                  Chairperson 
28, Phalguna,  1937 (Saka)                                        Standing Committee on  
                                       Chemicals and Fertilizers  

Page 28 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
The Committee sat on  Thursday, the 28th January, 2016 from 1 200 hrs.  
to 1230 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Smt. Anju Bala 
3. Smt. Veena Devi 
4. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
5. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
6. Shri S. Rajendran 
7. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
8. Dr. Uma Saren  
9. Shri Tasleem Uddin 
10. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Dr. M. S. Gill 
12. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
13. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
14. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
15. Shri Mansukh L. Mandaviya 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee.   
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the Two Action Taken R eports 
on the subjects  ‘Movement of Fertilizers and Monitoring System' (Department of 
Fertilizers) and 'Functioning  of National Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research, (NIPER)' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of  
Pharmaceuticals). 
4. While the draft ATR on the subject ‘Movement of Fertilizers and Monitoring System' 
was adopted with out any modification or amendments, the draft ATR` on the subject 
'NIPER' was adopted by the Committee with minor modifications. 
 
5. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to make consequential changes, if any, 
arising out of the factual verification of the Action Taken Reports by the Department of 
Fertilizers and Department of Pharmaceuticals of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
   The Committee then adjourned. 

Page 29 
 
 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION T AKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RE COMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWE LFTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA) OF THE ST ANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CH EMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2014-15) ON THE SUBJECT 
FUNCTIONING OF NATIO NAL INSTITUTES OF PH ARMACEUTICAL EDUCATI ON AND 
RESEARCH (NIPER) OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT 
OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 6 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1 and 2 )   
 
2 
Percentage of Total 33.33% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
NIL 
 
 
00 
Percentage of Total    0 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 3 and 5 )   
 
 
2 
Percentage of Total 33.33% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
(Vide Recommendation No.  4 and 6) 
 
2 
Percentage of Total 33.33% 
 