 
  
52 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS (2017-18) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF  CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Forty forth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants 2018-19' of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of   Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
 
 FIFTY SECOND REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
JULY, 2018 /SHRAVANA, 1940 (SAKA) 
 
  


 
  
CC&F.No.52 
 
 
FIFTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2017-18) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained  
in the  Forty fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  on  'Demands for Grants 2018-19' of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of   Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  31 July, 2018 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 31 July,  2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
JULY, 2018 /SHRAVANA, 1940 (SAKA) 
  

 
  
 
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18) 
 
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(v) 
Chapter I Report  
 
1 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
11 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government' s  
replies 
 
25 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee  
27 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
32 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of Fourteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee 
on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2017-18) held on 23.07.2018. 
 
37 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Forty  Fourth Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers on 'Demands for Grants 2018-19'  pertaining to 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 
  
  
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2017-18) 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri George Baker 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
6. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
7. Dr. Ratna De Nag 
8. Smt. Veena Devi 
9. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
10. Shri Innocent 
11. Prof. A Seetaram Naik # 
12. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
13. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
14. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
15. Shri Rajendran S. 
16. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
17. Dr. Uma Saren 
18. Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
19. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
20. 
21 
Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
Shri Sarfaraz Alam* 
   
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Shri Prem Chand Gupta 
24. Shri B.K. Hariprasad 
25.  Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar@ 
26. Shri Ranvijay Singh Judev 
27.  Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
28.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
29. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade  
30. 
31. 
Vacant^ 
Vacant^ 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi                          Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A. K. Srivastava                                  Director 
3. Shri U. C. Bharadwaj                                 Deputy Secretary 
 4. Shri N. Amarathiagan                                 Committee Officer 
 # Prof. A. Seetaram Naik MP, (LS) has been nominated as a Member of the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 3.11.20 17   
vice  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy MP, (LS) who ceased to be a Member of the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 3.11.2017 
*Shri Sarfaraz Alam has been nominated as a Member of the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 27.04.2018 
@Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar has been nominated as a Member of the Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers w.e.f. 02.06.2018 
^Vacant vice Dr. Bhusan Lal Jangade due to his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 02.04.2018. 
^Vacant vice Shri K. Parasaran due to his retirement from Rajya Sabha on 28.06.2018. 
 
 
(iii) 

 
  
  
INTRODUCTION 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2017-2018) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their 
behalf, present this Fifty Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Forty-fourth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(2017-18) on  Demands for Grants 2018-19  pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
       
2. The Forty-fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to  Lok Sabha on 13.03.2018.  The Action 
Taken replies of Government to all observations  / recommendations contained in the 
Report were received  on 11.06.2018 The Standing Committee on  Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2017 -2018) considered and adopted this Report  at their sitting held on 
23.07.2018. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Forty fourth Report  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Comments of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. - Chapter-I 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                    ANANDRAO ADSUL 
       July, 2018                                                                                   Chairperson 
      Shravana1940 (Saka)                                                Standing Committee on 
                                                                                                            Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 

 
 
1 
 
REPORT 
         CHAPTER  - I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Forty -fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers on the Demands for Grants 2018 -19 of 
the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 13.03.2018.  In all, the 
Committee made 15 Observations / Recommendations in the Report. 
1.2  Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of  Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish replies to the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the  Forty -fourth Report within three months from 
the date of presentation of the Report, i.e., by  12.06.2018. The Action Taken 
Replies of the Government in respect of all the 15 Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Departmen t of  Chemicals and Petrochemicals) vide 
their O.M. No.  20/1/2/C&F/2017 -18 dated 11 -06-2018. These Replies have been 
categorized as follows:- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government :- 
 Sl. Nos.  2,  4, 5, 9, 12, 13, 14 and 15.                   (Total = 08)                                                     
 These may be included in Chapter-II of the Report.  
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s reply :- 
 Sl. No. 11                                  (Total = 01) 
 This may be included in Chapter-III of the  Report. 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government   have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
 Sl.No. 1, 3, 10                       (Total = 03)   
 This may be included in Chapter-IV of the Report. 

 
 
2 
 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 
 Sl.No. 6, 7 & 8                             (Total = 03)  
These may be included in Chapter -V of the Draft Report. 
1.3 The Committee desire that  the Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report 
should be furnished expeditiously. 
 
1.4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations which  still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
(RECOMMENDATION NO. 1) 
Status of Chemical Industry 
1.5 The Committee in their Original Report had stressed about the need for 
promotion and support of Indian chemical industry and a comprehensive chemical law  
and recommended as under :-  
 
"The Committee take note that the chemical industry which includes basic 
chemicals and its products, petrochemicals, fertil izers, pesticides, paints, 
varnishes, gases, soaps, perfumes and toiletry and pharmaceuticals and covers 
more than eighty thousand diversified commercial products, occupies a pivotal 
position in meeting basic needs and improving quality of human life. This  
industry is the mainstay of industrial and agricultural development of the country 
and provides building blocks for several downstream industries, such as 
textiles, papers, paints, varnishes, soaps, detergents, pharmaceuticals, etc. 
According to National Accounts Statistics 2017, brought out by the Central 
Statistics Office (CSO), Chemical and Chemical products sector (industry 
division 20 and 21 of NIC 2008) accounted for 2.39% of the Gross Value 
Addition (GVA) (at 2011 -12 prices) in 2015 -16, compared to 2.23% in 2014-15. 
The production of Major Chemicals and Petrochemicals in 2017 -18 (up to 
December 2017) was 19793 thousand MT, as compared to 19210 thousand MT 
in 2016-17 (up to December 2016) implying growth of 3.03%. The Committee 
have been informed that  after adoption of liberal industrial, trade & FDI policy 
post 1991, the growth of the chemical industry has been driven by market 
forces and the industry has gained global recognition. The Indian chemical 
industry ranks seventh in the world and fourth in Asia. Taking into account the 

 
 
3 
 
foregoing, the Committee feel that the Department shall strive to promote and 
support the Indian chemical industry with all necessary financial and trade 
measures and through suitable schemes and programmes for its further gro wth 
and development. The Committee think that, if necessary a comprehensive 
chemical law may be enacted to regulate production, consumption and trade in 
chemicals and to safeguard the interests of the domestic chemical industry in 
consonance with provision s of WTO rules provisions. The Committee may be 
informed of the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.6 In their action taken reply in respect of the above mentioned recommendation, 
the Department of Chemicals and Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
  Presently production, consumption and trade for hazardous chemicals is  
governed by Manufactures, Storage & Import of Hazardous Chemicals Rules, 
1989 amended in 2000. Production, consumption and trade for Pesticides & 
Insecticides is covered under the Insecticides Act 1968. Other chemicals are 
governed by various Acts & Rules listed below: 
 The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
 The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 
 The Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 
 The Chemicals Accidents (Emergency Planning, Preparedness and Response), 
Rules, 1996 
 The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 amended 1992 
 The Explosive Act & Rules 
 The Factories Act & Rules 
 The Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000 
 The Petroleum Act & Rules 
 The CWC Act & Rules 
 In view of the above, there is no necessity to have new Chemicals Law in the 
country as the chemicals sector is being governed by the already existing Acts 
& Rules. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
1.7 The Committee had inter-alia recommended that the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals should strive to promote and support the Indian 
chemical industry with all necessary financial and trade measures and suitable 
schemes and programmes for its further growth and development. The 

 
 
4 
 
Committee had also recommended that, if necessary a comprehensive chemical 
law might be enacted to regulate production, consumption and trade in 
chemicals and to safeguard the interests of the domestic chemical industry in 
consonance with the provisions of WTO rules.  The Action Taken Reply  has 
stated that there is no necessity to have new Chemicals Law in the cou ntry as 
the chemicals sector is being governed by the already existing Acts & Rules.    
The reply of the Government also does not contain clarification on the asp ect of 
steps taken for the promotion  and support the Indian chemical industry through 
necessary financial and trade measures and suitable schemes and programmes 
for its further growth and development.    The Committee could have been  
apprised of the statu s of Indian chemical industry and about the steps being 
taken for its promotion and support.  The Committee in this regard would like to 
stress that, in the absence a comprehensive chemical law, the Government will 
have to intervene whenever felt necessary , to regulate and control cost -price 
and supply of certain essential chemical items.   The Committee desire to  be 
clarified about the position regarding cost and availability of essential chemicals 
and need for their regulation and  control especially in o rder to safeguard the 
interests of domestic chemical industry in consonance with provisions of WTO 
rule provisions.  They reiterate their earlier recommendation and seek a specific 
Action Taken Reply in this regard.   The Committee are of the strong view th at 
comprehensive chemical law should be made merging all the existing Acts 
which would not only bring all the law under one umbrella but also dispel any 
ambiguity. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
 
Budget Allocation 
 
1.8 Having taken note of the reduction in budgetary allocations for 2018 -19 for  
various schemes and programmes of the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals, the Committee in their 44th Report (16th Lok Sabha), recommended as 
under :-  
"The Committee observe that an amount of Rs.199.65/ - crore has been 
allocated as BE for the year 2018 -19 as against the projected requirement of 
Rs.288.09/- crore by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals for the 

 
 
5 
 
year. Reduced allocations have been mad e in the BE -2018-19 for (i) Central 
Institute of Plastic Engineering and Technology (Rs.83.64/ - cr. against 
Rs.156.47/- cr.), (ii) New Schemes of Petrochemicals (Rs.55.50/ - cr. against 
Rs.68.42/- cr.), (iii) Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme (Rs.3 .00 
cr. against Rs.5.40/ - cr.) and Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology 
(Rs.7.50 against Rs.10.23/ - cr.). Apart from the aforesaid reduced allocations, 
only a token amount of Rupees one lakh has been allocated for Assam Gas 
Cracker Project (AGCP)  in 2018 -19 budgetary provisions against Rs. 
Rs.449.45/- crore as unpaid balance of capital subsidy payment to AGCP. The 
Committee feel that the reduction in funds -allocations to the Department for 
2018-19 will adversely affect the implementation of scheme s and programmes 
of the Department. The Committee foresee that the Department intends to seek 
supplementary grants later on to meet the requirements of funds for AGCP, 
CIPET, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should 
project their additional funds requirement to the Ministry of Finance in time and 
in a convincing manner and impress upon them to allocate adequate funds to 
the Department in 2018 -19 at RE stage. The Committee, would like to be 
informed of the action taken in this regard."  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.9 The reply of Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals in this rega rd is as 
under : 
"The budget allocation of Rs.549.45 crore (as approved in Revised Cost 
Estimate-II as additional Capital Subsidy) for the Assam Gas Crac ker Project 
(AGCP) was sought in the third and final Batch of Supplementary Demands for 
Grants for 2016-17.  Ministry of Finance was requested to provide the required 
amount of Rs.549.45 crore under BE 2017 -18 vide D.O.letter dated 28 th 
February, 2017 from  Minister (Chemicals & Fertilizers and Parliamentary 
Affairs) to the Hon‟ble Finance Minister.  However, Ministry of Finance allocated 
an amount of Rs.100 crore under BE 2017-18 for AGCP. It is also stated that as 
per Monthly Expenditure Plan for 2017 -18, an amount of Rs.100.00 crore has 
been released to Brahmaputra Cracker & Polymer Limited (BCPL), Assam 
during May-June, 2017.  Regarding balance amount of Rs.449.45, the matter 
was taken up with Ministry of Finance vide D.O. letter dated 18.07.2017 from 
Secretary (C&PC).  During meeting held on 9.11.2017 in Ministry of Finance, as 

 
 
6 
 
well as, the amount was also sought in the 2nd Supplementary Demands for 
Grants for 2017-18 
 Further, the re -appropriation proposal accompanying the technical 
supplementary at the 4 th Supplementary stage for allocating Rs.15.41 crore to 
the scheme AGCP with internal savings after a proposal of Parliament, was not 
agreed to by M/o Finance. The M/o  Finance did not agree to projected demand 
of Rs.449.45 crore for AGCP for 2018 -19. Accordingly, a token amount of 
Rs.1.00 lakh was indicated in the BE 2018 -19 of the Department.  Thereafter 
two d.o. letter dated 17.05.2018 and 28.05.2018 have been sent to  Min. of 
Finance from the level of Secretary (DCPC) for providing balance capital 
subsidy in next Supplementary Demand for Grants." 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.10 While stressing the need for timely projection of funds requirement to the 
Ministry of Finance in a convincing manner , the Committee recommended to 
make provision for adequate funds to the Department at RE stage during the 
current financial year 2018-19.   The Committee are disappointed to note that the 
Action Taken Reply of the Department does not contain any details of specific 
steps being taken up by the Department to get adequate funds for a financial 
year instead of taking recourse of Supplementary Demands for Grants .  The 
Committee are not at all satisfied with the approach of the Department to seek 
release of Rs. 449.45 crore as balance of capital subsidy for Assam Gas Cracker 
Project.    The Committee are apprehensive that the Department is unsure of its 
ability to  project their requirement of funds in a convincing manner to get 
adequate funds from the Ministry of Finance and if additional funds are required, 
the same should be projected  well in time in a convincing manner.   The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates their earlier recommendation and seek a 
concrete action  
 
 
 

 
 
7 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
 
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology (CIPET) 
1.11 Having taken note of the reduction in budgetary allocations for  CIPET during 
2018-19,  the Committee in their Report recommended as under :-  
 
"The Committee are dismayed to note that a much lower allocation of 83.64/ -
crore has been allocated as BE 2018 -19 for the implementation of Central 
Institute Plastic Engineering and Technology (CIPET) against the proj ected 
requirement of Rs.156.47/ - crore. The Committee also note that at present 25 
CIPET centres are functional; 5 CIPET centres are to be started soon and 
setting up of 9 CIPET centres and under progress. The Department has also 
acquiesced to the fact tha t the budgetary allocations for CIPET during 2018 -19 
is inadequate. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals shall take up the issue of 
additional fund allocation with the Ministry of Finance highligh ting the activities 
of CIPET as an institute of national importance for skill development in its field. 
The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.12 The reply of Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals in this regard is as 
under : 
The matter regarding additional fund allocation has been taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance vide this Department‟s letters dated 22.11.2016, 
23.11.2016, 14.12.2016 and 09.02.2017. Letters dated 23.11.2016 and 
09.02.2017 were written to Finance Ministry by Minister of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers. 
In reply to this Department‟s letter dated 09.02.2017, Ministry of Finance 
replied that “as per the availability of fiscal space and absorptive capacity of the 
Department, appropriate budget has been earmarked for the scheme in RE 
2016-17 and BE 2017-18. The scheme has been allotted Rs. 68.08 crore in BE 
2017-18. Since, the Union Budget 2017 -18 already passed by the Parliament, 

 
 
8 
 
the allocation for the scheme may be reviewed a t the RE 2017 -18 stage”, 
However, no additional budget has been allocated in favour of CIPET. Since the 
allocations for BE 2018 -19 has already been finalized, the matter will be taken 
up again with the Ministry of Finance at RE stage for additional funds. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.13 The Committee had noted with concern the low allocation of Rs.83.64 
crore against the projected requirement of Rs.156.47 crore for Central Institute 
of Plastic Engineering and Technology (CIPET) during  the year 2018 -19 at BE  
stage.  Keeping into account the importance of the CIPET in promoting skill 
development , the Committee recommended to the Department to take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Finance for additional funds allocation.  The Action 
Taken Reply of the Govern ment indicate that the matter has been taken with the 
Ministry through a number communications.  The Committee note that the last 
communication was sent to the Ministry of Finance on 09 -02-2017 which shows 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has done nothing after the 
recommendation of the Committee in March, 2018.  The Department should have 
written to the Ministry of Finance quoting the Committee's recommendations.    
The Committee express their very serious view about the way the Department 
has treated their observations, suggestions and recommendations .   The 
Committee, therefore, once again reiterate their original recommendation to be 
dealt with all seriousness by the Department and a further action taken in this 
regard be apprised to the Committee. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 15 
 
Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster 
1.14 Having noted that a substantial balance  amount of Rs.37.24 crore as 
compensation  still pending in account and the m ammoth lethal toxic waste lying in 
Union Carbide premises the Committee recommended as under  :- 
" The Committee note that a budgetary allocation of Rs.28.32/ - crore has been 
made in 2018 -19 for providing financial assistance for rehabilitation for Bhopal 
Gas Leak Disaster (BGLD). The Committee also note that as on 31.01.2018, a 

 
 
9 
 
sum of Rs.37.24 Crore only is lying as balance out of compensation amount of 
$470 million deposited by Union Carbide Corporation with RBI in 1989. The 
Committee, therefore, hope tha t budgetary support for BGLD shall not suffer 
due to the reason that the compensation amount deposited with the RBI is likely 
to exhaust in the near future. 
 
The Committee also take note that 300 tonnes of toxic wastes still lying in the 
premises of Union Carbide India Limited were not disposed even after lapse 
more than 30 years from the occurrence of the disaster. This point was 
emphasized in the 38 th Report (16 thLokSabha) also. In this regard, the 
Committee recommend that Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals shall 
take up the matter with Government of Madhya Pradesh for expediting the 
disposal and remediation of the area and if necessary, the Ministry of Urban 
Affairs and Housing may also be requested to look into the matter under their 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban). The Committee would like to be informed of 
the action taken in this regard. " 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.15 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
as under :- 
 "Regarding budgetary support for BGLD, it  is stated that a compensation of US 
$ 470 million deposited by the Union Carbide Corporation, USA as per the 
direction of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India in 1989 has been disbursed as 
original of the compensation in 5,74,391 awarded cases and a sum of 
Rs.1549.34 crore was awarded. It was brought to notice in the year 2004 that 
an amount of approximately Rs.1500 crore, had accumulated with the Reserve 
Bank of India on account of accrual of interest and exchange rate variation. The 
Supreme Court vide orde r dated 19 th July, 2004 had directed the Welfare 
Commissioner to disburse the said amount, on pro -rata basis (in the ratio of 1 : 
1 of original compensation ) to the claimants whose cases had been settled. A 
sum of Rs.1517.70 crore as pro - rata compensatio n has been awarded in 
5,63,091 cases till April, 2018. Thus, as per the directions of the Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court of India, the original compensation and pro -rata compensation 
has been disbursed to the gas victims out of the amount deposited by Union 
Carbide Corporation, USA with the RBI. 
Subsequently, Government of India in the year 2010 took certain decisions to 
provide further relief and rehabilitation to the gas victims. One major decision 
taken by the Government was to pay ex -gratia to certain categories  of gas 

 
 
10 
 
victims. An amount of Rs.874.28 Crore has been approved by the Government 
for disbursement of ex -gratia by the Office of the Welfare Commissioner. Till 
April, 2018, Office of the Welfare Commissioner has awarded an amount of 
Rs.807.40 crore as ex-gratia. 
Regarding disposal of remaining toxic waste lying at the erstwhile Union 
Carbide India ltd. Bhopal, it is stated that the issue was reviewed many times in 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals for expenditure disposal of 
the said wastes by convening meetings with stakeholders concerned. Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has assisted the Government of Madhya 
Pradesh (GoMP) for preparation of Request for proposal (RFP) documents for 
inviting competitive bids for hiring operators of common  Hazardous Waste 
Incinerator (TSDFs) for disposal of the remaining waste. The floating of tender 
for procurement of incineration services is under process of GoMP. GoMP has 
come out with a proposal for remediation of contaminated sites in and around 
UCIL p remises and the construction of Bhopal Gas Tragedy Memorial. 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has requested the GoMP to 
complete the process of disposal of waste and remediation of UCIL site 
expeditiously. " 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.16 While agreeing with the Action Taken Re ply of the Department,  the 
Committee would like to further know whether all the disaster affected persons 
of Bhopal Gas Leak Tragedy have been rehabilitated fully and if not, details 
thereof.  They also like to know ab out the likely timeline by which the toxic 
wastes lying at UCIL complex would be disposed-off and remediation of the area 
is completed. 
  

 
 
11 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
Under-utilization of Budgetary Allocations 
2.1 The observation / recommendation of the Committee is as under :- 
 
 "The Committee are concerned to note that the Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals has been under -utilizing their budgetary allocations since 
the year 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 the current financial year as well. In the 
year 2015-16, the Department could spent only Rs.189.71/ - crore against RE of 
Rs.214.77/-crore. Similarly, in the year 2016 -17, the actual expenditure was 
Rs.166.77 cror e against RE of Rs.183/ - crore. Further, it has also been 
informed that in the current financial year i.e. 2017 -18 also the actual 
expenditure would be Rs.594.91/ - crore approximately against RE of 634.71/ - 
crore. The Committee also take a serious view of the failure of the Department 
for allowing a situation wherein two of the three Public Sector Undertakings 
under its administrative control i.e. Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited 
(HOCL) and Hindustan Fluorocarbons Limited (HFL) have become unviable 
and a re awaiting closure / disinvestment. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Department must take all necessary steps to ensure that 
the budgetary allocations for 2018 -19 are fully utilized. Further, the Committee 
also recommend that the Depa rtment shall take proactive steps in dealing with 
matters under its purview and issues / problems faced by the chemical industry 
in the country and if necessary, suitable new way -outs be devised and 
implemented to address the same. The Committee desire that the actions taken 
in this regard may be apprised to the former." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.2 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
as under :- 
"The Department agrees with the observations of the committee regarding t he 
non-utilization of funds in full by the Department during the last 3 financial 
years, i.e. 2015-16, 2016-17 & 2017-18. The Department monitors utilization of 
funds under various schemes regularly in the Senior Officers‟ Meeting. It has 
been observed tha t the under utilization of funds during the last 3 financial 

 
 
12 
 
years has been largely in the scheme NSP particularly in the component of 
“Plastic Parks”. 
Accordingly, the Department has constituted a Scheme Review Committee with 
the approval of Secretary (Ch emicals and Petrochemical) under the 
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser and other officers 
namely Senior Economic Adviser, Joint Secretary(Petrochemicals), Joint 
Secretary (Chemicals), Representative from NITI Aayog, DG(CIPET), 
Director(PC-I), Director(PC -II), and Assistant Industrial Advisor (AIA), 
DCPC/Consultant (technical) as Members. 
The scope of the Scheme Review Committee would be to look into issue 
relating to:-  
(i) Scope of the Scheme 
(ii) Funding pattern for the Scheme 
(iii) Financial assistance under the Scheme 
(iv) Implementation Framework for the Scheme 
(v) Role of Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) in project approval & 
implementation  
(vi) Role of Programme Manager (PM) in the existing Guidelines 
(vii) Role of the State Government in project implementation 
(viii) Criteria for release of funds 
(ix) Any other issue relating to the Scheme Guidelines.  
 It is anticipated that the outcome of the review exercise would lead to more 
effective budgeting and implementation of the scheme leading to better 
utilization of available resources." 
 
.RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
Export And Import of Chemicals 
2.3 The observation / recommendation of the Committee is as under :- 
The Committee are concerned to note that the foreign exchange outgo on 
account of imports of chemicals and petrochemicals during 2014 -15 was 
Rs.43,025.89/- crore and it was Rs.40,076.18/ - in 2015 -16, and in the year 
2016-17, it marginally rose to Rs.40,0142.07/ - crore. The Committee are aware 
that the Government is taking various steps including setting up of f our 
Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Regions (PCPIRS) to 
enhance domestic production of chemicals and petrochemicals to attain self -
reliance. Nevertheless, the Committee, recommend that the Department should 
take prompt steps for domestic p roduction of imported chemicals and to 
increase production of those chemicals which are short -in-supply. The 
Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard. 

 
 
13 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.4 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
as under 
"The chemicals sector is de -licensed. The entrepreneurs are setting up units in 
the private sector based on techno economic feasibility, demand and supply 
scenario and cost of feedstock / raw materials. Government h as taken various 
steps including rationalizing of custom duty on the feedstock / building blocks 
for having synergy in the complete value chain for boosting the Chemical sector 
and competitiveness of the industry in the country. In addition, various semina rs 
/ workshops alongwith „INDIA -CHEM Mumbai‟ and „INDIA -CHEM Gujarat‟ were 
organized for facilitating exchange of technology, ideas, innovations and buyer 
seller‟s meet for growth in the chemical sector." 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 
Strengthening of Statistics and Monitoring Mechanism 
2.5 The observation / recommendation of the Committee is as under :- 
"The Committee note that the data relating to chemical industry in the country 
including problems/issues faced by it are the collected and compiled by the 
Statistics and Monitoring Division of the Department from the Directorate 
General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (DGCIS), Kolkata and from 
the Industry Associations. The Committee are also aware that the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemical s is administrative Department for 
administration of the Chemicals Weapons and Convention Act, 2000. A strong 
monitoring and statistics mechanism is, therefore, very essential for identifying 
issues and problem areas in chemicals sector. The Committee, the refore, 
recommend that the Statistics and Monitoring Division of the Department 
suitably strengthened and equipped for effective discharge of the mandated 
responsibilities. The Committee, would like to be informed of the action taken in 
this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.6 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
as under :- 

 
 
14 
 
Some specific initiatives/specific actions for strengthening of Statistics and 
Monitoring Mechanism are as follows: 
i. Central Statistics Office (CSO) is in the process of collection of sector -
wise statistical information through online portal. This online portal will 
help to collect important data on chemicals and Petrochemical sector for 
different statistical purposes. This online portal will als o provide a 
compact package for collection of different important statistics, which will 
be useful for Policy making. This may reduce time lag for publishing 
important statistic. 
ii. Statistics and Monitoring Division of DCPC is in the process of 
expanding of existing frame for collection of Chemical and Petrochemical 
statistics. Two broad categories of this exercise are as follows:- 
a. Addition of new manufacturing units of Chemical and 
Petrochemical products, which are already being monitored by 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. 
b. Identification / addition of important Chemical and Petrochemical 
products along with manufacturing units, which are not being 
monitored by this Department. " 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 
 
Chemical Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS) 
 
2.7 The observation / recommendation of the Committee is as under :- 
 
 
"The Committee are unhappy to note that the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals have not been able to implement their Chemical Promotion 
Development Scheme (CPDS) in a professional manner to achieve desired 
goals. The figures of actual expenditure for CPDS during the year 2014 -15 was 
Rs.3.53 crore against RE of Rs.4.00 crore ; in 2015 -16 it was Rs.2.79 crore 
against RE of Rs 3.90 crore ; in 2016 -17 it was Rs.1.26 crore a gainst RE of 
Rs.1.99 crore and in the current year, the expenditure is Rs.83 lakh upto Feb, 
2018 against RE of Rs.2.00 crore. A budgetary allocation of RS.3.00 crore has 
been made for the implementation of CPDS during year 2018 -19. The 
Committee also take note that eligible projects under the CPDS are 
implemented by the autonomous bodies / PSUs under the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals. The Committee, taking into account the poor 
implementation of the scheme in the past 4 years, desire that the D epartment 
take all necessary action to fully utilize the BE of Rs. 3.00 crore allocated for the 
scheme." 
 

 
 
15 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.8 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
as under :- 
 "To implement the CPDS in a professional manner to achieve desired goals, the 
Department has taken many steps. Some important steps taken in this direction 
are as under: 
i. Revised CPDS guidelines have been issued. As per the revised guidelines, the 
CPDS will have three components viz c reation of Knowledge products, 
Knowledge dissemination and Excellence Awards. Apart from conducting 
studies, some new activities such as preparation of survey reports, learning 
modules, data banks, acquisition of books, magazines etc are included under 
the component of Creation of Knowledge products. Under knowledge 
dissemination component, a new feature is added, that is, organizing an event 
by a specialized organization having demonstrated expertise in the field in 
which the proposed event is to be organized. 
ii. To prepare the calendar of events under CPDS for the FY 2018 -19, a meeting 
was convened in the Department by inviting industry Associations, PSUs, 
Autonomous Bodies etc. Detailed discussions were held and topics of events to 
be organized were discusse d for preparation of annual calendar of events. The 
participants have been requested to undertake preliminary ground work before 
the events so that the events can result into actionable outcomes. 
iii. Efforts are being made that various Industry Associations ha ve to be 
adequately represented and given an opportunity to contribute to the growth 
and development of chemical and petrochemical sector. 
iv. The sub -scheme viz “National Awards for Technology Innovation in 
Petrochemical and Downstream Plastic Processing Indu stry” (National Award 
Scheme) is merged as a part of CPDS for optimum utilization of funds. 
v. Mega event India Chem. 2018 will be organized in October, 2018" 
 
 
 

 
 
16 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 
 
Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL) 
2.9 The observation / recommendation of the Committee is as under :- 
"The Committee are happy to note that Hindustan Insecticides Limited (HIL) is 
expected to post a net profit of 2.80 crores in the current financial year. The 
Committee have also taken note that though HIL has dropped its pla n to set up 
a multi-product facility at Rasayani due to cost factor of the major raw material 
Oxirane, mainly imported from China, the company would be starting 
commercial production of Pendimethalin from its new plant by mid -march, 2018 
and its plant for production of Long Lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLIN) would start 
production in June, 2018. The Committee have also been informed that HIL is 
planning to set up a new R& D facility at its Rasayani Unit, Maharashtra, for 
perfecting the technology / manufacturing process for Long Lasting Insecticidal 
Nets (LLIN) project, conduct shelf -life studies of the product and to conduct 
plant trials at large scale to make commercial production as the facility would be 
useful for studying and investigating the deviations occurring in production 
process and streamline the production process of the products manufactured at 
the Rasayani Unit. However, no budgetary provision has been made i n the 
budget for any financial assistance to HIL in 2018 -19. Considering the role 
played by HIL in the production and supply of quality pesticides to the farmers 
of the country, the Committee are keen that the HIL is given necessary support 
in the form of financial grants / assistance to enable it to run the company 
profitably for the welfare all stake -holders. The Committee are afraid lest the 
HIL meet the same fate as that of HOCL and HFL in the absence of necessary 
support. The Committee, therefore, reco mmend that all necessary assistance 
may be provided to HIL to enable it to set up a new R&D facility at its Rasayani 
Unit, Maharashtra, for perfecting the technology / manufacturing process for its 
Long Lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLIN) project. Accordingly , the Department, if 
necessary, may take up case with Ministry of Finance, for necessary budgetary 
provisions for this purpose in 2018 -19 at RE stage. The Committee desire that 
action in this regard may be informed at the earliest." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.10 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
as under 

 
 
17 
 
 "HIL has appointed CIPET (Central Institute of Plastics and Engineering 
Technology) as the Technical Consultant for perfecting the 
technology/manufacturing process for Long lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLIN). 
CIPET has successfully developed the pilot scale technology at their facility and 
same will be optimized at HIL‟s Rasayani unit. In this regard, the company is 
also in the process of setting up new R&D f acility at Rasayani unit. Tendering 
process for civil works and major equipments for the R&D facility has been 
initiated and is expected to be completed soon. 
 HIL is setting up the LLIN project at its Rasayani unit, Maharashtra with 
financial assistance/g rants from United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization (UNIDO) under the latter‟s project of developing Non -POP 
alternatives to DDT. UNIDO will be providing grant of approximately Rs.14 crore 
for purchasing plant, machinery and equipments and the re maining works 
requirement will be met by HIL from its own resources. An agreement in this 
regard is expect to be signed shortly between HIL and UNIDO. Because of 
some delay in finalizing the project and signing of the agreement with UNIDO, 
the LLIN facilit y is now expected to be commissioned by March, 2019. All 
necessary assistance is being provided by the Department to HIL to facilitate 
the setting up of the LLIN project at its Rasayani unit." 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 13 
 
Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited (HOCL) 
2.11 The observation / recommendation of the Committee is as under :- 
 
The Committee has taken note of the facts that HOCL has been making 
continuous cash losses since 2011 -12. As on 31.3.2017, it had accumulated 
losses of Rs.1357.22 crore and negative net worth of ( -) Rs.970.12 crore. The 
company has not paid salary regularl y to its employees since February, 2015 
and does not have working capital to run the plants. Severe competition is 
forthcoming in the sector with a private sector company setting up a 2 lakh MT 
per annum capacity Phenol plant which would meet majority of t he 2.75 lakh 
MT domestic demand in the country. Further, HOCL is unable to compete with 
imports in the absence of anti -dumping duties and struggles to compete even 
with the levying of anti -dumping duties. In this background, the 
Government/Cabinet Committe e on Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 17.05.2017 
approved a restructuring plan for HOCL by closing down the operation of its 
nine production plants at Rasayani and operating only 3 plants (including 2 

 
 
18 
 
plants at Kochi and the strategically important N2O4 plant wh ich is to be 
transferred to ISRO on „as is where is‟ basis, with about 20 acres of land and 
employees associated with the plant. While Kochi unit will continue its 
operations, 'in principle' approval has also been accorded for HOCL to be put 
up for strateg ic disinvestment through DIPAM after the process of disposing 
land and other unencumbered assets at Rasayani is completed. The Committee 
have been informed that as part of the restructuring plant the agreement for 
Transfer of Plant (ATP) for the transfer o f N2O4 plant to ISRO has been signed 
between HOCL and ISRO which is effective from 1st October, 2017 . The 
Committee also take note that the outstanding liabilities of 
HOCL as on 09 -02-2018 is Rs.1008.67 crore including bridge loan of 
Rs.384.87/-crore from the Government. The liabilities of HOCL are to be settled 
from the proceeds of the disposal of the unencumbered land and other assets 
of the company at Rasayani unit. However, no budgetary support has been 
catered for HOCL for 2018 -19 towards financial ass istance, if any, for its 
operations / restructuring. Taking into account all the foregoing developments 
and circumstances, the Committee are apprehensive that the restructuring plan 
of the Government especially the disinvestment of shares will take a longer time 
as the HOCL has been a loss making body for the last more than five years. 
Hence, theCommittee are of the view that the unencumbered land -assets and 
other assets of the company at Rasayani needs to be disposed expeditiously 
for the time -bound completion of the restructuring exercise. In this regard, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the restructuring exercise be carried out in 
a time bound manner and required financial assistance be provided to the 
Company for its continued operations. The Commit tee in particular recommend 
that all avenues including imposition of anti -dumping duties and other tariff 
measures be adopted to run remaining plants of HOCL profitably till completion 
of disinvestment process undertaken by the Government of India." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.12 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
as under :- 
The status of disposal of unencumbered land and other assets of HOCL is as 
follows: 
 i. All the closed down plants at Rasayani have been auction ed and the disposal 
of the same is in process. 
 ii. E -auction for 10 Nestle flats at Mumbai and Baroda office was carried out 
through MSTC. Only 2 out of the 10 Nestle flats have been sold. Necessary 

 
 
19 
 
action for disposing the remaining 8 flats and Baroda of fice is being taken by 
HOCL. 
 iii. The N 2O4 plant at Rasayani has been transferred to ISRO on 01.10.2017 
though HOCL is providing operational assistance in running the plant till transfer 
of plant license, pollution control certificate etc. are completed. Agreement for 
transfer of 20 acre land associated with the N 2O4 plant is being finalized by 
HOCL and ISRO and is expected to be executed shortly. 
 iv. Out of 442 acres approved by CCEA for sale to BPCL, sale and registration 
of 251 acres has been completed  and payment received by HOCL. For sale of 
balance 191 acres land to BPCL, survey and demarcation of land is to be 
completed which has been delayed due to protests/agitation by the local 
villagers and farmers. The Department has taken up the matter with the Govt. of 
Maharashtra for appropriate instructions to be issued to the district authorities 
for providing adequate police protection for carrying out land survey. 
 v. M/s NBCC, the Land Management Agency appointed by HOCL for disposal 
of remaining unencumbered land of Rasayani unit, had issued RFQ/EOI, for the 
identified land (about 500 acres at Rasayani, 8 acres at Panvel and 1000 sq m 
at Khargar) to various Central and State Govt. Ministries/ Departments/ PSUs/ 
agencies etc. as per DPE guidelines. Based on the report/recommendation of 
NBCC and approval of HOCL Board, a proposal for sale of additional 242 acres 
+/- 10% of land at Rasayani to BPCL and lease transfer of 1000 sq m land at 
Khargar in favour of NALCO is being processed by the Department for app roval 
of CCEA/competent authority. 
 vi. Regarding disposal of remaining unencumbered land at Rasayani and 
Panvel, some Central and State Govt. PSUs/agencies have expressed interest 
in purchasing the land. Based on the outcome of the response of these Govt.  
PSUs/agencies, further necessary action will be taken expeditiously for 
disposing the land assets as per DPE guidelines. 
  2. HOCL has taken necessary steps for the imposition/continuation of 
antidumping duty on Phenol and Acetone (main products of Kochi unit). Anti-
dumping duty on Phenol and Acetone is presently valid for varying periods 
(country wise) up to February 2019 to February 2021. HOCL periodically 
reviews the position and takes up the matter with the Directorate General of 
Anti-Dumping and Allie d Duties, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, for 
renewal/extension of anti -dumping duty from time to time. Further, after CCEA 
approval of the restructuring plan for the company in May, 2017, following steps 
have been taken by HOCL to improve the performance of Kochi unit:  

 
 
20 
 
 The operations of Phenol / Acetone plant has been revived with the major raw 
material supplier BPCL extending 30 days credit facility from October, 2017.  
 Advance from major customers are being obtained to ensure timely payment of 
dues to suppliers.  
 Old outstanding dues of BPCL has been partly settled (Rs.33 crore) from the 
first tranche of land sale (251 acres) to BPCL and balance dues will be settled 
out of the proceeds from the balance land sale (191 acres) to BPCL. 
 Efforts are being made by HOCL to tie up working capital facility with banks at 
attractive terms.  
During March, 2018, Kochi unit generated profit before interest and tax (PBIT) 
of around Rs.6.40 crore. It is expected that with the availability of sufficient 
working capital , regular supply of raw materials and reduced overhead cost 
(interest cost and overhead), Kochi unit can maximize production / turnover and 
be in a position to register operational profit in the near future on a sustainable 
basis.  
 
  It may be mentioned t hat presently no action is underway for disinvestment of 
HOCL.As per the restructuring plan of HOCL, „in principle‟ approval of CCEA 
has been accorded for the company to be put up for strategic disinvestment 
through DIPAM after the process of disposal of e ncumbered land and other 
assets of Rasayani unit is completed." 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 14 
 
Hindustan Fluorocarbons Limited (HFL) 
2.13 The observation / recommendation of the Committee is as under :- 
 
"The Committee are aware that the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) of the Government approved the restructuring of Hindustan Organic 
Chemicals Limited (HOCL) on 17 -05-2017 and the CCEA also accorded 'in -
principle for strategic disinvestment of Hindustan Flurocarbons Limited (HFL), 
the subsidiary unit of HOCL based on the recommendations of the NITI Aayog 
and the Core Group of Secretaries on Disinvestment (CGD). In this context, the 
Committee in their 38 th Report (16thLokSabha) presented on 10 -08-2017 had 
expressed desire that the strategic disinvest ment of HFL should be gainfully be 
done and that the sale should not incur any loss to the State exchequer. The 
Committee had also recommended that the Department should revisit their 
decision once more and apprise the Committee of the action in this regar d. 
Subsequently, the Committee, in their 42 nd Report presented on 21 -12-2017, 
recommended that the Government may also consider to purchase the shares 

 
 
21 
 
of HFL held by its parent company i.e., HOCL on 'as is where is basis', in case 
the strategic sale is not  feasible and the disinvestment in HFL may be pursued 
after the restructure of HOCL is completed. Taking into account the foregoing 
and the possible longer time period envisaged for completion of restructuring / 
disinvestment of HOCL, the Committee further  recommend that HFL may be 
given necessary financial support including working capital requirements, if any, 
to enable it to explore all avenues to become a profit making body before its 
strategic sale / disinvestment. The Committee desire that their recom mendation 
may be given due consideration and action taken in the matter may be informed 
to the Committee."  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.14 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
as under :- 
"It may be reiterated that pres ently „in principle‟ approval of CCEA has been 
accorded for disinvestment of HFL. The Preliminary Information Memorandum 
(PIM) and Expression of Interest (EoI) documents for strategic disinvestment of 
HFL has been approved by the competent authority and ad vertisements for 
PIM/EoI has been published in newspapers on 19.4.2018 for seeking interest of 
the prospective bidders. Further necessary action for disinvestment of HFL will 
be taken based on the response received from the bidders. It may be 
mentioned that an Evaluation Committee under the chairpersonship of AS&FA, 
M/o Chemicals & Fertilizers, has been constituted for fixing reserve price and 
making recommendations for approval of strategic partner and the bid amounts 
so as to ensure that the strategic dis investment of HFL is gainfully done. Once 
the procedures underway relating to submission of bids, short listing of bidders, 
etc. are completed, requisite proposal for HFL‟s disinvestment will be submitted 
for final decision of the CCEA.  
 
2.  With regard t o giving necessary financial support to HFL, it may be 
mentioned that the Government in 2014 -15 had sanctioned Plan loan of 
Rs.16.80 crore to the company for M-PTFE project and refurbishment of plant & 
machinery in order to improve the company‟s performanc e,. However, due to 
continuous losses suffered by the company since 2013 -14 onwards, it has 
defaulted in the repayment of the above mentioned loan and interest thereon. 
Also, Ministry of Finance vide OM dated 03.02.2016 has instructed that the 
window of in vestment and working capital loan to CPSEs from GoI, in general, 
is closed.  

 
 
22 
 
3.  To ensure availability of working capital, the company has been taking 
necessary measures to improve its operational performance and to cut down on 
the operational expenditure . Also, no fresh recruitment is being made in place 
of superannuated employees (except for statutory positions) resulting in 
manpower strength being brought down to 110 from 157 during the last 5 years. 
Further, major raw material supplier credit period ha s been increased from 
30/60 days to 50/90 days. Since it was financially more viable for the company 
to sell higher quantity of HCFC -22 directly as refrigerant gas in the market, this 
Department had taken up with the Ministry of Environment, Forests & Clim ate 
Change (MoEFCC) for enhancing HFL‟s non -feedstock production quota of 
HCFC-22 from 392 MT to 1100 MT for the calendar year 2017 which was 
agreed to by MoEFCC. HFL fully utilized the enhanced production quota of 
1100 MT in 2017. HFL has been able to ach ieved a turnover of Rs.37.17 crore 
(Prov.) and made net profit of Rs.0.56 crore (Prov.) in FY 2017 -18. However, it 
is relevant to mention that production of HCFC -22 and its consumption as non -
feedstock has been partially restricted from 2015 by the MoEFCC,  Govt. of 
India, as per the provisions of Montreal Protocol (1992) since HCFC -22 falls 
under Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS) category. Though the company has 
been generating positive contribution and profitability from direct sale of HCFC -
22, this scenari o may not continue beyond 2020 due to the compliance 
requirement of Montreal Protocol." 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 15 
Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster 
2.15 The observation / recommendation of the Committee is as under :- 
"The Committee note that a budgetary allocation of  Rs.28.32/- crore has been 
made in 2018 -19 for providing financial assistance for rehabilitation for Bhopal 
Gas Leak Disaster (BGLD). The Committee also note that as on 31.01.2018, a 
sum of Rs.37.24 Crore only is lying as balance out of compensation amount  of 
$470 million deposited by Union Carbide Corporation with RBI in 1989. The 
Committee, therefore, hope that budgetary support for BGLD shall not suffer 
due to the reason that the compensation amount deposited with the RBI is likely 
to exhaust in the near future. 
The Committee also take note that 300 tonnes of toxic wastes still lying in the 
premises of Union Carbide India Limited were not disposed even after lapse 
more than 30 years from the occurrence of the disaster. This point was 
emphasized in the 38 th Report (16 thLokSabha) also. In this regard, the 
Committee recommend that Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals shall 

 
 
23 
 
take up the matter with Government of Madhya Pradesh for expediting the 
disposal and remediation of the area and if necessary, the M inistry of Urban 
Affairs and Housing may also be requested to look into the matter under their 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban). The Committee would like to be informed of 
the action taken in this regard. " 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.16 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
as under 
 "Regarding budgetary support for BGLD, it is stated that a compensation of US 
$ 470 million deposited by the Union Carbide Corporation, USA as per the 
direction of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court o f India in 1989 has been disbursed as 
original of the compensation in 5,74,391 awarded cases and a sum of 
Rs.1549.34 crore was awarded. It was brought to notice in the year 2004 that 
an amount of approximately Rs.1500 crore, had accumulated with the Reserv e 
Bank of India on account of accrual of interest and exchange rate variation. The 
Supreme Court vide order dated 19 th July, 2004 had directed the Welfare 
Commissioner to disburse the said amount, on pro -rata basis (in the ratio of 1 : 
1 of original compen sation ) to the claimants whose cases had been settled. A 
sum of Rs.1517.70 crore as pro - rata compensation has been awarded in 
5,63,091 cases till April, 2018. Thus, as per the directions of the Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court of India, the original compensation an d pro-rata compensation 
has been disbursed to the gas victims out of the amount deposited by Union 
Carbide Corporation, USA with the RBI. 
Subsequently, Government of India in the year 2010 took certain decisions to 
provide further relief and rehabilitation  to the gas victims. One major decision 
taken by the Government was to pay ex -gratia to certain categories of gas 
victims. An amount of Rs.874.28 Crore has been approved by the Government 
for disbursement of ex -gratia by the Office of the Welfare Commissio ner. Till 
April, 2018, Office of the Welfare Commissioner has awarded an amount of 
Rs.807.40 crore as ex-gratia. 
Regarding disposal of remaining toxic waste lying at the erstwhile Union 
Carbide India ltd. Bhopal, it is stated that the issue was reviewed ma ny times in 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals for expenditure disposal of 
the said wastes by convening meetings with stakeholders concerned. Central 

 
 
24 
 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has assisted the Government of Madhya 
Pradesh (GoMP) for prepar ation of Request for proposal (RFP) documents for 
inviting competitive bids for hiring operators of common Hazardous Waste 
Incinerator (TSDFs) for disposal of the remaining waste. The floating of tender 
for procurement of incineration services is under pro cess of GoMP. GoMP has 
come out with a proposal for remediation of contaminated sites in and around 
UCIL premises and the construction of Bhopal Gas Tragedy Memorial. 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has requested the GoMP to 
complete the process  of disposal of waste and remediation of UCIL site 
expeditiously. " 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see para No. 1.16 of chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
25 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
 Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
3.1 The observation / recommendation of the Committee is as under :- 
 
"The Committee find that an amount of Rs.7.50 crore has been allocated for 
financial assistance to Institute of Pesticide Formulation and Technology (IPFT) 
during 2018-19 as against the projected requirement of Rs.10.23/ - crore. The 
main objective of IPFT is development and production of the state -of-the art 
user and environment fr iendly pesticide formulation technology and promotion 
of efficient application technologies suiting the existing requirement of newer 
formulations. Further, IPFT is the only institute of its kind in the country for 
helping Indian Agrochemical Industries in  the field of pesticide formulations 
development. It has developed 60 user & environment friendly pesticide 
formulation technology and transferred to industries and filed 12 patents during 
the last five years. As a reason for reduced allocation, the Commit tee have 
been informed that as per General Financial Rules -2017 (Rule 229), General 
Principles for setting up of Autonomous Organizations, all autonomous 
organizations, new or already in existence should be encouraged to maximize 
generation of internal res ources and eventually attain self sufficiency. Taking 
into account the importance of the institution for the agrochemical sector and its 
non-profit making status, the Committee strongly recommend that funds 
required for R&D initiatives of the institution b e fully catered for and the 
institution should not be allowed to suffer for want of funds. The Committee 
would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
3.2 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
as under 
 "Sufficient funds were released to IPFT for Salary of employees of IPFT, 
procurement of equipments and payment of stipend to Scientists during the year 
2016-17 and 2017 -18 as demanded by them.  The details of funds allocated and  
released to IPFT are given below." 
 

 
 
26 
 
 
 
 
(Rs.in Lakhs)  
F.Y. BE RE Funds released Expenditure incurred by 
IPFT 
GIA 
General 
GIA 
Salary 
GIA 
CCA 
GIA 
General 
GIA 
Salary 
GIA 
CCA 
GIA 
General 
GIA 
Salary 
GIA  
CCA 
GIA 
General 
GIA 
Salary 
GIA  
CCA 
2016-17 00.00 00.01 832.00 157.00 316.00 416.00 157.00 316.00 416.00 157.00 316.00 277.20 
2017-18 157.00 338.00 421.00 83.00 338.00 329.00 83.00 338.00 288.22 83.00 338.00 16.70 
2018-19 225.00 350.00 175.00 -- -- --  100.00     
 
 
 2. IPFT was unable to utilize the entire funds released under the Grants -in-Aid 
(CCA) to them in previous year. The funds allocated during the year 2018 -19 to 
IPFT are sufficient for research and other related work."   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
27 
 
CHAPTER  IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
Status of Chemical Industry 
4.1 Regarding the status of chemical industry of the country,  the observations / 
recommendations of the Committee are as under :- 
 
"The Committee take note that the chemical industry which includes basic 
chemicals and its products, petrochemicals, fertilizers , pesticides, paints, 
varnishes, gases, soaps, perfumes and toiletry and pharmaceuticals and covers 
more than eighty thousand diversified commercial products, occupies a pivotal 
position in meeting basic needs and improving quality of human life. This 
industry is the mainstay of industrial and agricultural development of the country 
and provides building blocks for several downstream industries, such as 
textiles, papers, paints, varnishes, soaps, detergents, pharmaceuticals, etc. 
According to National Accou nts Statistics 2017, brought out by the Central 
Statistics Office (CSO), Chemical and Chemical products sector (industry 
division 20 and 21 of NIC 2008) accounted for 2.39% of the Gross Value 
Addition (GVA) (at 2011 -12 prices) in 2015 -16, compared to 2.23%  in 2014-15. 
The production of Major Chemicals and Petrochemicals in 2017 -18 (up to 
December 2017) was 19793 thousand MT, as compared to 19210 thousand MT 
in 2016-17 (up to December 2016) implying growth of 3.03%. The Committee 
have been informed that afte r adoption of liberal industrial, trade & FDI policy 
post 1991, the growth of the chemical industry has been driven by market 
forces and the industry has gained global recognition. The Indian chemical 
industry ranks seventh in the world and fourth in Asia.  Taking into account the 
foregoing, the Committee feel that the Department shall strive to promote and 
support the Indian chemical industry with all necessary financial and trade 
measures and through suitable schemes and programmes for its further growth 
and development. The Committee think that, if necessary a comprehensive 
chemical law may be enacted to regulate production, consumption and trade in 
chemicals and to safeguard the interests of the domestic chemical industry in 
consonance with provisions of WTO rules provisions. The Committee may be 
informed of the initiatives taken by the Department in this regard." 
 
 

 
 
28 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.2 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
as under 
  "Presently production, consumption and trade for hazardous chemicals is  
governed by Manufactures, Storage & Import of Hazardous Chemicals Rules, 
1989 amended in 2000. Production, consumption and trade for Pesticides & 
Insecticides is covered under the Insecticides Act 1968. Othe r chemicals are 
governed by various Acts & Rules listed below: 
 The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
 The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 
 The Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 
 The Chemicals Accidents (Emergency Planning, Preparedness and Response), 
Rules, 1996 
 The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 amended 1992 
 The Explosive Act & Rules 
 The Factories Act & Rules 
 The Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000 
 The Petroleum Act & Rules 
 The CWC Act & Rules 
 
 In view of the above, there is no necessity to have new Chemicals Law in the 
country as the chemicals sector is being governed by the already existing Acts 
& Rules." 
 COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
   (Please see para No. 1.7 of chapter - I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
 
Budget Allocation 
 
4.3 The observation / recommendation of the Committee is as under :- 
 
 "The Committee observe that an amount of Rs.199.65/ - crore has been 
allocated as BE for the year 2018 -19 as against the projected requirement of 
Rs.288.09/- crore by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals for the 
year. Reduced allocations have been  made in the BE -2018-19 for (i) Central 
Institute of Plastic Engineering and Technology (Rs.83.64/ - cr. against 

 
 
29 
 
Rs.156.47/- cr.), (ii) New Schemes of Petrochemicals (Rs.55.50/ - cr. against 
Rs.68.42/- cr.), (iii) Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme ( Rs.3.00 
cr. against Rs.5.40/ - cr.) and Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology 
(Rs.7.50 against Rs.10.23/ - cr.). Apart from the aforesaid reduced allocations, 
only a token amount of Rupees one lakh has been allocated for Assam Gas 
Cracker Project (A GCP) in 2018 -19 budgetary provisions against Rs. 
Rs.449.45/- crore as unpaid balance of capital subsidy payment to AGCP. The 
Committee feel that the reduction in funds -allocations to the Department for 
2018-19 will adversely affect the implementation of sc hemes and programmes 
of the Department. The Committee foresee that the Department intends to seek 
supplementary grants later on to meet the requirements of funds for AGCP, 
CIPET, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should 
project their additional funds requirement to the Ministry of Finance in time and 
in a convincing manner and impress upon them to allocate adequate funds to 
the Department in 2018 -19 at RE stage. The Committee, would like to be 
informed of the action taken in this regard. " 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.4 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
states as under :- 
"The budget allocation of Rs.549.45 crore (as approved in Revised Cost 
Estimate-II as additional Capital Subsidy) for the Ass am Gas Cracker Project 
(AGCP) was sought in the third and final Batch of Supplementary Demands for 
Grants for 2016-17.  Ministry of Finance was requested to provide the required 
amount of Rs.549.45 crore under BE 2017 -18 vide D.O.letter dated 28 th 
February, 2017 from Minister (Chemicals & Fertilizers and Parliamentary 
Affairs) to the Hon‟ble Finance Minister.  However, Ministry of Finance allocated 
an amount of Rs.100 crore under BE 2017-18 for AGCP. It is also stated that as 
per Monthly Expenditure Plan fo r 2017-18, an amount of Rs.100.00 crore has 
been released to Brahmaputra Cracker & Polymer Limited (BCPL), Assam 
during May-June, 2017.  Regarding balance amount of Rs.449.45, the matter 
was taken up with Ministry of Finance vide D.O. letter dated 18.07.20 17 from 
Secretary (C&PC).  During meeting held on 9.11.2017 in Ministry of Finance, as 
well as, the amount was also sought in the 2nd Supplementary Demands for 
Grants for 2017-18 
 Further, the re -appropriation proposal accompanying the technical 
supplementary at the 4 th Supplementary stage for allocating Rs.15.41 crore to 
the scheme AGCP with internal savings after a proposal of Parliament, was not 

 
 
30 
 
agreed to by M/o Finance. The M/o Finance did not agree to projected demand 
of Rs.449.45 crore for AGCP for 20 18-19. Accordingly, a token amount of 
Rs.1.00 lakh was indicated in the BE 2018 -19 of the Department.  Thereafter 
two d.o. letter dated 17.05.2018 and 28.05.2018 have been sent to Min. of 
Finance from the level of Secretary (DCPC) for providing balance cap ital 
subsidy in next Supplementary Demand for Grants." 
  (Please see para No. 1.10 of chapter - I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology (CIPET) 
4.5 The observation / recommendation of the Committee is as under :- 
 
"The Committee are dismayed to note that a much lower allocation of 83.64/ -
crore has been allocated as BE 2018 -19 for the implementation of Central 
Institute Plastic Engineering and Technology (CIPET) against the projected 
requirement of Rs.156.47/- crore. The Committee also note that at present 25 
CIPET centres are functional; 5 CIPET centres are to be started soon and 
setting up of 9 CIPET centres and under progress. The Department has also 
acquiesced to the fact that the budgetary alloc ations for CIPET during 2018 -19 
is inadequate. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals shall take up the issue of 
additional fund allocation with the Ministry of Finance highlighting the activities 
of CIPET as an institute of national importance for skill development in its field. 
The Committee would like to be informed of the action taken in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.6 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochem icals is 
as under :- 
The matter regarding additional fund allocation has been taken up with the 
Ministry of Finance vide this Department‟s letters dated 22.11.2016, 
23.11.2016, 14.12.2016 and 09.02.2017. Letters dated 23.11.2016 and 
09.02.2017 were written  to Finance Ministry by Minister of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers. 
In reply to this Department‟s letter dated 09.02.2017, Ministry of Finance 
replied that “as per the availability of fiscal space and absorptive capacity of the 
Department, appropriate budget has been earmarked for the scheme in RE 

 
 
31 
 
2016-17 and BE 2017-18. The scheme has been allotted Rs. 68.08 crore in BE 
2017-18. Since, the Union Budget 2017 -18 already passed by the Parliament, 
the allocation for the scheme may be reviewed at the RE 2017 -18 stage” , 
However, no additional budget has been allocated in favour of CIPET. Since the 
allocations for BE 2018 -19 has already been finalized, the matter will be taken 
up again with the Ministry of Finance at RE stage for additional funds." 
   
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
   (Please see para No. 1.13 of chapter - I of the Report) 
 
  

 
 
32 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE  STILL AWAITED 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP) 
5.1 The observation / recommendation of the Committee is as under :- 
 
"The Committee note that a joint venture company, the Brahmaputra Cracker 
and Polymer Limited (BCPL) was set up for the implementation of Assam Gas 
Cracker Project (AGCP). The BCPL, [70% share held by Gas Aut hority of India 
Limited (GAIL) ; 10% by Oil India Limited (OIL) ; 10% by Numaligarh Refinery 
Limited (NRL) and the remaining 10% by State Govt. of Assam] was 
commissioned on 02-01-2016. The total project cost is Rs.9,965/ - crore. Out of 
the total project c ost, an expenditure of Rs.5,239.45crore is to be funded as 
Capital Subsidy for the project by the Union Government. At present, an 
amount of Rs.449.45/ - crore is pending as unpaid balance of Capital Subsidy 
for the project. The Committee note that an amoun t of Rs.1.00 lakh only has 
been made as BE towards financial assistance to BCPL for the year 2018 -19. 
They further note that the company is already facing acute inadequacy of 
working capital, high cost of raw material, etc. Therefore, it becomes, imperative 
that timely payment of balance Capital Subsidy of Rs.449.45/- crore for BCPL is 
very crucial to enable it to attain financial and operational stability. However, an 
amount Rupees only lakh has been allocated in the BE for 2018 -19 for BCPL. 
The Committee,  therefore, strongly recommend that the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals shall take up case for additional allocation of 
funds at RE stage for payment of Capital Subsidy dues to BCPL in 2018 -19. 
The Committee also hold the view that since the 90%  of share of BCP is held 
by PSUs under the administrative control of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas, a workable administrative model be devised for the smooth functioning of 
BCPL. The action taken in the matter may please be informed to the 
Committee." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
5.2 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
as under :- 
"The budget allocation of Rs.549.45 crore (as approved in Revised Cost 
Estimate-II as additional Capital Subsidy) for the Assam Gas Crac ker Project 
(AGCP) was sought in the third and final Batch of Supplementary Demands for 

 
 
33 
 
Grants for 2016 -17.  Ministry of Finance was again requested to provide the 
required amount of Rs.549.45 crore under BE 2017 -18 vide D.O.letter dated 
28th February, 201 7 from Minister (Chemicals & Fertilizers and Parliamentary 
Affairs) to the Hon‟ble Finance Minister.  The amount of Rs.100.00 crore 
provided in B.E. 2017-18 has been released to Brahmaputra Cracker & Polymer 
Limited (BCPL), Assam during May -June, 2017.  Re garding balance amount of 
Rs.449.45 crore, the matter was taken up with Ministry of Finance vide D.O. 
letter dated 18.07.2017 from Secretary (C&PC).  The amount was also sought 
in the Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2017 -18.  However, no additional 
funds were allocated during the 2 nd Supplementary stage of 2017 -18.  Further, 
the re-appropriation proposal accompanying the technical supplementary at the 
4th Supplementary stage for allocating Rs.15.41 crore to the scheme AGCP with 
internal savings after a  proposal of Parliament, was not agreed to by M/o 
Finance. Further, M/o Finance did not provide for requested allocation of 
Rs.449.45 crore in BE 2018 -19. Accordingly, a token amount of Rs.1.00 lakh 
was indicated in the BE 2018 -19 of the Department.  There after two D.O. letter 
dated 17.05.2018 and 28.05.2018 have been sent to Min. of Finance from the 
level of Secretary (DCPC) for providing balance capital subsidy in next 
Supplementary Demand for Grants. 
  Regarding smooth functioning of BCPL, it is stated t hat with the 
approval of Minister (Chemicals & Fertilizers), vide OM dated 25.05.2018, a 
Coordination Committee has been constituted under the chairmanship of 
Secretary (CPC) with Secretary (MoPNG) as co -chairman.  The other members 
in the Committee are: 
  (i) Joint Secretary (GP) (M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas) 
(ii) Joint Secretary (Refinery) (M/o Petroleum & Natural Gas) 
(iii) Joint Secretary (Petrochemicals), DCPC 
(iv) Chairman, BCPL & CMD GAIL  
(v) CMD, Oil and Natural Gas Commission 
(vi) CMD, Oil India Limited 
(vii) MD, Numaligarh Refinery Limited 
(viii) MD, Brahmaputra Cracker & Polymer Limited - Convenor 
(ix) Director (Petrochemicals - I), DCPC 
 
 The Terms of Reference of the Committee are as under:  
i. To review the status of feedstock supply to BCPL as per respective agreements 
stated at para 4 above. 
ii. To consult with all the concerned stakeholders, in this regard.  

 
 
34 
 
iii. The Committee will meet once every quarter to consider the issues/ problems 
being faced by BCPL.  
iv. The findings of this Committee will be plac ed/discussed during its meetings, to 
review the progress in the issue.  
 Since, the Company is owned by GAIL, OIL and NRL (BPCL), which are under 
the administrative control of MoPNG, which also deals with the issue of pricing of 
feedstock, with the approva l of Hon‟ble Minister (C&F), vide D.O.letter dated 
16.04.2018, the concurrence of MoPNG was sought regarding taking over the 
administrative control of BCPL.  MoPNG vide OM dated 4.05.2018 has conveyed its 
„in-principle‟ agreement to the proposal of DCPC fo r taking over the administrative 
control of BCPL." 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
Plastic Parks 
5.3 The observation / recommendation of the Committee is as under :- 
 
"The Committee note that Plastic Parks are the major component of the New 
Scheme of Petrochemicals. An amount of Rs.49.50/ - crore has been allocated 
as budgetary provision for setting up of Plastic Parks in the year 2018 -19. 
However, the Committee are dismayed to note that although the Plastic Park 
scheme was launched way back in 2013 -14 and 10 Plastic P arks were planned 
to be set up in phase -I of the scheme, the progress in setting up of the plastic 
parks have been found to be very slow. Funds utilization for the scheme has 
also been noted to be very less. At present, works for setting up of only four 
Plastic Parks are under progress and the said four Plastic parks are under 
different stages of completion. Works have not been started in respect of other 
14 additional Plastic Parks which were subsequently announced to be set up. In 
this context, the Commit tee strongly recommend that firm targets be set for the 
implementation of the parks in a time bound manner and progress be reviewed 
with all stake-holders periodically to give impetus in the pace of implementation 
of the Scheme. The Committee hope that at least, in the current financial year 
and in 2018-19 the Department will show positive results in improving the pace 
of setting up of Plastic Parks. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
5.4 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
as under :- 

 
 
35 
 
 "It has been decided to constitute a scheme review committee to review the 
Plastic Park Scheme to resolve the issues encountered while implementing the 
projects under th e scheme in phase -1 of the scheme to bring more clarity to 
scheme guidelines for smooth implementation of new additional plastic park 
projects in phase 2. A review committee vide O.M. dated 11 th May, 2018 has 
been constituted under the chairmanship of AS& FA, DCPC to review the 
meeting of scheme guidelines in phase-1 of the scheme.  
 
 Other Members of the Committee are Senior Economic Adviser, Joint 
Secretary(Petrochemicals), Joint Secretary (Chemicals), Representative from 
NITI Aayog, DG(CIPET), Director(PC-I), Director(PC-II), and Assistant Industrial 
Advisor (AIA), DCPC/Consultant (technical)." 
 The scope of the Scheme Review Committee would be to look into issue 
relating to:-  
i) Scope of the Scheme 
ii) Funding pattern for the Scheme 
iii) Financial assistance under the Scheme 
iv) Implementation Framework for the Scheme 
v) Role of Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) in project approval & implementation  
vi) Role of Programme Manager (PM) in the existing Guidelines 
vii) Role of the State Government in project implementation 
viii)Criteria for release of funds 
ix) Any other issue relating to the Scheme Guidelines.  
 
 The first meeting of the committee was held on 30 th May 2018 and the 
Committee is expected to submit its report within 1 month from the date of this 
meeting. It is anticipated th at the outcome of the review exercise would lead to 
more effective budgeting and implementation of the scheme leading to better 
utilization of available resources. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
Centre of Excellence 
5.5 The observation / recommendation of the Committee is as under :- 
"The Committee appreciate that the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals is implementing the scheme of Centre of Excellence for 
improving the petrochemicals technology and research in the country and to 
promote development of new applications of polyme rs and plastics. The 
Committee also note that five Centres of Excellence (CoEs) have already been 
set up at (i)National Chemicals Laboratory (NCL), Pune – CoE for Sustainable 
Polymer Industry through Research, Innovation & Training (CoE -SPIRIT); 

 
 
36 
 
(ii)Central Institute of Plastics Engineering & Technology (CIPET), Chennai – 
CoE for Green Transportation Network (GREET), (iii) IIT, Delhi – CoE for 
Advanced Polymeric Materials, (iv) CIPET, Bhubaneswar - CoE on Sustainable 
Green Materials and (v) IIT, Guwahati – CoE for Sustainable Polymers. The 
Department has now undertaken to set up three more Centres of Excellence 
and an amount of Rs.6/ crore has been allocated for the purpose. The 
Committee, are desirous that the proposed three CoEs be set up expeditiously 
in a time bound manner. The Committee also recommend that Department shall 
take steps for extension of the COE scheme to suitable educational and 
research institutions that may contribute for the promotion of chemical industry 
as well. The Committee would like  to be informed of the action taken in this 
regard." 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
5.6 The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
as under :- 
 
The Scheme of Centre of Excellence was continued from the 12 th Plan  in the 
year 2017 and approved for extension till 2020 that is till the duration of 14 th 
finance commission after bringing in some modifications to the then existing  
guidelines.  
Some of the major changes in the revised scheme pertain to eligibility 
conditions for selectin g institutions for establishing CoE, funding criteria, need 
for proposed CoE to present a road map for achieving financial sustenance 
through  consultancies and  patent registration, monitoring mechanism for post 
implementation and evaluation.  
The selection criteria for institutions include adequacy of infrastructure in terms 
of lands & building to house the Centre engaging competent core staff, 
research staff with appropriate credentials  of the field in which the CoE is 
proposed to be setup.  Changes in funding pattern involves reducing assistance 
to five crore per centre from six crores and limiting expenditure  for workshops 
seminars conferences   to not more than ten percent of total grants sanctioned.         
Steps for further implementation of the revamped scheme are underway.  " 
 
                         ANANDRAO ADSUL
 New  Delhi                                         Chairperson  
                      Standing Committee on 
        July, 2018       Chemicals and Fertilizers                       
 Sravana, 1940 (Saka)                           

 
 
37 
 
Appendix –__  
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION T AKEN BY THE GOVERNME NT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONT AINED IN THE FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA ) OF THE STANDING CO MMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS (2017-18) ON THE 'DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS 2018 -19' OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTM ENT OF CHEMICALS AND 
PETROCHEMICALS).‟ 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 
 
15 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 2,4, 5, 9, 12, 13, 14 & 15)   
 
8 
 
Percentage of Total  53.3% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s reply:- 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 11)   
1 
Percentage of Total   6.6% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-   
  
(Vide Recommendation No.  1, 3 & 10)   
 
3 
Percentage of Total  20% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 6, 7 & 8l) 
 
6 
 
Percentage of Total  20% 
 