26 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS (2015-16) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Twenty First Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  "Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
 
 
 
 
 TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
AUGUST, 2016 / SHRAVANA, 1938 (SAKA) 
 
  


2 
 
CC&F.No.26 
 
 
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  
contained in the Twenty First Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and  
Fertilizers (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  "Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers)] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11 August 2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11 August 2016 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2016 / SHRAVANA, 1938 (SAKA) 
  

3 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-16) 
 
ii 
INTRODUCTION 
 
iii 
Chapter I Report  
 
1-25 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
26-35 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government' s  
replies 
 
36 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
reply  of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee and which require reiteration 
 
37-38 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
39-42 
 APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2015-16) held on 09.08.2016. 
 
43 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2015 -16) On ‘Demands for Grants (2016 -
2017)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fert ilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers).  
 
44 
  

4 
 
(ii) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Idris Ali 
3. Smt. Anju Bala 
4. Shri B.N. Chandrappa 
5. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
6. Smt. Veena Devi 
7. Shri R.Dhruvanarayana 
8. Shri Innocent 
9. Shri K. Ashok Kumar 
10. Shri Kamalbhan Singh Marabi 
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12. Smt. Kamala Devi Patle 
13. Shri Rajendran S. 
14. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
15. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu 
16. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
17. Dr. Uma Saren 
18.  Dr. Krishna Pratap Singh 
19. Shri Taslimuddin 
20. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
21. Shri George Baker 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Biswajit Daimary  
23. Shri Ram Vichar Netam 
24. Shri Sanjay Dattatraya Kakade 
25. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
26. Shri K Parasaran 
27. Shri Garikapati Mohan Rao 
28. Dr. Sanjay Sinh 
29. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
30. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar 
31. Shri Abdul Wahab 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
  Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
  Shri A.K.Srivastava  - Director 
  Shri RamPrakash  - Additional Director 
  Shri Nishant Mehra  - Under Secretary  

5 
 
(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(2015-2016) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their 
behalf, present this Twenty Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by 
the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Twenty 
First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standin g Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (201 5-2016) on Demands for Grants (201 6-2017) of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
 
2. The Twenty First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha ) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 8.04.2016. The Action 
Taken replies of Government to all observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 14.07.2016.  The Standing Committee on C hemicals and 
Fertilizers (2015 -2016) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
09.08.2016.  
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/  
recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to 
the Committee.  
 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                  ANANDRAO ADSUL 
09 August, 2016                                                                                     Chairperson 
18 Shravana 1938 (Saka)                                                                   Standing Committee on 
                                                                                                                   Chemicals and Fertilizers 

6 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observati ons/Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty First Report ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee , on the Demands for Grants  
 (2016-17) of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 28.04.2016. In all, the Committee made 1 2 Observations / 
Recommendations in the Report. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were requested to 
furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report 
within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e., by 28.07.2016. The 
Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 1 2 Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) vide their O.M. No.F.No.5(1)/201 6-
Fin.II dated 14.07.2016. These have been categorized as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government:  
 
 Rec. Nos.3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11 & 12       (Total =08 )   
           Chapter II  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in  
view of the Government’s reply: 
  
Sl.No. Nil            (Total =Nil) 
            Chapter III  
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
  
Sl.Nos. 5         (Total =01)  
           Chapter IV  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are of still awaited: 
  
Sl.Nos. 1, 2 & 7        (Total =03)  
 Chapter V  
 
 

7 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I, including those in  Chapter IV in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
Chapter V for which final replies are still awaited, of this Report, should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken  by the Governmen t on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
A. GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF FERTILIZER INDUSTRY 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1 
 
1.5 Stressing the need to increase the indigenous production of fertilizers, the Committee 
had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note that the installed capacity of fertilizer manufacturing units in 
the country has reached to the level of 207.53 lakh MT of urea, 83.32 lakh MT of DAP 
and 60.72 Lakh MT of Complex Fe rtilizer during the year 2015 -16. The actual 
production of all the fertilizers during the year 2014 -15 was 370.03 Lakh MT. The 
Committee are happy to note that the estimated production of all the fertilizers during 
the year 2015 -16 is 402.93 Lakh MT showin g an increase of more that 8.89% in 
comparison of previous year. At present, there are 30 urea units in the country 
manufacturing urea annually, 21 units produce DAP and complex fertilizers and 2 
units manufacture Ammonium Sulphate as by -product. Besides, there are about 105 
medium and small scale units in operation producing Single Super Phosphate (SSP). 
The country is however, fully dependent on imports in Potassic sector and to the 
extent of 90% in Phosphatic sector in the form of either finished product s or its raw 
material. Non availability of raw material is the main factor which has impeded the 
self sufficiency in P&K fertilizers in the country. Other issues which contributed to 
near zero growth in fertilizer sector is low profitability, delay in paym ent of subsidy, 
inadequate gas availability in the country and no favorable tax incentives for 
indigenous manufacturers.  
 
 The Committee also noted that, the Department keeps sending from time to time their 
proposal for exemption on customs duty for indig enous fertilizers manufacturers and 
also on capital equipments. Considering the strategic importance of chemical 
fertilizers in the country's food security, the Committee are concerned about absence 
of any incentives in the form of lower taxes or duty to i ndigenous fertilizer 
manufacturers in the country.  The Committee expect the Department to take up this 
matter vigorously with the Ministry of Finance and impress upon them to consider its 
proposals regarding exemption of taxes/duty for indigenous fertiliz ers manufacturers 
favorably. 
 
 Further the Committee are of the view that the impediments for self sufficiency are 
matter of serious concern. Therefore, keeping in view the vital role played by the 
chemical fertilizers in the successful agriculture production in the country, the 
Committee recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should urgently take 

8 
 
suitable measures to further boost the growth of fertilizer industry leading to their 
self-sufficiency.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures taken in 
this regard." 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 1.6 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 "A proposal for reduction of customs duty on the raw materials of P&K fertilizers was 
given to Hon’ble Minister o f Finance at the level of Hon’ble Minister (C&F) but 
comments/views/approval of the Ministry of Finance has not been received so far." 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 1.7 In their original report, t he Committee while noting that that there are  no 
favorable tax incentives for indigenous fertilizer manufacturers , recommended that 
the Department should take up this matter vigorously with the Ministry of Finance and 
impress upon them to consider its proposals regarding exemption of taxes/duty for 
indigenous fert ilizers manufacturers favorably.  The Committee  had also 
recommended that the Department of Fertilizers should urgently take suitable 
measures to further boost the growth of fertilizer industry leading to their self -
sufficiency.  In this regard, the Departm ent in its Action Taken Replies informed that a  
proposal for reduction of customs duty on the raw materials of P&K fertilizers was 
given to Hon’ble Minister of Finance at the level of Hon’ble Minister (C&F) but 
comments/views/approval of the Ministry of Finance has not been received so far.  
 The Committee are distressed to note that Action Taken reply of the 
Department is silent on measures taken to boost the growth of the fertilizer industry.  
The Department was expected to outline the measures it has put in place for speedy 
growth of fertilizers industry.  Considering the strategic importance of chemical 
fertilizers in the country's food security, the Committee recommend that  the 
Department may play a proactive role and make a road map to boost the growth of 
fertilizer industry. 
 As regards o ne incentive proposal sent to Ministry of Finance  by the 
Department of Fertilizers, they may take up the matter vigorously with the Ministry of 
Finance for expeditious implementation of the proposal.  The Committee would like to 
be apprised of tangible efforts in terms of concrete deliverables made in this regard.   
 
 

9 
 
B. PLAN ALLOCATION AND EXPENDITURE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.2 
 
 1.8 Emphasizing the need for allocation of adequate plan funds to the Department, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note that under Plan Outlay, funds are released as Gross Budgetary 
Support (GBS) provided by Government of India to loss making CPSEs to keep them 
operational and also for Miscellaneous Schemes which include Management of 
Information Technology ( MIT) where funds are released for Fertilizer Monitoring 
System (FMS) and mobile based Fertilizer Monitoring System (mFMS) and Science & 
Technology (S&T) which primarily lays emphasis at Research and Development of 
processes and equipment.  The Committee ar e concerned to note that during the 
Twelfth Five Year plan period (2012 -17) there has been a radical decline in the above 
mentioned plan budgetary allocations. Budgetary allocations (BE) for the year 2012 -
13, 2013-14, 2014 -15 and 2015 -16 were Rs. 256 Crore , Rs 269 Crore, Rs.100 Crore 
and 50 crore. Even these allocations have been drastically reduced at the RE stage to 
Rs. 10 Crore (2012 -13), Rs 9 Crore (2013 -14), Rs. 2.32 Crore (2014 -15) respectively, 
except for the year 2015 -16, where it was increased to R s. 1002.80 Crore, in order to 
avert immediate crisis in FACT, a loan of Rs. 1000 Crores was provided for the same.  
However, for the year 2016 -17, as against the proposal of Rs 87.50 Crore for plan 
budget estimates (Gross Budgetary Support) the Ministry of  Finance has allocated 
only Rs.10 Crore ( Rs. 6.00 Crore has been allocated to FACT, Rs. 3.00 Crore has been 
allocated to MFL and Rs.1.00 Crore has been kept for BVFCL for NER & Sikkim.   
 
 The Committee noted that due to financial restrictions imposed by Ministry of Finance 
in respect of default in refund of Government of India Loans and payment of interest 
thereon by loss making CPSEs viz. MFL, BVFCL and FACT plan loan could not be 
released to these companies from 2012 -2013 onwards.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that non -allocation of plan funds to the loss making CPSEs has adversely 
affected their functioning and operation.  This also highlights that the Department has 
not taken up its proposal to make these loss making CPSEs functional effectively  
earnestly with the Ministry of Finance.  Further, the Department should also plan the 
probable expenditure instead of waiting for cropping up of the acute crisis as it was in 
the case of FACT for which Rs.1000 crore was provided during 2nd supplementary 
Demands for Grants in the year 2015 -16.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Department of Fertilizers should strengthen its budgetary planning and formulate 
effective plans for loss making CPSEs to make them function by optimum utilization of 
available fund which was abysmally low in the past." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 1.9 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 "The matter regarding allocation of funds for the loss making PSU s is being taken up 
with Ministry of Finance." 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 1.10 The Committee noted that Gross Budgetary Support is provided by Government 
of India to loss making CPSEs to keep them operational and also for Miscellaneous 
Schemes which include Management of Information Technology where funds are 
released for Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) and mobile based Fertilizer 
Monitoring System (mFMS) and Science & Technology (S&T) which primarily lays 
emphasis at Research and Development of pr ocesses and equipment.  During the 
Twelfth Five Year plan period (2012 -17) there has been a radical decline in the plan 
budgetary allocations of the Department . Further, non-allocation of plan funds to the 
loss making CPSEs has adversely affected their func tioning and operation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommended that the Department of Fertilizers should 
strengthen its budgetary planning and formulate effective plans for loss making CPSEs 
to make them function al by optimum utilization of available fund wh ich was 
abysmally low in the past.   In this regard, the Department in its Action Taken Replies 
informed that the matter regarding allocation of funds for the loss making PSUs is 
being taken up with Ministry of Finance.  
 The Committee are of the view that  in the absence of adequate funds available 
with them, the revival of the sick/ closed fertilizer PSUs  and the plan 
schemes/programmes undertaken by the Departme nt would be adversely affected. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should formulate 
action plan for revival of sick CPSEs and take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Finance proactively and impress upon them to allocate funds for the loss making PSUs  
and other plan activities without any  further delay. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the initiatives undertaken by them in this regard. 
 
C. NON-PLAN BUDGETARY ALLOCATION AND EXPENDITURE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.4 
 
1.11 Stressing the need to augment the non-plan budgetary allocation, the Committee had 
recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note that the projected requirement of the Department under Non -
plan section for the year 2013 -14 was Rs. 97051.00 crore against which RE allocation 
for the year 2013 -14 was Rs. 71,962.00 crore and the actual expenditure was Rs. 
71300.72 crore, although the actual requirement was much higher as the Department 
had to carry over liabilities of Rs.26414.88 crore relating to the year 2012 -13. As a 
result, the Department has to roll over an amount of Rs. 40340.78 crore to the next 
year as  carry over liabilities. Against the projected requirement of Rs.1,56,420.48 
crore for the year 2014 -15, the Department was allocated an amount of  Rs.75,092.73 

11 
 
crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure during the year was Rs. 75,089.67 crore. 
The Department has to roll over the arrears of unpaid subsidy of Rs. 31,830.77 crore 
for the next year. Against the projected requirement of Rs.1,08,691.48 crore for the 
year 2015-16, the Department was allocated an amount of Rs.77,097.80 crore at RE 
stage. Thus, while examining the year -wise allocation and amount released under the 
scheme, the Committee are distressed to find that the Department did not get the 
budgetary allocation over the past few years commensurate with the projected 
requirement under non-plan head. As a result, a huge amount of carryover liability of 
subsidy burden is piling up every year. As a reason of which, the subsidy continues to 
remain unpaid to the fertilizer companies. Even for non -plan budgetary allocation for 
the year 2015 -16 at BE st age is only Rs.72997.80 crore which is more or less at par 
with BE 2014-15. During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the Department had 
also accepted the fact that delay in payment of subsidies to the fertilizer companies is 
affecting the fertilizer  industry. Under enormous financial constraints, the fertilizer 
companies could not be expected to grow and make the country self -reliant in the 
field of fertilizer sector which is very vital for the development of the agriculture 
sector and overall economy of the country. The Committee are of the view that unpaid 
arrears of subsidy should not roll over year after year as the same affects the 
functioning and growth of the fertilizer industries in the country. The Committee have 
time and again emphasized in the past that that concerted efforts be made by the 
Department of Fertilizer to get its non -plan budgetary allocation increased 
commensurate with its requirement before the Ministry of Finance. The Committee, 
therefore, repeat their recommendation that the Ministry of Finance may augment the 
non-plan budgetary allocation of the Department so as to clear all the unpaid subsidy 
of the past.  The Committee would like the Department to address this issue seriously 
and intimate the initiatives taken by them in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.12 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 "During the current financial year (2016 -17), an amount of Rs. 74,100.00 
Crore(Gross) has been allocated for Fertilizer subsidy at BE  Stage. As on 01.04.2016, 
the carry over liabilities worked out to Rs. 43,356.23Crore. Due to reduced gas price 
at present and reduced NBS rates, the present requirement of funds for the current 
financial year (2016-17) is expected to be approximately Rs. 65,763.63 Crore (Gross).  
Taking into account the present requirement and carry over liability of Rs. 
43,356.23Crore, the total requirement for 2016 -17 may be to the extent of Rs. 
1,09,119.86 Crore. 
 
 Department would raise the demand for additional funds in the Supplementary 
Demand for Grants for the current financial year." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 1.13 The Committee while examining year -wise allocation and amount released 
under the scheme, note d that the Department did not get the budgetary allocation 
over the past few years commensurate with the projected requirement under non -
plan head. As a result, a huge amount of carryover liability of subsidy burden is piling 
up every year. As a reason of w hich, the subsidy continues to remain unpaid to the 

12 
 
fertilizer companies. Even for non -plan budgetary allocation for the year 2015 -16 at 
BE stage is only Rs.72997.80 crore which is more or less at par with BE 2014 -15. The 
Committee, therefore, emphasized t hat concerted efforts be made by the Department 
of Fertilizer to get its non -plan budgetary allocation increased commensurate with its 
requirement before the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee further desired that t he 
Ministry of Finance may augment the non-plan budgetary allocation of the Department 
so as to clear all the unpaid subsidy of the past. 
 In this regard, the Department in its Action Taken Replies informed that the 
total requirement for 2016 -17, is likely be to the extent of Rs. 1,09,119.86 Cror e, after 
taking into account the present requirement and carry over liability of Rs. 43,356.23  
Crore. The Department would raise the demand for additional funds in the 
Supplementary Demand for Grants for the current financial year.  
 The Committee are sati sfied to note that the government has accepted the 
Committee's recommendation   and is making efforts to get its non -plan budgetary 
allocation increased commensurate with its requirement before the Ministry of 
Finance. The Committee trust and expect that the Department will strongly take up its 
demand for additional fund in the Supplementary Demand for Grants for the current 
financial year before the Ministry of Finance  so as to neutralize the backlog .  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
D. DIRECT SUBSIDY TO FARMERS 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
 
1.14 Stressing the need for expeditious implementation of Direct Benefits Transfer 
Scheme, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee are perturbed to note the delay in implementation of Direct Benefits 
Transfer Scheme (DBT) which was conceptualized in February, 2011 on the 
recommendation of Task Force constituted by Ministry of Finance to recommend 
implementable solution for d irect transfer of subsidies on kerosene, LPG and 
fertilizers. Task Force submitted its final report on 7 th August, 2013 which suggested 
4 phased approach for direct disbursement of fertiliser subsidy to the intended 
beneficiaries. The implementation of Pha se-I has already been made operational from 
1st November 2011. It is being rolled out through all the registered fertilizers 
manufacturers (116), wholesalers (16577) and retailers (157274) across the country. 
Accordingly, a portion of the subsidy (5 -15% depending on the grade of fertilizer) is 
given to manufacturers only when the retailer will acknowledge the receipt in the 
Mobile Fertilizer Management system (mFMS). Retailer acknowledgement has been 
ensured by the Department by linking a portion of manufac turer’s subsidy to 
retailer’s acknowledgement. Phase II of mFMS envisages capturing sale made by the 
retailer to the buyer or end -user. This involves capturing sales details as well as 
buyers’ details. The Department is examining the feasibility of doing P roof of Concept 

13 
 
for Phase -II. As regards implementation of subsequent Phases, Phase III & IV the 
Department intimated that there are many operational and implementation 
challenges such as identification of beneficiaries and determination of entitlement etc . 
Department of Fertilizer is exploring various options for handling these operational 
issues. While not satisfied with the performance of the Department in implementation 
of DBT Scheme, the Committee recommend that all -out effort be made for the 
implementation of DBT Scheme at the earliest. The Committee are of the strong view 
that transfer of the benefits of direct subsidy to the farmers would check the 
corruption, close the loopholes and profligacy in subsidies. 
 
 Further, the Committee are of the view that the Soil Health Card is not only essential 
for the farmers to have the appropriate knowhow on the dosage of fertilizers but 
would also be beneficial for Direct Transfer of Subsidy to the farmers. During the 
course of evidence, the Secretary Department  of Fertilizers had also agreed with the 
observation of the Committee that un less all farmers are provided with Soil Health 
Cards, it is impossible to transfer subsidy directly to them. The Committee would, 
therefore, like the Department of Fertilizers in coordination with the Ministry of 
Agriculture to  make earnest efforts towards expeditious implementation of Soil 
Health Card Scheme and ensure that every farmer is provided with a Soil Health Card 
having his bank details for direct transfer of subsidy to the farmer.   The Committee 
would like to be appr ised of tangible efforts in terms of concrete deliverables made in 
this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 1.15 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
"Phase -1 of mFMS i.e. Informat ion initially till the retailer point has been got 
stabilized. “As per Hon’ble Finance Minister’s Budget Speech (2016 -17), the 
Department is planning to conduct a pilot in few districts across the country during 
October,2016 –September,2017 to capture sale  details and buyer’s details. (Bank 
Account details, Aadhar No., land records etc.) Apart from the retailer sales, other 
major outcome of Phase -II of mFMS would be the availability of a robust database of 
buyers /Farmers which might be leveraged for DBT subsequently. 
 
 The Department would also explore the expediency of various identification 
instruments such as Kisan Credit Cards, Aadhar Cards, Voter ID Card, Bank Account 
etc. for authentication of buyers. However, the Pilot would initially run on“no denia l 
mode”. The outcome of pilot would also provide key success indicators for pan -
country implementation of Phase –II and ultimately for DBT in Fertilizers." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
 1.16 The Committee note d that the Direct Benefits Transfer Scheme (DBT) was 
conceptualized in February, 2011 on the recommendation of Task Force constituted 
by Ministry of Finance to recommend implementable solution for direct transfer of 
subsidies on kerosene, LPG and fertilizers. The implementation of Phase -I of DBT 
Scheme has already been made operational from 1 st November 2011. Phase II of mFMS 
envisages capturing sale made by the reta iler to the buyer or end -user. The 

14 
 
Department is examining the feasibility of doing Proof of Concept for Phase -II. As 
regards implement ation of subsequent Phases, Phase III & IV the Department 
intimated that there are many operational and implementation challenges such as 
identification of beneficiaries and determination of entitlement , etc. While not 
satisfied with the performance of the  Department in implementation of DBT Scheme, 
the Committee recommend ed that all -out effort be made for the implementation of 
DBT Scheme at the earliest. The Committee further,  recommended the Department of 
Fertilizers to coordinate with the Ministry of Ag riculture to make earnest efforts 
towards expeditious implementation of Soil Health Card Scheme and ensure that every 
farmer is provided with a Soil Health Card having his bank details for direct transfer of 
subsidy to the farmer. 
 In this regard, the Department in its Action Taken Replies informed that Phase-I 
of mFMS i.e. Information initially till the retailer point has been got stabilized. As per 
Hon’ble Finance Minister’s Budget Speech (2016 -17), the Department is planning to 
conduct a pilot in few dis tricts across the country during October,  2016 –September, 
2017 to capture sal e details and buyer’s details.   The Department would also explore 
the expediency of various identification instruments such as Kisan Credit Cards, 
Aadhar Cards, Voter ID Card, Bank Account etc., for authentication of buyers. However, 
the Pilot would initially run on  “no denial mode”. The outcome of pilot would also 
provide key success indicators for pan -country implementation of Phase –II and 
ultimately for DBT in Fertilizers.  
 The Committee observe that  implementation of Phase -I of DBT Scheme  has 
already been made operational and t he Department is examining the feasibility of 
doing Proof of Concept for Phase -II of mFMS which envisages capturing of sale made 
by the reta iler to the buyer or end -user.   In view of the above, the Committee expect 
that Department would implement the Phase -II expeditiously. Further, in the Action 
Taken Replies , the Department  has stated that it would explore the expediency of 
various identification inst ruments such as Kisan Credit Cards, Aadhar Cards, Voter ID 
Card, Bank Account etc. , for authentication of buyers.  However, the reply is silent on 
the issue of Soil Health Card.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate its recommendation 
and would also like the  Department to explore early implementation of Soil Health 
Card Scheme and make it a pre requisite for DBT scheme along with Kisan Credit 
Cards, Aadhar Cards, Voter ID Card, Bank Account , etc.  The Department may apprise 
the Committee of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 

15 
 
E. NEW INVESTMENT POLICY 2012 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
 
1.17 Stressing the need to increase the production of indigenous fertilizers, the Committee 
had recommended as under :- 
 "The Committee note that the New Investment Policy 2012 (NIP -2012) was notified 
by the Government on 2 nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7 th October 2014 in 
order to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector to reduce India’s import 
dependency in urea production. The Department at present has received 06 proposals 
for setting up of Revamp, Expansion, Revival and Greenfield plants. The Department 
in April, 2015 had advised all the project proponents to furnish Bank Guarantee & 
take all necessary steps as per the provisions of NIP -2012 and its amendment.  In this 
regard, three project proponents viz., Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited, 
Kanpur Fertilizers & Cement Limited and Matix have written letter to the Department 
in respect of their proposals. However, no communication has been received from 
Indo-Gulf Fertilize rs Limited and Nagarjuna Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited.  The 
Committee are deeply constrained to note the slow progress made by the Department 
in implementing the New Investment Policy which was notified on 2nd January, 2013. 
The Committee further note t hat the commissioning of new fertilizer plant takes 
around 3 to 3.5 years from the zero date (date of financial closure). In view of this, it is 
imperative that these investment proposals are implemented at the earliest. 
Considering the importance of the f resh investment in the fertilizer sector, the 
Committee recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should make more 
sustained and proactive efforts in a time bound manner and take up matter with the 
project proponents to furnish the Bank Guarantee & take  all necessary further steps 
as per the provisions of NIP -2012 and its amendment. The Committee would further 
like the Department  to review periodically the progress made by the project 
proponents and take corrective measures to ensure their timely executi on. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 1.18 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 "At present, there are following 6 proposals for setting up of Greenfield and 
Brownfield (Expansion) projects received under NIP -2012 and its amendment with 
the Department of Fertilizers: -   
  
S. No. Company Projects Ownership State 
1. Kanpur Fertilizers & 
Cement Limited 
Greenfield Project at 
Jabalpur 
Private Madhya 
Pradesh 
2. Indo-Gulf Fertilizers 
Limited –Jagdishpur 
Brownfield Expansion 
urea project at 
Jagdishpur. 
Private Uttar 
Pradesh 
3. Chambal Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited -
Gadepan 
Brownfield of 
Ammonia-Urea units at 
Gadepan-Kota.  
Private  Rajasthan 
4. Matix Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited -II, 
Panagarh 
Brownfiled Ammonia -
Urpea Fertilizers 
Complex at Panagarh.   
Private West Bengal 

16 
 
5. Rashtriya Chemicals & 
Fertilizers Limited -
Thal 
Brownfield Ammonia -
Urea Expansion project 
at Thal. 
CPSU  Maharashtra 
6. Nagarjuna Fertilizers 
& Chemicals Ltd. 
Brownfield Project at 
Kakinada, Andhra 
Pradesh. 
Private Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
This Department vide its letter dated 21 st April, 2015 had advised all the project 
proponents to furnish Bank Guarantee & take all necessary steps as per the provisions 
of NIP -2012 and its amendment.  In this regard, three project proponents viz., 
Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (CFCL), Kanpur Fertilizers & Cement Limited 
(KFCL) and Matix have written letter to this Department in respect of their proposals, 
the details of which are as follows: - 
 
S. 
No. 
Company Present Status 
1. CFCL-
Brownfield of 
Ammonia-
Urea units at 
Gadepan-
Kota 
As per the terms of the NIP Policy, CFCL had furnished the 
Bank Guarantee of Rs. 300 crores to the Government of India. 
 
Subsequent to their finalization of LSTK/EPCA contractors 
and release of advance to contractors, i.e., achievement of 
first milestone, this department has approved the release of 
Bank Guarantee of Rs 100 crores to Chambal fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited. 
 
2. KFCL-
Greenfield 
project at 
Jabalpur 
The request of KFCL, Jai Prakash  Associates Limited for 
allocation of sufficient quantity of gas for the proposed urea 
plant at Jabalpur and to expedite the Surat - Paradip gas 
pipeline with a provision to connect Jabalpur to this pipeline 
was taken up with MoP&NG. 
 
 In this regard, GAIL informed that they are presently 
carrying out detailed route survey of Dhamra - Angul-Durg 
Section of Surat -Paradip-Dhamra Pipeline along with a 
spurline to Balaghat/Jabalpur. GAIL has requested to provide 
the indicative schedule/ plan for setting up a fert ilizer plant 
at Balaghat/Jabalpur. 
 
In response to the above letter of GAIL, KFCL has 
communicated that the acquisition of the desired land is 
under process by the state government, pending which, it 
would be difficult for them to communicate the indicativ e 
schedule. Subsequent to the land allotment, they will be 
starting the process for environment clearance. KFCL has 
indicated that the project for setting up a Greenfield fertilizer 
unit will take 36 months from receipt of Environment 
clearance. 
 
3. Matix Matix Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited has proposed to set up 
a Greenfield 3 Million Metric Tonne Per Annum gas based 
Ammonia-Urea complex (Train -I & II) at Pannagarh, West 
Bengal with the investment of over Rs. 6000 crores.   The 

17 
 
Matix plant will use Coal Bed Methane (CBM) gas as feedstock 
for manufacturing urea.   Matix has confirmed its readiness to 
commence production of urea subject to the availability of 
minimum 1.7 mmscmd of CBM.   There is no domestic gas 
allocation for this project by the Government of India and also 
the unit is not connected to National Gas Grid Network.  In 
order to facilitate the commissioning of plant, DoF takes up 
the matter of allocation of CBM Gas with MoP&NG. 
 
So far as Train -II is concerned, vide letter dated 24 th April, 
2016, Matix has informed that ‘they shall take all necessary 
action as required and also take steps to achieve Financial 
Closure.  They agree to submit Bank Guarantee on achieving 
financial closure but before making any LSTK/EPC financially 
effective. 
 
No communication has been received from Indo -Gulf Fertilizers Limited (IGFL) and 
Nagarjuna Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (NFCL).   
 
Department of Fertilizers has again taken up matter with the project proponents to 
furnish the Bank Guarantee & take  all necessary steps as per the provisions of NIP -
2012 and its amendment.   
 
The commissioning of new fertilizer plant takes around 3 to 3.5 years from the zero 
date. Therefore, the reduction of the import and increase in production of urea would 
only be analyzed when the plants start the production." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
1.19 The Committee note d that under the New Investment Policy 2012 (NIP -2012) 
notified by the Government on 2 nd January, 2013 and its amendment  on 07.10.2014, 
the Department at present has received 06 proposals for setting up of Revamp, 
Expansion, Revival and Greenfield plants . The Department in April, 2015 had advised 
all the project proponents to furnish Bank Guarantee & take all necessary steps as per 
the provisions of NIP-2012 and its amendment. Considering the importance of the 
fresh investment s in the urea sector, the Committee recommended that the 
Department of Fertilizers should make more sustained and proactive efforts in a time 
bound manner and take up the matter with the project proponents to furnish the Bank 
Guarantee & take all necessary further steps as per the provisions of NIP -2012 and its 
amendment. Further, the Department  should review periodically the progress made 
by the project proponents and take correc tive measures to ensure timely execution  of 
their projects. 
 In this regard, the Department in its Action Taken Replies informed that the 
Department vide its letter dated 21 st April, 2015 had advised all the project 
proponents to furnish Bank Guarantee & take all necessary steps as per the provisions 

18 
 
of NIP-2012 and its amendment.  In this regard, three project proponents viz., Chambal 
Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (CFCL), Kanpur Fertilizers & Cement Limited (KFCL) 
and Matix have written letter to the Department in respect of their proposals. CFCL has 
furnished the Bank Guarantee of Rs. 300 crores to the Government of India, as per the 
terms of the NIP Policy.  KFCL has indicated that the project for setting up a Greenfield 
fertilizer unit will take 36 months from receipt of Environment clearance. Matix has 
informed that they shall take all necessary action s as required and also take steps to 
achieve Financial Closure and agreed to submit Bank Guarantee on achieving financial 
closure. 
 In view of the abo ve, the Committee reiterates its recommendation that the 
Department of Fertilizers should gear up and make more sustained and proactive 
efforts in a time bound manner and take up matter with the project proponents to 
furnish the Bank Guarantee & take all n ecessary further steps as per the provisions of 
NIP-2012 and its amendment. The Committee would further like the Department  to 
review periodically the progress made by the project proponents and take action 
accordingly to ensure timely execution of projects.  
 
F. REVIVAL OF SICK FERTILIZER UNITS 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
 
1.20 Emphasizing the need fo r expeditious revival of sick fertilizer units, the Committee 
had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee have many time in the past emphasized the need for expeditious 
revival of closed/sick units of fertilizer companies particularly in the context of 
augmenting indigenous production of fertilizers and to make the country self reliant 
in fertilizer sector. The Committee are happy to observe that earnest efforts have been 
made by the Department in expediting the approval of Financial Restructuring 
proposal of Brahmputra Valley Fertiliser Corporation Limited (BVFCL) by the Cabinet, 
as a result of which the company is able to revive itself and is no more a loss making 
company. However, out of 9 public sector fertilizer companies under administrative 
control of the Department of Fertilizers, 2 companies viz. Fertilizers and Chemicals 
(FACT) and Madra s Fertilizers Limited (MFL) are sick and 2 companies viz. Fertilizer 
Corporation of India Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited 
(HFCL) are lying closed since 2002. The Committee also noted that Government is 
considering proposals for financial restructuring of two sick companies namely MFL 
and FACT which inter -alia involves write off of Government of India loan and the 
interest thereon. The Committee have also been given to understand that while the 
proposal for financial reconstructin g is under process, the Ministry of Finance has 
approved a plan loan of Rs. 1000 crores to FACT under RE 2015 -16. Department of 
Fertilizers and FACT have entered a legally binding Agreement with FACT mortgaging 
its free-hold land of worth Rs. 1836.72 crore  to Government of India against the total 
outstanding liabilities of Government of India. The interest on the total outstanding 

19 
 
loan till its repayment shall be at @ 13.5% from 31.03.2017. The Committee are of the 
strong view that interest charged @ 13.5% on the total outstanding loan from FACT, 
which is a sick company is unreasonable and harsh. During the course of evidence, the 
Secretary Department of Fertilizers had also accepted that the interest rate is very 
high. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should take 
up the issue vigorously with the Ministry of Finance to review the rate of interest 
charged from the FACT on the loan provided to them.  Further, the Committee also 
expect that the Department would make earnest effort s to expedite the 
implementation of pending financial restructuring of MFL and FACT."  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 1.21 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
"Against the DoF request to fix the rate of interest at G -Sec rate (i.e.8%), Department 
of Economic Affairs (DEA) calculated the rate of interest @13.5%. As conveyed by 
Secretary (DEA) DO letter no. 7/58/2014 -NS. I dated 12.01.2016, the interest rate for 
loan to FACT has been calculated on the basis of DEA’s OM No.5(3)-B(PD)/2014 dated 
29.12.2014. Vide this OM DEA has notified the revised rates of interest applicable 
from 01.04.2014. As per revised rates of interest rate of interest for the Working 
Capital loans and loans to meet C ash losses for the Industrial and Commercial 
Undertakings in the Public Sector and Cooperatives is 13.50 %. Accordingly, rate of 
interest for the plan loan of Rs.1000 crore given to the FACT has been fixed @13.5% 
till its repayment from 31.03.2017. DEA has  also informed that the rate of interest is 
subject to revision usually on an annual basis. The issue regarding review of interest 
rates is being taken up with Ministry of Finance as per the recommendations of the 
Committee. 
 
Dept. of Fertilizers is actively considering for the financial restructuring of FACT and 
MFL. It has already prepared a proposal for the financial restructuring of FACT. The 
proposal contains waiver of GoI loans and interest as on 31.03.2015, granting one -
time compensation for use of LNG and issuance of sovereign guarantee so as to come 
out of BIFR. The proposal also includes ‘In principle’ approval for sale / leveraging of 
land for raising resources to repay the loans raised against sovereign guarantee and  
to raise funds for implementation of short/medium & long term proposed projects. 
 
A proposal for the financial restructuring of MFL had been pending for the 
recommendation of the BRPSE for a long time. In the meantime, Government wound 
up the BRPSE and DP E issued guidelines for stream lining the mechanism for the 
revival and restructuring of sick/incipient sick and weak CPSE. Accordingly, DoF has 
asked MFL for engaging an external expert agency for exploring the possibility for the 
revival of MFL in terms of these guidelines. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
1.22 The Committee note d that out of 9 public sector fertilizer companies under 
administrative control of the Department of Fertilizers, 2 companies viz. Fertilizers 
and Chemicals (FACT) and Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) are sick. The Committee 
also noted that Government is conside ring proposals for financial restructuring of two 

20 
 
sick companies namely MFL and FACT which inter -alia involves write off of 
Government of India loan and the interest thereon. The Committee have also been 
given to understand that while the proposal for fina ncial reconstructing is under 
process, the Ministry of Finance has approved a plan loan of Rs. 1000 crores to FACT 
under RE 2015 -16. The interest on the total outstanding loa n till its repayment shall 
be @ 13.5% from 31.03.2017. The Committee were of the s trong view that interest 
charged @ 13.5% on the total outstanding loan from FACT, which is a sick company is 
unreasonable and harsh, therefore, strongly recommended that the Department 
should take up the issue vigorously with the Ministry of Finance to rev iew the rate of 
interest charged from the FACT on the loan provided to them.  Further, the Committee 
also expect that the Department would make earnest efforts to expedite the 
implementation of pending financial restructuring of MFL and FACT. 
 In this rega rd, the Department in its Action Taken Replies informed that as per 
revised rates of interest rate of interest for the Working Capital loans and loans to 
meet Cash losses for the Industrial and Commercial Undertakings in the Public Sector 
and Cooperatives is 13.50 %. Accordingly, rate of interest for the plan loan of Rs.1000 
crore given to the FACT has been fixed @13.5% till its repayment from 31.03.2017. 
DEA has also informed that the rate of interest is subject to revision usually on an 
annual basis. The issue regarding review of interest rates is being taken up in due 
course with Ministry of Finance as per the recommendations of the Committee. 
Further, Department of Fertilizers is actively considering for the financial 
restructuring of FACT and MFL.  A proposal for the financial restructuring of  FACT has 
already been prepared.   Based on DPC guidelines for streamlining the mechanism for 
the revival and restructuring of sick/incipient sick and weak CPSE s, t he Department 
has asked MFL for engaging an external  expert agency for exploring the possibility for 
the revival of MFL. 
 The Committee are satisfied that the government has accepted the Committee's 
recommendation to review of interest charged @ 13.5% on the total outstanding loan 
from FACT  and the same wou ld be  taken up with Ministry of Finance  in due course. 
The Committee would like the Department to  strongly take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Finance  and impress upon them to charge  the rate of interest which is 
reasonable and implementable.  While a proposal for the financial restructuring of 
FACT has already been prepared, the Committee would recommend the Department to 
make earnest efforts to expedite the implementation of pending financial 
restructuring  of MFL.  The Committee would also expect MFL /Department of 

21 
 
Fertilizers to expedite the appointment of external expert agency for preparing the 
proposal for revival of MFL in terms of DPE guidelines. 
 
G.  REVIVAL OF CLOSED FERTILIZER UNITS 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
 
1.23 Emphasizing the need for ex peditious revival of closed fertilizer units, the Committee 
had recommended as under::-  
 "Apart from these 2 sick PSUs, there are 8 fertilizer units lying closed at present. Out 
of these closed units, 5 are of FCIL and 3 are of HFCL. The Committee were in formed 
that the pre -project activities for revival of Talcher and Ramagundam units of FCIL 
are in progress  . As regards Sindri, Gorakhpur and Barauni units of FCIL a cabinet 
note seeking approval on the revised terms and conditions for bidding process has 
been circulated for inter ministry consultation. As regards revival of HFCL units, the 
Empowered Committee has recommended the proposal of Department of Fertilizer 
for taking fresh proposal to Cabinet for bringing out HFCL from the purview of BIFR 
and revi ve the units by itself through bidding route. the Committee are of the view 
that expeditious revival of sick and closed fertilizer units is essential for making India 
self-sufficient in the fertilizer sector and to reduce its imports dependency. However, 
the Committee regret to note the slow pace of progress made by the Government in 
the revival of these sick units so far. The Committee also feel that the delay in the 
revival of closed and sick units leads to time and cost overruns. Keeping in view the 
significant role which is expected to be played by these sick units after their revival, 
the Committee reiterate its recommendation that the process of revival of closed/ 
sick units of fertilizers be expedited with in a fixed time frame. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.24 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 "Revival of the closed units of FCIL: 
Unit wise further progress made on the revival of the closed units of the FCIL is as 
under: 
 
 Talcher unit: 
 
 • In the meeting convened by CEO, NITI Aayog on 15.03.2016 following 
decisions were taken: 
a. All the concerns raised by the Technical Consultants, TRU with regard to 
shortcomings in TEFR prepared by PDIL should be addressed satisfactorily. 
b. The issues raised by TRU relating to strategy for disposal of valuable by -
products like Naphtha, Tar, Phenol, etc. and their impact on financial viability 
needs to be examined. 
c. The problems associated with disposal of huge quantity of poor quality Ash 
needs to be addressed. 
d. Since JV has already applied for allocation of coal block, Ministry of coal should 
expedite the same. 

22 
 
• PDIL submitted their report on the concerns raised by the Technical 
consultant, TRU and same has been circulated to all the JV partners for their 
comments on 06.04.2016. 
• CEO, NITI Aayog convened another meeting on 13.04.2016. It has been decided 
that Jindal Steel Plant Ltd (JSPL) may be requested for a presentation 
highlighting their experience on ALGS Technology. 
• CEO, NITI Aayog again convened a meeting on 21.04.2016. In the meeting it 
was decided that- 
a. A test run will be carried out in JSPL plant for 5 days with coal samples of high 
ash Talcher coal with the following options: 
 100% Talcher coal washed down to 35% Ash content. 
 70% Talcher coal blended with 30% Raniganj (better quality) coal. 
 
b. It has already been decided, earlier, that North of Arakhpal coal mine would be 
allocated to the project and since coal seam from these mines are similar to 
Bhubaneswari coal mine which is an operating mine, coal samples shall be 
supplies to JSPL, Angul plant from Bhubaneswari coal mine. 
c. CIL shall make all arrangement for supplying the required quantity of co al from 
Bhubaneswari and Raniganj coal mine. 
d. The test run would be under the observation of the engineers from the 
consortium partners. 
e. Entire activity will be co-ordinated by Coal India Limited and completed within a 
period of one month. 
f. The final decision for selection of technology will be taken based on the outcome 
of the test run. 
 
 Ramagundam Unit: 
RFCL Board in its meeting held on 16 th March, 2016 approved debt tie up of Rs 
3940.71 cr from consortium of six banks led by SBI. 
 Gorakhpur unit & Sindri Unit: 
 
 In the meeting held by CEO, NITI Aayog on 15.03.2016 it was decided that- 
 
a. Sindri, Gorakhpur and Barauni Units will be revived through financially strong 
PSUs like Coal India Limited, NTPC and ONGC respectively.  
b. Department of Fertilizer will prepare a detailed information brochure of each 
unit highlighting all the assets including its land and other infrastructure, the 
required investment and other support to be provided by the Government. 
 
 CEO, NITI Aayog convened another meeting on 6.04.2016 . After detailed 
deliberation it was decided that: 
a. Ministries/CPSUs were once again asked to confirm their participation in revival 
process. 
b. They were also given the option for investment through SPV/JV consisting of 
more than one PSU of their ministry. 
 
 A Cabinet Note for revival of Gorakhpur and Sindri Units through PSU route is 
under consideration. 
 
 Revival of the closed units of HFCL: 

23 
 
 
In addition to earlier reply of the Department it is submitted that the cabinet note to 
bring the HFCL out from the p urview of BIFR and revive Barauni unit itself through 
bidding route was finalized after receiving the comments of all the stake holding 
Ministries/organization during the Inter -Ministerial Consultation on the draft cabinet 
note. The final cabinet note has been sent to Cabinet Secretariat on 13.05.2016 for 
placing before the Cabinet at an early date." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.25 The Committee noted that expeditious revival of closed fertilizer units is 
essential for making India self -sufficient in the production of fertilizers and to reduce 
its import dependency. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the process of 
revival of closed/sick units of fertilizers be expedited within a fixed timeframe. 
 
 In its Action Taken Replies, the Department has st ated the progress made with 
regard to revival of closed  units of fertilizer companies i.e. Fertilizer Corporation of 
India Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFCL) . With 
regards Talcher unit of FCIL, a test run will be carried out  in Jindal Steel Plant Ltd 
(JSPL) plant for 5 days with coal samples of high ash Talcher coal . The final decision 
for selection of technology will be taken based on the outcome of the test run.  With 
regard to Ramagundam unit of FCIL, RFCL Board in its meet ing held on 16 th March, 
2016 approved debt tie up of Rs 3940.71 crore from consortium of six banks led by 
SBI. With regard to Gorakhpur and Sindri units of FCIL, A Cabinet Note for revival of 
Gorakhpur and Sindri Units through PSU route is under considerat ion. With regards 
revial of closed units of HFCL, the Department has submitted that the cabinet note to 
bring the HFCL out from the purview of BIFR and revive Barauni unit itself through 
bidding route was finalized after receiving the comments of all the s take holding 
Ministries/organization during the Inter -Ministerial Consultation on the draft cabinet 
note. The final cabinet note has been sent to Cabinet Secretariat on 13.05.2016 for 
placing before the Cabinet at an early date. 
 
 After reviewing the action taken replies furnished by the Department, the 
Committee are pleased to note the earnest efforts  made in the revival of closed  
fertilizer units of FCIL and HFCL. The Committee desire that such sustained efforts may 
continue to be made so as to e xpedite the process of revival of closed units. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
 

24 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.9 & 11 
 
1.26 Emphasizing the need to ensure supply of gas to the fertilizer manufacturing units, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note with deep concern that the inadequate availability of gas is one 
of the major limiting factors to the growth of urea industry in the country. Presently, 
the availability of domestic natural gas is not even su fficient to meet the demand of 
existing gas based urea units. The current requirement of gas for the fertilizer sector 
is 46.5 MMCMD while only 31.5 MMCMD is being allocated to them.  As against that, 
what is supplied is only 24 to 26 MMCMD of domestic gas . The Committee are of the 
strong view that pricing and firm availability of natural gas for existing and new units 
of fertilizer companies are the pre-requisites to increase the  indigenous production 
and would, therefore, desire the Department to play a p roactive role in association 
with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas towards allocation of gas for the 
existing and new fertilizer plants in the country." 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
 
 "The Committee is further informed that Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has 
notified Pooling of Gas for Fertilizers (Urea) Sector, which, inter alia, includes that the 
domestic gas will be pooled with Re -gasified Liquefied Natural Gas (RLNG) to provide 
natural gas at uniform delivered price to all Natural Gas Grid connected Urea 
manufacturing plants for the purpose of manufacturing urea.  The provisions of gas 
pooling will ensure that RLNG will the supplied to urea units at competitive price and 
urea units are incentivized to maximize their production beyond reasses sed capacity 
because of simplified subsidy calculation parameters under New Urea Policy (NUP) -
2015.  It also envisaged the constitution of Empowered Pool Management Committee 
(EPMC) to monitor implementation of gas pooling and procurement of RLNG through 
competitive and transparent manner. The Committee are of the view that this is an 
important policy decision implemented in the fertilizer sector which would boost the 
production of urea and also provide good building block for further fertilizer sector 
reforms. Considering the importance of the decision, the Committee expect that the 
Department should make earnest efforts to implement the decision successfully and 
also constantly monitor it in order to achieve the desired results." 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT (REC. NO. 9 & 11) 
 
1.27 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
"Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has notified Pooling of Gas for Fertilizers (Urea) 
Sector vide its Notification dat ed 20 th May, 2015 (read with 29 th May, 2015) which, 
inter alia, includes that “the domestic gas will be pooled with Re -gasified Liquefied 
Natural Gas (RLNG) to provide natural gas at uniform delivered price to all Natural 
Gas Grid connected Urea manufactur ing plants for the purpose of manufacturing of 
Urea. After gas pooling, all urea units gets gas at uniform rate irrespective of the gas 
allocation to the unit. It will ensure better utilization of available domestic gas to urea 
sector. The provisions of gas pooling will ensure that Natural Gas will be supplied to 
urea units at competitive price and urea units are incentivized to maximize their 
production beyond reassessed capacity because of simplified subsidy calculation 
parameters under New Urea Policy (NUP) – 2015, which was notified on 25 th May, 

25 
 
2015 by the Department of Fertilizers. It also envisages the constitution of 
Empowered Pool Management Committee (EPMC) to monitor implementation of gas 
pooling and procurement of RLNG through a competitive and  transparent manner. 
Department of Fertilizers regularly takes up the matter of allocation and regular 
supply of natural gas to the urea units, in the EPMC meetings. A D.O letter dated 22 nd 
June, 2016, from Secretary (Fertilizers) has also been written to Secretary (MoP&NG) 
to ensure the supply of domestic gas atleast to the extent of 31.5 mmsmcd to the urea 
sector as per EGoM decision dated 23.08.2013." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
1.28 The Committee noted that pricing and firm availability of natural gas for 
existing and new units of fertilizer companies are the pre -requisites to increase the 
indigenous production and, therefore, recommended that the Department to play a 
proactive role in association with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas towards 
allocation of gas for the existing and new fertilizer plants in the country. The 
Committee further, recommended that the Department should make earnest efforts to 
implement the notification regarding Pooling of Gas for Fertilizers (Urea) Sector 
successfully and also constantly monitor it in order to achieve the desired results. 
 In this regard, the Department in its Action Taken Replies informed that the 
Department of Fertilizers regularly takes up the matter of allocation and regular 
supply of natural gas to the urea units, in the EPMC meetings. A D.O letter dated 22 nd 
June, 2016, from Secretary (Fertilizers) has also been written to Secretary (MoP&NG) 
to ensure the supply of domestic gas atleast to the extent of 31.5 mmsmcd to the urea 
sector as per EGoM decision dated 23.08.2013.  
 In view of the above, t he Committee would like to reiterate its earlier 
recommendation that the Department should play a proactive role and pursue with 
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and explore all possible options t o supply 
the required gas to these urea manufacturing units at the earliest. The Committee 
would like to know the action taken in this regard. 
 
H.  FEEDSTOCK POLICY/ALL OCATION OF GAS  TO NAPHTHA BASED FER TILIZER 
UNITS. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.10 
 
1.29 Stressing the need to assured supply of gas to Naphtha based fertilizer units , the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee are given to understand that three urea units, viz., Madras Fertilizers 
Limited (MFL)-Manali, Mangalore Chemicals & Fer tilizers Limited (MCFL) -Mangalore 
and Southern Petrochemicals Industries Limited (SPIC) -Tuticorin are producing urea 

26 
 
using Naphtha in absence of gas allocation and pipeline connectivity.   While 
appreciating the step taken by Department of allowing these ur ea units to continue 
urea production on Naphtha as a feedstock till these plants get assured supply of gas 
either by pipeline or by any another means, the Committee expect that immediate 
necessary steps be taken to explore all the available options in orde r to ensure 
assured supply of gas to these plants at the earliest.  The Committee also note that 
fertilizer units which are away from sea shore may take much time for their 
conversion from Naptha/FO/LSHS based to gas based as laying of the pipeline is a 
mammoth task but the units which are near the sea shore like MFL which require only 
18 KM pipeline are deprived to get gas supply owing to non -existence of terminal at 
Chennai port.  The Committee, are given to understand that terminal is being 
constructed by IOCL and it would be constructed by 2018.  The Committee, therefore, 
trust and expect that the terminal would be constructed expeditiously by IOCL 
without any time over run.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that Department of 
Fertilizers should take up the matter with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
on priority to expedite the project." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.30 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
"Department of Fertilizers regularly reviews the progress of infrastructure for supply 
of gas and readiness to receive gas for Naphtha based urea units with Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas. As per the feedback received from the MoP&NG, the latest 
status of Gas Pipeline Connectivity to Naphtha based Urea units is as follows: 
 
1.  Southern Petrochemicals Industries Corporation (SPIC)-Tuticorin: 
 SPIC is about 120 Km away from ONGC’s Ramanad gas field. ONGC has informed the 
availability of non -APM gas for allocation from Kanjirangudi (KJR) field, Ramnad 
under Cauvery Assets in Tamilnadu. Based on the requests made by M/s SPIC to 
allocate 0.9 MMSCMD of natural gas from Ramnad field for its urea manufactur ing 
unit located at Tuticorin in Tamilnadu and as per recommendations of DoF, Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas has earmarked 0.9 MMSCMD of Non -APM gas from 
ONGC’s Kanjirangudi (KJR) field, Ramnad for SPIC, Tuticorin.  
  
 SPIC, Tuticorin is proposed to  be connected with ONGC’s Ramanad gas field by laying 
a 120 Km pipeline by M/s IOCL as a part of its authorized pipeline Ennore – 
Nagapattinam - Tuticorin - Madurai - Bengaluru Natural Gas Pipeline (ENTMBPL). 
This pipeline has been awarded in Dec. 2015.  I OCL has been advised to expedite the 
pipeline connectivity. 
 
2.  Madras Fertilizers Ltd (MFL)- Manali: 
Option 1:    MFL, Manali is proposed to be connected with IOCL’s proposed LNG 
Terminal at Ennore by Ennore – Nagapattinam – Tuticorin – Madurai – 
Bengalauru Natural Gas Pipeline (ENTMBPL). Ennore LNG terminal is likely to 
be commissioned in 2017 -18. This plant is only 17 kms away from the 
proposed LNG terminal. In order to connect this plant, PNGRB has granted 
authorization to IOCL on 15 th December, 2015 to construct ENTMBPL. Thus, 
MFL, Manali may be connected in synchronization with the commissioning of 
Ennore LNG terminal. 

27 
 
 
Option 2:  As an alternative supply to MFL -Manali, GAIL has also plans to connect the 
plant through a spurline of ab out 270 kms from its Kochi -Koottannad-
Bangalore-Mangalore (KKBMPL) pipeline.   Further, gas can also be supplied 
from Dabhol LNG terminal of RGPPL through Dabhol -Bangalore pipeline with 
extension to MFL, Manali.   For execution of the pipeline, GTA and GSA a re 
required to be signed by GAIL with MFL, Manali.   GAIL had offered MFL to 
supply RLNG at Henry Hub (HH) linked prices for a Long term period of 20 
years and for the initial period of 2017 -18.  MFL is yet to execute the 
necessary agreements. 
 
3.  Mangalore Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd. (Mangalore): 
  GAIL has planned to connect this plant with Kochi LNG terminal by laying 
Kochi-Koottannad-Bangalore-Mangalore Pipeline (KKBMPL).  GAIL has commissioned 
Phase-I of KKBMPL project with a total length of 42 kms.   However, due to stiff 
resistance from farmers in the state of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, the Kootannad -
Mangalore pipeline section and Koottannad -Bangalore pipeline section are getting 
delayed in execution.   In view of this delay, GAIL has proposed to connect t he plant 
through an alternative route by taking a tap -off on Dabhol-Bangalore pipeline (DBPL) 
at Chitradurga / Housepet / Devengiri to Mangalore for which necessary 
arrangements shall be required to be executed by the entities." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
1.31 The Committee noted that three urea units, viz., Madras Fertilizers Limited 
(MFL)-Manali, Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (MCFL) -Mangalore and 
Southern Petrochemicals Industries Limited (SPIC) -Tuticorin are producing urea 
using Naphtha in absence of gas allocation and pipeline connectivity.   While 
appreciating the step taken by Department by  allowing these urea units to continue 
urea production on Naphtha as a feedstock till these plants get assured supply of gas 
either by pipeline or by an y another means, the Committee recommended that 
immediate necessary steps be taken to explore all the available options in order to 
ensure assured supply of gas to these plants at the earliest.   
 In this regard, the Department in its Action Taken Replies informed that 
Department of Fertilizers regularly reviews the progress of infrastructure for supply of 
gas and readiness to receive gas for Naphtha based urea units with Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas. As per the feedback received from the Ministry of  Petroleum 
& Natural Gas, SPIC, Tuticorin and MFL, Manali, are  proposed to be connected with 
ONGC’s Ramanad gas field by laying a 120 Km pipeline by M/s I ndian Oil Corporation 
Limited as a part of its authorized pipeline Ennore – Nagapattinam - Tuticorin - 
Madurai - Bengaluru Natural Gas Pipeline (ENTMBPL).  As an alternative supply to 
MFL-Manali, GAIL has also plans to connect the plant through a spurline of about 270 
kms from its Kochi -Koottannad-Bangalore-Mangalore (KKBMPL) pipeline.   Further, 

28 
 
gas can a lso be supplied from Dabhol LNG terminal of RGPPL through Dabhol -
Bangalore pipeline with extension to MFL, Manali.   Further, with regards Mangalore 
Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd. (Mangalore), GAIL has planned to connect this plant 
with Kochi LNG terminal b y laying Kochi -Koottannad-Bangalore-Mangalore Pipeline 
(KKBMPL).  GAIL has commissioned Phase -I of KKBMPL project with a total length of 
42 kms.  However, due to stiff resistance from farmers in the state of Kerala and Ta mil 
Nadu and consequent delay in ex ecution of the Kootannad-Mangalore pipeline section 
and Koottannad -Bangalore pipeline section , GAIL has proposed to connect the plant 
through an alternative route by taking a tap -of on Dabhol -Bangalore pipeline (DBPL) 
at Chitradurga/ Housepet/ Devengiri to  Mangalore for which necessary arrangements 
shall be required to be executed by the entities. 
 After analyzing the action taken replies furnished by the Department, the 
Committee are pleased to note the progress  of infrastructure for supply of gas  by the 
Department in pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee . However, at this 
stage, utmost priority needs to be given to remove bottlenecks for execution of 
infrastructure which are coming in the way of supply of gas to the urea based plants . 
The Committee, therefore , desire that more sustained and proactive efforts may be 
made to remove the above cited hindrance s as per the reply . The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the initiatives undertaken by them in this regard. 
 
I.  DEMAND AND AVAILABILITY OF FERTILIZERS  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.12 
 
1.32 Stressing the need for sustainable increase in the production of fertilizer and 
minimizing imports, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 "The Committee note that the month -wise demand is assessed and projected by the 
Department of Agriculture & Co -operation (DAC) in consultation with the State 
Governments before commencement of each cropping season.  On the basis of month -
wise & state -wise projection, the Department of Fertilizers allocates sufficient/ 
adequate quantities of fertilizers to States by issuing monthly supply plan and the 
movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is being monitored throughout the 
country by an on -line web bas ed monitoring system also called as Fertilizer 
Monitoring System (FMS). The State Governments are regularly advised to coordinate 
with manufacturers and importers of fertilizers for streamlining the supplies through 
timely placement of indents for railway rakes through their state institutional 
agencies like Markfed etc. Regular Weekly Video Conference is conducted jointly by 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Department of Fertilizers (DoF), and 
Ministry of Railways with State Agriculture Offic ials and corrective actions are taken 
to dispatch fertilizer as indicated by the State Governments. The gap between demand 
(requirement) and production is met through import. While examining the quantity 
and value of urea imported during the last three years (2012-15), the Committee finds 

29 
 
that there has been gradual rise in import of urea viz. import of urea was 80.44 LTM 
in 2012-13, 70.88 LTM in 2013 -14 and 83.09 LTM in 2014 -15. Further, the import of 
urea for the year 2015 -16 (up to February 2016) is agai n on the high side viz. 83.09 
LTM.   The Committee note with serious concern the consequential financial burden 
on the exchequer due to increase in imports of urea to meet the demand -supply gap. 
The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to take i mmediate necessary 
steps to minimize the import of urea by taking proactive measures towards a 
sustainable increase in domestic production commensurate with increasing domestic 
demand. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this reg ard."
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.33 In reply to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under :- 
 "Concern of the committee regarding increase in import of Urea over the years has 
been noted. In this cont ext, it is stated that DoF is mandated to provide all subsidized 
chemical fertilizers to the States/UTs as per requirement projected by Department of 
Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) in consultation with States. 
Requirement is projected on the basis of various parameters. To meet the gap 
between domestic demand and indigenous production Urea is imported. Requirement 
of Urea over the years has increased marginally which has resulted in import of Urea 
as the domestic production has not incr eased that could match with the demand. In 
the year 2015 -16, domestic production was highest ever, but the original demand 
(requirement) was also highest ever from States. 
 In order to reduce the import dependence gradually, Department has initiated various 
steps to enhance the domestic production. To facilitate fresh investment in urea 
sector and to make India self -sufficient in the urea sector, the Government had 
notified New Investment Policy – 2012 on 2 nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 
7th October 2014.  At present, there are 6 proposals for setting up of Greenfield and 
Brownfield (Expansion) projects received under NIP -2012 and its amendment with 
the Department of Fertilizers. 
 The commissioning of new fertilizer plant takes around 3 to 3.5 years fr om the zero 
date (date of financial closure).  Therefore, the reduction of the import and increase in 
production of urea would only be analyzed when the plants start the production. 
Further, the New Urea Policy -2015 (NUP - 2015) has also been notified on 25 th May 
2015 effective from 1 stJune 2015 to 31 st March 2019 with the objectives to maximize 
indigenous urea production; promote energy efficiency in the urea units; and to 
rationalize the subsidy burden on the Government of India.   The policy has led to 
additional production of 19 LMT from the existing plants and the total production of 
urea during the year 2015-16 was 244.75 LMT, i.e. the highest ever urea production in 
the country. 
 
New Urea Policy is one of such steps. Similarly, steps have been taken for  
revival/opening New Urea Plants in the coming years. It will take some reasonable 
time to get the desired result of New Urea Policy and revival/opening of new Plants."  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
1.34 The Committee noted that there has been gradual rise in import of urea viz. 
import of urea was 80.44 LTM in 2012 -13, 70.88 LTM in 2013 -14 and 83.09 LTM in 
2014-15. Further, the import of urea for the year 2015 -16 (up to February 2016) is 

30 
 
again on the high side viz. 83.09 LTM.   The Committee note d with serious concern the 
consequential financial burden on the exchequer due to increase in imports of urea to 
meet the demand -supply gap. The Committee therefore, recommended the 
Department to take immediate nece ssary steps to minimize the import of urea by 
taking proactive measures towards a sustainable increase in domestic production 
commensurate with increasing domestic demand.  
 In this regard, the Department in its Action Taken Replies informed that  the 
concern of the Committee regarding increase in import of Urea over the years has 
been noted. In this context, it is stated that the Department of Fertilizers is mandated 
to provide all subsidized chemical fertilizers to the States/UTs as per requirement 
projected by Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) in 
consultation with States. In the year 2015 -16, domestic production was highest ever, 
but the original demand (requirement) was also highest ever from States.  Further, in 
order t o reduce the import dependence gradually, Department has initiated various 
steps to enhance the domestic production. The Government had notified New 
Investment Policy – 2012 on 2 nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7 th October 
2014.  Further, the New Urea  Policy-2015 (NUP - 2015) has also been notified on 
25th May 2015 effective from 1 stJune 2015 to 31 st March 2019 with the objectives to 
maximize indigenous urea production; promote energy efficiency in the urea units; 
and to rationalize the subsidy burden o n the Government of India.   The policy has led 
to additional production of 19 LMT from the existing plants and the total production of 
urea during the year 2015-16 was 244.75 LMT, i.e. the highest ever urea production in 
the country. 
 The Committee welcome the proactive step s being taking by the Department in 
order to reduce import dependency  gradually and to augment indigenous urea 
production. The Committee are of the view that expeditious implementation of various 
steps taken by the Department would be helpful in making the country self -reliant in 
the field of fertilizer sector which is very vital for the development of the agriculture 
sector and overall economy of the country. The Committee while reiterating its earlier 
recommendation desire that sustai ned efforts be continued to be made by the 
Department for implementing the p olicy and programmes to augment  domestic 
production of urea within the stipulated time . The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
RECOMMENDATION NO.3 
"The Committee note that no plan allocation has been made for the Miscellaneous 
Schemes viz, MIT and S&T during 2016-17. The fund allocation (RE) in respect of R&D 
for the year 2015 -16 was also nil, since the Department was unable to receive 
adequate number of quality proposals conforming to guidelines. The Committee were 
also informed that R&D Scheme has been discontinued from the Plan Budget and has 
been merged with Secretariat Economic Services under Non -Plan Budget.  The 
Committee are of the view that S&T programme is of paramount importance which 
primarily lays emphasis at indigenous Research and Development for  ensuring 
optimum levels and international stand ards in terms of achieving higher capacity 
utilization, upgradation/modernization of process technologies & equipment to 
reduce the specific energy consumption and pollutants including Coal and Coal Bed 
Methane. The Committee are apprehensive that disconti nuing the R&D Scheme from 
the Plan Budget and merging with Secretariat Economic Service under Non -Plan 
Budget is likely to dilute its relevance and focus.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Department to play a proactive role in order to get quality proposals 
conforming to the guidelines and thereafter take up the matter vigorously with the 
Ministry of Finance to create a separate R&D head under Plan Budget and  also 
impress upon them with stellar performance so as to obtain adequ ate plan funds for 
the purpose." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 "The matter regarding allocation of funds for R&D is being taken up with Ministry of 
Finance." 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2016-Fin.II , dated 14.07.2016] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.4 
 
 "The Committee note that the projected requirement of the Department under Non -
plan section for the year 2013 -14 was Rs. 97051.00 crore against which RE allocation 
for the year 2013 -14 was Rs. 71,962.00 crore and the actual expenditur e was Rs. 
71300.72 crore, although the actual requirement was much higher as the Department 
had to carry over liabilities of Rs.26414.88 crore relating to the year 2012 -13. As a 
result, the Department has to roll over an amount of Rs. 40340.78 crore to the  next 
year as carry over liabilities. Against the projected requirement of Rs.1,56,420.48 
crore for the year 2014 -15, the Department was allocated an amount of  Rs.75,092.73 
crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure during the year was Rs. 75,089.67 cro re. 
The Department has to roll over the arrears of unpaid subsidy of Rs. 31,830.77 crore 
for the next year. Against the projected requirement of Rs.1,08,691.48 crore for the 
year 2015-16, the Department was allocated an amount of Rs.77,097.80 crore at RE 
stage. Thus, while examining the year -wise allocation and amount released under the 
scheme, the Committee are distressed to find that the Department did not get the 
budgetary allocation over the past few years commensurate with the projected 
requirement under non-plan head. As a result, a huge amount of carryover liability of 
subsidy burden is piling up every year. As a reason of which, the subsidy continues to 

32 
 
remain unpaid to the fertilizer companies. Even for non -plan budgetary allocation for 
the year 201 5-16 at BE stage is only Rs.72997.80 crore which is more or less at par 
with BE 2014-15. During the course of evidence, the Secretary of the Department had 
also accepted the fact that delay in payment of subsidies to the fertilizer companies is 
affecting t he fertilizer industry. Under enormous financial constraints, the fertilizer 
companies could not be expected to grow and make the country self -reliant in the 
field of fertilizer sector which is very vital for the development of the agriculture 
sector and overall economy of the country. The Committee are of the view that unpaid 
arrears of subsidy should not roll over year after year as the same affects the 
functioning and growth of the fertilizer industries in the country. The Committee have 
time and again e mphasized in the past that that concerted efforts be made by the 
Department of Fertilizer to get its non -plan budgetary allocation increased 
commensurate with its requirement before the Ministry of Finance. The Committee, 
therefore, repeat their recommendation that the Ministry of Finance may augment the 
non-plan budgetary allocation of the Department so as to clear all the unpaid subsidy 
of the past.  The Committee would like the Department to address this issue seriously 
and intimate the initiatives taken by them in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 "During the current financial year (2016 -17), an amount of Rs. 74,100.00 
Crore(Gross) has been allocated for Fertilizer subsidy at BE Stage. As on 01.04.2016, 
the carry over liabilities worked out to Rs.  43,356.23Crore. Due to reduced gas price 
at present and reduced NBS rates, the present requirement of funds for the current 
financial year (2016-17) is expected to be approximately Rs. 65,763.63 Crore (Gross).  
Taking into account the present requirement and carry over liability of Rs. 
43,356.23Crore, the total requirement for 2016 -17 may be to the extent of Rs. 
1,09,119.86 Crore. 
 
 Department would raise the demand for additional funds in the Supplementary 
Demand for Grants for the current financial year." 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2016-Fin.II , dated 14.07.2016] 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see pare No.1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
 
 "The Committee note that the New Investment Policy 2012 (NIP -2012) was notified 
by the Government on 2 nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7 th October 2014 in 
order to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector to reduce India’s import 
dependency in urea production. The Department at present has received 06 proposals 
for setting up of Revamp, Expansion, Revival and Greenfield plants. The Department 
in April, 2015 had advised all the project proponents to furnish Bank Guarantee & 
take all necessary steps as per the provisions of NIP -2012 and its amendment.  In this 
regard, three project proponents viz., Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited, 
Kanpur Fertilizers & Cement Limited and Matix have written letter to the Department 

33 
 
in respect of their proposals. However, no communication has been received from 
Indo-Gulf Fertilizers Limited and Nagarjuna Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited.  The 
Committee are deeply constrained to note the slow progress made by the Department 
in implementing the New Investment Policy which was notified on 2nd January, 2013. 
The Committee further note that the commissioning of new fertilizer plant takes 
around 3 to 3.5 years from the zero date (date of financial closure). In view of this, it is 
imperative that these investment proposals are implemented at the earlies t. 
Considering the importance of the fresh investment in the fertilizer sector, the 
Committee recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should make more 
sustained and proactive efforts in a time bound manner and take up matter with the 
project proponents to furnish the Bank Guarantee & take all necessary further steps 
as per the provisions of NIP -2012 and its amendment. The Committee would further 
like the Department  to review periodically the progress made by the project 
proponents and take corrective m easures to ensure their timely execution. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 "At present, there are following 6 proposals for setting up of Greenfield and 
Brownfield (Expansion) projects  received under NIP -2012 and its amendment with 
the Department of Fertilizers: -   
  
S. No. Company Projects Ownership State 
1. Kanpur Fertilizers & 
Cement Limited 
Greenfield Project at 
Jabalpur 
Private Madhya 
Pradesh 
2. Indo-Gulf Fertilizers 
Limited –Jagdishpur 
Brownfield Expansion 
urea project at 
Jagdishpur. 
Private Uttar Pradesh 
3. Chambal Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited-
Gadepan 
Brownfield of Ammonia-
Urea units at Gadepan-
Kota.  
Private  Rajasthan 
4. Matix Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited-II, 
Panagarh 
Brownfiled Ammonia-
Urpea Fertilizers 
Complex at Panagarh.   
Private West Bengal 
5. Rashtriya Chemicals & 
Fertilizers Limited-Thal 
Brownfield Ammonia-
Urea Expansion project 
at Thal. 
CPSU  Maharashtra 
6. Nagarjuna Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Ltd. 
Brownfield Project at 
Kakinada, Andhra 
Pradesh. 
Private Andhra 
Pradesh 
 
This Department vide its letter dated 21 st April, 2015 had advised all the project 
proponents to furnish Bank Guarantee & take all necessary steps as per the provisions 
of NIP -2012 and its amendment.  In this regard, three project proponents viz., 
Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (CFCL), Kanpur Fertilizers & Cement Limited 
(KFCL) and Matix have written letter to this Department in respect of their proposals, 
the details of which are as follows: - 
 
S. 
No. 
Company Present Status 
1. CFCL-
Brownfield of 
Ammonia-
Urea units at 
As per the terms of the NIP Policy, CFCL had furnished the Bank 
Guarantee of Rs. 300 crores to the Government of India. 
 
Subsequent to their finalization of LSTK/EPCA contractors and 

34 
 
Gadepan-Kota release of advance to contractors, i.e., achievement of first 
milestone, this department has approved the release of Bank 
Guarantee of Rs 100 crores to Chamba l fertilizers & Chemicals 
Limited. 
2. KFCL-
Greenfield 
project at 
Jabalpur 
The request of KFCL, Jai Prakash Associates Limited for allocation of 
sufficient quantity of gas for the proposed urea plant at Jabalpur 
and to expedite the Surat - Paradip gas pipeline with a provision to 
connect Jabalpur to this pipeline was taken up with MoP&NG. 
 
 In this regard, GAIL informed that they are presently carrying out 
detailed route survey of Dhamra - Angul-Durg Section of Surat -
Paradip-Dhamra Pipeline along wi th a spurline to 
Balaghat/Jabalpur. GAIL has requested to provide the indicative 
schedule/ plan for setting up a fertilizer plant at 
Balaghat/Jabalpur. 
In response to the above letter of GAIL, KFCL has communicated 
that the acquisition of the desired land is under process by the 
state government, pending which, it would be difficult for them to 
communicate the indicative schedule. Subsequent to the land 
allotment, they will be starting the process for environment 
clearance. KFCL has indicated that the proje ct for setting up a 
Greenfield fertilizer unit will take 36 months from receipt of 
Environment clearance. 
3. Matix Matix Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited has proposed to set up a 
Greenfield 3 Million Metric Tonne Per Annum gas based Ammonia-
Urea complex (Train -I & II) at Pannagarh, West Bengal  with the 
investment of over Rs. 6000 crores.   The Matix plant will use Coal 
Bed Methane (CBM) gas as feedstock for manufacturing urea.   
Matix has confirmed its readiness to commence production of urea 
subject to the availability of minimum 1.7 mmscmd of CBM.   There 
is no domestic gas allocation for this project by the Government of 
India and also the unit is not connected to National Gas Grid 
Network.  In order to facilitate the commissioning of plant, DoF 
takes up the matter of allocation of CBM Gas with MoP&NG. 
 
      So far as Train-II is concerned, vide letter dated 24th April, 2016, 
Matix has informed that ‘they shall take all necessary action as 
required and also take steps to achieve Financial Closure.  They 
agree to submit Bank Guarantee on achieving financial closure but 
before making any LSTK/EPC financially effective. 
 
No communicat ion has been received from Indo -Gulf Fertilizers Limited (IGFL) and 
Nagarjuna Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (NFCL).   
 
Department of Fertilizers has again taken up matter with the project proponents to 
furnish the Bank Guarantee & take all necessary step s as per the provisions of NIP -
2012 and its amendment.   
 
The commissioning of new fertilizer plant takes around 3 to 3.5 years from the zero 
date. Therefore, the reduction of the import and increase in production of urea would 
only be analyzed when the plants start the production." 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2016-Fin.II , dated 14.07.2016] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see pare No.1.19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

35 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
 
 "Apart from these 2 sick PSUs, there are 8 fertilizer units lying closed at present. Out 
of these closed units, 5 are of FCIL and 3 are of HFCL. The Committee were informed 
that the pre -project activities for revival of Talcher and Ramagundam units of FCIL  
are in progress  . As regards Sindri, Gorakhpur and Barauni units of FCIL a cabinet 
note seeking approval on the revised terms and conditions for bidding process has 
been circulated for inter ministry consultation. As regards revival of HFCL units, the 
Empowered Committee has recommended the proposal of Department of Fertilizer 
for taking fresh proposal to Cabinet for bringing out HFCL from the purview of BIFR 
and revive the units by itself through bidding route. the Committee are of the view 
that expeditious revival of sick and closed fertilizer units is essential for making India 
self-sufficient in the fertilizer sector and to reduce its imports dependency. However, 
the Committee regret to note the slow pace of progress made by the Government in 
the reviva l of these sick units so far. The Committee also feel that the delay in the 
revival of closed and sick units leads to time and cost overruns. Keeping in view the 
significant role which is expected to be played by these sick units after their revival, 
the C ommittee reiterate its recommendation that the process of revival of closed/ 
sick units of fertilizers be expedited with in a fixed time frame. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 "Revival of the closed units of FCIL: 
Unit wise further progress made on the revival of the closed units of the FCIL is as 
under: 
 
 Talcher unit: 
 
 • In the meeting convened by CEO, NITI Aayog on 15.03.2016 following 
decisions were taken: 
a. All the concerns raised by the Technical Consultants, TRU with regard to 
shortcomings in TEFR prepared by PDIL should be addressed satisfactorily. 
b. The issues raised by TRU relating to strategy for disposal of valuable by -
products like Naphtha, Tar, Phenol, etc.  and their impact on financial viability 
needs to be examined. 
c. The problems associated with disposal of huge quantity of poor quality Ash 
needs to be addressed. 
d. Since JV has already applied for allocation of coal block, Ministry of coal should 
expedite the same. 
• PDIL submitted their report on the concerns raised by the Technical 
consultant, TRU and same has been circulated to all the JV partners for their 
comments on 06.04.2016. 
• CEO, NITI Aayog convened another meeting on 13.04.2016. It has been d ecided 
that Jindal Steel Plant Ltd (JSPL) may be requested for a presentation 
highlighting their experience on ALGS Technology. 
• CEO, NITI Aayog again convened a meeting on 21.04.2016. In the meeting it 
was decided that- 
g. A test run will be carried out in JSPL plant for 5 days with coal samples of high 
ash Talcher coal with the following options: 
 100% Talcher coal washed down to 35% Ash content. 
 70% Talcher coal blended with 30% Raniganj (better quality) coal. 

36 
 
 
h. It has already been decided, earlier, that Nor th of Arakhpal coal mine would be 
allocated to the project and since coal seam from these mines are similar to 
Bhubaneswari coal mine which is an operating mine, coal samples shall be 
supplies to JSPL, Angul plant from Bhubaneswari coal mine. 
i. CIL shall mak e all arrangement for supplying the required quantity of coal from 
Bhubaneswari and Raniganj coal mine. 
j. The test run would be under the observation of the engineers from the 
consortium partners. 
k. Entire activity will be co-ordinated by Coal India Limited and completed within a 
period of one month. 
l. The final decision for selection of technology will be taken based on the outcome 
of the test run. 
 
 Ramagundam Unit: 
RFCL Board in its meeting held on 16 th March, 2016 approved debt tie up of Rs 
3940.71 cr from consortium of six banks led by SBI. 
 Gorakhpur unit & Sindri Unit: 
 
 In the meeting held by CEO, NITI Aayog on 15.03.2016 it was decided that- 
 
c. Sindri, Gorakhpur and Barauni Units will be revived through financially strong 
PSUs like Coal India Limited, NTPC and ONGC respectively.  
d. Department of Fertilizer will prepare a detailed information brochure of each 
unit highlighting all the assets including its land and other infrastructure, the 
required investment and other support to be provided by the Government. 
 
 CEO, NITI Aayog convened another meeting on 6.04.2016. After detailed 
deliberation it was decided that: 
c. Ministries/CPSUs were once again asked to confirm their participation in revival 
process. 
d. They were also given the option for investment through  SPV/JV consisting of 
more than one PSU of their ministry. 
 
 A Cabinet Note for revival of Gorakhpur and Sindri Units through PSU route is 
under consideration. 
 
 Revival of the closed units of HFCL: 
 
In addition to earlier reply of the Department it is subm itted that the cabinet note to 
bring the HFCL out from the purview of BIFR and revive Barauni unit itself through 
bidding route was finalized after receiving the comments of all the stake holding 
Ministries/organization during the Inter -Ministerial Consultation on the draft cabinet 
note. The final cabinet note has been sent to Cabinet Secretariat on 13.05.2016 for 
placing before the Cabinet at an early date." 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2016-Fin.II , dated 14.07.2016] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see pare No.1.25 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

37 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.9  
 
 "The Committee note with deep concern that the inadequate availability of gas is one 
of the major limiting factors to the growth of urea industry in the country. Presently, 
the availability of domestic natural gas is not even sufficient to meet the demand of 
existing gas based urea units. The current requirement of gas for the fertilizer sector 
is 46.5 MMCMD while only 31.5 MMCMD is be ing allocated to them.  As against that, 
what is supplied is only 24 to 26 MMCMD of domestic gas. The Committee are of the 
strong view that pricing and firm availability of natural gas for existing and new units 
of fertilizer companies are the pre -requisites to increase their indigenous production 
and would, therefore, desire the Department to play a proactive role in association 
with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas towards allocation of gas for the 
existing and new fertilizer plants in the countr y. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard." 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
 
 "The Committee is further informed that Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has 
notified Pooling of Gas for Fertilizers (Urea) Sector, which, inter alia, includes that the 
domestic gas will be pooled with Re -gasified Liquefied Natural Gas (RLNG) to provide 
natural gas at uniform delivered price to all Natural Gas Grid connected Urea 
manufacturing plants for the purpose of manufacturing urea.  The prov isions of gas 
pooling will ensure that RLNG will the supplied to urea units at competitive price and 
urea units are incentivized to maximize their production beyond reassessed capacity 
because of simplified subsidy calculation parameters under New Urea Pol icy (NUP)-
2015.  It also envisaged the constitution of Empowered Pool Management Committee 
(EPMC) to monitor implementation of gas pooling and procurement of RLNG through 
competitive and transparent manner. The Committee are of the view that this is an 
important policy decision implemented in the fertilizer sector which would boost the 
production of urea and also provide good building block for further fertilizer sector 
reforms. Considering the importance of the decision, the Committee expect that the 
Department should make earnest efforts to implement the decision successfully and 
also constantly monitor it in order to achieve the desired results." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT (REC. NO. 9 & 11) 
 
"Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas has notified Pooling of Gas f or Fertilizers (Urea) 
Sector vide its Notification dated 20 th May, 2015 (read with 29 th May, 2015) which, 
inter alia, includes that “the domestic gas will be pooled with Re -gasified Liquefied 
Natural Gas (RLNG) to provide natural gas at uniform delivered p rice to all Natural 
Gas Grid connected Urea manufacturing plants for the purpose of manufacturing of 
Urea. After gas pooling, all urea units gets gas at uniform rate irrespective of the gas 
allocation to the unit. It will ensure better utilization of avail able domestic gas to urea 
sector. The provisions of gas pooling will ensure that Natural Gas will be supplied to 
urea units at competitive price and urea units are incentivized to maximize their 
production beyond reassessed capacity because of simplified s ubsidy calculation 
parameters under New Urea Policy (NUP) – 2015, which was notified on 25 th May, 
2015 by the Department of Fertilizers. It also envisages the constitution of 
Empowered Pool Management Committee (EPMC) to monitor implementation of gas 
pooling and procurement of RLNG through a competitive and transparent manner. 
Department of Fertilizers regularly takes up the matter of allocation and regular 
supply of natural gas to the urea units, in the EPMC meetings. A D.O letter dated 22 nd 

38 
 
June, 2016, from Secretary (Fertilizers) has also been written to Secretary (MoP&NG) 
to ensure the supply of domestic gas atleast to the extent of 31.5 mmsmcd to the urea 
sector as per EGoM decision dated 23.08.2013." 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2016-Fin.II , dated 14.07.2016] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see pare No.1.28 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.10 
 
 "The Committee are given to understand that three urea units, viz., Madras Fertilizers 
Limited (MFL)-Manali, Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (MCFL) -Mangalore 
and Southern Petrochemicals Industries Limited (SPIC) -Tuticorin are producing urea 
using Naphtha in absence of gas allocation and pipeline connectivity.   While 
appreciating th e step taken by Department of allowing these urea units to continue 
urea production on Naphtha as a feedstock till these plants get assured supply of gas 
either by pipeline or by any another means, the Committee expect that immediate 
necessary steps be tak en to explore all the available options in order to ensure 
assured supply of gas to these plants at the earliest.  The Committee also note that 
fertilizer units which are away from sea shore may take much time for their 
conversion from Naptha/FO/LSHS based  to gas based as laying of the pipeline is a 
mammoth task but the units which are near the sea shore like MFL which require only 
18 KM pipeline are deprived to get gas supply owing to non -existence of terminal at 
Chennai port.  The Committee, are given to understand that terminal is being 
constructed by IOCL and it would be constructed by 2018.  The Committee, therefore, 
trust and expect that the terminal would be constructed expeditiously by IOCL 
without any time over run.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that Department of 
Fertilizers should take up the matter with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
on priority to expedite the project." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
"Department of Fertilizers regularly reviews the progress of infrastructure for supply 
of gas and readiness to receive gas for Naphtha based urea units with Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas. As per the feedback received from the MoP&NG, the latest 
status of Gas Pipeline Connectivity to Naphtha based Urea units is as follows: 
 
4. Southern Petrochemicals Industries Corporation (SPIC)-Tuticorin: 
SPIC is about 120 Km away from ONGC’s Ramanad gas field. ONGC has informed the 
availability of non -APM gas for alloc ation from Kanjirangudi (KJR) field, Ramnad 
under Cauvery Assets in Tamilnadu. Based on the requests made by M/s SPIC to 
allocate 0.9 MMSCMD of natural gas from Ramnad field for its urea manufacturing 
unit located at Tuticorin in Tamilnadu and as per recom mendations of DoF, Ministry 
of Petroleum and Natural Gas has earmarked 0.9 MMSCMD of Non -APM gas from 
ONGC’s Kanjirangudi (KJR) field, Ramnad for SPIC, Tuticorin.  
SPIC, Tuticorin is proposed to be connected with ONGC’s Ramanad gas field by laying 
a 120 Km  pipeline by M/s IOCL as a part of its authorized pipeline Ennore – 
Nagapattinam - Tuticorin - Madurai - Bengaluru Natural Gas Pipeline (ENTMBPL). 
This pipeline has been awarded in Dec. 2015.  IOCL has been advised to expedite the 
pipeline connectivity. 
 
5. Madras Fertilizers Ltd (MFL)- Manali: 

39 
 
Option 1:    MFL, Manali is proposed to be connected with IOCL’s proposed LNG 
Terminal at Ennore by Ennore – Nagapattinam – Tuticorin – Madurai – 
Bengalauru Natural Gas Pipeline (ENTMBPL). Ennore LNG terminal is likely to 
be commissioned in 2017 -18. This plant is only 17 kms away from the 
proposed LNG terminal. In order to connect this plant, PNGRB has granted 
authorization to IOCL on 15 th December, 2015 to construct ENTMBPL. Thus, 
MFL, Manali may be connected in synchronization with the commissioning of 
Ennore LNG terminal. 
 
Option 2:  As an alternative supply to MFL -Manali, GAIL has also plans to connect the 
plant through a spurline of about 270 kms from its Kochi -Koottannad-
Bangalore-Mangalore ( KKBMPL) pipeline.   Further, gas can also be supplied 
from Dabhol LNG terminal of RGPPL through Dabhol -Bangalore pipeline with 
extension to MFL, Manali.   For execution of the pipeline, GTA and GSA are 
required to be signed by GAIL with MFL, Manali.   GAIL ha d offered MFL to 
supply RLNG at Henry Hub (HH) linked prices for a Long term period of 20 
years and for the initial period of 2017 -18.  MFL is yet to execute the 
necessary agreements. 
 
6. Mangalore Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd. (Mangalore): 
  GAIL has planne d to connect this plant with Kochi LNG terminal by laying 
Kochi-Koottannad-Bangalore-Mangalore Pipeline (KKBMPL).  GAIL has commissioned 
Phase-I of KKBMPL project with a total length of 42 kms.   However, due to stiff 
resistance from farmers in the state of  Kerala and Tamil Nadu, the Kootannad -
Mangalore pipeline section and Koottannad -Bangalore pipeline section are getting 
delayed in execution.   In view of this delay, GAIL has proposed to connect the plant 
through an alternative route by taking a tap -off on Dabhol-Bangalore pipeline (DBPL) 
at Chitradurga / Housepet / Devengiri to Mangalore for which necessary 
arrangements shall be required to be executed by the entities." 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2016-Fin.II , dated 14.07.2016] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see pare No.1.31 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.12 
 
 "The Committee note that the month -wise demand is assessed and projected by the 
Department of Agriculture &  Co-operation (DAC) in consultation with the State 
Governments before commencement of each cropping season.  On the basis of month -
wise & state -wise projection, the Department of Fertilizers allocates sufficient/ 
adequate quantities of fertilizers to State s by issuing monthly supply plan and the 
movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is being monitored throughout the 
country by an on -line web based monitoring system also called as Fertilizer 
Monitoring System (FMS). The State Governments are regularly  advised to coordinate 
with manufacturers and importers of fertilizers for streamlining the supplies through 
timely placement of indents for railway rakes through their state institutional 
agencies like Markfed etc. Regular Weekly Video Conference is condu cted jointly by 
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Department of Fertilizers (DoF), and 
Ministry of Railways with State Agriculture Officials and corrective actions are taken 
to dispatch fertilizer as indicated by the State Governments. The gap  between demand 
(requirement) and production is met through import. While examining the quantity 

40 
 
and value of urea imported during the last three years (2012-15), the Committee finds 
that there has been gradual rise in import of urea viz. import of urea wa s 80.44 LTM 
in 2012-13, 70.88 LTM in 2013 -14 and 83.09 LTM in 2014 -15. Further, the import of 
urea for the year 2015 -16 (up to February 2016) is again on the high side viz. 83.09 
LTM.   The Committee note with serious concern the consequential financial bu rden 
on the exchequer due to increase in imports of urea to meet the demand -supply gap. 
The Committee would, therefore, like the Department to take immediate necessary 
steps to minimize the import of urea by taking proactive measures towards a 
sustainable increase in domestic production commensurate with increasing domestic 
demand. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard."
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 "Concern of the committee regarding increase in import of Urea over the ye ars has 
been noted. In this context, it is stated that DoF is mandated to provide all subsidized 
chemical fertilizers to the States/UTs as per requirement projected by Department of 
Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) in consultation with S tates. 
Requirement is projected on the basis of various parameters. To meet the gap 
between domestic demand and indigenous production Urea is imported. Requirement 
of Urea over the years has increased marginally which has resulted in import of Urea 
as the domestic production has not increased that could match with the demand. In 
the year 2015 -16, domestic production was highest ever, but the original demand 
(requirement) was also highest ever from States. 
 In order to reduce the import dependence gradually, Department has initiated various 
steps to enhance the domestic production. To facilitate fresh investment in urea 
sector and to make India self -sufficient in the urea sector, the Government had 
notified New Investment Policy – 2012 on 2 nd January, 2013 an d its amendment on 
7th October 2014.  At present, there are 6 proposals for setting up of Greenfield and 
Brownfield (Expansion) projects received under NIP -2012 and its amendment with 
the Department of Fertilizers. 
  
 The commissioning of new fertilizer pl ant takes around 3 to 3.5 years from the zero 
date (date of financial closure).  Therefore, the reduction of the import and increase in 
production of urea would only be analyzed when the plants start the production. 
 
Further, the New Urea Policy -2015 (NUP - 2015) has also been notified on 25 th May 
2015 effective from 1 stJune 2015 to 31 st March 2019 with the objectives to maximize 
indigenous urea production; promote energy efficiency in the urea units; and to 
rationalize the subsidy burden on the Government o f India.   The policy has led to 
additional production of 19 LMT from the existing plants and the total production of 
urea during the year 2015-16 was 244.75 LMT, i.e. the highest ever urea production in 
the country. 
 
New Urea Policy is one of such steps. S imilarly, steps have been taken for 
revival/opening New Urea Plants in the coming years. It will take some reasonable 
time to get the desired result of New Urea Policy and revival/opening of new Plants." 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2016-Fin.II , dated 14.07.2016] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see pare No.1.34 of Chapter-I of the Report)  
 
  

41 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLY  
 
-- NIL-- 
 
  

42 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
 
 "The Committee are perturbed to note the delay in implementation of Direct Benefits 
Transfer Scheme (DBT) which was conceptualized in February, 2011 on the 
recommendation of Task Force constituted by Ministry of Finance to recommend 
implementable solution for direct transfer of subsidies on kerosene, LPG and 
fertilizers. Task Force submitted its final report on 7 th August, 2013 which suggested 
4 phased approach for direct disbursement of fertiliser subsidy to the intended 
beneficiaries. The implementation of Phase-I has already been made operational from 
1st November 2011. It is being rolled out through all the registered fertilizers 
manufacturers (116), wholesalers (16577) and retailers (157274) across the country. 
Accordingly, a porti on of the subsidy (5 -15% depending on the grade of fertilizer) is 
given to manufacturers only when the retailer will acknowledge the receipt in the 
Mobile Fertilizer Management system (mFMS). Retailer acknowledgement has been 
ensured by the Department by l inking a portion of manufacturer’s subsidy to 
retailer’s acknowledgement. Phase II of mFMS envisages capturing sale made by the 
retailer to the buyer or end -user. This involves capturing sales details as well as 
buyers’ details. The Department is examining  the feasibility of doing Proof of Concept 
for Phase -II. As regards implementation of subsequent Phases, Phase III & IV the 
Department intimated that there are many operational and implementation 
challenges such as identification of beneficiaries and determination of entitlement etc. 
Department of Fertilizer is exploring various options for handling these operational 
issues. While not satisfied with the performance of the Department in implementation 
of DBT Scheme, the Committee recommend that all -out effor t be made for the 
implementation of DBT Scheme at the earliest. The Committee are of the strong view 
that transfer of the benefits of direct subsidy to the farmers would check the 
corruption, close the loopholes and profligacy in subsidies. 
 
 Further, the Committee are of the view that the Soil Health Card is not only essential 
for the farmers to have the appropriate knowhow on the dosage of fertilizers but 
would also be beneficial for Direct Transfer of Subsidy to the farmers. During the 
course of evidence , the Secretary Department of Fertilizers had also agreed with the 
observation of the Committee that un less all farmers are provided with Soil Health 
Cards, it is impossible to transfer subsidy directly to them. The Committee would, 
therefore, like the Dep artment of Fertilizers in coordination with the Ministry of 
Agriculture to make earnest efforts towards expeditious implementation of Soil 
Health Card Scheme and ensure that every farmer is provided with a Soil Health Card 
having his bank details for direc t transfer of subsidy to the farmer.   The Committee 
would like to be apprised of tangible efforts in terms of concrete deliverables made in 
this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
"Phase -1 of mFMS i.e. Information initially till the retailer point has be en got 
stabilized. “As per Hon’ble Finance Minister’s Budget Speech (2016 -17), the 
Department is planning to conduct a pilot in few districts across the country during 
October,2016 –September,2017 to capture sale details and buyer’s details. (Bank 

43 
 
Account details, Aadhar No., land records etc.) Apart from the retailer sales, other 
major outcome of Phase -II of mFMS would be the availability of a robust database of 
buyers /Farmers which might be leveraged for DBT subsequently. 
 
 The Department would also expl ore the expediency of various identification 
instruments such as Kisan Credit Cards, Aadhar Cards, Voter ID Card, Bank Account 
etc. for authentication of buyers. However, the Pilot would initially run on  “no denial 
mode”. The outcome of pilot would also provide key success indicators for pan -
country implementation of Phase –II and ultimately for DBT in Fertilizers." 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2016-Fin.II , dated 14.07.2016] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see pare No.1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
  

44 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH  FINAL REPLIES  OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1 
 "The Committee note that the installed capacity of fertilizer manufacturing units in 
the country has reached to the level of 207.53 lakh MT of urea, 83.32 lakh MT of DAP 
and 60.72 Lakh MT of Complex Fertilizer during the year 2015 -16. The actual 
production of all the fertilizers during the year 2014 -15 was 370.03 Lakh MT. The 
Committee are happy to note that the estimated production of all the fertilizers during 
the year 2015 -16 is 402.93 Lakh MT showing an increase of more that 8.89% in 
comparison of previ ous year. At present, there are 30 urea units in the country 
manufacturing urea annually, 21 units produce DAP and complex fertilizers and 2 
units manufacture Ammonium Sulphate as by -product. Besides, there are about 105 
medium and small scale units in ope ration producing Single Super Phosphate (SSP). 
The country is however, fully dependent on imports in Potassic sector and to the 
extent of 90% in Phosphatic sector in the form of either finished products or its raw 
material. Non availability of raw material  is the main factor which has impeded the 
self sufficiency in P&K fertilizers in the country. Other issues which contributed to 
near zero growth in fertilizer sector is low profitability, delay in payment of subsidy, 
inadequate gas availability in the coun try and no favorable tax incentives for 
indigenous manufacturers.  
 
 The Committee also noted that, the Department keeps sending from time to time their 
proposal for exemption on customs duty for indigenous fertilizers manufacturers and 
also on capital equ ipments. Considering the strategic importance of chemical 
fertilizers in the country's food security, the Committee are concerned about absence 
of any incentives in the form of lower taxes or duty to indigenous fertilizer 
manufacturers in the country.  The  Committee expect the Department to take up this 
matter vigorously with the Ministry of Finance and impress upon them to consider its 
proposals regarding exemption of taxes/duty for indigenous fertilizers manufacturers 
favorably. 
 
 Further the Committee ar e of the view that the impediments for self sufficiency are 
matter of serious concern. Therefore, keeping in view the vital role played by the 
chemical fertilizers in the successful agriculture production in the country, the 
Committee recommend that the De partment of Fertilizers should urgently take 
suitable measures to further boost the growth of fertilizer industry leading to their 
self-sufficiency.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures taken in 
this regard." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 "A proposal for reduction of customs duty on the raw materials of P&K fertilizers was 
given to Hon’ble Minister of Finance at the level of Hon’ble Minister (C&F) but 
comments/views/approval of the Ministry of Finance has not been received so far." 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2016-Fin.II , dated 14.07.2016] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see pare No.1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

45 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.2 
 
 "The Committee note that under Plan Outlay, funds are released as Gross Budgetary 
Support (GBS) provided by Government of India to loss making CPSEs to keep them 
operational and also for Miscellaneous Schemes which include Management of 
Information Technology (MIT) where funds are released f or Fertilizer Monitoring 
System (FMS) and mobile based Fertilizer Monitoring System (mFMS) and Science & 
Technology (S&T) which primarily lays emphasis at Research and Development of 
processes and equipment.  The Committee are concerned to note that during  the 
Twelfth Five Year plan period (2012 -17) there has been a radical decline in the above 
mentioned plan budgetary allocations. Budgetary allocations (BE) for the year 2012 -
13, 2013-14, 2014 -15 and 2015 -16 were Rs. 256 Crore, Rs 269 Crore, Rs.100 Crore 
and 50 crore. Even these allocations have been drastically reduced at the RE stage to 
Rs. 10 Crore (2012 -13), Rs 9 Crore (2013 -14), Rs. 2.32 Crore (2014 -15) respectively, 
except for the year 2015 -16, where it was increased to Rs. 1002.80 Crore, in order to 
avert immediate crisis in FACT, a loan of Rs. 1000 Crores was provided for the same.  
However, for the year 2016 -17, as against the proposal of Rs 87.50 Crore for plan 
budget estimates (Gross Budgetary Support) the Ministry of Finance has allocated 
only Rs.10 Crore ( Rs. 6.00 Crore has been allocated to FACT, Rs. 3.00 Crore has been 
allocated to MFL and Rs.1.00 Crore has been kept for BVFCL for NER & Sikkim.   
 
 The Committee noted that due to financial restrictions imposed by Ministry of Finance 
in respect o f default in refund of Government of India Loans and payment of interest 
thereon by loss making CPSEs viz. MFL, BVFCL and FACT plan loan could not be 
released to these companies from 2012 -2013 onwards.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that non -allocation of plan funds to the loss making CPSEs has adversely 
affected their functioning and operation.  This also highlights that the Department has 
not taken up its proposal to make these loss making CPSEs functional effectively  
earnestly with the Ministry of Fi nance.  Further, the Department should also plan the 
probable expenditure instead of waiting for cropping up of the acute crisis as it was in 
the case of FACT for which Rs.1000 crore was provided during 2nd supplementary 
Demands for Grants in the year 2015 -16.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Department of Fertilizers should strengthen its budgetary planning and formulate 
effective plans for loss making CPSEs to make them function by optimum utilization of 
available fund which was abysmally low in the past." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 "The matter regarding allocation of funds for the loss making PSUs is being taken up 
with Ministry of Finance." 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2016-Fin.II , dated 14.07.2016] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see pare No.1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
 
 "The Committee have many time in the past emphasized the need for expeditious 
revival of closed/sick units of fertilizer companies particularly in the context of 
augmenting indigenous production of fertilizers and to make the country self reliant 
in fertilizer sector. The Committee are happy to observe that earnest efforts have been 

46 
 
made by the Department in expediting the approval of Financial Restructuring 
proposal of Brahmputra Valley Fertiliser Corporation Limited (BVFCL) by the Cabinet, 
as a result of which the company is able to revive itself and is no more a loss making 
company. However, out of 9 public sector fertilizer companies under administrative 
control of the Department of Fertilizers, 2 companies viz. Fertilizers and Chemicals 
(FACT) and Madra s Fertilizers Limited (MFL) are sick and 2 companies viz. Fertilizer 
Corporation of India Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited 
(HFCL) are lying closed since 2002. The Committee also noted that Government is 
considering proposals for financial restructuring of two sick companies namely MFL 
and FACT which inter -alia involves write off of Government of India loan and the 
interest thereon. The Committee have also been given to understand that while the 
proposal for financial reconstructin g is under process, the Ministry of Finance has 
approved a plan loan of Rs. 1000 crores to FACT under RE 2015 -16. Department of 
Fertilizers and FACT have entered a legally binding Agreement with FACT mortgaging 
its free-hold land of worth Rs. 1836.72 crore  to Government of India against the total 
outstanding liabilities of Government of India. The interest on the total outstanding 
loan till its repayment shall be at @ 13.5% from 31.03.2017. The Committee are of the 
strong view that interest charged @ 13.5% on the total outstanding loan from FACT, 
which is a sick company is unreasonable and harsh. During the course of evidence, the 
Secretary Department of Fertilizers had also accepted that the interest rate is very 
high. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should take 
up the issue vigorously with the Ministry of Finance to review the rate of interest 
charged from the FACT on the loan provided to them.  Further, the Committee also 
expect that the Department would make earnest effort s to expedite the 
implementation of pending financial restructuring of MFL and FACT."  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
"Against the DoF request to fix the rate of interest at G -Sec rate (i.e.8%), Department 
of Economic Affairs (DEA) calculated the rate of intere st @13.5%. As conveyed by 
Secretary (DEA) DO letter no. 7/58/2014 -NS. I dated 12.01.2016, the interest rate for 
loan to FACT has been calculated on the basis of DEA’s OM No.5(3) -B(PD)/2014 dated 
29.12.2014. Vide this OM DEA has notified the revised rates o f interest applicable 
from 01.04.2014. As per revised rates of interest rate of interest for the Working 
Capital loans and loans to meet Cash losses for the Industrial and Commercial 
Undertakings in the Public Sector and Cooperatives is 13.50 %. Accordingl y, rate of 
interest for the plan loan of Rs.1000 crore given to the FACT has been fixed @13.5% 
till its repayment from 31.03.2017. DEA has also informed that the rate of interest is 
subject to revision usually on an annual basis. The issue regarding review  of interest 
rates is being taken up in due course with Ministry of Finance as per the 
recommendations of the Committee. 
 
Dept. of Fertilizers is actively considering for the financial restructuring of FACT and 
MFL. It has already prepared a proposal for t he financial restructuring of FACT. The 
proposal contains waiver of GoI loans and interest as on 31.03.2015, granting one -
time compensation for use of LNG and issuance of sovereign guarantee so as to come 
out of BIFR. The proposal also includes ‘In princip le’ approval for sale / leveraging of 
land for raising resources to repay the loans raised against sovereign guarantee and 
to raise funds for implementation of short/medium & long term proposed projects. 
 
A proposal for the financial restructuring of MFL had been pending for the 
recommendation of the BRPSE for a long time. In the meantime, Government wound 
up the BRPSE and DPE issued guidelines for stream lining the mechanism for the 

47 
 
revival and restructuri ng of sick/incipient sick and weak CPSE. Accordingly, DoF has 
asked MFL for engaging an external expert agency for exploring the possibility for the 
revival of MFL in terms of these guidelines. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizer s),  
 OM No.F.No.5(1)/2016-Fin.II , dated 14.07.2016] 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see pare No.1.22 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                               ANANDRAO ADSUL 
09 August, 2016                                                                                       Chairperson 
18 Shravana 1938 (Saka)                                                                   Standing Committee on 
                                                                                                                   Chemicals and Fertilizers   

48 
 
APPENDIX – I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2015-16) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 09 August, 2016 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri Anandrao Adsul -  Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Anju Bala 
3. Shri Sankar Prasad Datta 
4. Shri R. Dhruvanarayana 
5. Shri K. Ashok Kumar  
6. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
7. Shri S. Rajendran 
8. Shri Chandu Lal Sahu  
9. Dr. Kulamani Samal 
10. Smt. Rekha Arun Verma 
11. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
12. Shri George Baker 
Rajya Sabha 
13. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya 
14. Shri K. Parasaran 
15. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
16. Shri Ram Vichar Netam 
17 Shri Abdul Wahab 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Smt. Rashmi Jain  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri A. K. Srivastava  - Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee.  
3. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
a) XXXX XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
b) Draft Action Taken Report on "Demands for Grants (2016 -17)" of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers); 
4. The draft Reports were adopted by the Committee without any amendment.   
5. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to make consequential changes, if any, 
arising out of the factual verification of the Reports by the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals and Department of Fertilizers of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament on 11.08.2016. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
XXXX  Matters not related to this Report. 
  

49 
 
APPENDIX – II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
  
 
 ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIRST REPORT (16 TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(2015-16) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (201 6-2017)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS).  
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 12 
 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11,& 12) 
 
08 
Percentage of Total 66.6 % 
 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 
(Vide Recommendation  No. Nil)  
 
0 
Percentage of Total 0% 
 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation No.5)  
 
1 
Percentage of Total 8.4 % 
  
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are still awaited:-  
 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 2 and 7) 
 
3 
Percentage of Total 25% 
 
 
  
 
 