 
 
 
 
 
 
              
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2023-24) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Thirty-Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Nano-fertilizers for sustainable crop production and maintaining soil health’ of 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 
FORTY- SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana,1945 (Saka) 
 
  
47
…
. 

2 
 
 
CC&F NO. 175 
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Thirty-Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Nano-fertilizers for sustainable crop production and maintaining 
soil health’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 December, 2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 December, 2023 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2023-24) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter -I Report 1 
Chapter -II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
13 
Chapter- III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
27 
Chapter -IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
28 
Chapter -V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
30 
 APPENDICES  
I *Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2023-24) held on 14th December, 2023. 
- 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty -Ninth Report  
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘Nano -fertilizers for sustainable crop production 
and maintaining soil health ’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
31 
 
*to be appended  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2023-24) 
  
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
5. Shri Deepak Baij 
6. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
7. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhalikar 
8. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
10. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
11. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt. Aparupa Poddar  
14. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15. Shri Muniyan Selvaraj 
16. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
17. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
18. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
19. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
20. Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
21. Vacant* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar  
23. Dr. Anil Jain  
24. Shri Arun Singh  
25. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
26. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
27. Vacant 
28. Vacant 
29. Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
     1.   Shri Chander Mohan        -                   Joint Secretary 
2.   Smt. Geeta Parmar                 -    Director 
3.   Shri Panna Lal                           -    Under Secretary 
 
* Vacant vice Shri Uday Pratap Singh, MP(LS) who resigned his seat in LS w.e.f. 06.12.2023. [Lok Sabha 
Secretariat Notification No. 21/1(1)/2023/T(B) dated 6th December, 2023] 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(2023-24) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this 
Forty-Seventh Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty -Ninth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Nano -fertilizers for sustainable crop 
production and maintaining soil health’  pertaining to the Department of Fertilizers , 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
2.  The Thirty-Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and  also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 21 st March, 2023. The Department of Fertilizers , Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers furnished their replies on  11th August, 2023 indicating Action Taken 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty -Ninth Report. The 
Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on  
14th December, 2023. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty -Seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;     DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
 14 December, 2023 CHAIRPERSON, 
23 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 
  

6 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report deals with the Action-Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers contained in 
their Thirty -Ninth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Nano-fertilizers for sustainable crop 
production and maintaining soil health’ of the Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
1.2 The Thirty-Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on  
21st March, 2023. The  Report contained 21 Observations/Recommendations.  
Action Taken Replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations of the Report 
have been received and are categorized as under:  
   
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the  
Government: 
         Rec. Para No. 1,2,3,4, 6, 7,8,9,10,11,12, 13, 14,16,17,18, 20 and 21  
     (Total=18) 
Chapter-II 
   
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire   
 to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 Rec. Para No.         (Total =00) 
                                Chapter-III 
    
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration: 
  Rec. Para No. 5, 15 and 19                   (Total=03) 
 
                                   Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
  Rec. Para No. Nil                           (Total = 00)  
                                                                                                      Chapter-V 

7 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report may be furnished to the 
Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
1.5 The Committee had noted in their original Report that IFFCO had developed 
other Nano fertilizers macronutrient grades - Nano DAP and secondary /micronutrient 
grades - Nano Zinc, Nano Copper, Nano Boron, Nano Sulphur, etc.  Nano DAP was 
undergoing field trial and results of research conducted on it on more than ten crops 
had been submitted to the Department of Agriculture for further validations approval and 
inclusion under FCO.  While observing the significance of Nano fertilizers in agr iculture, 
the Committee had desired that both the Department of Fertilizers and IFFCO should 
expedite the process   of inclusion of other Nano fertilizers under FCO to enable their 
commercial utilization and they be priced considerably cheaper than the prev ailing price 
of their conventional bulk counterparts. 
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “Nano DAP has been included in FCO, 1985 on 02.03.2023. Further, the 
price of one bottle of Nano Urea is Rs. 225 per Unit (500 ml bottle) and the 
price Nano DAP is Rs. 600 per Unit (500 ml bottle) which is less than their 
conventional counterpart”. 
 
1.7  The Committee note with satisfaction that Nano DAP has been included in 
FCO, 1985 and that the price of a bottle of Nano DAP is less than its conventional 
counterparts. Further, keeping in view  the significance of Nano fertilizers in 
agriculture, the Committee in their earlier Report had recommended to the 
Department of Fertilizers/IFFCO  to expedite the process   of inclusion of other  
 
Nano fertilizers like Nano Zinc, Nano Copper, Nano Boron, Nano Sulphur, etc. 

8 
 
under FCO, to enable their commercial utilization . However, no update ha s been 
given in the matter. The Committee would like to be informed accordingly.  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
1.8 The Committee in their Report had noted with concern that in spite of the 
numerous benefits of Nano fertilizers which , inter-alia, include its low cost than the 
subsidized conventional fertilizers, at least 50 per cent saving in the use of chemical 
fertilizers, ease of carrying and stor age, economy in terms of reduced transportation 
and warehousing cost, etc. no separate funds were allocated for rese arch in Nano 
fertilizers. The Committee  had strongly urged that the Department of Fertilizers should 
seek a sizeable amount of budget for research in Nano fertilizers through its fertilizer 
PSUs (even in coordination with IFFCO) for developing innovative, cost effective and 
efficient fertilizer products so that self -reliance is achieved in the Fertilizer Sector and 
substantial amount of foreign exchange on import of fertilizers is saved. 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Depart ment of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
  
 “The price of one bottle of Nano Urea has been brought down to Rs. 225 
per Unit (500 ml bottle) by IFFCO to make it more competitive with 
conventional urea. Department of Fertilizers is supportive to and 
encouraging its PSUs as well as other fertilizer companies for research in 
nano fertilizers and other innovative alternatives.  IFFCO has signed 
technology transfer agreement with RCF and NFL for production of Nano 
Urea.  This will enable leading PSUs of DoF i. e. RCF and NFL to enhance 
their R&D capabilities”. 
 
1.10 The Committee in their Report had noted that Nano technology is a 
promising field of research for developing Nano fertilizers and has emerged as an 
innovative solution for addressing the issue of low or declining nutrient use 
efficiency (NUE) with minimal environment footprint and therefore desired th at 
the Department of Fertilizers should seek a sizeable fund for nanotechnology 
based research activities so that it gets focused attention of its fertilizer PSUs for 
developing innovative fertilizer products which are cost effective and efficient. 
However, the Department’s reply is silent on this issue. The Committee, therefore, 

9 
 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the Department should take 
up the matter for alloca tion of sufficient fund s with the Ministry of Finance  for 
R&D in Nano-technology based fertilizers and keep them updated in the matter.  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
1.11 The Committee in their Report had noted with satisfaction that NFL and RCF are 
setting up their plants for production of Nano Urea at Nangal i n Punjab and Trombay in 
Maharashtra respectively with the technology transferred by IFFCO. It also noted that 
the request made by the Department of Fertilizers to IFFCO for transferring the Nano 
Urea technology to other CPSUs viz. BVFCL and FACT, without any cost is also under 
consideration of IFFCO. The Committee, therefore, urged that this time too IFFCO 
would take a favorable decision on the request of the Department to transfer Nano urea 
technology on similar terms to BVFCL and FACT which would help enhance the 
production of nano urea in the country. 
  
1.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “In order to enhan ce the production of nano urea, IFFCO has recently (April 
2023) started commercial production of nano urea at its Phulpur and Aonla units 
in UP with 6 Cr bottles each annually.  The observation of the committee has 
been noted”. 
 
1.13 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Department. In their 
Report, the Committee had desired that IFFCO should take a favorable decision 
on the request  of the Department for transfer of Nano Urea technology to other 
CPSUs viz. BVFCL and FACT without any royalty as was done in case of NFL and 
RCF.  However, the reply of the Department in this regard is not specific. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and expect the 
Department to be more specific while furnishing action taken reply.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10)  
 
1.14 While acknowledging the benefits of drones  for spraying nano fertilizers or seed 
spreading and welcoming the decision of the Government to ban import of drones to 

10 
 
support indigenous production of drones in the country, the Committee had desired that 
the Government should take policy initiatives with a view t o encourage drone adoption 
by States and Union Territories and simplify the procurement process of drones. 
Further, the Committee hoped that the Ministry of Civil Aviation would achieve their 
target to provide  10 drones for each village for fulfilling the requirement of more than 6 
lakh villages in the country within a reasonable timeframe.   
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “In order to ensure adequate numbers of drone manufactures and supplies in 
the country, Department of Fertilizers has formulated guidelines on 
“Development of Entrepreneurs for Drone Spraying of Liqui d Fertilizers.” 
Department of Fertilizers has taken up the matter with Ministry of Civil 
Aviation at the highest level for seeking their assistance for widespread use 
of drones. Subsequently, a meeting was held under the Chairpersonship of 
Additional Secretary on 06.01.2023 with the stakeholders to discuss reliable 
models for using drones for spraying nano fertilizers including nano Urea. 
Department of Fertilizers is making efforts to develop the ecosystem of using 
drones for application of nano fertilizers”. 
 
1.16 The Committee note with satisfaction that the Department of Fertilizers has 
formulated guidelines on “Development of Entrepreneurs for Drone Spraying of 
Liquid Fertilizers” in order to ensure adequate numbers of drone manufactures 
and supplies in the country. Further, the Department has taken up the matter with 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation to seek their assistance for the widespread use of 
drones. However, efforts made by the Ministry of Civil Aviation to achieve their 
target to provide 10 drones for each village to fulfill the requirement of more than 
6 lakh villages  in a reasonable timeframe and upd ate on the matter has not been 
furnished. The C ommittee, therefore, reitera te their  earlier recommendation to 
this extent.  
It has further been stated that a meeting was held on 06.01.2023 under the 
Chairpersonship of Additional Secretary with stakeholders to discuss reliable 
models for using drones for spraying nano fertilizers including Nano Urea. The 
Committee would desire that  such meetings should be held periodically with the 
stakeholders so as to undertake requisite mid -term correction for development of 

11 
 
models for using drones for spraying nano fertilizers  while ensuring that they are 
available to the farmers at a cheaper cost.  
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
1.17 While t aking note of the assurance given, t he Committee had desired that the 
Department of Fertilizers should take up the matter with the companies/ corporate 
houses for utilizing their Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) fund to provide the 
facility of drones to the farmers for spray ing Nano Urea at subsidized rates / free of cost 
and to impart drone pilot training to the local village entrepreneurs and farmers. 
  
 
1.18 In their Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “The suggestion of the committee has been noted. Further, IFFCO is 
procuring 2500 drones to provide spraying solutions to the farmers for use of 
Nano Urea & Nano DAP. IFFCO has informed that these drones will be 
provided free of cost to the selected Rural Entrepreneurs. Ownership of 
Drone as well as well as Electric three wheelers (loader) will be transferred in 
favour of Entrepreneur on completion of spraying in targeted area. IFFCO 
shall arrange Drone Pilot Training for the Entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs shall 
provide spraying services to the farmers at a concessional rate (lower by 
about Rs.100/- per acre)”. 
 
 
1.19 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Department of 
Fertilizers as it does not mention the initiatives , if any, taken for utilizing the 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) fund by the companies/corporate houses 
for providing the facility of drones to the farmer s for spray ing of Nano fertilizers 
and also to impart drone pilot training to the local vi llage entrepreneurs and 
farmers, as assured by the Department .  The refore, the Committee reiterate their 
recommendation and would desire to be updated on the matter.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
1.20 While observing the sub mission of Department of Agricultural Research & 
Education ( DARE) that  the research trials  to assess the  long-term effects of Nano 
fertilizers on the nutritional quality of various crops had completed only one year/ one 
season, t he Committee  had recommended that  concerted dedicated research be 

12 
 
conducted by the Department of Fertilizers in coordination with DARE/ICAR/ Agricultural 
universities covering all the major crops in all the agro -climatic regions of the country so 
as to thoroughly assess the merits and demerits of the use of nano fertilizers and   
establish their nutritional quality, bio-safety, efficacy, etc.  
  
1.21 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “At present Nano Urea and Nano DAP are enlisted in FCO, 1986 based on the 
results on efficacy of IFFCO Nano Urea (Nitrogen) tested by few ICAR Institutes 
and SAUs. Experimental trials of Nano Nitrogen (Nano Urea) were undertaken 
through National Agriculture Research System (NARS) involving ICAR research 
institutes/state agricultural Universities on different crops like Paddy, Wheat, 
Mustard, Maize, Tomato, Cabbage, Cucumber, Capsicum, Onion”. 
 
1.22 The Committee had observed  that research trials to assess t he long-term 
effects of Nano fertilizers on the nutritional quality of various crops had 
completed only one year/ one season and therefore recommended that concerted 
dedicated research be conducted by the Department  in coordination with 
DARE/ICAR/ Agricultural universities covering all the major crops in all the agro -
climatic regions of the country to assess their merits and demerits. 
From the Action Taken r eply, the Committee take note of the efforts made 
by the Department in establishing the efficacy of Nano DAP and Nano Urea . 
However, keeping in view th e need for assessment of long-term effects of Nano 
fertilizers on the nutritional quality  of various crops , the Committee reiterate that  
dedicated research be conducted to establish their nutritional quality, bio -safety, 
efficacy, etc. 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER – II 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
 BY THE GOVERNMENT 
  
  
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
2.1 The Committee are gravely concerned to note that agriculture world wide is 
facing wide spectrum of challenges, such as stagnation in crop yields, low nutrient use 
efficiency (NUE), declining soil organic matter, multi -nutrient deficiencies, shrinking 
arable land and water availability. Fertilizers do provide nutrients needed by the plants 
for their optimal productivity. However, presently the farmers typically apply fertilizers 
through the soil by surface broadcasting, subsurface placement or mixing with ir rigation 
water. It is worrisome that in this process, a large portion of bulk conventional fertilizers 
like urea is lost to the atmosphere or surface water bodies, thereby polluting the 
ecosystem. It is disheartening that fertilizer consumption in India is  imbalanced, and 
Urea accounts for more than 82% of the nitrogenous fertilizers applied to majority of the 
crops. Furthermore, the Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potassium (NPK) consumption ratio 
has widened from 4:3.2:1 in 2009 -10 to 7:2.8:1 in 2019 -20. Hon’ble Prime Minister has 
called for “Reduction in chemical fertilizer consumption especially Urea by 50%. Against 
this background, it is satisfying to note that Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative  
Limited ( IFFCO) has indigenously developed nano technology -based Nano Urea 
fertilizer and attempted to address the issue of imbalanced and excessive use of 
conventional Urea. Nano Urea is a source of nitrogen which is a major essential nutrient 
required for proper growth and development of a plant. Typically, nitrog en content in a 
healthy plant is in the range of 1.5 to 4%. Foliar application of Nano Urea at critical crop 
growth stages of a plant effectively fulfils its nitrogen requirement and leads to higher 
crop productivity. Ministry of Agriculture & Family Welfa re (M/o A&FW) has notified 
Nano Urea as nano fertilizer under Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), GoI in February, 
2021. Keeping in view the significance of nano fertilizers for agricultural needs of our 
country, the Committee applaud the efforts of IFFCO in d eveloping Nano Urea.  It is for 
the first time in the world that Nano Urea has been introduced to the farmers. 
 
 The steps taken by the Department of Fertilizers (DoF)/IFFCO and other 
concerned Ministries for availability, usage, promotion and adaptability of nano fertilizers 
in the country as deliberated over by the Committee, have been detailed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. At the same time, the Committee would like the Department of 
Fertilizers to ensure that the steps so taken do not suffer from the pro cedural delays 
and such delays, if any, are avoided with efficient, proper management and timely 
action. 

14 
 
2.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “Department of Fertilizers has an ef ficient system in place for proper 
management and timely action on critical issues. The observation of the 
committee has been noted”. 
 
(Recommendation No.  2) 
 
2.3 The Committee note that IFFCO has developed technology for bringing other 
nano fertilizers macronutrient grades - Nano DAP and secondary /micronutrient grades - 
Nano Zinc, Nano Copper, Nano Boron, Nano Sulphur, etc. in order to ensure eco -
friendly sustainable agriculture. Nano DAP is under field trial. Research trials have been 
conducted on more than ten crops across thirty -four locations in twenty States and the 
results have been submitted to the Department of Agriculture for further validation and 
approval and its inclusion under FCO. In view of the significance of nano fertilizers in 
agriculture, the Committee urge the Department of Fertilizers and IFFCO to expedite the 
process  of inclusion of other nano fertilizers, which have been developed by IFFCO 
and undergone sufficient field trials, under FCO to enable their commercial utilization. 
The Committee desire that other nano fertilizers should be priced considerably cheaper 
than the prevailing price of their conventional bulk counterparts. 
 
 
2.4 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “Nano DAP has been included in FCO, 1985 on 02.03.2023. Further, the price 
of one bottle of Nano Urea is Rs. 225 per Unit (500 ml bottle) and the price 
Nano DAP is Rs. 600 per Unit (500 ml bottle) which is less than their 
conventional counterpart”. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
(Recommendation No.  3) 
 
2.5 The Committee observes that there are several benefits of nano fertilizers like 
they cost less than the subsidized conventional fertilizers.  Also, IFFCO field trials have 
shown that a 500 ml bottle of Nano Urea can replace one 45 Kg. bag of conventional 
urea and thus can curtail the requirement of the same by at least 50 per cent.   The 
current MRP of IFFCO’s Nano Urea is Rs. 240 per 500 ml bottle which is approx. 10% 

15 
 
less than the conventional 45 Kg. urea bag having subsidized price of Rs. 266.50 per 
bag.  Further, nano fertilizers are easy to carry and store. They are economical in t erms 
of reduced transportation and warehousing cost. Besides, application of nano fertilizers 
results into better crop productivity and higher income for the farmers. IFFCO in 
collaboration with ICAR – KVKs has conducted 11,000 all India farmer field trial s on 94 
crops and found an average 8 % higher crop yield with the application of Nano Urea. 
This translates into Rs. 2000 to Rs. 5000 per hectare higher income for the farmers. 
Application of nano fertilizers has commensurate benefits in terms of better so il health, 
air and water quality, which ultimately will benefit the farmers through improvement in 
total factor productivity (TFP) of crop production systems. As per interim report of the 
International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), if India’s 50 percent of rice cultivation area 
is brought under Nano Urea, it would lead to reduction in Green House Gas emission by 
4.6 million tonnes.    Even if 20 -30 per cent of the  urea that is going waste can be 
replaced and utilised, then the issue of green house gas emis sion can be appropriately 
addressed. 
 
Despite many benefits of nano fertilizers, which are critical for our agriculture food 
production systems (FPS) to sustain the burgeoning population, the Committee regret to 
note that no separate funds have been alloca ted by the Department of Fertilizers for 
Nanotechnology.  As Nano technology is a promising field of research for developing 
nano fertilizers that has emerged as an innovative solution for addressing the issue of 
low or declining nutrient use efficiency (N UE) with minimal environment footprint, it is   
imperative that   the Ministry/Department of Fertilizers allocate a sizeable amount for 
nanotechnology based research activities through its fertilizer PSUs so that it gets 
focused attention for developing inno vative fertilizer products which are cost effective 
and efficient. Fertilizer PSUs should be fully supported for work on common research 
projects along with IFFCO so that they contribute in development of varied nano 
fertilizers (both macro and micro nutri ent based) and help to achieve self -reliance in the 
Indian Fertilizer Sector thereby saving a substantial amount of foreign exchange lost on 
import of fertilizers which has shown an increasing trend over the years. 
 
2.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished  to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “The price of one bottle of Nano Urea has been brought down to Rs. 225 per 
Unit (500 ml bottle) by IFFCO to make it more competitive with conventional 
urea. Department of Fertilizers is supportive to and encouraging its PSUs as 
well as other fertilizer companies for research in nano fertilizers and other 
innovative alternatives.  IFFCO has signed technology transfer agreement with 
RCF and NFL for production of Nano Urea.  This will enable leading PSUs of 
DoF i.e. RCF and NFL to enhance their R&D capabilities”. 
 

16 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
(Recommendation No.  4)  
 
2.7 The Committee note with concern a continuous increase in the import of urea 
over the years to meet the demand of fertilizers in our country. During 2016 -17, the 
import of urea was 54.81 lakh MT and it has reached to 98.28 lakh MT during 2020 -21. 
Subsidy burden on account of urea import constitutes 26  % of the overall urea subsidy 
paid in a year by the Government. Amid the prevailing circumstances, the Committee 
believe that judicious application of urea is the need of the day and nano fertilizers can 
definitely play an important role to reduce the dep endency of our country on the import 
of urea. As submitted, with the precise application of nano fertilizers at critical crop 
growth stages, about 25 to 50% replacement of convention fertilizers is possible. 
Resultantly, with the use of Nano Urea, GOI Exch equer can save approx. 3 billion USD 
equivalent to around Rs. 25,000 crore in subsidy bill per year considering subsidy of 
approx. Rs. 20,000 per MT of Urea. The Committee are glad to learn that by the year 
2023, IFFCO’s two plants will be operational with  total production of 11 crore bottles 
every year. The expected replacement is 50 lakh MT of conventional urea. By 2023 -24, 
5 plants will be operational with production of 28 crore bottles per year and the expected 
replacement is 127 lakh MT of conventional  urea. By 2025 -26, all the proposed eight 
plants will be operational and the total production would be 44 crore bottles every year 
and they are expected to replace 200 lakh MT of urea. The Committee find the figures 
for expected replacement of urea encoura ging and trust that DoF/IFFCO would take 
further steps to enhance the production of Nano Urea towards making our country self -
reliant for meeting the requirement of fertilizers.  
  
2.8  In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
  
 “Department of Fertilizers has effectively facilitated the transfer of technology 
of Nano urea from IFFCO to RCF and NFL to augment nano urea production. 
The observation of the committee has been noted”. 
  
  

17 
 
Recommendation No.  6  
 
2.9 The Committee are aware that the Department of Fertilizers has a larger role to 
play in making available the required quantum of nano fertilizers to fulfill the need of 
farmers of the entire country. The Committee are of the str ong conviction that Public 
and Private Sector Companies desirous of manufacturing nano fertilizers can do much 
better and should be given every possible support by the Government. In this regard, 
the Committee would like to impress upon the Department to take up the matter with the 
Ministry of Finance at the appropriate level to bring production of nano fertilizers under 
the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme in order to give a boost to the fertilizer 
industry with a view to increasing the production of nano fertilizers. 
  
2.10 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “As on date, there is no such proposal in the Department to bring Nano Urea 
under Production Linked Incentive (PLI) s cheme. But it is informed that 
Department is facilitating and encouraging fertilizer companies to adopt nano 
fertilizers; State Governments and IFFCO have been asked to make Nano 
fertilizers available at fertilizer retail shops/ PMKSKs. The suggestion of t he 
committee has been noted”. 
 
Recommendation No.  7  
 
2.11 The Committee are informed that as our country do not have sufficient raw 
materials, gas, oil, rock phosphate, potash needed to produce fertilizers, there is an 
urgent need to think differently to be self-reliant. The Committee share the 
apprehension of th e Department that in case of dependency for raw materials on other 
countries, our country would be prone to exploitation as fertilizer raw material is 
available only in a few countries. In view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend 
that the Department of Fertilizers should play a proactive role to establish long term 
agreements for import of fertilizers’ raw materials and set -up joint venture plants in 
countries rich in fertilizers’ raw materials with buy back arrangements thereby assuring 
access to acq uisition of the fertilizers’ raw materials abroad, through the Ministry of 
External Affairs, Ministry of Finance and other concerned Departments/ agencies. All 
necessary steps are needed to be taken by the Government to avoid any hinderances 
in production of nano fertilizers. This may help achieve self -reliance in the fertilizer 
sector while ensuring regular supply of fertilizers and raw materials at reasonable rates 
and saving precious foreign exchange by decreasing the import burden of the country. 
Besides, the Department may approach the Ministry of Finance to rationalize/ exempt 
the Basic Custom Duty on fertilizers’ raw materials (i.e. P&K and other macro and micro 
nutrients) so that they are available at reasonable price thus incentivizing setting up of  

18 
 
nano technology based plants in the country for enhancing   the  production of nano 
fertilizers.  
  
2.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “P&K Fertilizers under the Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) scheme is 
decontrolled and thus the decisions for production, import of P&K fertilizers are 
taken by the manufactures/importers as per   business plans and requirement 
projected by the States during Kharif and Rabi. 
 
 Department of Fert ilizers has taken several steps to reduce dependency on 
import of raw materials for fertilizers. In addition to monitoring the supply 
situation on daily basis, DoF has been   proactively  facilitating fertilizer 
companies to set up Joint Ventures,  long term tie ups and  short term supplies 
of critical P&K fertilizers from alternative sources from different countries in 
consultation with other concerned ministries such as – Ministry of External 
Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Department of Commerce etc. 
  
 Further, in December 2021, DoF had already requested Ministry of Finance for 
exempting custom duty on fertilizers’ raw materials. However, M/o Finance in 
its reply had stated that the custom duty on fertilizers raw materials is already 
on a lower side.  Public Sector Companies of NFL and RCF are also involved 
in setting up of  nano urea along with  IFFCO”. 
 
 
Recommendation No.  8 
 
2.13 The Committee are made to understand that use of Nano Urea will act as one of 
the tools to double the income of farmers. It has higher nutrient use efficiency which will 
boost crop production and would increase farmers’ income. Based on 11,000 all India 
farmer field trials conducted on 94 crops by IFFCO in collaboration with ICAR – KVKs, 
an average 8 % higher crop yield was achieved with the application of Nano Urea, 
which translates into Rs. 2000 -Rs. 5000 per hectare higher income for the farmers. 
Economic benefit is even more in case of high value/high MSP crops. With the use of 
Nano Urea, there is input cost saving for farmers in terms of purchase of less fertilizer. 
Average 45 – 90 Kg less subsidized urea would be applied per acre of field which 
translates into Rs.266 -Rs.532 per acre cost saving for the farmers in terms of lower 
purchase cost for the farmers. Despite advantages, the practical implementation of 
nano-fertilizers still has a long way to go. The Committee realize that the biggest 
challenge for any game changer technology is its adoption on a larger scale by common 
masses. In the instant case, the biggest challenge being faced, is the adoption of Nano 

19 
 
Urea by the small and marginal farmers. Department of Fertilizers is taking a lot of 
activities for promotion of Nano Urea viz. village level demonstration on Nano Urea 
application through progressive farmers, creating awareness for use of Nano Urea in 
kisan sammelans. Films have also been made in different regional languages and the 
social media i s extensively being used for dissemination of information on Nano Urea 
and its use among farmers. Besides, regular talks and panel discussions on radio, DD 
Kisan channel and other television channels are being held. One training module is 
being developed for farmers for crop specific right dose of Nano Urea. Further, the State 
Governments are repeatedly requested, in their monthly meetings, to take up the 
initiative to popularize Nano Urea amongst the farmers. IFFCO has also taken 
organised promotional and extension programmes for use of Nano Urea across the 
country through Crop Demonstrations , Short video films of Nano Urea, Print & 
Electronic, Media and Mass Media Campaigns, Publicity Material, Gifts & Awards, 
Dedicated Internet Site, Training & Awareness programmes and State -wise Flag off 
Programmes& Endorsement by Opinion Leaders, Government Officials and Scientists, 
etc.  
 
            While appreciating the efforts being made by DoF/IFFCO to promote use of 
Nano Urea, the Committee feel that a lot of work  can still be done in this direction. The 
Committee are of the opinion that enhancement of the crop produces and income 
benefits to the farmers should be given adequate focus in the promotional programmes 
of nano fertilizers. Once farmers are convinced of these benefits, they would be open to 
use the related information through various promotional activities organized by 
Department of Fertilizers  and IFFCO. The faster the farmers of our country adopt the 
Nano Urea, the sooner the country will be able to mov e towards complete Atma 
Nirbharta in the fertilizer sector. 
 
 
2.14 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “In addition to above mentioned media activities, Department of Fertilizers has 
been facilitating  live field demonstrations to farmers, with the help of IFFCO 
and other fertilizer companies to convince far mers through interaction with 
field experts and progressive farmers using nano urea in their farms .States 
are encouraged to t ake up large scale demonstrations of nano urea and 
assistance is ensured under Agriculture schemes such as National Food 
Security Mission, Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana etc.  Nano urea is also 
included under supply plan to ensure availability at ground lev el. Availability of 
nano urea at PM Kisan Samrudhi Kendras (PMKSKs) is also ensured”.     
 
Recommendation No.  9  

20 
 
 
2.15 The Committee note that an agriculture sprayer is a special type of farm 
equipment that a farmer uses to apply liquid or powder agricultural chemicals and 
fertilizers on farm fields. For spraying of liquid Nano Urea, the farmers use a hand 
operated or battery -operated knapsack sprayer of 15 or 16 litres water tank capacity. 
They also use power or mist sprayers / boom sprayers of 200 litres or more capacity. 
Cost of manual sprayers,  battery operated sprayers and power sprayers is in the range 
of Rs. 1200-1500, Rs. 3000-4500 and Rs 6000-10,000 per sprayer, respectively. In this 
regard, Department of Fertilizers has submitted that a collective and community 
spraying with the help of cooperatives, retailers as well as custom hiring of sprayers by 
village level youth/ FPOs are being explored for effe ctive spray of Nano Urea. The 
Committee would desire the Department to speed up their efforts for provisioning of 
effective and cheaper means of spraying of nano fertilizers to the farmers. 
 
2.16 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the D epartment of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “Department of fertilizers have urged fertilizer companies to come up with 
farmer friendly and cheaper means of spraying of nano fertilizers. As per the 
information received, IFFCO will procure 2500 drones  for training rural 
entrepreneurs. Further, Coromandel International has invested in drone start 
up Dhaksha and raised its stake to 51%. It will facilitate its presence in the 
fast-growing Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) segment where drones and its 
applications are expected to exponentially grow in agriculture. The observation 
of the Committee has been noted”. 
 
 
Recommendation No.  10  
 
2.17 The Committee note that drones are also used to spray nano fertilizers . 
Spreading fertilizer or seed spreading with a drone allows a user to reach places that 
traditionally would be hard to access and at a faster pace. As informed by the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, import of drones has been banned to support the indigenous pro duction 
of drones in the country. The Committee strongly support the decision of the 
Government in this regard and desire that such facilities should be encouraged and 
established within the country itself. As submitted, the Government has come up with 
good policies and have introduced incentives and engaged three world -famous type 
certification bodies for drones viz. Tata Quality, TQC of US and Bureau Veritas. 
Therefore, things have been liberalized to create demands and policy& procedural 
bottlenecks removed. The Committee would like to be assured that the Government has 
taken policy initiatives with a view to encourage drone adoption by States and Union 
Territories and procurement process of drones have been simplified. Keeping in view 
that the production of drones have just started and also in view of the initiatives taken by 

21 
 
the Government, the Committee trust that target set by the Ministry of Civil Aviation to 
provide 10 drones for each village and fulfill the requirement of more than 6 lakh villages 
in the country would be accomplished within a reasonable time frame by taking care of 
the avoidable delays. The Committee would like the Department of Fertilizers to provide 
an update in the matter from time to time. 
 
2.18 In their Action Taken Note furnish ed to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “In order to ensure adequate numbers of drone manufactures and supplies in 
the country, Department of Fertilizers has formulated guidelines on 
“Development of Entrepreneurs for Dr one Spraying of Liquid Fertilizers.” 
Department of Fertilizers has taken up the matter of with Ministry of Civil 
Aviation at the highest level for seeking their assistance for widespread use of 
drones. Subsequently, a meeting was held under the Chairperson ship of 
Additional Secretary on 06.01.2023 with the stakeholders to discuss reliable 
models for using drones for spraying nano fertilizers including nano Urea. 
Department of Fertilizers is making efforts to develop the ecosystem of using 
drones for application of nano fertilizers”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No.  11) 
2.19 The Committee do appreciate that the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
have included drones as part of agricultural machinery. However, in view of the fact that 
a 25 kg agricultural drone costs between Rs. 8 to 10 lakh, the Committee find it 
extremely difficult for the small and marginal farmers, which constitute about 86% 
farmers, to afford the same. The C ommittee are aware that the Government on 
15.09.2021 has approved the Production Linked Inc entives (PLI) Scheme for drones 
and d rone components. The PLI scheme  
allocates Rs. 120 crore for drones and drone components spread  over three financial 
years which is almost twice the combined turnover of Rs. 60 crore of all 
domestic drone manufacturers during 2020-21. As submitted, out of 120 manufacturers 
of drones and about 180 -200 service providers, 23 drone/ component manufacturers 
having a turnover of Rs. 2 cro re have been found eligible for the PLI Scheme. As the 
PLI scheme for drones and drone components is  in place, the Committee are hopeful 
that the drone manufacturing industry would play a significant role and supplement the 
Governments’ efforts. In other w ords, while the industry expects the Government to 
display a trust based facilitator attitude by way of creating a conducive manufacturing 
environment, the Committee expect the industry to display exemplary focus on drone 

22 
 
manufacturing for domestic agricul tural use by way of investing significantly thus 
ensuring the growth of the drone manufacturing industry up to the expected level.  
 
2.20 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “Department of Fertilizers is playing its pivotal role in encouraging fertilizer 
companies in creating a drone-conducive agriculture environment for spraying 
of nano fertilizers. The observation of the committee has been noted”. 
  
 
Recommendation No.  12  
 
 2.21 The Committee note that SOP for use of drone to spray the nano fertilizers in 
agriculture is under consideration of the Department of Fertilizers, wherein 90% of 
drone price would be provided through Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) for those 
entrepreneurs who wish to avail the facility of drones. The Committee desire that the 
Department in coordination with all the concerned Ministries/Departments and other 
stakeholders seek for sufficient budgetary support to the AIF for provisioning of drones 
at subsidized rates to the Kisan Vikas Kendras, Custom Hire Centres and Agricultural 
Universities, etc. The Committee would desire that SOP for use of drone for spray of 
nano fertilizers should be finalized at the earliest. The Committee further desire tha t 
Department of Fertilizers should take similar measures to ensure the availability of 
fertilizer sprayers for enhanced and better productivity of crops. 
 
2.22 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “The observation of the committee has been noted.  Further, Department of 
Fertilizers has already issued guidelines for development of entrepreneurs for 
drone-based spraying of liquid fertilizers. As per the information received, 
IFFCO will procure 2500 drones for training rural entrepreneurs. Further, 
Coromandel International invested drone start up Dhaksha and raise its stake 
to 51%.  It will facilitate It’s presence in the fast -growing Unmanned Aerial 
Systems (UAS) segment where drones and its applications are expected to 
exponentially grow in agricultur e. Moreover, calibration and compatibility 
studies are conducted for Nano DAP and WSF products for key crops and 
geography covering 5 states and 1000 + Acres. Also, Pilot projects on 
commercial drone spraying are planned for Andhra Pradesh and Telangana 
states for coming Kharif season and having plan to expand pan India next 
year”. 
 
Recommendation No.  13  
 

23 
 
2.23 The Committee are further informed that Department of Fertilizers has also 
issued the g uidelines for development of entrepreneurs for spraying of l iquid fertilizers 
by drones and they are in regular touch with the stakeholders for promotion of the said 
guidelines, which will ensure availability of drones to spray fertilizers at cheaper cost. 
The Committee would desire that it should be closely monito red that the guidelines for 
development of entrepreneurs for spraying of liquid fertilizers by drones are strictly 
followed so that their very purpose to ensure availability of drones at cheaper price is 
achieved.   
 
 2.24 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “The observation of the committee has been noted. As per the information 
received, IFFCO will procure 2500 drones for training rural entrepreneurs. Further, 
Coromandel International invested drone start up Dhaksha and raise its stake to 
51%. It will facilitate It’s presence in the fast -growing Unmanned Aerial Systems 
(UAS) segment where drones and its applications are expected to exponentially grow 
in agriculture. Moreover, calibration and compatibility studies are conducted for Nano 
DAP and WSF products for key crops and geography covering 5 states and 1000 + 
Acres. Also, Pilot projects on commercial drone spraying are planned for Andhra 
Pradesh and Telangana states for coming Kharif season and having plan to expand 
pan India next year”. 
 (Recommendation No.  14) 
 
2.25 It is satisfying to note that a drone takes only 5 minutes to complete spraying on 
one acre of the field and a single day to spray 80 acres of the field whereas a manual 
sprayer takes one full day to spray one acre of the field. The Committee are, however, 
not happy to note that though the rates fixed for spray by drones as per the guidelines 
on the development of entrepreneurs for drone spraying of liquid  fertilizers is Rs.200/ - 
per acre per day, the farmers are being charged more i.e. @ Rs.500/ - per acre per day 
inclusive of its transportation charges upto the farm gate. Hence, though the n ano 
fertilizers have several benefits, the concern of the farmers with regard to the higher 
cost of drone spray application remains unattended. A representative of Tamil Nadu 
Agricultural University (TNAU) reacted to the concern of the Committee and submitted 
that the transportation charges for drones up to the farm gate s can be subsidized. The 
Committee would like to be assured that the Department would take all necessary steps 
to resolve the anomalies with regard to the rates of drone spray and address the 
concern of the farmers in this regard so that more farmers avail  the facility of drones for 
spraying of fertilizers. 
  
2.26 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 

24 
 
 “The suggestion of the committee has been noted. Further, IFFCO is procuring 
2500 drones to provide spraying solutions to the farmers for use of Nano Urea & 
Nano DAP. IFFCO has informed that these drones will be provided free of cost to 
the selected Rural Entrepreneurs. Ownership of Drone as well as well as Electric 
three wheelers (load er) will be transferred in favour of Entrepreneur on 
completion of spraying in targeted area. IFFCO shall arrange Drone Pilot 
Training for the Entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs shall provide spraying services to 
the farmers at a concessional rate (lower by about Rs.100/- per acre)”. 
 
Recommendation No.  16  
 
2.27 The representative of Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU) has informed 
that they have 40 research stations, 18 colleges and 14 KVKs and in all their units, they 
have a drone. They also propose to give a custom hiring and for that they have the 
complete SOP. Also, to improve the manpower for drone operation, the Tamil Nadu 
Government has taken a special initiative to include drone training in diploma course in 
agricultural engineering. It is a 10 ho urs course and within two weeks one gets trained 
and get license to operate drones. Tamil Nadu State Assembly has sanctioned a project 
worth Rs. 11 crore to buy 60 drones.   There is a drone laboratory in TNAU where 
several parameters of flight height, swat h, speed of the drones are assessed.   Tamil 
Nadu Government has also requested the TNAU to train unemployed youth for drone 
usage and for that efforts are being made.  Also, several companies are ready to sign 
MoUs to promote drone technology.  The Committ ee welcome the initiatives taken by 
the State Government of Tamil Nadu/TNAU in drone usage for agricultural needs and 
promotion of drone technology. The Committee recommend to the Department of 
Fertilizers to pursue with the other State Governments to foll ow suit to cater to the need 
of the farmers for use of drone in spraying of fertilizers/nano fertilizers. 
  
2.28 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “DoF circulated guidelines on Development of Entrepreneurs for Drone 
Spraying of Liquid Fertilizers to all the stakeholders including all the states and 
UTs. Thereafter, DoF has taken a review meeting on 12.08.2022 with State 
Governments to expedite the matter. As recommended by the Co mmittee, the 
matter will again be pursued with other States/ UTs”. 
 
 
Recommendation No.  17  
 
2.29 The Committee find that there is limited number of drone training centres which 
makes it difficult  for the farmers to avail the training facility.   As per the submission of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, they have planned for 8000 drone training schools for 800 

25 
 
districts in the country with an average of 10 schools per district. However, it involves 
certain process of approval.  The Committee desire that the Department of Fertilizers 
should devise a definite plan in coordination with the   Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Krishi Vigyan Kendras, Kishan Vikas Kendras, 
Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), Customer Hire Centres, Farmers 
Cooperatives, Agricultural Universities, fertilizer manufacturing companies, etc. for 
conducting regular training programmes to train   the entrepreneurs and farmers 
throughout the country ab out appropriate usage of various types of fertilizer sprayers 
including drones for precision and targeted application of right dosage of nano 
fertilizers, etc. on the crops.   
 
2.30 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “DoF has issued the guidelines regarding the “Development of Entrepreneurs 
for Drone Spraying of Liquid Fertilizers.” Further, IFFCO is procuring 2500 
drones to provide spraying solutions to the farmers for use of Nano Urea & 
Nano DAP. IFFCO has informed that these drones will be provided free of cost 
to the selected Rural Entrepreneurs. Ownership of Drone as well as well as 
Electric three wheelers (loader) will be transferred in favour of Entrepreneur on 
completion of s praying in targeted area. IFFCO shall arrange Drone Pilot 
Training for the Entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs shall provide spraying services 
to the farmers at a concessional rate (lower by about Rs.100/- per acre)”. 
 
Recommendation No.  18  
 
2.31 The Committee note that the Sub-Mission on agricultural mechanization (SMAM) 
has been introduced by the Government of India.  Eligible farmers can apply for 
the scheme and can buy modern agricultural equipment with 50% to 80% subsidy. This 
scheme, therefore, will facilitate the availability of drones in the villages with the active 
cooperation of the State Governments. A representative of the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
during evidence admitted that implementation of the SMAM scheme is little slow. The 
Committee recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should work in unison with the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation and State Governments and others concerned agencies for 
effective implementation of SMAM so as to achieve its objective of facilitating the 
availability of drones to the farmers at the Block/ village level throughout the country.  
  
2.32 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 

26 
 
 “The observation of the committee has been noted. As per the issued 
guidelines of DoF, upto 90% of the total cost of Drones along with extra 
batteries is to financed through Agri Infra Fund (AIF)”. 
 
(Recommendation No.  20)  
 
2.33 The Committee learn that during the field trials on varieties of crops with the 
application of Nano Urea, it was found that there was 25 to 50 percent saving in top 
dress nitrogen.   The Committee desire that a thoroug h audit of the field trials on 
application of nano fertilizers may be got conducted by the Department in coordinati on 
with other Ministries/ organizations , to assess the reasons for huge variation (25 to 50 
percent) in top dress nitrogen saving   on different crops and in different regions, by the 
premier agricultural research institutes, etc.;   the reasons for variance  and effects may 
be scientifically analyzed and a crop specific Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for 
appropriate application of Nano Urea be devised so that the variance range in this 
regard may be minimized/ removed.   
 
2.34 In their Action Taken Note f urnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “The observation of the committee has been noted. As suggested by the 
Committee, Department of Fertilizers will take up the issue with DA&FW and 
ICAR”. 
 
Recommendation No.  21  
 
2.35 The Committee further desire that as assured, the Department of Fertilizers 
would take up the matter for setting up of quality testing laboratories throughout the 
country to ensure production and sale of quality nano fertilize rs with the Department of 
Agriculture and Farmer’s Welfare. The Committee would like to be kept informed of the 
progress in the matter. 
  
2.36 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “As per the information received from Department of Agriculture and Farmer’s 
Welfare (DA&FW), they have initiated an administrative procedure for creating 
facilities for quality testing of nano fertilizers that includes equipping already 
existing labs for quality testing of nano-fertilizers”. 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER – III 
  
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
   
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  AND 
REQUIRE REITERATION. 
 
Recommendation No.  5  
 
4.1 The Committee draw some satisfaction from the fact that IFFCO has transferred 
the technology of Nano Urea to NFL and RCF and they are setting up their plants with 
the technology transfer at Nangal in Punjab and Trombay in Maharashtra, respectively. 
Department has now requested IFFCO to transfer the Nano Urea technology to other 
CPSUs viz. BVFCL and FACT also without any cost. The matter is stated to be under 
consideration before the management of IFFCO. The Committee are aware that IFFCO 
has transferred the  technology to NFL and RCF without any royalty. The Committee 
trust that a favorable decision would be taken by IFFCO this time too on an urgent basis 
with a view to enhance the production of nano urea to meet its increasing demand 
because of the multiple benefits of Nano Urea. 
  
4.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “In order to enhance the production of nano urea, IFFCO has recently (April 
2023) started commercial production of nano urea at its Phulpur and Aonla units 
in UP with 6Cr bottles each annually. The observation of the committee has been 
noted”. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No.  15  
 
4.3 The Committee hope that as assured, the Department of Fertilizers would take 
up the matter with the companies/ corporate houses for utilizing their Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) fund to provide the facility of drones to the farmers of a particular 
ear-marked area (adopted by them) for spray of Nano Urea at subsidized rates / free of 
cost and to impart drone pilot training to the local village entrepreneurs and farmers. 
 
4.4 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 

29 
 
 “The suggestion of the committee has been noted. Further, IFFCO is procuring 
2500 drones to provide spraying solutions to the farmers for use of Nano Urea 
& Nano DAP. IFFCO has informed that these drones will be provided free of 
cost to the selected Rural Entrepreneurs. Ownership of Drone as well as well 
as Electric three wheelers (loader) will be transferred in favour of Entrepreneur 
on completion of spraying in targeted area. IFFCO shall arrange Drone Pilot 
Training for the Entrepre neurs. Entrepreneurs shall provide spraying services 
to the farmers at a concessional rate (lower by about Rs.100/- per acre)”. 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.  19 
2.28 The Committee gather from the sub -mission of Department of Agricultural 
Research & Education (DARE) that long-term effects of nano fertilizers on the nutritional 
quality of various crops cannot be drawn as till date the research trials being conducted 
have completed only one year and in most cases, only one season. The Committee 
would recommend that  concerted long-term dedicated research may be got conducted 
by the Department of Fertilizers in active coordination with DARE/ ICAR, all the 
Agricultural unive rsities/ fertilizer manufacturing companies, etc. by covering all the 
major crops in all the agro -climatic regions and soil types of the country so as to 
thoroughly assess the merits and demerits of the use of nano fertilizers and   establish 
nutritional qu ality, bio -safety, efficacy  and reliability of the harvested produce of nano 
fertilizers treated crops.  
  
 
2.29 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “At present Nano Urea and Nano DAP are enlisted in FCO, 1986 based on the 
results on efficacy of IFFCO Nano Urea (Nitrogen) tested by few ICAR 
Institutes and SAUs. Experimental trials of Nano Nitrogen (Nano Urea) were 
undertaken through National Agriculture Research System (NARS) involv ing 
ICAR research institutes/state agricultural Universities on different crops like 
Paddy, Wheat, Mustard, Maize, Tomato, Cabbage, Cucumber, Capsicum, 
Onion”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER – V 
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLEIS OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED   
  
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                 DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
14 December,  2023                                                Chairperson, 
 23 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on     
                                       Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
 
 
 
  

31 
 
APPENDIX-II  
ANALYSIS OF ACTION T AKEN BY THE GOVERNME NT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONT AINED IN THE THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SAB HA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTIL IZERS (2023 -24) ON ‘NANO-FERTILIZERS FOR  
SUSTAINABLE CROP PRO DUCTION AND MAINTAI NING SOIL HEALTH ’ OF 
THE MINISTRY OF CHEM ICALS AND FERTILIZER S (DEPARTMENT OF 
FERTILIZERS).  
 
 
 
 Total No. of Recommendations 21 
I Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
(Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4, 6, 7,8,9,10,11,12, 13, 14,16,17,18, 
20 and 21)  
  
 18 
Percentage of Total 86%   
II Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not like to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
NIL 
  
00 
Percentage of Total      0% 
III Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies given 
by the Government  have not been accepted by the Committee  and 
which require reiteration:  
(Recommendation No.  5, 15 and 19 )   
 
03 
Percentage of Total 14%    
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  the final replies 
of the Government are still awaited:  
Nil 
 
00 
Percentage of Total  0%    