i 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(2021-22) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                   
                          MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
                    (DEPARTMENT OF  PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Review of Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) ’ of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of  Pharmaceuticals)] 
   
                    TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
 
       
  LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
           DECEMBER, 2021 /   AGRAHAYANA, 1943 (SAKA) 
29 

ii 
 
TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICLAS) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their  Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on 
"Review of Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) ” of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.12.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02.12.2021 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2021 /  AGRAHAYANA, 1943 (SAKA 


iii 
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) (iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22) (v) 
INTRODUCTION (vi) 
Chapter I Report  1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
17 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
23 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
28 
Chapter V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
35 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2020-21) held on 
16th November 2021.. 
37 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers on "Review of Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya 
Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) ” pertaining to the Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals). 
39 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Deepak Baij 
4 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
5 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
6 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
7 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8 Shri Pakauri Lal 
9 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
11 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
12 Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
13 Shri Atul Kumar Singh alias Atul Rai 
14 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15 Shri M. Selvaraj 
16 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
17 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
18 Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
19 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
20 Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari# 
21 Vacant* 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26 Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27 
28 
Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
Shri Arun Singh$ 
29 Shri A.D. Singh 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj Kumar Arora  - Officer on Special Duty(LSS) 
2. Shri Nabin Kumar Jha - Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary 
5. Ms Sonia Sankhla - Assistant Executive Officer 
____________________________________________________________________________ 
$Re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.12.2020. 
#Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 28.12.2020 vice Shri Nandigam Suresh. 
*Vacant vice Shri Er. Bishweswar Tudu nominated MoS on 07.07.2021. 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri Deepak Baij 
5. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
6. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
7. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
8. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
10. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
11. Shri Vasava Prabhubhai Nagarbhai  
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt Aparupa Poddar (Afrin Ali) 
14. Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
15. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
16. Shri M. Selvaraj 
17. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
18. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
19. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
21. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
24. Dr. Anil Jain 
25. Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27. Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Arun Singh 
29. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
30. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
   
1. Shri Nabin Kumar Jha - Director  
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms Sonia Sankhla - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2021-22) 
having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this Twenty Ninth 
Report on Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth Lo k Sabha) on 
"Review of Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) ”, pertaining to 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).  
2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in  Rajya 
Sabha on 17 th March, 2021. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) furnished their replies on 24 th June, 2021 indicating action taken on 
the recommendations contained in that Report. The Committee at their sitting held on 
16th November, 2021 considered and adopted the Draft Report. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth  Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
4. For the facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/  
Observations/further comments of the Committee have been printed in bold let ters in 
the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; KANIMOZHI  KARUNANIDHI 
16 November, 2021 
25 Kartika, 1943 (Saka) 
                                         Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
     CHAPTER  I 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  contained 
in the Seventeenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on  the subject 
“Review of Pradhan Mantri Jan Aushadhi Pariyojana ” of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) which was presented to Lok Sabha and 
Rajya Sabha on 17.3.2021.   In all, the Committee made 15 Observations / 
Recommendations in the Report. 
1.2  Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) was 
requested to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
17th Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Report.  The  Action 
Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 15 Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry  of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) vide their OM F. 
No.35030/14/2021-Scheme dated 24- 06-2021.  These Replies have been categorized 
as follows:- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government :- 
 Sl.Nos.1, 2,5,12 and 15                                  (Total = 6) 
   Included in Chapter II of the Report.                                                   
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the Government ’s reply :- 
 Sl.No. 3,4,6 and 10                              (Total = 4) 
 Included in Chapter III of the Report. 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government   have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
 Sl.No.  7,8,11,13 and 14                          (Total = 5)  
 Included in Chapter IV of the Report. 

2 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations  in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 
 Sl.No. 9                                                  (Total=1 )  
 Included in Chapter V of the Report. 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Replies  to the further comments  
made by the Committee  in Chapter-I and to the observations/recommendations 
included in Chapter V of this Report should be furnished within three months from the 
date of presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4  Some of the action taken replies  furnished by the Department wh ich require     
further comments of the Committee or reiteration of the earlier recommendation s  are 
dealt with in the following paragraphs:- 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
 COVERAGE OF PRADHAN MANTRI JAN AUSHADHI PARIYOJANA (PMBJP) 
 
1.5 While stressing on the need to expand the coverage of PMBJP kend ras, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee note that as on 31.07.2020, 6520 PMBJP outlets are functio nal across 
the country.  732 districts have been covered under the Scheme an d the Department 
has fixed a target to cover all districts of the country by this financial year so that a mass 
community gets benefitted. The Department has also fixed target to establish  10500 
PMBJP outlets by the end of 31 st March 2025. The Committee are concerned to note 
that coverage of the Scheme is still inadequate despite of the fact that the number of 
outlets have been increased from 80 to 6520 during the last six years. M oreover, the 
number of outlets is very less in most of the States.  Only five states viz. Gujarat, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have more than 500 PMBJP 
outlets.  Many states including Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Himachal Pra desh, 
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan have less than 200 PMBJP outlets in 
them.   At present, the total consumption of medicines in the country is   nearly Rs. 1.5 
lakh crore in a year but the contribution of PMBJP was only Rs.433.60 crore during 
2019-20.  The Department has informed that presently around 1800 to 2000 peop le are 
purchasing medicines from one PMBJP outlet in a month but it has not fu rnished any 
information regarding average population covered by an outlet under the  
Scheme.  Even though the Government has taken many steps fo r increasing the 
coverage of the Scheme, the Committee are of the view further impetus needs to be 
given to make the benefits under the Scheme reach the vast majority  of people belong 
to  low income category in the country.  In this regard, the  Committee recommend  that 

3 
 
i. State/Union Territory-wise analysis should  be made regarding status of 
implementation of the Scheme.   Based on the outcome of the 
analysis,  comprehensive strategies  should be chalked out in respect of each 
State/UT and concrete steps should be taken   to increase the number of PM BJP 
outlets in each of  them; 
ii.  The Department need to focus on block level coverage instead of the prese nt 
district level approach.  Every block in the country should have commensurate 
number of PMBJP outlets according to its population so as to achieve th e 
objectives of the Scheme. 
iii. The  State/UT Governments should be impressed upon the need to p rovide free 
space in every Government hospital and  Primary/Community Health Centre so 
as to make available  quality generic medicines at affordable prices to  low 
income categories  of people particularly the   poor people and those  belong to 
below poverty line.  Services of Members of Parliament of the concerned S tates 
may be utilized for the purpose.   
iv. Special attention should be given to serve the people in rural areas, remote and 
hilly areas, slums and other low-income group people living areas in cities and 
towns." 
Reply of the Government 
1.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Depart ment of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated  as under:- 
 "PMBI has recorded a turnover of Rs 665 Cr in FY 2020-21 which led to savings of 
approx. Rs 4000 Cr to the citizens. It has also acted as a catalyst for other 
manufacturers to expand share of generic medicines in  the domestic ph arma market. 
However, a lot of work is still required to expand  the market share of Janaushadhi. 
1. Opening of new Janaushadhi Kendra at a particular place depends upon getting 
a qualified applicant from that area as it is a franchisee-based mo del. BPPI has 
done the trend analysis of applications and it is found that fewer appli cations are 
coming from hill areas, island areas and aspirational districts. Grant policy is 
suitably amended to provide financial assistance for the opening of kendras in 
these areas. 
2. At present, all districts of the nation are covered and now the focus is shifted to 
cover more and more blocks. It has been decided to start with blocks which 
shares borders with other countries. Applications have been invited from 
interested applicants by giving advertisements in newspapers. Also,  preference  
is being given to applicants from the rural areas of the country. 
3. Administration of States/UTs is  being requested regularly to provide rent-free 
spaces at their health care facilities for opening Janaushadhi Kendras. Many 
correspondences have been done in this regard and results are encouraging. A t 
present, 1004 kendras are functional in government premises. 
4. For encouraging the opening of more outlets in hill areas, island areas and  
aspirational districts, grant policy is suitably amended to provide financial 
assistance up to two lakh rupees for opening of kendras in these areas. 

4 
 
 In order to increase awareness of the scheme as well for providing free spa ces for 
opening JAKs in the State/ District hospitals and community centres, letters ha ve been 
sent at the level of Hon'ble Ministers to the Governors, Chief Ministers and Members of 
Parliament and by the senior functionaries of the  Department to the  Chief Secretaries/ 
Health Secretaries of all the State/ UTs from  time to time."  
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.7 The Committee note that Pharmaceuticals & Medical Devices Bureau of India 
(PMBI) has recorded a turnover of Rs. 665 crore in FY 2020-21 which led to savings o f 
approx. Rs. 4000 Crore to the citizens. However , the reply furnished by the Department 
is silent on the recommendation of the Committee to make a State/UT  wise analysis 
regarding status of implementation of the scheme. In this regard, the Committee hope 
that the Department will undertake State/UT-wise analysis as recommended by 
the Committee and based on the outcome of the analysis, comprehensive 
strategies should be chalked out in respect of each State/UT and concrete steps 
should be taken   to increase the number of PMBJP outlets in each of them .  
Action taken reply in this regard should be furnished to the Committee.  
1.8 The Committee further note that the Department has accepted the 
recommendation of the Committee and has shifted its focus to cover m ore and more 
blocks which is the need of the hour.  It has been decided by PMBI  to start with blocks 
which shares borders with other countries. Applications have been invited from 
interested applicants by giving advertisements in newspapers. Also, preference is being 
given to applicants from the rural areas of the country.  In this regard, the Committee 
would like to reiterate that concrete measure should be taken to ensure that every 
block in the country should have commensurate number of PMBJP outlets 
according to its population so as to achieve the objectives of the Scheme.    
Moreover, specific steps should be taken to open more outlets in rural areas of 
the country as the people of rural area would be immensely benefitted by the 
quality generic medicines made available through the Scheme at affordable 
prices. 

5 
 
1.9   The Committee also note that 1004 Kendras are operational in Government 
premises out of 6520 PMBJP Kendras (as on 31.07.2020) functional across the country.   
In this regard, the efforts being made by the Department to impress upon the 
State Governments/Union Territories, should be further strengthened to provide 
free space in Government hospitals,  Primary Health Centres, etc. so as to open 
more outlets in them.   
Recommendation No. 7 
NEW INCENTIVE PLAN 
1.10 While analysing the New Incentive Plan of the Department of Pharmaceutica ls 
for the PMBJP Kendra owners, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals has recently 
revised the incentive plan for Janushadi outlets owners.  As per the revised plan, 
three categories of incentives have been announced viz. normal incen tive, 
additional incentive and special incentive.  The normal incentive which will be  
provided to  all the categories of outlets owners including the existing ou tlets has 
been enhanced from  Rs. 2.50 lakh to  Rs. 5.00 lakh and  will be given @  15% of 
monthly purchase made from BPPI by these outlets subject to a ceiling of Rs. 
15,000/- per month upto the  total limit of Rs. 5 lakh.   Additional Incentive of Rs. 
2 lakh in addition to normal incentive will be given to outlets opened in b ackward 
areas mentioned as aspirational districts by NITI Aayog and in Himalayan , Island 
territories and North-Eastern States.  Special Incentive of Rs. 2.00 lakh in 
addition to normal incentive will be given to PMBJP outlets  run by  women 
entrepreneurs, Divyang and  SCs  & STs.  Additional and Special incen tives are 
meant  for  reimbursement of expenditure on  furniture and fixtures upto  Rs. 1.50 
lakh  and Rs. 0.50 lakh for reimbursement expenditure on  computer, internet, 
printer, scanner, etc. In order to make the incentive plan more attractive to those 
who come forward to set up PMBJP outlets, the Committee would like to mak e 
the following recommendations:- 
i. Even though the Committee welcome this move of the Department to enha nce 
the normal incentive from Rs.2.5 lakh to  Rs.5 lakh, still feel that this should 
be  given for a longer period till the outlet owners establish themselves to run the 
outlets in a profitable  and self sustaining manner.  As per the present plan , 
normal incentive will be given upto 33 months till the outlets reach the  limit of 
Rs.5 lakh.   Since the PMBJP is aimed at the holistic social goal of providing 
quality generic medicines at affordable prices, the Committee recommend that 
the normal incentive may be provided up to five years so as to boost the  morale 

6 
 
of outlet owners and accordingly incentive amount may be worked out b y the 
Department.  
ii. Secondly the additional incentive of Rs.2 lakh may be provided to all t he 
categories outlet owners so as to make the Scheme attractive to the prospec tive 
entrepreneurs.  Temperature control devices like refrigerator, air conditioners etc. 
may be included in the items of furniture ’s and fixtures so as to maintain the 
quality of medicines. 
iii. The number of outlets owned by SC/ST/differently abled persons/women  
category is only 3% of the total outlets in the country presently. Even though the 
Department has announced special incentives for these categories, the 
Committee recommend that special drives may be undertaken by the 
Department to attract more entrepreneurs from these categories." 
Reply of the Government 
1.11 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Departme nt of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
" The proposed increase in incentive and grant for kendras as proposed, will 
require huge financial outlay, which is far in excess of approved outlay of Rs 49 0 
crore till March, 2025. In FY 2020-21, approx. 1400 new kendras have  been 
opened. If Rs 2 lakh grant is given to all, it would require Rs 28 Cr for gran t only. 
Similarly, if a  sales-based incentive (up to Rs. 15,000 p.m.) is given to all for five 
years, it will further require a  huge outlay. It is further felt that fixed inco me 
supports up to five years is given to all kendras, may have adverse e ffect on 
entrepreneurial skills of Kendra owners.  
Temperature Control devices like fridge and AC have been included for th e 
grants under the clause "Furniture & Fixtures", as these are required to keep 
medicines in good condition.   
Special drive is already being undertaken in social media & other platforms an d 
many seminars are organized for inviting applications from entrepreneurs f rom 
these categories (SC/ST/differently abled persons/women)." 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.12 The Committee note  the Action Taken Reply furnished by the Departme nt   that 
the providing  normal incentive upto  five years and extending additional incentive of Rs. 
2 lakh to all types of entrepreneurs will require huge financial outlay f ar in access of 
approved outlay of Rs 450 crore till March 2025 .  The Scheme offers quality generic 
medicines at affordable prices to the people.  Poor people can be i mmensely benefitted 
if penetration of the Scheme is more.  Presently the percentage of PM BJP outlets  is 

7 
 
very much negligible in the total   number of medical shops in the  country.   In this 
regard, the Committee are of the view that it is necessary to offer more inc entives 
to the prospective entrepreneurs so as to make it attractive to them to come 
forward to open PMBJP outlets.   As far as the financial implication is concerned , 
the Department may discuss the matter with the Ministry of Finance for the 
allocation of additional funds for offering more incentives under the scheme. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate the above recommendation with respect to the 
normal and additional incentives under the Scheme. 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
SUSTAINABILITY OF PMBJP OUTLETS 
1.13 While stressing on the need to ensure sustainability of PMBJP outlets, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note the concern expressed by the Department about the 
sustainability and profitability of PMBJP outlets.  Since the margin of pro fit is very 
low, the Department feels that it is difficult to run these outlets on sustaina ble 
basis.  In this regard, the Department has taken certain steps to make the outlets 
commercially viable viz. product basket has been increased, new products with 
attractive packing have been  launched like poshan, Janani protein powder,  
Suvidha sanitary napkins, etc. so as to increase footfalls to PMBJP outlets as 
well as medicine  sales, a new incentive plan has been started to suppo rt them 
financially, items other than medicines have been permitted to be sold a nd 
now  the sale of AYUSH medicines has also been permitted alongwith allopathi c 
medicines.  The main causes of worry for the Department are competition w ith 
branded medicine industry and sellers, similar schemes of the State 
Governments and Ayushman Bharat Scheme of the Government of India through 
which the beneficiaries are given free medicines.  In Committee ’s view PMBJP 
outlets can carve out niche for themselves in the vast market for drugs in the 
country by continuously selling quality generic medicines at affordable prices to 
all the sections of the society.  In this regard, the Committee recommend th at 
Department should work relentlessly for the projection of Jan Aushadi 
medicine   as a trusted public brand which delivers quality medicines at low cost 
particularly a unique model/design may be developed for all PMBJP outlets.  This 
will give separate identity/glorification for PMBJP outlets.  These shops may 
continuously be permitted to sell other products such as toiletries, cosmetics, 
hygiene products, nutrition and food supplements etc. to enable them operate in 
a economically viable position." 

8 
 
Reply of the Government 
 1.14 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Departme nt of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
"The Department is taking all necessary efforts to increase the footfalls at 
Janaushadhi Kendras. It is placing advertisements in all forms of media , 
conducting seminars with all stakeholders, organizing Janaushadhi week and 
Janaushadhi Diwas for increasing popularity. PMBI has also expanded its 
product basket to cater needs of more and more consumers. These kendras are 
permitted to sell other products such as toiletries, cosmetics, hygiene prod ucts, 
nutrition, and food supplements etc. to make them economically viable." 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.15 The Committee note that the Department is taking steps to make PMBJP outlets  
operationally sustainable as well as efforts are also made to make these ou tlets popular 
among common people . However, the Committee feel that a unique model/design 
may be developed for all PMBJP outlets so as to give separate 
identity/glorification for PMBJP outlets.  Reply given by the Department is silent 
on the recommendation made by the Committee in this regard .  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate the earlier recommendation to develop a unique model/design 
for PMBJP outlets   so that these outlets are easily identified by the common 
man. 
Recommendation No. 9 
BASKET OF MEDICINES UNDER PMBJP 
1.16 While stressing on the need to expand the basket of medicines, th e Committee 
had recommended as under: 
" The Committee note that the present product basket of PMBJP consists of 1250 
medicines and 204 surgical instruments. DoP is set to enhance it up to 200 0 
medicines and 300 surgical products by the end of 31 st March 2024 so that all 
essential medicines covering therapeutic groups, like - Anti Diabetics, 
Cardiovascular Drugs, Anti-Cancer, Analgesics & Antipyretics, Anti Allergic, 
Gastro Intestinal Agents, Vitamins, Minerals & Food supplements, Tropical 
Medicines, etc. get included under the Scheme.   The Committee note that the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has chalked out a programme for gradual 

9 
 
increase of number of medicines and surgical instruments over the next four 
years.  In this regard, the Committeee are of the firm view that a stro ng   basket 
of medicines and surgical instruments under the Scheme covering all 
the  therapeutic groups and all the surgical requirements  can only compe te with 
the private market.   When the people visit Janaushadi stores and f ind that all the 
quality medicines and surgical instruments are available in them at a lower 
cost,  it will definitely attract more people  towards the Janaushadi stores and  
with the increase in volume of sales,  their profit position will also be 
enhanced  correspondingly.   The Committee, therefore, recommend th at 
a  Committee of experts in the field including the eminent medical practitioners 
may be constituted to study the present basket of medicines and surgical 
instruments under the scheme and to suggest within three months a 
comprehensive basket of medicines and instruments covering all the th erapeutic 
groups so as to offer all the medicines and surgical instruments to the people a t 
affordable costs.  Their suggestions may be implemented within a year to  make 
PMBJP outlets sustainable and profit making. 
Reply of the Government 
1.17 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
"At present, new products are introduced based on the demand given by  
kendras/distributors which is duly vetted by other commercial data collected fro m 
the market. Opinions of medical professionals are also taken about the product to 
be introduced. The recommendation of the Committee  will be put  to the 
Governing Council for necessary action." 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.18 The Committee note the reply given by the Department that the above 
recommendation of the Committee will be put to the Governing Council for nec essary 
action.  Since it is very much essential to have a broad basket of medicines  and 
surgical instruments  under the Scheme so as to offer all the medicines and 
surgical instruments to the people at affordable costs, the Committee hope that 
necessary action would have  been  taken to place the recommendation of the 
Committee before the Governing Council of Pharmaceuticals and Medical 
Devices Bureau of India (PMBI) for initiating  immediate steps   to constitute  
a  Committee of experts in the field including the eminent medical practitioners to 

10 
 
study the present basket of medicines and surgical instruments under the 
scheme as recommended by the Committee earlier.  The Committee should be 
informed about the action taken in this regard. 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
STORAGE AND LOGISTICS 
1. 19 While stressing on the need to create more warehouses and involve more  
distributors in the supply chain mechanism, the Committee had recommended as 
under:- 
 
"The Committee note that  the Department of Pharmaceuticals  has taken 
steps  for the establishment of an effective IT-enabled logistics and supply-chain 
system for ensuring real-time distribution of medicines at all outlets to avoid 
stock out situation. In addition, appointment of Distributors in States/UTs is also  
being envisioned to strengthen the supply chain system.  At present three 
warehouses are functional at Gurugram, Chennai and Guwahati. Earlier the 
Committee were informed that fourth warehouse was functional at Bengaluru  
but subsequently the Department has become silent in this regard. However, 
the Department is planning to increase the strength of warehouses to six by the  
year 2022-23.  Out of these, one regional warehouse is proposed to be set up in 
the western region and the one in the eastern region of the country for 
increasing supply in near future.  Apart from that, warehouses of distributors 
each with 5000 square feet capacity are functioning all over the country to 
supplement the end-to- end supply chain of BPPI.  In this regard, the Committee 
are concerned to note that only 29 distributors are presently associated with 
BPPI across the nation but BPPI is in process of appointment of new 
distributors in 15 states for 19 locations.  According to the Department, no target 
is fixed for the engagement of a certain number of distributors to enha nce the 
warehouse facility and their engagement for any location/area is need-based, as 
it is only a supplementary step to strengthen the End- to-End supply chain 
system.  The Committee further note that the BPPI strives to ensure the 
dispatch of the medicines within 48 hours on the receipt of the purchase ord er 
from PMBJP Kendra but the delivery time allowed for  a consignmen t after 
dispatch is maximum of 10 days. The Committee feel that this time period  for 
dispatch and delivery of medicines should be less for a smooth supply chai n 
under the Scheme and for this purpose the Department/BPPI need to set u p 
more warehouses across the length and breadth of the country and multiply  the 
number of distributors as well.  Since the supply chain is presently marr ed by 
delays, many PMBJP outlets unable to maintain  the stock of  various g eneric 

11 
 
medicines/devices at their counters and as a result these outlets are becoming  
commercially non viable as well as not able to fulfill their prime ob jective of 
providing quality  generic medicines to the people. The Committee, there fore 
recommend that BPPI should set up chain of its own warehouses and 
distributors in such a way that the medicines ordered by the outlets are 
dispatched within a day and delivered within next two days all over the country 
even in remote and hilly areas.  The Committee therefore recommend that   the 
hilly areas of Himachal Pradesh, West Bengal, Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kash mir 
and Ladhakh and North-east special warehouses should be set up with 
adequate number of distributors to make timely supply in these remote 
areas  with full coverage of all the States of North East region and hilly 
areas.  In this regard, more warehouses region-wise or state-wise should be 
planned and set up to cover the entire population and area in a time bound 
manner and commensurate number of distributors should be appointed in  each 
state as they are the key players to strengthen the End- to-End supply chain 
system.  Bigger states like Uttar Pradesh should have more warehouses an d 
distributors." 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
1.20 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
" At present, the number of distributors has increased to 37. Further, one 
warehouse at Surat, Gujarat, is under construction and expected to get 
operational by August 2021. PMBI strives to ensure the dispatch of the  
medicines within 48 hours on the receipt of the purchase order from PMBJP 
Kendra, the delivery time allowed for a consignment after dispatch  is  maximum 
of 10 days. For any delay, penalty is imposed on the logistics partner. 
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Bureau of India (PMBI) is trying to 
reduce the turnaround time for dispatch to 24 hrs. within  the approval of  order. 
However, for ensuring delivery within 2 days, some operational issues are 
present. For supply to any store, a route chart is prepared by the distributor so 
that orders of all nearby stores are clubbed and a dedicated vehicle can  be 
allotted. So, where stores are in the  cluster, delivery can be done with in 3- 4 
days (being done at present also). For stores in the hinterland where den sity is 
low, it will take some time as it has to be dispatched through courier. For 
avoiding stock out position, all stores are directed to maintain inventory of at 
least 15 days average sales. The kendras who are following this, have nev er 
faced stock out position. 
  

12 
 
PMBI is also trying to appoint more distributors and has placed advertisement in 
newspapers for this. It keeps on appointing eligible entrepreneurs as 
distributors. However, willingness of entrepreneurs depends upon commercial 
viability of the venture. At metro cities, breakeven point for profit to distributors is 
dispatch of Rs 75 lacs per month. In smaller cities, it is Rs 30-50 lacs. PMB I 
faces problem in appointing distributors at hinterlands/N-E States where store 
density is low. In Uttar Pradesh, four distributors are functional at present. 
Similarly, distributors are functional in J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and 
West Bengal. In UT of Ladakh, only two stores are functional, hence, a 
dedicated distributor cannot be appointed there”. 
  
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.21 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply given by the Depart ment in regard 
to setting up of more warehouses in the country.    Presently, warehouses are functional 
at Gurugram, Chennai and Guwahati.  As per reply, fourth warehouse is under  
construction at Surat and is expected to get operational by August 2021.  So, there is no 
warehouse for the entire eastern region of the country.  In Committee ’s view, more 
number of warehouses need to be set up for ensuring smooth and ti mely 
supply/distribution of medicines under the Scheme.   The Committee further note that 
the number of distributors under the Scheme has been increased from 2 9 to 37.   PMBI 
is also trying to appoint more distributors and has placed advertisement in newsp apers 
for the purpose. It keeps on appointing eligible entrepreneurs as distribu tors. Owing to 
the inadequate number of warehouses and distributors,  it is noticed that PMBJP outlets 
are receiving their orders in 4 to 10 days.  In this regard, the Committee feel that 
continuous and concerted efforts are necessary on the part of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals and Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Bureau of India 
(PMBI) for establishing more Warehouses and involving higher number of 
distributors so as to improve the supply chain infrastructure across the country 
which would enabl e PMBJP outlets receive their medicines/medical devices 
orders within a reasonable time period of two to three days . The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate the earlier recommendation that more warehouses region-wise 
and or state-wise should be planned and set up to cover the entire population in a 
time bound manner and commensurate number of distributors should be 

13 
 
appointed in each state as they are the key players to strengthen the End- to-End 
supply chain system.     
1.22   In regard to the problem being faced by Pharmaceuticals and Medical 
Devices Bureau of India (PMBI) in appointing distributors at hinterlands/N- E 
States where store density is low, the Committee recommend that sincere and 
special  efforts should be made by  the Department/PMBI  to increase the PMBJP 
outlets in these regions so as to ensure the benefits of the Scheme reach the 
people of those regions.  
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
PRESCRIPTION OF GENERIC MEDICINES BY MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS 
 
1. 23 While stressing on the need for strategy which ensures that prescriptions without  
the generic name are not permitted at all, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee have noted the huge price differential between brand ed 
medicines and the generic medicines under the Jan Aushadhi Sche me.  While 
the Government is committed to the target of “health for all”, the availability of low 
cost medicines is a critical factor in achievement of this target.  At the sam e time, 
the Committee are well aware of the “pharmaceutical mafia” which ensures that 
medical practitioners continue to prescribe branded medicines notwithstanding 
the Indian Medical Council (Professional Conduct and Ethics) Regulations 
2002.  This nexus between the pharmaceutical mafia and the med ical 
professionals needs to be broken with a heavy hand because only that can 
ensure affordable medicine for every citizen of our country.  Therefore, the 
Committee recommend that the Department of Pharmaceuticals and the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare should draw out a strategy which ensures th at 
prescriptions without the generic name are not permitted at all.  If required, a new 
law should be brought to the House on an urgent basis to enforce the same." 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.24 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department o f 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
" Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Bureau of India (PMBI) is taking all 
possible steps to persuade doctors for prescribing medicines in the generic n ame. 

14 
 
It has also initiated an award ‘Janaushadhi Chikitsak ’ to encourage doctors for 
supporting generic medicines. This award was announced and given in p resence 
of Hon’ble Prime Minister in the year 2021. The advisory has also been issued by 
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to prescribe generic medicines. 
 The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, which led to 
issuance of Circular (No.-MCI-211(2)(Gen.)/2017-Ethics/104728 dated 21- 04-
2017,  by the erstwhile Medical Council of India, whereby all registered me dical 
practitioners under the IMC Act have to comply with the provisions of the 
Regulations without fail. It stipulates that that every physician should prescribe 
drugs with generic names legibly and preferably in capital letters and he/she shall 
ensure that there is a rational prescription and use of drugs." 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.25 The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals took up the ma tter 
with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, which led to issuance of  the erstwhile  
Medical Council of India circular  dated 21- 04-2017 whereby all registered medical 
practitioners should prescribe drugs with generic names legibly and preferably in capital  
letters and he/she shall ensure that there is a rational prescription and use o f drugs. In 
Committee’s view, merely issuing a circular will not suffice because it is unlikely 
that the physicians follow these regulations scrupulously in the absence of a 
strict law to enforce them.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
should draw out a strategy which ensures that prescriptions without the generic 
name are not permitted at all.  If required, a new law should be brought to the 
House on an urgent basis to enforce the same. 
Recommendation No. 14 
CONTRIBUTION OF PMBJP DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
1.26 While appreciating on the contribution of PMBJP during Covid-19 pande mic, the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee are happy to note that BPPI came forward and joined ha nds for 
fight against the Covid 19 pandemic. PMBJP outlets remained functional d uring 
lockdown period and maintained operations as part of their commitment to 
ensure uninterrupted availability of essential medicines.  BPPI  has  sold about 

15 
 
10 lakh Face masks and about 60 lakh tablets of Hydroxychloroquine, which 
saved around Rs. 1260 crore for  the people.  Moreover, the Committee no te that 
BPPI is maintaining adequate stocks of the medicines which are currently un der 
demand viz. Face Masks, Hand Sanitizers, Hydroxychloroquine, Paracetamol 
and Azithromycin. However, Oximeter which is in high demand due to the 
pandemic is not in the basket of medical devices under PMBJP.  The Committee  
also find from the reply given by the  Department of  Pharmac euticals  that 
Hydroxychloroquine tablets are not procured from Public Sector Undertakings 
under the Department viz. Bengal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) 
and Karnataka Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL) which  have the 
capacity to manufacture hydroxychloroquine tablets and can manufacture the 
same if the required raw material is made available to them.  The Committee feel 
that opportunity should be given to these CPSUs at time  of health  emergency 
situations like COVID-19 pandemic to manufacture the quality medicines at  
affordable prices. The Committee, therefore, recommend that  BPPI may 
consider purchase of hydroxychloroquine from these two CPSUs on competitive 
rate basis and this drug may  also be included in the Pharmaceuticals Purchase  
Policy (PPP).  The Committee also recommend that Oximeter should be included 
in the medical devices basket of PMBJP immediately to make available quality 
Oximeters at affordable prices to the people."  
  
Reply of the Government 
1.27 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Bureau of India (PMBI) gives preference 
to CPSUs for procurement provided they offer competitive rates and has 
procured medicines from CPSU many times earlier. Presently, it has sufficient 
stock of HCQ. In future procurement, preferential orders to CPSUs for HCQ or 
other medicines will be given in case they provide  competitive rates.” 
  
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.28 The Committee note that the reply given by the Department ha s not addressed 
the recommendation made by the Committee to include Oximeter in the me dical 
devices basket of  PMBJP   so as to make available quality Oximeters at affordable 
prices to the people.   Since the COVID 19 pandemic is not yet over, availability of 
devices like Oximeter at affordable prices to the people is vital for the earl y 
detection and treatment of COVID- 19 infection.  The Committee, therefore, 

16 
 
reiterate the recommendation that Oximeter should be included in the medical 
devices basket of PMBJP immediately to make available quality Oximeters at 
affordable prices to the people. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.1  
 
COMPOSITION OF GOVERNING COUNCIL OF BPPI 
2.1 The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals mana ges the 
functioning of Bureau of Pharma Public Sector Undertakings of India (BPPI) through its 
Governing Council. The present composition  of the Governing Council  include the  
Secretary of the Department as Chairperson, Joint Secretary of the Departmen t and the 
CMDs/MDs of five Public Sector Pharma companies under the Department.  Out of ten 
Members of the Council, eight are the Government nominees and only two are experts 
in the field of Pharmaceutical industry.  Moreover, three PSUs viz. IDPL, RDPL and 
HAL whose heads are Members of the Council are almost non functional.    The 
Committee are of the view that the Governing Council of BPPI should have m ore expert 
Members from the field of pharma industry for effectively managing the aff airs of BPPI 
and for its monitoring. In this regard, the Committee note that the Governme nt has 
decided to re-name the BPPI as the Pharmaceuticals & Medical Devices Bu reau of 
India (PMBI) so as to set up a Pharma Bureau with an objective of “Single point 
interface of the Department of Pharmaceuticals with Industry ”.   Since it is necessary to 
have a balanced composition of Governing Council of BPPI for the holistic  
implementation of Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMB JP), the 
Committee recommend that the number of expert Members in the Governing Council  
should be increased.  In this regard, the Government may consider nomination of 
eminent medical administrations to the Governing Council along with expert indu stry 
representatives.  The Committee should also be informed about the status of 
transformation of BPPI into PMBI. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.2  The name of the Bureau of Pharma Public Sector Undertakings of India (B PPI) 
has been recently changed to Pharmaceuticals & Medical Devices Bureau of Ind ia 
(PMBI) along with changes in its Memorandum of Association. It has also been decide d 
to set up a Pharma Bureau under PMBI with an objective of ‘Single point interface of the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals with Industry ’.  The same have been duly registered 
with the Registrar of Societies, Delhi. The suggestion for associating experts in the 
governance has been noted and further follow up action in the matter is being taken.  

18 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.2 
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR BPPI 
2.3 The Committee note that BPPI is continuously striving to increase its revenue 
and attain self- sufficiency without diluting its main objective i.e. providing qu ality 
generic medicines at affordable cost. Presently BPPI is given budgetary grant to meet 
its Human Resources (HR) and Administrative costs.  In this regard, the Committee 
note that the grant provided in 2017-18 was Rs.47.64 crore and the same wa s reduced 
to Rs.42.50 crore in 2018-19 and further reduced to 35.10 crore during 2019 -20.  The 
Committee note from the submissions made by the Department of Pharmace uticals that 
BPPI has focused on cost reduction and has given financial prudence  in all its 
decisions. It has outsourced IT, Logistics, storage and distribution work and closed a ll 
C&F agents. Further, use of SAP based IT system has helped BPPI to mon itor its cost 
on real time basis. The Committee also note that the Administrative and HR costs of 
BPPI remained almost same during the period from 2017-18 to 20 19-20 even though its 
sales and the number of  PMBJP outlets had increased considerably during  th e 
period.  As a result, its Administrative and HR costs came down from 4.60% to 1.59% of 
its sales turnover during the period.   Moreover, BPPI has earned a Prof it Before Tax 
(PBT) of Rs 5.50 crore in FY 2019-20.  In view of the social goals of t he scheme to 
provide quality generic medicines at affordable costs to the people particula rly to the 
poor and needy, the Committee recommend that budgetary grants to BPPI sh ould be 
continuously given to fully meet its HR and administrative costs till it augments its 
income up to the level of self sustainability.  Moreover, the expendit ure on normal, 
additional and special incentives to the PMBJP outlets owners may also be borne by the 
Government till BPPI consolidates its profits to the level of self sustainability to bear the 
cost of incentives under the Scheme. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 Pharmaceuticals & Medical Devices Bureau of India (PMBI) has recorded a 
turnover of Rs 665 Cr (at MRP) during FY 2020-21 with Profit Before Tax (PBT-
unaudited) more than Rs 15 Cr. Thus, PMBI per se  does not require any financial 
assistance for meeting its HR & Administrative cost at the present level of operations. It 
mainly needs funds for providing incentives and grants for its Kendras, procurement  of 
products which are to be sold at a subsidized price like Suvidha sanitary napkins and for 
publicity and awareness. PMBI has informed that of these three su b heads, approx. 
80% of the fund is required for incentive and grants to kendras only. PMBI ha s informed 
that for all other expenses, it can manage through its own resou rces at the planned 
scale of operations. The Department will strive to provide the amount to PM BI as per 
the budgetary allocation of the Scheme, while seeking more funds from the Ministry of 
Finance  at Supplementary and RE stage.   

19 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.5 
COVERAGE OF PMBJP 
2.5 The Committee note that as on 31.07.2020, 6520 PMBJP outlets  are functional 
across the country.  732 districts have been covered under the Scheme and the 
Department has fixed a target to cover all districts of the country by this financial year so 
that a mass community gets benefitted. The Department has also fixed target to 
establish 10500 PMBJP outlets by the end of 31 st March 2025. The Committee are 
concerned to note that coverage of the Scheme is still inadequate des pite of the fact 
that the number of outlets have been increased from 80 to 6520 du ring the last six 
years. Moreover, the number of outlets is very less in most of the States.  On ly five 
states viz. Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have more  than 
500 PMBJP outlets.  Many states including Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan have less than 200 PMBJP 
outlets in them.   At present, the total consumption of medicines in the country is   nearly 
Rs. 1.5 lakh crore in a year but the contribution of PMBJP was only Rs.433.60 crore  
during 2019-20.  The Department has informed that presently  around 1800 to 2000 
people are purchasing medicines from one PMBJP outlet in a month but it has not 
furnished any information regarding average population covered by an outlet under the 
Scheme.  Even though the Government has taken many steps for in creasing the 
coverage of the Scheme, the Committee are of the view further impetus needs to be 
given to make the benefits under the Scheme reach the vast majority  of people belong 
to  low income category in the country.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that 
i. State/Union Territory-wise analysis should  be made regarding status of 
implementation of the Scheme.   Based on the outcome of the 
analysis,  comprehensive strategies  should be chalked out in respect of each 
State/UT and concrete steps should be taken   to increase the number of P MBJP 
outlets in each of  them; 
ii.  The Department need to focus on block level coverage instead of the prese nt 
district level approach.  Every block in the country should have commensurate  
number of PMBJP outlets according to its population so as to achieve th e 
objectives of the Scheme. 
iii. The  State/UT Governments should be impressed upon the need to p rovide free 
space in every Government hospital and  Primary/Community Health Centre so 
as to make available  quality generic medicines at affordable prices to  low 
income categories  of people particularly the   poor people and those  belong to 
below poverty line.  Services of Members of Parliament of the concerned S tates 
may be utilized for the purpose.   
iv. Special attention should be given to serve the people in rural areas, remote and 
hilly areas, slums and other low-income group people living areas in cities and 
towns. 

20 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.6  PMBI has recorded a turnover of Rs 665 Cr in FY 2020-21 which led t o savings 
of approx. Rs 4000 Cr to the citizens. It has also acted as a catalyst for othe r 
manufacturers to expand share of generic medicines in  the domestic ph arma market. 
However, a lot of work is still required to expand  the market share of Janaushadhi. 
1. Opening of new Janaushadhi Kendra at a particular place depends upon getting 
a qualified applicant from that area as it is a franchisee-based mo del. BPPI has 
done the trend analysis of applications and it is found that fewer appli cations are 
coming from hill areas, island areas and aspirational districts. Grant policy is 
suitably amended to provide financial assistance for the opening of kendras in 
these areas. 
2. At present, all districts of the nation are covered and now the focus is shifted to 
cover more and more blocks. It has been decided to start with blocks which 
shares borders with other countries. Applications have been invited from 
interested applicants by giving advertisements in newspapers. Also,  preferenc e 
is being given to applicants from the rural areas of the country. 
3. Administration of States/UTs is  being requested regularly to provide rent-free 
spaces at their health care facilities for opening Janaushadhi Kendras. Many 
correspondences have been done in this regard and results are encouraging. A t 
present, 1004 kendras are functional in government premises. 
4. For encouraging the opening of more outlets in hill areas, island areas and  
aspirational districts, grant policy is suitably amended to provide financial 
assistance up to two lakh rupees for opening of kendras in these areas. 
 In order to increase awareness of the scheme as well for providing free spa ces for 
opening JAKs in the State/ District hospitals and community centres, letters h ave been 
sent at the level of Hon'ble Ministers to the Governors, Chief Ministers and Members of 
Parliament and by the senior functionaries of the  Department to the  Chief Secretaries/ 
Health Secretaries of all the State/ UTs from  time to time.   
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.7, 1.8 and 1.9 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.12 
NEED FOR WIDE PUBLICITY OF PMBJP 
 
2.7 The Committee note that the Department is making initiatives to fulfill the  
objective of PMBJP to popularize generic medicines among the masses and to dispel 

21 
 
the prevalent notion that low priced generic medicines are of inferior qua lity through 
various ways and means of education and publicity.  The Committe e also note that the 
price of Jan Aushadhi Medicines is cheaper at least by 50% and in some cases, by 80% 
to 90% of the market price of branded medicines. During 2019-20, PM BJP has 
achieved sales worth Rs. 433.60 crore and this has led to savings of approximat ely Rs. 
2500 crore to the common citizens of the country.   In order to educate  the general 
public about the usages of Quality Generic Medicines, the BPPI is using various ways of 
publicity like distribution of handouts, advertisements in newspapers an d cinema, FM 
Radio campaigns, TV commercials, Social Media advertisements, outdoor publicity, 
organizing/ participating in workshops, seminars, public meetings, health fairs, outd oor 
branding through bus queue shelters and bus/auto wrapping, etc.   For me eting the 
expenses for the publicity initiatives, BPPI has spent Rs 4.76 crore, Rs 6.50 crore a nd 
Rs. 5.70 crore during the years 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20 resp ectively. However, 
the Committee are of the view that the current spending by the Departme nt is way too 
less to adequately cover the whole country through different modes of a wareness 
generation. In this regard, the Committee note that an enhanced budgetary a llocation of 
Rs. Rs 95.00 crore has been approved by the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) for 
the next five years up to 2024-25.  Further the Committee note th at the present 
initiatives of BPPI are confining to few urban pockets and urban people a nd its 
penetration to rural areas and  poorer sections of the society is not adequate. Th e 
Committee, therefore, recommend that  the awareness campaigns of BPPI nee d to be 
target based, specially focusing on the  poor and low income group  li ving in slums, 
pavement dwellers and shanty places in both urban and rural areas as  they are the 
most disadvantaged as well as needy section of the society.  Quality generic medicines 
should be made available at affordable prices to these deprived sections o f the society 
and   for this purpose, the awareness generation campaigns of BPPI need to go deep 
down to the last needy person in the society. In this regard the Committ ee further 
recommend that the entire publicity strategy of BPPI should be revisited and m ore 
suitable and rigorous publicity campaigns on all platforms like FM radio/community 
radio, visual media, print media and social media etc.  in local language has to be 
undertaken by the Department/BPPI in coming years using the enhanced bud getary 
allocation so as to make PMBJP a household scheme.  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.8  PMBI has spent Rs 13.39 Cr during FY 2020-21 for creating awareness abo ut 
Janaushadhi. It uses all platform for advertisement like social, print, electronic like TV & 
FM, Outdoor billboards etc. The recommendation for a focused advertisement to poor 
and low-income group living in slums, pavement dwellers and shanty places  in both 
urban and rural areas as they are the most disadvantaged as well as the needy section 
of the society is welcomed. As recommended by the Committee, PMBI will take a more 

22 
 
targeted approach to popularize and create awareness about Janaushadhi in such an 
area. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.15 
PUBLIC PERCEPTION 
  
2.9            The Committee have observed that the Jan Aushadhi medicines suffe r from 
a perceptional disadvantage.  These medicines have been promoted as poor man ’s 
medicines and, therefore, many people hesitate to use them under a false notion about 
its quality and efficacy.  We need to break this notion and create a  hugely positive 
perception towards these medicines.  We have live examples of public perception 
driving the programmes like Swatchh Bharat Abhiyan with a huge amount o f 
positivity.  Similar exercise needs to be done for the Jan Aushadhi Sch eme also.  Using 
popular brand ambassadors, creating transformational branding in packaging, 
standardization of the visual appeal of Jan Aushadhi Kendras, etc. can break the 
existing notions and help create an image of these medicines being abs olutely top 
quality products.  This will require resources but deploying them will be absolute ly worth 
it for the future growth of BPPI and ensuring affordable healthcare for all. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.10  The suggestion of the committee is well taken that it is required to chang e the 
perception about Janaushadhi from only poor man ’s medicines to affordable medicines 
for all. For promoting this as medicines for all, the quote of Hon ’ble Prime Minister is 
also changed from ‘Gharib ko sasti dawai mile ’ to ‘Sabhi ko sasti dawai mile ’. PMBI has 
also worked upon improving  the visual appearance and packaging of the medicin es. It 
has further introduced nutritional products like protein drinks, bars and othe r 
nutraceuticals at competitive rates to attract all sections of the society. 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
PROCUREMENT OF MEDICINES BY BPPI 
3.1 The Committee note that BPPI procures medicines and other products through 
open tender published on e-procurement website of the Government of In dia.   Rate 
contract is entered with eligible bidders. However, special relaxations are given to 
start-ups and MSME firms as per the norms of the Rule 153(iii) of th e General 
Financial Rules (GFR) 2017 in line with the “Make in India ” Programme.    The 
Committee also note that BPPI per se  doesn ’t give any additional 
reservation/preference in procurement to MSME units other than those notified by the 
Government of India. BPPI is facing many hurdles in timely procurement of medicines 
due to failure of suppliers.   It has been observed that 90% supplie rs of BPPI are from 
MSME Sector who can’t absorb the fluctuations in price of raw materials, other factors 
& defaults in supply in time of stress.  In order to ameliorate the situation , BPPI is 
working on a new procurement policy to encourage large scale manufacturers to 
participate in tenders so that supply can be further smoothened. In this regard, the 
Committee feel that timely supply of adequate quantity of quality medicin es and 
medical devices at affordable cost is of paramount importance for the succ essful 
implementation of PMBJP as the Scheme aims at providing quality generic m edicines 
at affordable prices to the people.    At the same time, it is equally im portant to 
encourage MSME sector to participate in supply of quality medicines/device s for the 
implementation of the Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that due care 
may be taken while formulating new procurement policy for  according  b alanced 
opportunities to  both large scale manufacturers and the MSME sector.  Certain 
percentage of medicines/devices or some categories of medicines/devices may  be 
reserved for startups/MSME sector to encourage them flourish as per the goals of 
“Make in India” mission.   
Reply of the Government 
 3.2 PMBI provides all exemptions to Startups/MSME sector as stipulated in 
directions issued by the Government of India from time to time. Further, all 
procurements are made from the domestic manufacturers only. As the share o f 
startups/MSME sector in total procurement of PMBI is presently more than 75%, no 
additional reservation is required to be given to the sector at this stage. As the regular 
supply of medicines along with their best price and quality is the c ornerstone of the 
scheme, participation of large-scale manufacturers is desirable. However, no specia l 

24 
 
exemption/facility is being provided to large scale manufacturers at the cost o f 
Startups/MSMEs. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
 
SUPPLY OF JAN AUSHADHI MEDICINES TO GOVERNMENT HEALTH FACILITIES 
  
 3.3           Charity begins at home.  The Committee are dismayed to know that while the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has taken a lot of efforts to propagate and  expand the 
use of Jan Aushadhi medicines, there has been no attempt to get the se medicines into 
the healthcare system of the Government itself.  CGHS, ESI, Railway Hospitals, PSU 
Hospitals, dispensaries in prisons, Army Hospitals, ECHS and State Government 
healthcare systems have very large budgets for procurement of medicines for th e 
beneficiaries.  For example, CGHS spends around Rs. 2,600 crores for the retired 
government officials and Rs. 500 crores for the serving employees every year.  Major 
part of this is used for procurement of medicines and medical devices.  Ideally all this 
should be procured from Jan Aushadhi unless the medication itself is not available 
through BPPI.  If the government ’s own healthcare system does not use the Jan 
Aushadhi medicines, it sends out a signal as if the government is not su re of the 
efficacy of these medicines.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
medicines (and medical devices) procured and dispensed by the Government 
healthcare system (Central and State governments as well as PSUs) should be 
mandated to be only Jan Aushadhi medicines unless the specific me dicine being 
recommended is not available under Jan Aushadhi.  The Department  of 
Pharmaceuticals should get this mandated from all concerned ministries/autho rities and 
also get directions issued to the State Governments to mandate the same in t he 
healthcare systems under their jurisdiction.  Such a step will increase the turnover of 
BPPI manifold from the current level of Rs. 500 crores.  This will also enable a huge 
saving of costs by the respective healthcare authorities and also improve the pe rception 
of Jan Aushadhi medicines in the eyes of general public.  The Committ ee will be 
separately writing to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare as well as the Ministry o f 
Home Affairs to take note of this recommendation. 
Reply of the Government 
 3.4 The objective of starting PMBJP was to provide quality medicines at aff ordable 
prices to the citizens of India. At present, PMBI is supplying medicines throu gh more 
than 7,800 Janaushadhi Kendra across the country. It is also doing institutional s upply 
to CGHS, ESI, Railway Hospitals, PSU Hospitals, Army Hospitals, ECHS and some 
State Government healthcare system at a smaller scale. In order to increase to th is 
scale, a large-scale upliftment is required at all levels like manpower, IT, logistics & 
warehousing, and procurement. It will also require a big investment in working capita l 
and procurement of medicines for PMBI. This will result in creation of a big entity and 

25 
 
may result in PMBI losing its flexibility in operations. Further, managing such an 
organization will be a huge task and it may result in disruption in su pply of medicines to 
kendras, thus defeating the very purpose of the scheme. The recommendation  of 
providing generic drugs through the government healthcare system would pertain to th e 
Procurement Ministries, which already have their own procurement mechanis ms.  It is 
submitted that PMBI is better suited to meet its mandate by its focus on running its 
operations through Jan Aushadhi kendras rather than to act as a procureme nt agency 
for other government organizations . 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.6 
ECONOMIC VIABILITY OF BPPI 
3.5          After taking into account the details of efforts made for making the Jan  
Aushadhi outlets financial viable the Committee have come to a conclusion that it is n ot 
possible for a Jan Aushadhi outlet to become financially viable unless the volume  of 
business at each store gets multiplied by a few times.  This will require a massiv e 
awareness programme so that more and more people start demanding these gene ric 
medicines.  Till such demand gets generated, small entrepreneurs will not come forward 
to open the Jan Aushadhi Kendras.  This has led to non-penetratio n of the Jan 
Aushadhi as a concept in the country which has led to the demand not incre asing at the 
required pace.  This is a typical chicken and egg situation.  Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Department of Pharmaceuticals should start its own stores in  
different cities which are strategically located and also provide a good feel to the 
customers.  In case the recommendation at para 4 is implemented in full, the business 
of BPPI will increase by many times which will bring in profits (BPPI curre ntly operates 
at 14 % gross and 9% net margin on its total turnover).  The increase in profits will itself 
be sufficient to open and operate a large network of stores.  The Co mmittee 
recommends the following criteria for opening the stores by BPPI which are operated by 
BPPI: 
Population of the city (2011) Number of Kendras to be opened and operated by 
BPPI on its own 
5 lakh population At least 1 
10 lakh population At least 2 
20 lakh population At least 3 
Above 50 lakh population At least 5 
  
 
 

26 
 
Reply of the Government 
3.6  At present, PMBI is operating five outlets itself. This number may increase 
gradually keeping in mind the commercial viability of the new kendras. In  order to 
increase to the scale recommended by the Committee, a large-scale increase will be 
required in manpower, IT, logistics & warehousing, and procurement. the budg etary 
support will also need to be increased commensurately. The approved outla y of the 
Scheme for a five period up to March, 2025 is  Rs 490 cr, which  may not be sufficient to 
support such large scale expansion of the Schemes. Further, it is submitted th at the 
scheme also serves to promote entrepreneurs and self employment, and bud getary 
support is leveraged for this purpose. Additional assistance is provided for remote an d 
hilly areas to improve viability. Thus the  number of kendras has grow n at a very high 
rate in the last 5 years.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.10 
QUALITY OF DRUGS 
  
3.7  The Committee note that BPPI procures medicines only from WHO-GMP 
certified suppliers for ensuring the quality of medicines and batches of drugs are tested 
at laboratories accredited by National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibratio n 
Laboratories (NABL) and then only after passing the quality terms, medici nes are 
dispatched to PMBJP Kendra.  The Committee also note that during th e last three 
financial years 0.54%, 0.37% and 0.46% of batches of medicines procured w ere 
declared as of ‘Non Standard Quality ’.  This is a matter of concern that quality is 
compromised by a few suppliers despite of  them being  WHO-GMP certifie d 
suppliers.  The Committee further note that sale and distribution of batch es identified 
as "Not of Standard Quality" is stopped to all levels - Central Warehouse (CWH), 
Carrying and Forwarding Agent (CFA), Distributor and  Janaushadhi Kendra. 
Consequently stringent action is initiated against the concerned drug supplier as pe r 
the relevant clauses of the tender, such as forfeiture of security depo sit, recovery of 
cost of entire batch, blacklisting/debarment of firm from supply of medicines an d 
participation in future tenders for two years. The details of firms blacklisted/debarred by 
BPPI are also disclosed to the public by hoisting it on BPPI ’s website.  In this regard, 
the Committee are of the considered view that the quality of medicines sold under the 
Scheme should not be compromised at any cost as the sale of poor qua lity medicines 
will defeat the very purpose of providing quality medicines to the poor people under the 
Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals should review whether quality standards scrupulously adhered t o by 
BPPI on periodic basis and suitable corrective steps should be taken to ensu re quality 
of PMBJP medicines.  Moreover, the errant drug suppliers should banned for life or at 

27 
 
least banned for five years instead of two years as done presently so a s to create a 
deterrent effect on others.  The Committee also recommend that medicine s/injections 
etc., which need to be stored at low temperatures, should be stored by wholesa lers 
and retailers in refrigerator/cool chambers and it should be ensured by BPPI.  
  
Reply of the Government 
3.8  PMBI follows very stringent quality parameters and representative samples f rom 
each batch of the medicines are tested at NABL accredited labs. All medicin es are 
procured from WHO-GMP certified manufacturers and prescribed standards of storag e 
and distributions are observed at each stage till the medicines reach  the c onsumers. 
Also, frequent inspection of kendras & distributors is done by marketing officers/qua lity 
assurance team of PMBI for ensuring storage standards. 
As per the current practice of the government procurement agencies, the  c ompanies 
are debarred for supply for two years in case of quality failures. For a single fa ilure, 
debarment for five years will be a little harsh and will discourage qua lified bidders to 
participate in tenders for procurement. However, PMBI may consider increasing this 
period to five years for repeated failures. 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.7 
NEW INCENTIVE PLAN 
4.1 The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals ha s recently 
revised the incentive plan for Janushadi outlets owners.  As per the revised plan,  three 
categories of incentives have been announced viz. normal incentive, add itional 
incentive and special incentive.  The normal incentive which will be provided  to  all the 
categories of outlets owners including the existing outlets has been enhanced  
from  Rs. 2.50 lakh to  Rs. 5.00 lakh and  will be given @ 15% of m onthly purchase 
made from BPPI by these outlets subject to a ceiling of Rs. 15,000/- p er month upto 
the  total limit of Rs. 5 lakh.   Additional Incentive of Rs. 2 lakh in ad dition to normal 
incentive will be given to outlets opened in backward areas mentioned as as pirational 
districts by NITI Aayog and in Himalayan, Island territories and North-Ea stern 
States.  Special Incentive of Rs. 2.00 lakh in addition to normal incentive will be given 
to PMBJP outlets  run by women entrepreneurs, Divyang and  SCs  &  STs.  Additional 
and Special incentives are meant  for  reimbursement of expenditure on  furnitu re and 
fixtures upto Rs. 1.50 lakh  and Rs. 0.50 lakh for reimbursement expenditure 
on  computer, internet, printer, scanner, etc. In order to make the incentive plan mo re 
attractive to those who come forward to set up PMBJP outlets, the Comm ittee would 
like to make the following recommendations:- 
i. Even though the Committee welcome this move of the Department to enha nce 
the normal incentive from Rs.2.5 lakh to  Rs.5 lakh, still feel that this should 
be  given for a longer period till the outlet owners establish themselves to run the 
outlets in a profitable  and self sustaining manner.  As per the present plan , 
normal incentive will be given upto 33 months till the outlets reach the  limit of 
Rs.5 lakh.   Since the PMBJP is aimed at the holistic social goal of providing 
quality generic medicines at affordable prices, the Committee recommend that 
the normal incentive may be provided up to five years so as to boost the  morale 
of outlet owners and accordingly incentive amount may be worked out b y the 
Department.  
ii. Secondly the additional incentive of Rs.2 lakh may be provided to all the 
categories outlet owners so as to make the Scheme attractive to the prospec tive 
entrepreneurs.  Temperature control devices like refrigerator, air conditioners etc. 
may be included in the items of furniture ’s and fixtures so as to maintain the 
quality of medicines. 

29 
 
iii. The number of outlets owned by SC/ST/differently abled persons/women  
category is only 3% of the total outlets in the country presently. Even though the 
Department has announced special incentives for these categories, the 
Committee recommend that special drives may be undertaken by the 
Department to attract more entrepreneurs from these categories. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2  The proposed increase in incentive and grant for kendras as proposed, will 
require huge financial outlay, which is far in excess of approved outlay of Rs 490 cr till 
March, 2025. In FY 2020-21, approx. 1400 new kendras have been opened. If Rs 2 lakh 
grant is given to all, it would require Rs 28 Cr for grant only. Similarly, if a  sales-based 
incentive (up to Rs. 15,000 p.m.) is given to all for five years, it will furthe r require 
a  huge outlay. It is further felt that fixed income supports up to f ive years is given to all 
kendras, may have adverse effect on entrepreneurial skills of Kendra owners.  
Temperature Control devices like fridge and AC have been included for the  grants 
under the clause "Furniture & Fixtures", as these are required to keep me dicines in 
good condition.   
Special drive is already being undertaken in social media & other platf orms and many 
seminars are organized for inviting applications from entrepreneurs from these  
categories. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.12 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
  
RECOMMENDATION NO.8 
SUSTAINABILITY OF PMBJP OUTLETS 
4.3 The Committee note the concern expressed by the Department about the 
sustainability and profitability of PMBJP outlets.  Since the margin of prof it is very low, 
the Department feels that it is difficult to run these outlets on sustainab le basis.  In this 
regard, the Department has taken certain steps to make the outlets comme rcially viable 
viz. product basket has been increased, new products with attractive packing h ave 
been  launched like poshan, Janani protein powder, Suvidha sanitary na pkins, etc. so 
as to increase footfalls to PMBJP outlets as well as medicine  sales, a new incentive 
plan has been started to support them financially, items other than medicines have been 
permitted to be sold and now  the sale of AYUSH medicines has also been  permitted 
alongwith allopathic medicines.  The main causes of worry for the Depa rtment are 
competition with branded medicine industry and sellers, similar schemes of the S tate 
Governments and Ayushman Bharat Scheme of the Government of India t hrough which 

30 
 
the beneficiaries are given free medicines.  In Committee ’s view PMBJP outlets can 
carve out niche for themselves in the vast market for drugs in the country b y 
continuously selling quality generic medicines at affordable prices to all th e sections of 
the society.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that Department should work 
relentlessly for the projection of Jan Aushadi medicine   as a trusted publi c brand which 
delivers quality medicines at low cost particularly a unique model/design ma y be 
developed for all PMBJP outlets.  This will give separate identity/glorificat ion for PMBJP 
outlets.  These shops may continuously be permitted to sell other produ cts such as 
toiletries, cosmetics, hygiene products, nutrition and food supplements etc. to ena ble 
them operate in a economically viable position. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4  The Department is taking all necessary efforts to increase the footfalls a t 
Janaushadhi Kendras. It is placing advertisements in all forms of med ia, conducting 
seminars with all stakeholders, organizing Janaushadhi week and Janaush adhi Diwas 
for increasing popularity. PMBI has also expanded its product basket to ca ter needs of 
more and more consumers. These kendras are permitted to sell other products suc h as 
toiletries, cosmetics, hygiene products, nutrition, and food supplements etc. to m ake 
them economically viable. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.15 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
  
RECOMMENDATION NO.11 
 
STORAGE AND LOGISTICS 
  
4.5            The Committee note that  the Department of Pharm aceuticals  has taken 
steps  for the establishment of an effective IT-enabled logistics and supply -chain 
system for ensuring real-time distribution of medicines at all outlets to av oid stock out 
situation. In addition, appointment of Distributors in States/UTs is also being 
envisioned to strengthen the supply chain system.  At present three w arehouses are 
functional at Gurugram, Chennai and Guwahati. Earlier the Committee were informed 
that fourth warehouse was functional at Bengaluru but subsequently the Depart ment 
has become silent in this regard. However, the Department is planning to increase the 
strength of warehouses to six by the year 2022-23.  Out of these, on e regional 
warehouse is proposed to be set up in the western region and the one in t he eastern 
region of the country for increasing supply in near future.  Apart from that, warehouses 

31 
 
of distributors each with 5000 square feet capacity are functioning all over the country 
to supplement the end-to- end supply chain of BPPI.  In this regard, the Committee are 
concerned to note that only 29 distributors are presently associated with BPPI across 
the nation but BPPI is in process of appointment of new distributors in 15 states fo r 19 
locations.  According to the Department, no target is fixed for the enga gement of a 
certain number of distributors to enhance the warehouse facility and their e ngagement 
for any location/area is need-based, as it is only a supplementary step to strengthen 
the End-to-End supply chain system.  The Committee further note that the BPPI strives 
to ensure the dispatch of the medicines within 48 hours on the receipt of the purchase 
order from PMBJP Kendra but the delivery time allowed for  a con signment after 
dispatch is maximum of 10 days. The Committee feel that this time period  for dispatch 
and delivery of medicines should be less for a smooth supply chain un der the Scheme 
and for this purpose the Department/BPPI need to set up more warehouses across the 
length and breadth of the country and multiply the number of distribu tors as 
well.  Since the supply chain is presently marred by delays, many PMBJP ou tlets 
unable to maintain  the stock of  various generic medicines/devices at their counters 
and as a result these outlets are becoming commercially non viable as well a s not able 
to fulfill their prime objective of providing quality  generic medicine s to the people. The 
Committee, therefore recommend that BPPI should set up chain of its own 
warehouses and distributors in such a way that the medicines ordered by the outlets 
are dispatched within a day and delivered within next two days all over th e country 
even in remote and hilly areas.  The Committee therefore recommend that  the hilly 
areas of Himachal Pradesh, West Bengal, Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir and  
Ladhakh and North-east special warehouses should be set up with adequa te number 
of distributors to make timely supply in these remote areas  with full cove rage of all the 
States of North East region and hilly areas.  In this regard, more warehouses region-
wise or state-wise should be planned and set up to cover the entire population  and 
area in a time bound manner and commensurate number of distributors sho uld be 
appointed in each state as they are the key players to strengthen the End -to-End 
supply chain system.  Bigger states like Uttar Pradesh should have more warehous es 
and distributors. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
4.6  At present, the number of distributors has increased to 37. Further, one 
warehouse at Surat, Gujarat, is under construction and expected to get ope rational by 
August 2021. PMBI strives to ensure the dispatch of the medicines w ithin 48 hours on 
the receipt of the purchase order from PMBJP Kendra, the delivery time allo wed for a 
consignment after dispatch is  maximum of 10 days. For any delay, pena lty is imposed 
on the logistics partner. PMBI is trying to reduce the turnaround time for dispatc h to 24 
hrs. within  the approval of order. However, for ensuring delivery within 2 da ys, some 
operational issues are present. For supply to any store, a route chart is prepared b y 

32 
 
the distributor so that orders of all nearby stores are clubbed and a dedicated  vehicle 
can be allotted. So, where stores are in the  cluster, delivery can be done within 3-4 
days (being done at present also). For stores in the hinterland where density is low, it 
will take some time as it has to be dispatched through courier. For avoiding  stock out 
position, all stores are directed to maintain inventory of at least 15 days av erage sales. 
The kendras who are following this, have never faced stock out position. 
  
PMBI is also trying to appoint more distributors and has placed advertisement in 
newspapers for this. It keeps on appointing eligible entrepreneurs as distributors . 
However, willingness of entrepreneurs depends upon commercial viability of the 
venture. At metro cities, breakeven point for profit to distributors is dispatch of Rs 75  
lacs per month. In smaller cities, it is Rs 30-50 lacs. PMBI faces problem in app ointing 
distributors at hinterlands/N-E States where store density is low. In Uttar Pradesh, f our 
distributors are functional at present. Similarly, distributors are functional in J&K , 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal. In UT of Ladakh, only two stores 
are functional, hence, a dedicated distributor cannot be appointed there. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.22 and 1.23 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 RECOMMENDATION NO.13 
 
PRESCRIPTION OF GENERIC MEDICINES BY MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS 
 
4.7            The Committee have noted the huge price differential between bran ded 
medicines and the generic medicines under the Jan Aushadhi Schem e.  While the 
Government is committed to the target of “health for all ”, the availability of low cost 
medicines is a critical factor in achievement of this target.  At the same time, the 
Committee are well aware of the “pharmaceutical mafia ” which ensures that medical 
practitioners continue to prescribe branded medicines notwithstanding the Ind ian 
Medical Council (Professional Conduct and Ethics) Regulations 2002.  This nexus 
between the pharmaceutical mafia and the medical professionals needs to be broken 
with a heavy hand because only that can ensure affordable medicine for every citizen of 
our country.  Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should draw out a 
strategy which ensures that prescriptions without the generic name are not pe rmitted at 
all.  If required, a new law should be brought to the House on an urgent basis to enforce 
the same. 
 

33 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.8  PMBI is taking all possible steps to persuade doctors for prescribing medicines 
in the generic name. It has also initiated an award ‘Janaushadhi Chikitsak’ to encourage 
doctors for supporting generic medicines. This award was announced an d given in 
presence of Hon’ble Prime Minister in the year 2021. The advisory has also been issued 
by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare to prescribe generic medicines. 
 The matter was taken up with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, which led  to 
issuance of Circular (No.-MCI-211(2)(Gen.)/2017-Ethics/104728 dated 21- 04-2017,  by 
the erstwhile Medical Council of India, whereby all registered medical practitioners 
under the IMC Act have to comply with the provisions of the Regulation s without fail. It 
stipulates that that every physician should prescribe drugs with generic names legibly 
and preferably in capital letters and he/she shall ensure that there is a rationa l 
prescription and use of drugs. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.25 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 RECOMMENDATION NO.14 
CONTRIBUTION OF PMBJP DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
 
4.9 The Committee are happy to note that BPPI came forward and j oined hands for 
fight against the Covid 19 pandemic. PMBJP outlets remained functional during  
lockdown period and maintained operations as part of their commitment to ensure 
uninterrupted availability of essential medicines.  BPPI  has  sold a bout 10 lakh Face 
masks and about 60 lakh tablets of Hydroxychloroquine, which saved around Rs. 1 260 
crore for  the people.  Moreover, the Committee note that BPPI is maintaining  adequate 
stocks of the medicines which are currently under demand viz. Face Masks, Hand 
Sanitizers, Hydroxychloroquine, Paracetamol and Azithromycin. However, Oximeter 
which is in high demand due to the pandemic is not in the basket of medical devices 
under PMBJP.  The Committee also find from the reply given by the  Dep artment 
of  Pharmaceuticals  that Hydroxychloroquine tablets are not procured from Public 
Sector Undertakings under the Department viz. Bengal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals 
Limited (BCPL) and Karnataka Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL) 
which  have the capacity to manufacture hydroxychloroquine tablets and can 
manufacture the same if the required raw material is made available to  them.  The 
Committee feel that opportunity should be given to these CPSUs at time  of  health 
emergency situations like COVID-19 pandemic to manufacture the quality med icines at 
affordable prices. The Committee, therefore, recommend that  BPPI may consider 
purchase of hydroxychloroquine from these two CPSUs on competitive rate basis a nd 

34 
 
this drug may  also be included in the Pharmaceuticals Purchase Policy (PPP).  The 
Committee also recommend that Oximeter should be included in the medical devices 
basket of PMBJP immediately to make available quality Oximeters at affo rdable prices 
to the people.  
  
Reply of the Government 
4.10  PMBI gives preference to CPSUs for procurement provided they offer 
competitive rates and has procured medicines from CPSU many times earlier. 
Presently, it has sufficient stock of HCQ. In future procurement, preferential orders t o 
CPSUs for HCQ or other medicines will be given in case they provide  competitive 
rates. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.28 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation No. 9 
BASKET OF MEDICINES UNDER PMBJP 
5.1 While stressing on the need to expand the basket of medicines, the  Committee 
had recommended as under: 
" The Committee note that the present product basket of PMBJP consists of 1250 
medicines and 204 surgical instruments. DoP is set to enhance it up to 200 0 
medicines and 300 surgical products by the end of 31 st March 2024 so that all 
essential medicines covering therapeutic groups, like - Anti Diabetics, 
Cardiovascular Drugs, Anti-Cancer, Analgesics & Antipyretics, Anti Allergic, 
Gastro Intestinal Agents, Vitamins, Minerals & Food supplements, Tropical 
Medicines, etc. get included under the Scheme.   The Committee note that the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has chalked out a programme for gradual 
increase of number of medicines and surgical instruments over the next four 
years.  In this regard, the Committeee are of the firm view that a stron g   basket 
of medicines and surgical instruments under the Scheme covering all 
the  therapeutic groups and all the surgical requirements  can only compe te with 
the private market.   When the people visit Janaushadi stores and f ind that all the 
quality medicines and surgical instruments are available in them at a lower 
cost,  it will definitely attract more people  towards the Janaushadi stores and  
with the increase in volume of sales,  their profit position will also be 
enhanced  correspondingly.   The Committee, therefore, recommend t hat 
a  Committee of experts in the field including the eminent medical practitioners 
may be constituted to study the present basket of medicines and surgical 
instruments under the scheme and to suggest within three months a 
comprehensive basket of medicines and instruments covering all the th erapeutic 
groups so as to offer all the medicines and surgical instruments to the people a t 
affordable costs.  Their suggestions may be implemented within a year to make 
PMBJP outlets sustainable and profit making. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department o f 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 

36 
 
"At present, new products are introduced based on the demand given by  
kendras/distributors which is duly vetted by other commercial data collected fro m 
the market. Opinions of medical professionals are also taken about the product to 
be introduced. The recommendation of the Committee will be put to the 
Governing Council for necessary action." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.18 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                          KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
 16 November,  2021                                                Chairperson, 
 25 Kartika, 1943 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on  
                                        Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

37 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2021-22) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 16 th November, 2021 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1700.hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
K. KANIMOZHI -    CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
4. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
5. Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
6. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
7. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
8. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
9. 
 
 
 
       10  
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
 
Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
11 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
12 Dr. Anil Jain 
13 Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
14 Shri Arun Singh 
 
 SECRETARIAT  
1.  Shri  N. K. Jha  -  Director 
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director   
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Panna Lal   - Under Secretary 
  
  2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the newly  constituted 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to co nsider 
Memorandum No.1 regarding selection of subjects for examination during the  year 
(2021-22) and also to discuss the future course of action of the Committee duri ng the 
tenure.  
 
3. The Committee then considered Memorandum No. 1 and after discussion 
selected the following subjects pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Ferti lizers for 
detailed examination during 2021-22:- 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
                                 
APPENDIX - I 
 
 

38 
 
1. Nano-fertilizers for sustainable crop production and maintaining soil    health.   
2. Tax structure on fertilizers sector in terms of GST and import duties – 
analysis of the tax structure of raw material and final products and its imp act 
on self-sufficiency and use of fertilizers. 
3. Prices, Availability and distribution of fertilizers.  
 
II. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
4.  Vision 2024 - To establish India as a leading manufacturer of chemica ls and 
petrochemicals. 
5.  Insecticides – promotion and development including safe usage -   licensing 
regime for insecticides. 
6.  Disposal of toxic waste from Bhopal Gas Leak site. 
7. Environmental Impact of Petrochemical products. 
 
III. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
8.    Promotion of Medical Device Industry.  
9.    Availability of Medicines and Medical devices for COVID Management.  
10.  Self sufficiency of key starting Material and intermediates. 
 
4. The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft Action T aken 
Reports unanimously without any amendment/change:- 
 
i.     XXX    XXX     XXX  
 
ii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
iii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
iv.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
v.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
vi. ATR on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained  in the 
Seventeenth Report on “Review of Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi 
Pariyojana (PMBJP)” (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
 
vii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
5  The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to finalize and prese nt the 
Action Taken Reports to the Parliament in the ensuing session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

39 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS ON THE SUBJECT ‘REVIEW OF PRADHAN 
MANTRI BHARTIYA JANAUSHADHI PARIYOJANA (PMBJP) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  (DEPARTMENT OF 
PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 15 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1,2,5,12 and 15)   
5 
Percentage of Total 33.33% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
(Vide Recommendation Nos.3,4,6 and 10)   
 
4 
 
Percentage of Total    
26.70% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-   
 (Vide Recommendation No. 7,8,11,13 and 14 )   
5 
Percentage of Total 33.33% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
(Vide Recommendation No. 9 )   
1 
Percentage of Total 6.70% 
Total 100% 
 