i 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2023-24) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Planning for Fertilizers Production and Import Policy on Fertilizers Including GST 
and Import Duty thereon’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Department of Fertilizers) 
 
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
  
52
. 

ii 
 
CC&F NO. 180 
 
 
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Planning for Fertilizers Production and Import Policy on Fertilizers Including GST 
and Import Duty thereon’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Department of Fertilizers) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08th February, 2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08th February, 2024 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2023-24) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
8 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
23 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
24 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
26 
 APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2023-24) held on 07th February, 2024. 
27 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Forty -Third Report  
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘ Planning for Fertilizers Production and Import 
Policy on Fertilizers Including GST and Import Duty thereon’  of 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers). 
29 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(2023-24) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
5. Shri Deepak Baij 
6. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
7. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhalikar 
8. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
10. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
11. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt. Aparupa Poddar  
14. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15. Shri Muniyan Selvaraj 
16. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
17. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
18. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
19. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
20. Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
21. Vacant* 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar  
23. Dr. Anil Jain  
24. Shri Arun Singh  
25. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
26. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
27. Vacant 
28. Vacant 
29. Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
      1.   Shri Chander Mohan        -                   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Geeta Parmar                 -    Director 
3.   Shri Kulvinder Singh                -  Deputy Secretary 
 
* Vacant vice Shri Uday Pratap Singh, MP(LS) who resigned his seat in LS w.e.f. 06.12.2023. [Lok Sabha 
Secretariat Notification No. 21/1(1)/2023/T(B) dated 6th December, 2023]  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2023-2024) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Fifty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty -Third Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Planning for Fertilizers Production and Import Pol icy on 
Fertilizers Including GST and Import Duty thereon’  pertaining to the Department of 
Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
2.  The Forty -Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 09 th August, 2023. The Depar tment of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers furnished their replies on 10 th October, 2023 indicating Action Taken on  
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty -Third Report. The 
Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report  at their sitting held on  
07th February, 2024. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty -Second Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
07 February, 2024 CHAIRPERSON, 
18 Magha, 1945 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 

1 
 
 CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report deals with Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers contained in 
their Forty -Third Report (17th Lok  Sabha) on ‘Planning for fertilizers production and 
Import Policy on fertilizers including GST and Import Duty thereon’ pertaining to the 
Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
1.2 The Forty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabh a and laid in Rajya Sabha on  
09th August, 2023. The Report contained 20 Observations/Recommendations.  
Action Taken Replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received and are categorized as under:  
   
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
           Rec. Para No. 2,3,4, 5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20  
         (Total=19) 
Chapter-II 
   
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire   to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
Rec. Para No. Nil                               
 (Total = 00) 
                                            Chapter-III 
    
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been  accepted by the Committee which require 
reiteration: 
  Rec. Para No. 1                                       
    (Total=01) 
                                   Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
          Rec. Para No. Nil                            (Total = 00)  
                                                                                                        Chapter-V 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report may be furnished to the 
Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
RECOMMENDATION  AT SL. NO. 1 
Production and Consumption of Fertilizers in the Country 
1.5         The Committee had noted in their Report that the cumulative total production of 
Urea, DAP, MOP and NPK during the year 2022 -23 (up to November, 2022) was 
281.83 LMT whereas their cumulative total consumption was 401.46 LMT. Thus, there 
was a deficit of 119.63 LMT for all types of fertilizers in the country. The position in 
respect of urea, which is the main fertilizer in the country, was more alarming as the 
consumption of Urea during 2022 -23(up to January, 2023) was 319.03 LMT as against 
its production of 237.15 LMT in the country resulting in deficit of about 81.88 LMT. The 
Department had admitted that the production capacity of Urea in the country does not 
commensurate with the demand of Urea in the country and the gap between demand 
and supply is filled through imports only. The Committee had, therefore, desired that 
Department of Fertili zers should take all remedial measures to contain the deficit of 
various types of fertilizers in the country especially Urea, as consumption of Urea is the 
highest in the country, and make the country more self -reliant. The Committee liked to 
be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
1.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of  
Fertilizers has stated as under:  
“ As regards to the Committee’s recommendation that the Department should take 
all remedial measures to contain the deficit of various types of fertilizers in the 
country specially Urea, as consumption of urea is the highest in the country, and 
make the country more self-reliant. In this regard, it is submitted that after setting up 
six new Ammonia -Urea units under the New Investment Policy (NIP) – 2012, the 
annual installed capacity of indigenous urea production has increased from 207.54 
LMT during F.Y. 20 14-15 to 283.74 LMT during F.Y 2022 -23. Further, 
incentivization of urea production beyond the Re -Assessed Capacity by the existing 
units under New Urea Policy -2015 (NUP -2015) has added about 20 -25 LMT 
additional urea production annually in the country. Du e to above measures, India 
recorded highest ever urea production of 284.95 LMT during F.Y. 2022 -23 and urea 

3 
 
production is expected to cross 300 LMT during   F.Y. 2023 -24. Further,  an 
exclusive policy has also been notified on 28 th April 2021 for the revival  of Talcher 
unit of FCIL by setting up a new green field urea plant of 12.7 LMT per annum 
through coal gasification route. 
In addition to above, introduction of PM Programme for Restoration, Awareness 
Generation, Nourishment and Amelioration of Mother -Earth (PM-PRANAM), Market 
Development Assistance (MDA) to promote Organic Fertilizers, Promotion of 
Sulphur Coated Urea with the name of ‘Urea Gold’ and production of Nano Urea is 
expected to reduce use of chemical fertilizers particularly urea.” 
1.7 The Commi ttee in their original recommendation had noted that the 
cumulative total production of different fertilizers in the country was 281.83 LMT 
against the consumption of 401.46 LMT and therefore desired that the Department 
of Fertilizers should take all remed ial measures to contain the shortage of about 
119.63 LMT of fertilizers. In its action taken note, the Department has inter-alia 
submitted that after setting up of 6 new Ammonia -Urea units under the New 
Investment Policy (NIP) -2012, the annual installed ca pacity of indigenous urea 
production has increased from 207.54 LMT in 2014 -15 to 283.74 LMT in 2022 -23. 
Further, incentivization of urea production beyond the Re -Assessed Capacity by 
the existing units under New Urea Policy(NUP) -2015 has added about 20 -25 LMT 
urea production annually in the country. Due to these measures, India has 
recorded highest ever urea production of 284.95 LMT in 2022 -23 and urea 
production is expected to cross 300 LMT during 2023-24.  
In view of the foregoing, the Committee find that  even if the production of 
urea crosses 300 LMT during 2023 -24, it will remain much below 401.46 LMT of 
fertilizers consumed in the country. While taking note of the earnest efforts of the 
Departments to increase the urea production, the Committee desire t hat the 
momentum be continued and further escalated so as to undertake requisite mid -
term corrections to improve the performance of its various urea/fertilizers units in 
order to boost the production of urea/other fertilizers in the country.  
 
 

4 
 
RECOMMENDATION AT SL. NOs. 16 and 17 
GST on Fertilizers 
  
1.8       The Committee had noted that 12% GST on fertilizers was reduced to 5% 
bracket on the demand of various States. The issue to further reduce GST on fertilizers 
was placed before the GST coun cil in its 45 th and 47 th meetings held in September, 
2021 and June, 2022, respectively, however, GST council did not recommend any 
change in the rates of fertilizers or other organic farm inputs.  The Committee had, 
therefore, recommended placing the issue to further reduce GST on fertilizers again 
before the GST Council at the earliest. 
 
1.9     Further, as per the recommendations of the GST council, though fertilizers are 
levied GST @5%, its raw materials like Sulphuric Acid and Ammonia are levied a higher  
GST@18%. In this regard, the Department had submitted that the raw material of 
fertilizers like Sulphur has multiple uses and is also used in the production of 
detergents, paints, dyes etc. and Ammonia too has multiple uses and is used as 
refrigerator gas , manufacturing of plastics, explosives, textiles etc . With a strong 
conviction that raw materials used for production of fertilizers should be levied with 
lesser GST, the Committee had desired that the Department should  consider favorably 
the proposal to lower the GST on raw materials in the interest of fertilizer manufacturing 
companies and ultimately the farmers.   
  
1.10 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of  
Fertilizers has stated as under: 
 
“The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue).” 
  
  
1.11 The Committee in their earlier Report had recommended to reduce GST on 
fertilizers and also to lower the GST on raw materials in the interest of fertilizer 
manufacturing companies and the farmers.   The Committee are satis fied to learn 
from the action taken note that the Department of Fertilisers has forwarded the 
recommendation of the Committee to the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue). However, the Committee would desire the Department of Fertilizers to 
consistently pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance (Department of 

5 
 
Revenue) for favorable consideration in the interest of fertilizer manufacturing 
companies and  the farming community at large.  
 
RECOMMENDATION AT SL. NO. 18 
  
Bringing Natural Gas under the ambit of GST 
  
1.12     The Committee had noted that  the Natural Gas was kept outside the ambit of 
GST and VAT/CST was being levied on sale of Natural Gas. As VAT/CST on import is 
par-through element of cost, such VAT/CST forms part of cost of production of Urea and 
is reimbursed in the form of subsidy. Further, in cases where Natural Gas was sold 
twice in two States, there were incidence of double levying of VAT on Natural Gas. 
Besides, VAT rates differed from State to State and ranges as low as 3% to as high as 
25% in States like Chhattisgarh, which made the Natural Gas costlier and was 
detrimental to the interests of the farmers. As the Department too admitted that natural 
gas should be brought under the ambit of GST, the Committee had recommended tha t 
the Department should take up the matter of bringing natural gas under the ambit of 
GST, at the highest level with the Ministry of Finance.  
  
  
1.13 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of  
Fertilizers has stated as under: 
 
“The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural gas and Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).”  
  
1.14 The Committee had noted that Natural gas was kept outside the ambit of 
GST and VAT/CST is being levied on sale of Natural Gas and therefore 
recommended that the Department of Fertilisers should take up the matter of 
bringing natural gas under the ambit of GST, at the highest level with the Minist ry 
of Finance. The Department had too admitted that natural gas should be brought 
under the ambit of GST. In its action taken note, the Department has stated that it 
has forwarded the Committee’s recommendation to the Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas as well as to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). The 
Committee would desire the Department of Fertilizers to consistently pursue the 

6 
 
matter with the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) for favorable 
consideration and keep them updated on the matter. 
    
RECOMMENDATION AT SL. NO. 20  
GST & Basic Custom Duty (BCD) on Micronutrients: 
  
1.15      The Committee had noted that Micronutrients, essential plant nutrients under 
the Fertilizer (Inorganic, Organic Mixed) Control order, 1985 are very important for 
growth and development of plants, as, on an average, soil is deficient in Zinc, 
manganese, copper and boron. However, micronutrients were being levied GST ranging 
from 12% to 18% which made them costlier for the farmers. Besides, BCD at the rate of 
7.5% was leviable on micronutrients. The Committee had desired that GST rates on 
micronutrients be brought down to make micronutrient affordable to the farmers. The 
Department of Fertilizers in February, 2023 had also requested the Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Revenue to do the needful in this regard . The Committee had desired 
that the Department should draw the attention of the Department of Revenue to the 
benefits and need of micronutrients in agriculture and actively pursue the matter f or 
lesser GST and BCD on micronutrients so that farmers get them at affordable rates and  
the soil is replenished with the nutritional content.  
  
1.16 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of  
Fertilizers has stated as under: 
 
“The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue). ” 
  
1.17 The Committee had noted in their earlier Report that m icronutrients,  
essential plant nutrients that are  very important for growth and development of 
plants in view of the fact that on an average soil is deficient in Zinc, manganese, 
copper and boron, are being levied GST ranging from 12% to 18%. This makes 
them costlier for the farmers and BCD at the rate o f 7.5% is also leviable on them. 
While observing that the Department of Fertilizers in February, 2023 had 
requested the Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue to do the needful in 
this regard, the Committee had recommended that GST rates on micronutrie nts 
should be brought down to make micronutrient affordable to the farmers. 

7 
 
From the action taken note, it has been observed that the Department of 
Fertilisers has forwarded the Committee’s recommendation to lower the GST and 
BCD on micronutrients to Minis try of Finance (Department of Revenue). T he 
Committee are satisfied to note that their recommendation to lower the GST and 
BCD on micronutrients has been forwarded to Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue). The Committee would desire the Department of  Fertilizers to 
consistently pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Revenue) for favorable consideration and keep them updated on the matter. 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
 BY THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 2 
 Availability of Fertilizers 
2.1 The Committee have been informed that position of Urea, DAP, MOP and NPK in 
respect to their availability is quite comfortable. For Rabi (2022 -23), the requirement of 
Urea was 180 LMT. As submitted,  about 90 LMT was sold to the farmers and the 
Department had a stock of 40 LMT, besides their production being 25 lakh tones per 
month. In respect of DAP, out of the requirement of 55 LMT, 37.69 LMT were sold and 
the Department had a remaining stock of 11. 47 LMT. For Kharif (2022), out of the 
requirement of 179.01 LMT for Urea, 172.61 LMT was sold with a closing stock of 47.37 
LMT.  Similarly for DAP, out of the requirement of 58.82 LMT, 51.60 LMT was sold with 
a closing stock of 14.18 LMT. However, to a co ncern expressed by the Committee 
about the non -availability of fertilizers, the representative of the Department admitted 
during evidence that there were local shortages in some States . Therefore, though the 
Committee express their satisfaction over the av ailability of fertilizers in the country, 
they would strongly desire that the Department of Fertilizers should ascertain the 
reasons for shortage of fertilizers being reported in some of the States in the country 
and ensure availability of fertilizers in every State by taking corrective steps accordingly. 
2.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“Before the commencement of each cropping season, Department of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welf are (DA&FW), in consultation with all the State Governments, 
assesses the state-wise & month-wise requirement of fertilizers. On the basis of 
requirement projected, Department of Fertilizers allocates sufficient/ adequate 
quantities of fertilizers to States by issuing monthly supply plan and continuously 
monitors the availability. Further, following measures are taken by the 
Department to ensure adequate availability at state level. 
i. The movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is monitored throughout th e 
country by an on -line web based monitoring system called integrated 
Fertilizer Monitoring System (Ifms); 
ii. The State Governments are regularly advised to coordinate with suppliers of 
fertilizers. 
iii. Regular Weekly Video Conference is conducted jointly by DA&F W and DoF 
with State Agriculture Officials and corrective actions are taken to dispatch 
fertilizer as indicated by the State Governments. 

9 
 
iv. As internal distribution of Fertilizers is looked after by concerned State 
Government, fertilizer is moved on priority  whenever mismatch occurs 
between demand and availability of fertilizers at local level on the request of 
State Government. 
 RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 3 
2.3       The Department has admitted that there is a problem of over -application of Urea 
in the country a nd that the consumption of nitrogen in India is much higher than many 
other countries in the world. Evidently, Indian farmers do not adhere to the established 
ideal fertiliser ratio of 4:2:1 of N:P:K, with negative consequences for soil health. The 
Committee are of the view that the over -consumption of Urea is being promoted due to 
Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy which covers other fertilisers like P & K fertilisers only. 
Urea is left out of the scheme and hence it remains under price control whereas 
technically there is no price control in other fertilizers. The prices of the other fertilizers 
which were decontrolled have gone up and that has led farmers to use more Urea than 
before.  This has further worsened fertilizer imbalance.  Therefore, the Committee ur ge 
that the Government should review the present NBS Policy in order to remove the 
disincentives for farmers to use other fertilizers rather than Urea. The Committee would 
wish to kept informed of further progress in this regard. 
 2.4 In their Action Taken  Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“The subsidy rates for P&K fertilizers under the Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) 
scheme are revised on annual/bi -annual basis keeping in mind the international 
prices of raw materials as well as finished fertilizers. Other relevant factors such 
as requirement of nutrients in the country, balanced use of fertilizers, subsidy 
burden, MRP of fertilizers etc. are also considered in fixation of subsidy rates. 
Thus, the relevant factors the effect of which may affect farmers and to save 
farmers from such disincentives/effects are kept in mind. Accordingly, the Actual 
expenditure for P&K fertilizers under NBS scheme has been increased by GoI 
over the years. The details of the same are as under:” 
                                                                                    (Rs. In Crore) 
Years Actual Expenditure 
2022-23 86122.00 
2021-22 52726.26 
2020-21 37303.73 
2019-20 26335.00 
2018-19 24080.35 
  

10 
 
 RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 4 
2.5        The Committee take note of the gap between requirement and availability of 
different category of fertilizers, and, therefore, recommend further increasing the 
indigenous production of fertilizers. The Committee are happy to note that four new 
DAP and NPK plants are being set up in Jhabua and Sagar districts of Madhya 
Pradesh, RCF is setting up one unit at Thal and FACT is also setting up one more unit . 
The Committee would recommend that the Department should oversee and monitor the 
development of the upcoming fertilizer plants from time to time so that these Plants are 
completed within a fixed timeline and contribute towards meeting the need of fertilizers 
in the country.   
  
2.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Departm ent of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“Department of fertilizers has started inducting Potash Derived from Molasses 
(PDM) product of fertilizer companies. In this connection, the guidelines for 
induction of companies were circulated and based on appli cations received; the 
department has inducted two companies for supply of PDM while other 
applications are under process.  
  
Similarly, the DAP/NPK fertilizers plants of M/s. Madhya Bharat Agro Products 
Ltd. and M/s. Krishna Phoschem, which were permitted for production of P&K 
fertilizers, have already started manufacturing and selling P&K fertilizers 
produced from the plant. Ap provals have been given to DAP/NPK Plants of RCF 
and FACT with annual capacities of 5 LMT and 5.5 LMT respectively. Similarly 
approval has been given to PPL to manufacture additional DAP/NPK to the tune 
of 8 LMT /annum.”  
  
  
  
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 5 
2.7         The Committee note that India is the second largest consumer and third largest 
producer of finished fertilizers in the world. The country has so far achieved 80% self -
sufficiency in production capacity of Urea. However, it is matter of concern tha t about 
90% of gas requirement of Urea sector (RLNG) is met through imports. In case of Di 
Ammonium Phosphate (DAP), about 50 -60% of domestic requirement is imported. The 
production of indigenous DAP is dependent on import of Phosphoric Acid, Rock 
Phosphate, Ammonia, etc. In case of MOP, 100% is imported whereas 8 -10% of NPK 
domestic requirement is met through imports. Though, SSP is indigenously produced 
fertilizer in which rock phosphate (RP) and Sulphuric acid are the raw materials, high 

11 
 
grade RP is impo rted for the production of SSP. For enhancing fertilizer production in 
the country and reducing dependence on import, the Committee, therefore, recommend 
for taking effective policy initiatives aimed at creating environment that would facilitate 
investments in the public, co -operatives and private sectors that are engaged in 
manufacturing and marketing of fertilizers.   The Committee trust that the Department 
would take concrete measures in this direction. 
  
2.8 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Co mmittee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“Under the Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) scheme, the P&K fertilizers sector is 
decontrolled i.e. the P&K fertilizers companies decides on the investment, 
progress, plans based on the market dyna mics. The MRPs of P&K fertilizers are 
also fixed by fertilizer companies as per market dynamics at reasonable level 
which is monitored by the Government.  
However, Government has included Potash Derived from Molasses (PDM) under 
the Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) scheme which is indigenously manufactured 
fertilizer, facilitating the production and usage of Potassic fertilizer in the country.  
Department of Fertilizers is also monitoring that indigenous Mining of Fertilizer 
Minerals is expedited in order to ac hieve self sufficiency in the fertilizer 
sector. After meeting of Hon’ble Minister with Ministry of Mines, exploration of 
fertilizer minerals has got a renewed focus. Meetings were held with fertilizer 
PSUs, State government of Madhya Pradesh and State gov ernment of Rajasthan 
involving ministry of mines officials also. DOF emphasized urgent need of 
increasing availability of fertilizer minerals and auctioning more blocks of mines of 
fertilizers minerals. States have started auctioning mineral blocks for fer tilizer 
minerals. One of the major issue in operationalizing a mineral block is issuance of 
Forest and Environmental Clearances. Regular monitoring of the progress of 
mining is being done by DoF along with Ministry of Mines so that all the 
clearances are o btained expeditiously and mineral blocks are operationalized 
quickly. Department of Fertilizers is constantly in touch with Ministry of Mines for 
starting mining operations of fertilizer minerals expeditiously in States. Very 
recently Ministry of Mines has included phosphorus and potash as critical minerals 
crucial for economic development, national security and food security in order to 
ensure “self -reliance” and to address “the vulnerability” in its supply chain. This 
step of Government of India is very c rucial in ensuring quick availability of these 
minerals to the country. As a result of the constant efforts made by the Central and 
State Governments,first ever successful auction of Glauconite Block in the 
Country has been done in North of Arjuanda Mahasa mund district of Chhattisgarh 
State which has paved way for successful initiation towards self-reliance of India in 
the Potassic Fertilizers sector. The same zeal from all stakeholders is definitely 
going to make India self-reliant in the field of fertilizers in the near future.” 
  
 

12 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 6 
Single Super Phosphate (SSP) 
  
2.9         The Committee learn that Single Super Phosphate (SSP)  is the most popular 
phosphatic fertilizer as it contains 3 major plant nutrients namely Phosphorus, Sulphur 
and Calcium along with traces of many micro -nutrients. SSP can be used as an 
alternative to Di -ammonium Phosphate (DAP). Besides, SSP is indigenously available 
and it also helps to treat sulphur deficiency in soils (40% Indian soil is sulphur deficient) 
as well for further enhancement of yields at the least cost. In various crops, which 
require more of sulphur and phosphate like oilseeds, pulses, sugarcane, fruits and 
vegetables, tea etc., SSP is an essential fertilizer. A   representative of the 
Department  of Fertilizers stated during evidence that SSP uses locally available 
material i.e. rock phosphate and about 10% of the requirement of fertilizers is met 
through SSP whereas DAP is manufactured on the basis of imported raw materials. It 
is, however,  disheartening to note that though there are some mines in Rajasthan, UP 
and Madhya Pradesh, where phosphates and potash are available, not much progress 
has been made as the technology required for mining of potash is not commercially 
viable at the moment an d the matter is being looked into. Considering that SSP is 
indigenously available and is an alternative to DAP which is being manufactured with 
imported raw materials, the Committee strongly recommend that the Department should 
make earnest efforts to remo ve all the bottlenecks in the projects for mining of potash 
and phosphates, so that our country becomes self -sufficient in production of SSP as a 
replacement of DAP. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made by 
the Department in this regard.  
2.10 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“To boost up the domestic production of mining of domestically available fertilizer 
mineral Department of Chemicals and Fertilizers has been making efforts to 
reduce dependence on imports, and exploring indigenous deposits of Phosphatic 
and Potassic fertilizer minerals and make them available to indigenous industries 
for production of SSP. After active persuasion by Department of Fertilizers, the 
state Government of Madhya Pradesh has reserved two block of rock phosphate 
i.e (i) Khatamba block, in Jhabua, M adhya Pradesh with area upto 39.5 Hec and 
(ii)  Piploda Block, in Jhabua, Madhya Pradesh for area upto 135.20 Hec   in 
favour of FAGMIL.  The matter stand referred to Ministry of Mines.  
  
Department of Fertilizers has also requested M/o Mines to allocate 0 4 separate 
mines of Rock Phosphate to FAGMIL in the State of Uttarkhand   i.e. Durmala 
Block of Rock Phosphate in District Tehri Garhwal,   Kaphalda Block of Rock 

13 
 
Phosphate in District  Tehri Garhwal,  Bhutsi Block of Rock Phosphate in District 
Tehri Garhwal and Maldeota Block of Rock Phosphate in District  Dehradun. 
  
Ministry of Mines, vide two separate replies, both dated 17/07/2023, have 
declined the proposals of DoF and informed that there is policy of Government to 
auction mines, so that Government rece ives the right value of national assets. 
However, M/o Mines has advised that the State PSUs may be encouraged to 
participate in the auction process. 
                  
Recently Ministry of Mines has included phosphorus and potash as critical 
minerals crucial for economic development, national security and food security in 
order to ensure “self -reliance” and to address “the vulnerability” in its supply 
chain. This step of Government of India is very crucial in ensuring quick 
availability of these minerals to the country.” 
  
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 7 
  
2.11     The Committee derive some consolation from learning that the Department of 
Fertilizers is promoting SSP in a big way as SSP is being seen as an indigenous source 
of phosphatic fertilizers. Keeping in view  the numerous advantages of SSP, the 
Committee would like the Department to ensure that adequate measures are taken to 
increase the production of SSP so that it matches the increasing demand of SSP. The 
issues/concerns of the manufacturers/suppliers of SSP  should be looked into and they 
should be encouraged by way of incentivizing them, if required, for enhancing the 
production of SSP and for preparing themselves to meet the increasing demand of SSP. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the various st eps being taken by the 
Department for promotion of SSP. 
2.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“The various steps being taken by the Department for promotion of SSP are: 
  
 The new policy guidelines has been issued for SSP Industry by the Ministry 
on 21.9.2022. 
 The freight subsidy has been extended to SSP Industry.  
 With the objective to promote SSP Industry, improving the quality of SSP 
fertilizer and to increase the capacity utilization. 
 Emphasis is on improving the quality of SSP Fertilizer with adequate 
infrastructure.  
 The focus is on utilizing the existing capacities in this sector. 
 The combination of SSP and Urea can be economical for the farmers and 
benefit the country. 

14 
 
 The co mbination of SSP and Urea have the potential to replace DAP thus 
saving huge amount of foreign exchange for the country. 
 The SSP Parks are being setup to promote this industry for providing social, 
economic and environmental benefits. 
 The above measures will lead to the self reliance in the fertilizers and will fulfil 
the dream of Atma Nirbhar Bharat.” 
  
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 8 
New Investment Policy (NIP) 2012 
  
2.13         The Committee note that the Government had announced New Investment 
Policy (NIP)-2012 on 2 January, 2013 read with amendment dated 7 th October, 2014 
with an objective to facilitate fresh investment in Urea sector and to make India self -
sufficient in the Urea sector. It is satisfying to note that since then 6 new Urea plants (1 
Brownfield and 5 Greenfield) have been set up each having the annual production 
capacity of 12.7 LMT thereby adding Urea production capacity of 76.2 LMT per annum 
in the existing Urea production capacity of the country. Now, 36 Urea manufacturing 
units are f unctioning in our country, out of which, four (04) new Urea Units viz 
Ramgundam, Gorakhpur, Sindri Unit of Fertilizers Corporation of India limited (FCIL) 
and Barauni unit of Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFCL), have been revived 
by setting up of new gas -based Greenfield units.   Therefore, under the NIP -2012, not 
only new Urea manufacturing units have been set up but the ailing urea manufacturing 
units too are revived. The Department has mentioned that the NIP -2012 along with the 
increasing capacity of Nano Urea is likely to make India Atmanirbhar in Urea Sector by 
the year 2025-26. The Committee are optimistic that more Urea fertilizers manufacturing 
Plants (Brownfield and Greenfield) would be set up in the coming years and recommend 
accordingly.  The Committee would like to be kept updated in this regard from time to 
time. 
  
2.14 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“Noted” 
  
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 9 
  
2.15        The Committee find it encouraging that the Talcher unit of FCIL located in 
Odisha is being revived by setting up of coal -gasification based urea plant by the 
Talcher Fertilizers Limited with annual installed capacity of 12.70 LMT, for which an 
exclusive policy has b een notified. The Talcher urea unit will increase the annual urea 

15 
 
production capacity of country from 283.74 LMT to 296.44 LMT. The Committee feel 
that for setting up of more urea fertilizers manufacturing Plants, Brownfield as well 
Greenfield, the Fertilizer Companies need the patronage of the Department of Fertilizers 
and, therefore, recommend the Department to continue to extend its support for setting 
up/revival of fertilizer manufacturing companies. The Committee also recommend that 
the Government shou ld bring in more effective policy reforms with the objective of 
increasing domestic production capacities of the fertilizers in the country.  
  
  
2.16 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“As stated above, six new Urea Plants have been set up under NIP -2012 having 
production capacity of 12.7 LMTPA each. Further, Talcher unit of FCIL is also 
being revived by forming JV Company of nominated PSUs i.e. RCF, GAIL, CIL 
and FCIL. An exclusive policy has been notified on 28 th April 2021 for the revival 
of Talcher unit of FCIL by setting up a new green field urea plant of 12.7 LMT per 
annum through coal gasification route.”   
   
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 10  
New  Urea Policy (NUP) 2015 
2.17   The Committee further note that the Department of Fertilizers had introduced 
New Urea Policy (NUP) -2015 in May, 2015 with the objectives to maximize indigenous 
urea production, promote energy   efficiency in urea production and rationalize subsidy 
burden on the Government. With an aim to make the urea units energy efficient, the 
energy norms of existing 25 gas -based Urea units were revised for the perio d 2015-16, 
2016-17 and 2017 -18 and these units were categorized into three groups and given 
Target Energy Norms (TEN) based on their pre -set energy norms. Reportedly, 15 units 
have so far achieved TEN, 5 units are implementing Energy Saving Scheme (ESS) an d 
likely to achieve the TEN in near future. However, for 3 Units, a proposal to revise TEN 
is under consideration as these units will have to replace their coal proportion with much 
costlier natural gas and the remaining 2 units have been directed to exped ite the 
implementation of ESS. The Committee have been informed that TEN has saved Rs 
8851.59 crore and also due to the provision of production   beyond Re -Assessed 
Capacity (RAC), these units have produced additional quantity of about 20 -25 LMT of 
urea the reby increasing total production of urea from 225 LMT to 240 LMT.   While 
observing that NUP -2015 is showing good results , the Committee would like the 
Department of Fertilizers to take such similar steps and ensure that all urea units are 
made more and more energy efficient and produce fertilizers to the optimum capacity. 

16 
 
  
2.18 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“Energy Norms prescribed under NUP -2015 is effective till 31 st March 202 5. 
Thereafter, energy norms of the units are to be decided based on the 
recommendation of the expert group constituted under the NITI -Aayog. With 
regard to production of urea at optimum capacity, it is stated that the provisions 
of NUP -2015 relating to pro duction of urea beyond RAC/installed capacity is 
currently not applicable for the 6 new units set up under the NIP-2012 and 3 units 
namely SPIC-Tuticorin, MFL-Chennai and MCFL-Mangalore which have recently 
converted from naphtha to natural gas. Department of Fertilizers has submitted a 
proposal to Department of Expenditure (DoE) for extending the BRAC provisions 
of NUP-2015 also to these units. The proposal is likely to enhance the production 
of Urea from these units.”  
 RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 11  
Import of Fertilizers 
  
2.19        The Committee are concerned over the fact that the production capacity of 
fertilizers in the country does not commensurate with its demand/requirement and, 
therefore, the gap between demand and supply is met through imports. Abou t 20% of 
domestic requirement of urea, 50 -60% of domestic requirement of DAP and 100% of 
domestic requirement of MOP is met through import. For DAP & MOP, the country is 
fully dependent on imports in Potassic sector (100 %) and heavily import dependent in 
Phosphatic sector in the form of either finished products or its raw material. The import 
of P&K fertilizers is under Open General Licensing (OGL), wherein the fertilizer 
companies are free to import the quantities/raw material based on their commercial 
considerations. P&K fertilizers, under Nutrient Based Subsidy scheme are decontrolled. 
P&K fertilizer companies are not regulated to manufacture or import P&K fertilizers. The 
Committee have been informed that some measures may be enforced strictly to 
gradually decrease the dependency on imports viz. introduction of Potash derived from 
molasses under Nutrient Based Subsidy Scheme, grant of permission for production of 
P&K fertilizers and plans for exploration of minerals for raw materials for fertilizers in 
India, etc. The Committee would like to be apprised of the present status in this 
regard.  The Committee, however, are of the considered opinion that the Government 
should take long term measures to meet the fertilizer requirement of the country. There 
is a  need for clear vision, a consistent policy and an action plan after serious 
interactions with all the stakeholders for exploring ways and means to increase 
production of fertilizers thus decreasing their dependence on imports.  
 

17 
 
2.20 In their Action Taken  Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“Department of fertilizers has started inducting Potash Derived from Molasses 
(PDM) product of fertilizer companies. In this connection, the guidelines for 
induction of companies were circulated and based on applications received, the 
department has inducted two companies for supply of PDM while other 
applications are under process.  
Similarly, the DAP/NPK fertilizers plants of M/s. Madhya Bharat Agro Products 
Ltd. and M/s. Krishna Phoschem, which were permitted for production of P&K 
fertilizers, have already started manufacturing and selling P&K fertilizers 
produced from the plant.”  
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 12 
Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy (NBS) 
  
2.21      The Committee note that Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy (NBS) is being 
implemented since 01.04.2020. Under this policy, fixed rate of subsidy is announced in 
Rs. Per Kg basis on each nutrient of subsidized P&K fertilizers, on annual basis but 
MRP of P&K fertilizers have been left open. Fertilizer manufacturers/marketers are 
allowed to fix the MRP at reasonable rates subject to check by the Government. The 
Committee have been informed t hat a proposal was prepared in 2008 for NBS on 
fertilizers. However, the Cabinet decided to separate urea because urea is critical. 
Thereafter, a committee of Niti Aayog looked into the matter and various deliberations 
were held. However, NBS policy in ure a could not be implemented. In this context, the 
Committee apprehend that in case urea is brought under NBS policy, its prices would 
be determined by manufacturers/marketers based on demand and supply and possibly 
higher prices would be fixed by the manufa cturers. Urea bag which is available to the 
farmers @ Rs.242 would cost higher and prove detrimental to the interest of the 
farmers. Hence, the Committee recommend that the present system of subsidy on urea 
may be continued. 
  
  
2.22 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 28 th 
June, 2023 has inter -alia approved to continue the present system of subsidy on 
urea till 2024 -25. The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) chaired by 
Secretary (Expenditure) will review the scheme during 2024 -25 for continuation 
of the scheme beyond 2024-25.”  

18 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 13, 14 & 15  
  
Investments in Mines and Plants abroad 
  
2.23     The Committee are aware that worldwide, more than 85% of the phosphate rock 
mined is used to manufacture phosphate fertilizers. All common fertilizers have an “N-P-
K” rating. Phosphorus is the “P” in fertilizers, which is essential for plants. Indigenous 
reserves of phosphatic rock and potash will not only be advantageous to the indigenous 
industries but will also cater to the needs of Indian farmers with the production of 
fertilizers like DAP, SSP, NPK, and MOP. Currently, India is largely dependent on 
imports for this raw material. The volatility in international prices also affects the 
domestic prices of fertilizers, which in turn, hinders the progress and development of the 
agriculture sector in the country and puts extra pressure on the farmers.  As per 
National Mineral Inventory, India too has a reserve/resources of 46000 thousand  tonnes 
of rock phosphate. The Committee are of the considered opinion that there is emergent 
need to explore indigenous deposits of phosphoric rocks as it will help save the cou ntry 
money that now goes out of the country through import. Further as studies suggest, the 
demand for phosphatic fertilizers is expected to increase gradually with the increase in 
population and the requirement of food. Exploring Phosphatic reserves would  mean 
India can reduce its dependency on other countries and become self -reliant in the 
production of Urea and other fertilizers. The Committee recommend to the Department 
to act responsibly and take concrete measures accordingly. 
  
  
2.24       The Committee further note that there are enough reserves of phosphate rock 
in Mines abroad. However, the Department of Fertilizers has no plans to own any of the 
Mines in countries like Jordan, Morocco and South African countries. The Committee 
impress upon the Dep artment for owning some Mines abroad for seamless supply of 
fertilizers in the country and apprise the Committee of the steps taken in this regard.  
2.25 The Committee are satisfied to note the Department has been encouraging 
Indian Companies to invest in Mines and Plants abroad and investments have also 
been made in some phosphoric acid plants and in some mines. However, all of them 
are not operational.  The Committee recommend that necessary remedial measures be 
taken so that the non -operational phosphori c acid plants and mines are made 
operational at the earliest.    
     
 
2.26 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  

19 
 
“The Government of India has been encouraging Indian companies to establish 
Joint Ventures abroad in countries which are rich in fertilizer resources for 
production facilities with buy back arrangements and to enter into long term 
agreement for supply of fertilizers and fertilizer inputs to India. Further the 
department is also working with the goal of having access to acquisition of 
fertilizer raw materials abroad. During the said year a number of initiatives were 
taken for signing of MOUs with resource rich nations for secured supply of 
finished  fertilizers , raw materials and intermediates.  
  
To reduce our dependence on import of fertilizer   minerals, the Department of 
Fertilizers has held several consultations with Ministry of Mines .Based on efforts 
made Ministry of mines has identified Phosphorous and Potash in the  list of 
“critical minerals” to help plan for acquisition and preservation taking into account 
their long term requirement for the agriculture sector which is the backbone of 
our economy. The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act,1957 
have be en amended in August, 2023. The amendment with focus on critical 
minerals introduces major reforms in the mining sector which includes the 
fertilizer minerals also.”  
  
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 16 
GST on Fertilizers 
  
2.27 The Committee have been informed th at fertilizers were placed under the 12% 
GST bracket. However, on demand of various States, GST on fertilizers was reduced to 
5%. The issue to further reduce GST on fertilizers was placed before the GST council in 
its 45 th and 47 th meetings held in Septemb er, 2021 and June, 2022, respectively. The 
GST council, however, did not recommend any change in the rates of fertilizers or other 
organic farm inputs. The Committee strongly recommend that the issue to further 
reduce GST on fertilizers may be placed befor e the GST Council at the earliest in the 
best interest of the farmers of our country. 
  
2.28 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarde d to the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue).” 
 
 COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 

20 
 
 RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 17  
2.29     The Committee note that fertilizers are levied GST @5% and its raw materials 
like Sulphuric Acid and Ammonia are levied a higher GST@18% on the 
recommendations of the GST council. The Committee failed to understand this 
anomaly. The Department have clarified that the raw material of fertilizers like Sulphur 
has multiple uses and is  also used in the production of detergents, paints, dyes etc. 
Similarly, Ammonia too has multiple uses and is also used as refrigerator gas, 
manufacturing of plastics, explosives, textiles etc. However, the Committee are of the 
strong conviction that raw m aterials used for production of fertilizers should be levied 
with lesser GST and hence desire the Department to consider favorably the proposal to 
lower the GST on raw materials in the interest of fertilizer manufacturing companies and 
ultimately farmers.   
  
2.30 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue).” 
  
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
  
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 18 
  
Bringing Natural Gas under the ambit of GST 
  
2.31     At present, the Natural Gas is kept outside the ambit of GST and VAT/CST is 
being levied on sale of Natural Gas. As VAT/CST on import is par -through element of 
cost, such VAT/CST forms part of cost of production of Urea and is reimbursed in the 
form of subsidy. The GST Council has not made any recommendation for levying GST 
on Natural Gas and VAT/Central Excise duty continue to be levied on Natural Gas and 
is adding to the subsidy bill. In cases where Natural Gas is sold twice in two States, 
there are incidence of double levying of VAT on Natural Gas. What is more disturbing is 
the fact that VAT rates differ from Stat e to State and ranges as low as 3% to as high as 
25% in States like Chhattisgarh, which makes the Natural Gas costlier and is 
detrimental to the interests of the farmers. However, if natural gas is brought under the 
ambit of GST, then such problems would b e resolved. The Department admits that 
natural gas should be brought under the ambit of GST.  The Committee therefore 

21 
 
recommend that the Department should take up the matter of bringing natural gas under 
the ambit of GST, at the highest level with the Ministry of Finance.  
  
2.32 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
  
 “The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural gas and Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).” 
  
 COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 19  
  
 2.33 It is a matter of serious concern that every State has a different VAT rate. The 
Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers has requested the States to have a 
uniform VAT on natural gas. The Committee do agree with the contention of the 
Department that GST Council has to take a call on this issue.   However, the Committee 
would emphasise that till the issue is decided by GST Council the States should be 
convinced to fix uniform VAT on natural gas.  The Department, therefore, need to take 
the responsibility in the matter by discussing the repercussions of having separate VAT 
rates in States and to avoid t he unfortunate incidences of double taxation on sale of 
natural gas. 
 2.34 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“Department of Fertilizers vide DO letters dated 9 th May 2023 at the lev el of 
Hon’ble Minister (Chemicals & Fertilizers) to the Chief Ministers of all the States 
having the urea manufacturing units have already taken up the issue of higher 
VAT rates on the natural gas used for the Urea manufacturing. The State 
Governments have  been requested to review their VAT rates imposed on the 
natural gas used for the Urea manufacturing. Further, it has also been requested 
to remove the VAT or at least bring down to the level of GST rate applicable on 
Urea and if necessary, differential VA T rates can be prescribed at a lower level 
for natural gas used for manufacturing fertilizers.” 
 
 

22 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 20  
GST & Basic Custom Duty (BCD) on Micronutrients: 
  
2.35       Micronutrients are considered as an essential plant nutrients under t he 
Fertilizer (Inorganic, Organic Mixed) Control order, 1985. Though micronutrients are 
required in small quantities, they are very important for growth and development of 
plants, as on an average, soil is deficient in Zinc, manganese, copper and boron. 
However, presently micronutrients are being levied GST ranging from 12% to 18% 
which discourages the farmers from using them. Besides, BCD at the rate of 7.5% is 
leviable on micronutrients. The high rate of GST together with a higher BCD on 
micronutrients, are making them costlier for the farmers. It is an unhappy situation.   In 
the opinion of the Committee, GST rates on micronutrients should be brought down to 
make micronutrient available to the farmers at affordable rates. The Department of 
Fertilizers in t he month of February, 2023 has already requested the Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Revenue to do the needful in this regard. The Committee desire 
that the Department should draw the attention of the Department of Revenue to the 
benefits and need of mi cronutrient in agriculture and actively pursue the matter for 
lesser GST and BCD on micronutrients so that farmers get the micronutrients at 
affordable rates and use them so that the soil is replenished with the nutritional content. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress in the matter. 
  
2.36 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue).” 
 
 COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
- NIL - 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
RECOMMENDATION  SL. NO. 1 
Production and Consumption of Fertilizers in the Country 
4.1         The Committee note th at the production of Urea, DAP, MOP and NPK during 
the year 2022 -23 (up to November, 2022) was 187.21, 27.41, Nil, 67.21 LMT 
respectively. The cumulative total production of these fertilizers comes to 281.83 
LMT.  However, the consumption of Urea, DAP, MOP  and NPKs for the same period 
was 232.54, 83.53, 11.23 and 74.16 LMT, respectively. Therefore, cumulative total 
consumption of these fertilizers was 401.46 LMT. Thus, there was a deficit of 119.63 
LMT for all types of fertilizers in the country, which is w orrisome. The position in respect 
of urea, which is the main fertilizer in the country, is more alarming as the consumption 
of Urea during the current year(up to January, 2023) was 319.03 LMT as against its 
production of 237.15 LMT in the country resulting  in deficit of about 81.88 LMT. The 
Department’s representative admitted during evidence that the production capacity of 
Urea in the country is not commensurate with the demand of Urea in the country and 
the gap between demand and supply is filled through imports only. The Committee 
would, therefore, desire that Department of Fertilizers should take all remedial 
measures to contain the deficit of various types of fertilizers in the country especially 
Urea, as consumption of Urea is the highest in the countr y, and make the country more 
self-reliant. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Department in this regard. 
4.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“As reg ards to the Committee’s recommendation that the Department should 
take all remedial measures to contain the deficit of various types of fertilizers in 
the country specially Urea, as consumption of urea is the highest in the country, 
and make the country mo re self -reliant. In this regard, it is submitted that after 
setting up six new Ammonia-Urea units under the New Investment Policy (NIP) – 
2012, the annual installed capacity of indigenous urea production has increased 
from 207.54 LMT during F.Y. 2014 -15 to  283.74 LMT during F.Y 2022 -23. 
Further, incentivization of urea production beyond the Re -Assessed Capacity by 
the existing units under New Urea Policy -2015 (NUP-2015) has added about 20 -

25 
 
25 LMT additional urea production annually in the country. Due to abo ve 
measures, India recorded highest ever urea production of 284.95 LMT during 
F.Y. 2022 -23 and urea production is expected to cross 300 LMT during   F.Y. 
2023-24. Further, an exclusive policy has also been notified on 28th April 2021 for 
the revival of Talc her unit of FCIL by setting up a new green field urea plant of 
12.7 LMT per annum through coal gasification route. 
In addition to above, introduction of PM Programme for Restoration, Awareness 
Generation, Nourishment and Amelioration of Mother -Earth (PM -PRANAM), 
Market Development Assistance (MDA) to promote Organic Fertilizers, 
Promotion of Sulphur Coated Urea with the name of ‘Urea Gold’ and production 
of Nano Urea is expected to reduce use of chemical fertilizers particularly urea.” 
 COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
- NIL -    
 
  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
 07 February, 2024 CHAIRPERSON, 
18 Magha, 1945 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 
 
 
 
  

27 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2023-24) 
 
Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 07 th February, 2024 from 1530 hrs. to 
1600  hrs. in the Chamber of Hon’ble Chairperson, Room No. 219, ‘B’ Block, Parliament 
House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
DR. SHASHI THAROOR-  Chairperson  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri C. N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhalikar 
4. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
5. Smt. Aparupa Poddar  
6. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
7. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Dr. Anil Jain  
9. Shri Arun Singh 
10. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  1. Shri Chander Mohan - Joint Secretary 
            2. Smt. Geeta Parmar  -          Director 
            3. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary 
   4. Shri Panna Lal  - Under Secretary 
   5. Ms. Neelam Bhave             -         Committee Officer 

28 
 
          
  
2.   At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following Draft 
Reports: -:- 
 (i)    xxx     xxx     xxx                                 xxx  
(ii)       xxx     xxx     xxx                                 xxx 
 (iii)   Fifty-Second Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  
observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty -Third 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘ Planning for Fertilizers Production and 
Import Policy on Fertilizers Including GST and Import Duty thereon’  pertaining to 
the Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
3.  Giving an overview of the important Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of the Members. 
4  After some deliberations, the draft Rep orts were adopted by the Committee 
without any amendment. 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and 
present/lay the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament in the current session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
  

29 
 
 
APPENDIX-II  
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY -THIRD REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS 
AND FERTILIZERS (2023 -24) ON PLANNING FOR FERTILIZERS PRODUCTION 
AND IMPORT POLIC Y ON FERTILIZERS INCLUDING GST AND IMPORT DUTY 
THEREON’ PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 Total No. of Recommendations 20 
I Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
(Recommendation Nos. 2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15, 
16,17,18,19 and 20)  
  
 19 
Percentage of Total 95  
II Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not like to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
NIL 
  
00 
Percentage of Total      0% 
III Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies given 
by the Government  have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:  
(Recommendation No.  1)   
 
01 
Percentage of Total 5%    
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  the final replies 
of the Government are still awaited:  
NIL 
 
00 
Percentage of Total  0%    

30 
 
 