 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF  FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the  
Fifth  Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  
on Study of System of Fertilizer Subsidy  of the  Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers 
(Department of  Fertilizers)] 
   
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
   FEBRUARY, 2021 /MAGHA, 1942 (SAKA) 


 
 
REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF  FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the  Fifth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on  Study of 
System of Fertilizer Subsidy of the Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers (Department of  Fertilizers) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.2.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.2.2021 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2021 /MAGHA, 1942 (SAKA) 


 
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) (iv) 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
Chapter I Report   
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government' s  
replies 
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee  
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2020-21) held on 12.10.2020 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers on   Study of System of Fertilizer Subsidy 
pertaining to the Ministry  of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of  Fertilizers) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(2020-21) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Deepak Baij 
4 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
5 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
6 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
7 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8 Shri Pakauri Lal 
9 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
11 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
12 Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
13 Shri Atul Kumar Singh alias Atul Rai 
14 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15 Shri M. Selvaraj 
16 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
17 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
18 Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
19 Shri Er. Bishweswar Tudu 
20 
21 
Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari# 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26 Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27 
28 
Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
Shri Arun Singh$ 
29 Shri A.D. Singh 
30 
31 
Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
Shri K. Vanlalvena 
  
 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora    -  Officer on Special Duty 
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava    -  Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram   -  Additional Director 
4.          Shri Panna Lal                            -          Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
$Re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.12.2020. 
#Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 28.12.2020 vice Shri Nandigam Suresh 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fer tilizers 
 (2020-21) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their 
behalf, present this Twelfth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recom mendations contained in the Fifth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(2019-20) on   Study of System of Fertilizer Subsidy per taining to the Department of 
Fertilizers. 
 
2. The Fifth  Report (Seventeenth Lok  Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals an d Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 17.3.2020 and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 17.3.2020  The Action Taken replies of Government to all 
observations / recommendations contained in the Report were received on 
11.6.2020.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers ( 2020-21) 
considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 12.10.2020. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the further Comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                   KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
08 February, 2021                                                                               Chairperson 
19 Magha, 1942 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on 
       Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 

 
 
     
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2019 -20) deals 
with the action taken by the  Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject ‘Study of System of Fertilizers 
Subsidy’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 17-03-2020. In all, the Committee made 1 4 Observations / 
Recommendations in the Report. 
1.2 The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were requested to 
furnish replies to the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report within three 
months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e. by 17-06-2020. Th e Action Taken 
Replies of the Government in respect of all the 1 4 Observations/ Recommendations contained 
in the Report have been received from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers) vide their O.M. No.H-11021/8/2020-Parl. da ted 12 -06-2020.  These Replies have 
been examined and categorized as under:-  
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government- 
 
 Rec. Nos.  1, 4, 7, 10, 12, 13  & 14           (Total 07). 
             (Included in Chapter-II of the Report)     
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s reply-  
 
Rec. Nos. 3, 5, 6 &11.                    (Total 04) 
       (Included in Chapter-III of the Report)       
   
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration-  
 
Rec. No. 9.                                                                                    (Total 01) 
   (Included in Chapter-IV of the Report)   
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited- 
 
  Rec. Nos. 2 & 8.                                                                            (Total 02) 
   (Included in Chapter-V of the Report)       

1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken N otes on the Observations / 
Recommendations of the Committee  contained in Chapter -I of this Report and the Final 
Replies in respect of Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter -V for which 
final replies are still awaited, should be furnished expeditiously. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/ Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation  No.4 
Delay in Settlement of Subsidy Claims and Carry-forward Liabilities 
1.5 The Committee in their 5th Report made the following observations / recommendations 
with regard to delay in settlement of subsidy claims submitted by fertilizer companies and 
resultant carry-forward liabilities of the Department of Fertilizers:- 
 “The Committee are concerned to note the huge carry-over liabilities of the 
Department of Fertilizers on subsidy expenditure at the end of each 
financial year due to non payment of subsidy bills received from 
companies. As on 31.03.2018, 2688 subsidy bills amounting to Rs. 19362.54 
crore were pending for settlement and as on 31.03.2019, 9223 subsidy bills 
amounting to Rs. 30,243.93 crore were pending for payment.  As per policy 
guidelines, DBT claims are to be settled within 7 working days from the 
date of s ubmission of the claims and there is no time limit prescribed for 
settlement of non-DBT claims. There is no provision for payment of interest 
in case of delay in settlement of subsidy claims. According to Department 
of Fertilizers, non-receipt of Proforma B1/B2 from the concerned State, non 
submission of requisite documents/data by fertilizers companies as per 
policy guidelines and paucity of funds are the reasons for delay in 
settlement of arrears of subsidy claims. In Committee’s view, the paucity of 
funds due to inadequate budgetary allocation is the major reason for delay 
in settlement of subsidy arrears. To avert the financial difficulties of 
fertilizer manufacturing companies, the Government allows the fertilizer 
companies to take loans against the rec eivables of subsidies from the 
banks and the government to bear the cost of interest. There is also a 
proposal to allow public sector fertilizer companies to borrow from 
National Small Saving Fund as a temporary measure with the bearing of 
interest by the Government. The Committee has taken note of the delays in 
settlement of subsidy claims. The Committee have strongly taken note of 
the specific cases brought out by some of the Members where the delay in 
payment of subsidy to the manufacturer is unusually l ong. The Committee 
have also taken note of the fact that very often the amount held up due to 
such delays is fairly high while the amount that is disputed in the individual 
claim may be a small proportion of the total amount of subsidy claim by 
manufacturer. Since the present situation is not conducive for the smooth 
functioning of fertilizer subsidy system, the Committee recommend the 
following:-  
(i) The Committee strongly recommend that the Department should 
develop a system by which a certain proportion of the amount of 
claim is paid to the manufacturer automatically within a period of 
seven working days. This amount could be 75% of the total claim of 
subsidy. The remaining amount should also be paid off in a fixed 
period of time subject to the completion of  all documentation and 
clarifications by the manufacturer/importer. It is to be noted that the 
automatic payment should be really automatic and not subject to any 
scrutiny beyond a basic calculation checking. Such a system will 

eliminate financial stress o n the manufacturers which is often 
caused due to delay in payment of subsidy amounts. This will also 
bring in transparency and accountability on the Department and 
improvement in the governance standards. 
 
(ii) The Department should impress upon the Ministry of Finance at the 
highest level to make adequate amount of funds in the form of 
budgetary allocation for subsidy schemes and it is the responsibility 
of the Department of Fertilizers to place before that Ministry of 
Finance the exact requirement o f funds for meeting  the expenditure 
on fertilizers subsidies in a financial year. Sentiments expressed by 
this committee for the allocation of adequate amount of funds for 
subsidy schemes should be conveyed to the Ministry of Finance.  
 
(iii) One time Additiona l supplementary budgetary allocation to 
completely dismantle the recurring carry over liabilities may be 
sought from the Ministry of Finance particularly to avoid 
unnecessary expenditure on interest on loans borrowed by fertilizer 
companies to manage the s ituation arising out of delays in payment 
of subsidies by the Government.  
 
(iv) Department should initiate strong steps to settle the subsidy claims 
under DBT within 7 working days as stipulated under the policy 
guidelines. Definite time limit should also be f ixed for non DBT 
subsidy claims and the progress made in this regard should be 
intimated to the Committee. 
 
(v) Before settlement of subsidy claims submitted by fertilizer 
companies, 30 days are presently given for B-1 proforma certification 
by the concerned s tate regarding short and substandard quantity of 
fertilizer supplied by fertilizer companies and 180 days are allowed 
for state certification for quality under B -2 proforma. This may be 
examined by the Department whether these many days are 
necessary for c ertification as this may be one of the reasons for 
carry-over liabilities and appropriate action may be taken for 
reducing the number of days required for these certifications by the 
concerned states. “ 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.6 The Action Taken Reply is as under:- 
(i) “As of now 100% subsidy is released to the fertilizers manufacturing / 
importing companies by Direct Benefit Transfer based on the actual sales. 
Periodical monitoring is being done to avoid any delay through Bill 
Monitoring module. 
The reason for delay in the subsidy payments is lack of sufficient 
budgetary allocation.  
 

(ii) The Department of Fertilizers has time and again impressed upon the 
Ministry of Finance about the financial hardships faced by the fertilizers 
companies. In the current  financial year i.e. 2020-21 also, this department 
took up the matter at the level of Secretary and Minister. Further, it is 
stated that Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers in its 7th 
Report dated 20.03.2020 recommended that henceforth there sh ould be 
no cut on the fertilizer subsidy budget sought by the Department of 
Fertilizers so that fertilizer companies are able to operate in a healthy 
environment and directed Department of Fertilizers to convey the 
recommendation to Ministry of Finance.  T he same has been conveyed to 
Ministry of Finance vide this Dep artment’s D.O. No. 1(6)/2019 -Fin.I dated 
15th May, 2020.  
 
(iii) The Department had projected a requirement of Rs. 100349.50 Crore  for 
the financial year 2020 -21. However, Ministry of Finance has allocated 
only Rs.73975 Crore keeping in view the overall fiscal space and priorities 
of the government. As on 1.04.2019, the carry over liabilities in fertilizer 
subsidy were to the tune of Rs.32488.54 Crore, the Department has wiped 
up the carry over liabilities from the budget allocation of  
2019-20. In the absence of adequate budget allocation for 2020 -21, the 
Department would seek additional allocation in the supplementary 
demands and if  required it would seek the Special Banking Arrangement 
also besides any other measures. 
 
(iv) All the DBT payments are being processed in a time bound manner, 
though paucity of sufficient budgetary allocation is a major challenge for 
time bound payments.  
Periodical monitoring is being done to avoid any delay through Bill 
Monitoring module for DBT payments.  
Similarly, Non DBT subsidy payments are being affected due to lack of 
sufficient budgetary allocation.  
 (v) The Direct Benefit Transfer system was impleme nted w.e.f. 1.10.2016 for 
the fertilizer subsidy initially in 17 districts and gradually has covered all 
the districts in the country. In DBT system, there is no requirement of 
submission of certificates (B1 and B2 proforma) as 100% subsidy on 
various fert ilizer grades is released to the fertilizer companies, on the 
basis of actual sales made by the retailers to the beneficiaries 
The reason for carryover liabilities of fertilizer subsidy is inadequate 
budgetary allocation. The annual budget allocation for f ertilizer subsidy 
has been consistently less compared to the requirement projected by D/o 
Fertilizers.  This has resulted in continuing Carryover Liabilities of 
fertilizer subsidy.”  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No.  H-
11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 

1.7  The  Committee are very much concerned to note the Action Taken Reply 
given by the Department of Fertilizers that the reason for carryover liabilities of 
fertilizer subsidy is inadequate budgetary allocation and that the annual budget 
allocation for fertilizer  subsidy has been consistently less compared to the 
requirement projected by the Department.  As per the reply given by the 
Department, 100% subsidy is released by it  to the fertilizers manufacturing / 
importing companies by Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) b ased on the actual sales. 
All the DBT payments are being processed in a time bound manner, though 
paucity of sufficient budgetary allocation is a major challenge for time bound 
payments.  Similarly, Non DBT subsidy payments are being affected due to lack 
of sufficient budgetary allocation. This has resulted in continuing Carryover 
Liabilities of fertilizer subsidy. For the financial year 2020 -21, the Department had 
projected a requirement of Rs. 100349.50 Crore. However, Ministry of Finance has 
allocated only Rs.73975 Crore. Eventhough the Department had taken up the 
matter at Secretary and Minister  levels, the Ministry of Finance reduced the 
budgetary allocation keeping in view the overall fiscal space and prio rities of the 
government.   In Committees’ view, agriculture is a priority area and the fertilizer 
subsidy is very much necessary for making fertilizers affordable to the farmers.  
In case of any difficulties in this regard, it may affect the crop producti vity and 
yield.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend again  that there should not 
be any cut in the fertilizer subsidy budget from 2021 -22 onwards being a priority 
sector.   As far as the necessity of funds for 2020 -21 is concerned, the 
Department should seek additional funds required to meet the subsidy 
expenditure at supplementary demand stage and the same should be provided by 
the Ministry of Finance without any cut so as to eliminate the continuing liabilities 
of fertilizer subsidy.  This recomm endation of the Committee should also be sent 
to the Ministry of Finance for its compliance. 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation  No.7 
 
Quantum of allocation of gas for fertilizer industry 

1.8  “The Committee note that out of 32 urea manufacturing plants, 30 were 
converted into gas based plants and the remaining two which are 
presently using Naphtha as feed stock, are in the process of conversion. 
Since Naphtha is an expensive feed stock, the Gov ernment took initiative 
and converted the plants into gas based Plants. Total production of gas in 
the country is 71 MMBTU. Out of this, the requirement for gas based 
fertilizer manufacturing units is 48 MMBTU. Out of this requirement, 
although the Governm ent makes allocation of 31.5 MMBTU, only 16 
MMBTU is being actually provided to fertilizer industry after meeting the 
requirements of city gas, power sector etc. Since the fertilizer industry is 
not getting the allocated quantum of gas, the gap between the  demand 
and supply is met by the import of RLNG which is costlier than 
domestically produced gas resulting in increased subsidy bill due to increase in 
cost of production. Since this is an important sector concerning agricultural 
productivity, the Committee recommend that the entire quantum of gas allocated 
for fertilizer man ufacturing industry should be provided for use by fertilizer 
industry to ward off import of RNLG. The Department of fertilizer should take up 
issue with the concerned Ministry at the highest level in this regard and the 
recommendation made by this Committe e should also be conveyed to it for 
compliance.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.9 The Action Taken Reply is as under:- 
During the meeting of Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) on Gas 
Pricing and Commercial Utilization of gas held on 23.08.2013, it has been 
decided that the supply of domestic gas to the fertilizer sector to be maintained at 
31.5 mmscmd.  The details of supply of domestic gas to urea manufacturing units 
during the months of November 2019, December 2019 and January, 2020 as 
against the allocation of 31.5 MMSCMD of gas in tabular form is as under:  
                                        (in MMSCMD) 
Month November 2019 December 2019 January, 2020 
Total Supply  43.421 43.801 43.776 
Supply of 
Domestic Gas 
14.090 13.025 11.047 
 
It is evident from the above table that as against the total gas supply of 
around 43-44 mmscmd of gas and the allocated quantity of 31.5 mmscmd of gas, 
the urea sector is currently being supplied domestic gas only at the level of 11 -15 
mmscmd. Vide D.O let ter 4 th October, 2018, Hon’ble MoS for Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers has written to Hon’ble Minister of Petroleum & Natural 

Gas to ensure the supply of domestic gas at least to the extent of 31.5 mmsmcd 
to the urea sector as per EGoM decision dated 2 3.08.2013. Vide letters dated 
22nd October, 2018 and 5 th February, 2020, the matter regarding shortfall in 
supply of domestic gas has been again taken up with M/o P&NG.   
 
In view of the aforesaid facts, vide DO letter dated 28 th April, 2020,the 
issue has been taken up again with Hon’ble Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
at the level of  Hon’ble Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers to intervene in the 
matter and ensure that the immediate steps may be taken for supplying 
domestic natural gas to ur ea manufacturing units at least to the extent of 31.5 
mmscmd. 
 
Further, the matter has been recently discussed in a high level meeting in 
the NITI Aayog under the chairmanship of the CEO, NITI Aayog on 18 th March, 
2020. During the meeting certain changes i n the existing mechanism for the 
procurement of gas for the urea units has been recommended which are under 
consideration in consultation with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.   
It is evident from the above, that matter has been already taken up with 
the concerned Ministry from the highest level. Further, as recommended by the 
Committee the recommendation has been also forwarded to the concerned 
Ministry for its compliance vide OM dated 1st June, 2020 
 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Depart ment of Fertilizers) O.M. No. H -
11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.10 The Committee are constrained to note the Action Taken Reply furnished by the 
Department that the shortfall in supply of domestic gas  to urea 
manufacturing units continues despite of taking up the matter at Minister 
level with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  It  is a matter of 
concern that the urea sector is currently being supplied domestic gas only 
at the level of 11 -15 mmscmd  against the allocated quantity of 31.5 
mmscmd of gas.  Rest of the requirement of gas for fertilizer units is being 
met through import    which is costlier, thereby increasing the cost of 
production of fertilizers and the subsidy bill.  In view of the above, the Committee 
would like to seek a  compliance report of the  Ministry of Petroleum and Natural 
Gas on the  earlier recommendation of the Committee that  the entire quantum of 
gas allocated for fertilizer manufacturing industry should be provided for use by 
fertilizer industry to ward off import of RNLG ,  within three months from the date 
of presentation of this Report.    Action Taken R eply of the Ministry further 
indicates that a meeting was held  to discuss this matter under the Chairmanship 
of the CEO, NITI Aayog on 18 th March, 2020 wherein    certain changes in the 
existing mechanism for procurement of gas for the Urea units have  been 
recommended which are under consideration by the Department in 
consultation with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas.  The details of 
the recommendations made in the NITI Ayog meeting alongwith the final decision 
taken by the Department on the bas is of  those recommendations may be 
conveyed to the Committee.   
 

Recommendation No.9 
System of sale of fertilizers to Farmers 
    
1.11     “The Committee note that presently the government is implementing 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) system. Under this system 100% subsidy on 
various fertilizer grades is released to the fertilizer companies on the basis 
of actual sales made by retailers to the beneficiaries. Sa le of all subsidized 
fertilizers to the farmers/buyers is made through Point of Sale (POS) 
devices installed at each retailer shop and the beneficiaries are identified 
through Aadhaar Card, Kishan Credit Card, voter Identity Card etc. Under 
this DBT system , subsidized fertilizer is sold through POS devices on no 
denial basis with no fixed purchase quantity limit. One farmer is permitted 
to purchase fertilizers on behalf of many farmers after biometric 
verification. Presently there is no system to verify tha t the fertilizer 
purchased on behalf of other farmers actually reaches them or diverted 
elsewhere. In this regard it is pertinent to note here that there is possibility 
of subsidized urea diverted for use by chemical industries which may be 
around 10 lakh tones or 3.5 percent of total urea supplied in the system 
throughout the country. The Committee are of the view that the current 
system of fertilizer subsidy is inherently inefficient to administer. Although 
a fairly elaborate IT system has been put in pla ce to monitor the movement 
of fertilizers from the point of manufacture/import to the farmer, there is no 
system in place to prevent its diversion and misuse. The Committee do not 
agree with the views of the Ministry that the quantity reported to be 
diverted/misused is only a small proportion of the total quantity 
manufactured. Since the present system is prone to misuse by miscreants, 
the Committee recommend that the Department may issue instructions that 
the retailer may obtain the list of farmers along  with their signature/thumb 
impression and the quantum of fertilizers required by each of them for 
verification purposes. State Governments may also be requested to keep a 
vigil on diversion/misuse of subsidized fertilizer and for the purpose 
Integrated Fert ilizer Management System may be used by the authorities 
concerned. The Department of Fertilizers may also undertake random 
scrutiny of activities in this regard to find out any possible misuse of 
subsidized fertilizers.”  
 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
    
1.12          “System of sale of fertilizers to farmers The Department has developed a 
dashboard which can be accessed at  http://urvarak.nic.in. The Dashboard 
facilitates easy monitoring by State Agriculture Departments, District Collectors 
and State Marketing Federations by providing various reports like list of top 20 
buyers (State -wise, District-wise), which is available for the State Agriculture 

Dept. The State Governments have been empowered to take ap propriate 
action as per FCO after examining each case.  
 
             Further, vide letter No. D(FA)/DBT -NIC/2017-Pt. dated 22.04.2019, 
Department has written to all States to closely monitor fertilizer distribution & 
availability to ensure smooth implemen tation of DBT in al l States using the 
services of iFMS and DBT Dashboards.” 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.13 The Committee are dismayed   to note that the reply furnished by the Department 
is silent on the recommendation of the Committee that the Department may issue  
instructions so that the retailer may obtain the list of farmers along  with their 
signature/thumb impression and t he quantum of fertilizers required by each of 
them for verification purposes . Eventhough the Dashboard developed by the 
Department facilitates monitoring by State and district authorities, it is not 
clarified by the Department whether the information avail able in the Dashboard 
enables the State and district authorities to verify whether the fertilizer purchased 
by a farmer on behalf of others actually reaches them or diverted somewhere 
else.  Since it is very much necessary to ensure that the subsidized fer tilizer 
reaches the needy farmers so as to enable them reap the benefits of the system, 
the Committee reiterate the earlier recommendation and expect that the Department 
would  give suitable instructions as recommended by the Committee  to ensure 
credibility and transparency in the system.  The Committee also hope that the 
Department of Fertilizer would undertake random scrutiny of activities in this 
regard to find out any possible misuse of subsidized fertilizers. 
Recommendation  No.12 
Scheme for promotion of City compost 
  
1.14  “The Committee are happy to note that a policy on promotion of city 
compost was notified by the Department of Fertilizers on 10.02.2016 under which 
Market Development Assistance (MDA) in the form of fixed amount of Rs. 1500/ - 
per tonne of city Compost is provided on the sale of city compost to fertilizer 
Marketing companies as well as to city compost manufactures. This policy aims at 
conversion of city wastes into compost manure for use by farmers in place of 
chemical fertilizers. Since city compost is a unique Bio organic soil enricher and 
its use reduces the use of chemicals fertilizers, the Committee recommend that 
that the Department of fertilizers should take necessary steps for increasing the 
production and use of city compost  on a large scale so as to reduce the use of 
chemical fertilizers in the country. The Committee also recommend that the 
Department of Fertilizers should examine the feasibility of involving all fertilizer 
companies in the production and distribution of cit y compost along with 
chemicals fertilizers. Freight subsidy may also be considered for city compost 
The Committee has taken note of the problems associated with the use of 
excessive quantities of fertilizers by the farmers. The Committee has analysed the 
literature available on long -term environmental consequences of such excessive 
use of chemical fertilizers. While the Department has a scheme for providing 
financial assistance for city composting units, the Committee feels that the effort 

is too little to make a significant positive environmental impact. The Committee 
observe that the flagship programme of the Government Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, 
is having a deeper penetration and is leading to significant changes in the manner 
in which urban solid waste is ha ndled. The Committee note that there are a large 
number of good opportunities available for dove -tailing the city composting 
scheme by the Department with the urban waste management projects so that the 
dependence on chemical fertilizers gets reduced and a s a society we are able to 
utilize the urban waste properly.   The Committee recommend that the Department 
should constitute an inter -Ministerial body comprising of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Housing and Urban Development,  
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation as well as the Department of Fertilizers 
to set a clear roadmap for vastly expanding the city composting systems and 
taking the farmers to shift from using chemical fertilizers to using compost for 
their agriculture. The Committee advise the Department to take up this issue in the 
national interest immediately and set out a time frame of not more than six 
months for this inter-Ministerial Committee to submit its recommendations. “ 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
1.15        (i)       The Department of Fertilizers has taken various steps to promote and  
use of city compost on large scale. With the concerted efforts of DoF, 
the sale of city compost has increased over the years.   The sale of city 
compost on which Marketing Development Allowance has been claimed 
during last 4 years has increased and is given below: 
Year  Total sale (in MT) 
2016-17 96584.00 
2017-18 199061.91 
2018-19 306630.47 
2019-20 326772.72 
 
 (ii)         As per the policy on promotion of city compost, all fertilizer companies 
are allowed to market city compost. At present, 22 marketing companies are 
involved in sale/distribution of city compost and 49 manufacturing companies 
have also permitt ed for bulk direct sale of city compost to farmers.  Vide 
guidelines dated 10.10.2016, any fertilizer company (manufacturer of Urea and 
P&K Fertilizer) is allowed to produce city compost and market as its own brand 
and claim MDA. However, no major chemical  fertilizer company has yet come 
forward   to produce city compost as it is a different sector and technology.  
(iii).    The very little amount of city compost are produced in the various cities 
which are easily distributed and consumed in the local nearb y areas of the city 
and hence consideration of freight subsidy for city compost is not required.  
(iv)      A Committee of Joint Secretaries of Department of Fertilizers, Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs and Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & 
Farmers Welfare has already been set up to resolve the coordinated related 

issues and promotion of city compost.  A communication has been sent to M/o 
DW&S for nomination of an officer for inclusion in the aforesaid Committee.“  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. H -
11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.16 The Committee are happy to note that the sale  of city compost on which 
Marketing Development Allowance has been claimed has increased from 96584 
Metric Tons in 2016 -17 to 326772.72 Metric Tons in 2019 -20.  However, the 
quantum of city compost produced in various cities is very little and the same is 
consumed in nearby areas of the cities. Hence, there is very vast s cope for large 
scale production of city compost in urban and semi urban areas of this hugely 
populated country.   Since the city compost is a unique Bio -Organic soil enricher, 
its large scale production and  use by the farmers should be encouraged 
particularly due to the long term ill-effects of excessive use of chemical fertilizers.   
Keeping in view of the above, the Committee  emphasized the necessity of dove -
tailing the city composting scheme with the urban waste management projects 
and further  recomme nded  that an Inter -Ministerial Body be constituted 
immediately, which may submit its Report within 6 months time, to frame a 
roadmap for expanding the city composting system.  In this regard, the 
Committee note that a Committee of Joint Secretaries of Dep artment of 
Fertilizers, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and Department of Agriculture, 
Cooperation & Farmers Welfare has been set up to resolve the  related issues and 
promotion of city compost and  the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation has 
been requested to nominate  an officer in this Committee.  The Committee hope 
that this Committee would look into all issues relating to promotion of city 
compost including dovetailing/converging of the City Compost Scheme with 
urban/semi urban waste management schemes/projects   within six months time 
to frame a road map for large scale production and use of City Compost in the 
country. 
 
Recommendation  No.13 
 
Education to Farmers for use of Soil Specific Fertilizers 

 
  
1.17         “The Committee feel that the nutrients based system (NBS) for fertilizer 
subsidy is far too complicated. Simultaneously, the Committee observes 
that there is very little knowledge and understanding available with the 
farmers on the use of appropriate nutrients in view of the soil conditions as 
well as the cropping patterns. The Committee have come to know of 
situations where the farmers are being encouraged to use a particular 
group of nutrients even when their soil or cropping pattern does not  
warrant so. It is suspected that this may be happening due to inappropriate 
promotion of use of fertilizers by some of the manufacturers who keep in 
view the amount of subsidy available on the basis of the nutrients 
contained in the fertilizers produced b y them. The Committee observe that 
the Government has successfully expanded the use of soil health cards 
across the country and therefore it should be possible to educate the 
farmers on the appropriate combination of nutrients which may be required 
to administer in their farms. The Committee therefore, recommend that the 
Department should take up this subject with the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare and come up with a firm plan of action so that the use of 
nutrients by individual farmers gets ra tionalised on the basis of scientific 
analysis. The Committee also recommend that steps be taken to identify 
States/UTs where fertilizers especially urea is used by farmers in a very 
high distorted ratio against the desirable NPK ratio of 4:2:1. Further, 
suitable preventive mechanism be evolved by the Movement Division of 
Department of Fertilizers to preclude supply of very high quantity of 
subsidized fertilizers to States/UTs based on their projection of annual 
demand for fertilizers. The Kisan Call Centre s (KCC) may also be involved 
for tendering appropriate advice to the farmers regarding judicious use of 
soil specific fertilizers.” 
 
 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
1.18         “Department of Fertilizers has taken a initiative to jointly organize  the 
Fertilizer Application Awareness Programme for farmers biennially before Rabi 
and Kharif Seasons with Department of Agriculture Cooperation & Farmers 
Welfare (DAC&FW), Department of Agricultural Research & Education (DARE) to 
disseminate knowledge on optimum usage of fertilizer nutrients based on various 
parameters to sustain the agriculture productivity and to make farmers aware of 
new developments in the field of fertilizer usage and management along with 
State Governments.   Accordingly, the programme has been launched by Hon’ble 

Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers and Hon’ble Minister of Agriculture 
Cooperation and farmer’s welfare on 22.10.2019 before Rabi Season.  
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) 
assessed the requirement/demand of fertilizers for Kharif and Rabi seasons in bi-
annual Zonal Conferences in consultation with the representatives of fertilizers 
companies, Fertilizer Association of India, Ministry of Railways, State 
Governments, Department of Fertilizers ( DoF) and other concerned agencies.  
The projected requirement is communicated to DoF.  DoF ensures availability of 
all fertilizers at State level as per requirement projected by DAC&FW.” 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M.  No. H -
11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.19    The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers has launched a joint 
biennial Fertilizer Application Awareness Programme along with the 
concerned Departments of the Ministry of Agriculture for educating 
farmers before  Rabi and Kharif  Seasons every year.  In Committee’s view, 
dissemination of knowledge to farmers on optimum usage of fertilizer 
nutrients based on various parameters to sustain the agriculture 
productivity should be a regular feature rather than merely a biennial 
event.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that a coordinated 
programme should be launched by the concerned Central Ministries, State 
Governments’ agricultural departments, field organizations like Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras, Kisan Call Centres, etc.   for the continuous education of 
farmers throughout the year about the balanced and soil specific use of 
fertilizers so as to attain the desired results in this regard.    Moreover, the 
Committee also recommend that the over use of any particular fertilizer in 
any Sta te may be taken into account while assessing the  
requirement/demand  of fertilizers for Kharif and Rabi seasons in bi-annual 
Zonal Conferences organized by the Department of Agriculture, 
Cooperation & Farmers Welfare in which the representatives of  
Department of Fertilizers are also participating along with the other stake 
holders.   
  

CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation  No.1 
 
Fertilizer Subsidy Policy: 
    
“The Committee note  that chemical fertilizer is an essential component of 
modern agriculture. Timely availability of fertilizer at affordable price to 
farmers is vital for the growth of agriculture sector in the country. Fertilizer 
subsidy schemes have been an integral part of the Government policy to 
sustain agricultural productivity which in turn plays critical role in ensuring 
the food security in the country and in promoting rural livelihood and 
employment. Presently the government is implementing separate subsidy 
schemes for urea, P&K fertilizers and city compost. The Government is 
also providing freight subsidy for the movement of urea and P&K 
fertilizers. As far as urea is concerned, the government is fixing maximum 
Retail price and it has been left to fertilizer compan ies to fix the MRP of 
P&K fertilizers. The difference in concession rate/import price and net 
market realization is given as subsidy by the government to the fertilizer 
industry. Farmers are the actual beneficiaries of the Subsidy schemes as 
they are getti ng the fertilizers at affordable prices. Implementation of 
fertilizer subsidy schemes has resulted in tremendous growth of 
agricultural productivity which was necessary to meet the food security of 
the huge population of the country. However, there are som e negative 
effects of use of Chemical fertilizes viz over -use of fertilizers, imbalanced 
use of fertilizers and the resultant soil degradation etc. In this regard, the 
Committee note that a committee of Secretaries headed by Cabinet 
Secretary has suggested  to study the existing subsidy regime and to 
suggest any improvement or change in the policy. NITI Ayog has also 
constituted a Committee to examine the feasibility of providing agriculture 
subsidy on area basis through Direct Benefit Transfer system. 57 Dr aft 
Report of this committee has been circulated to various stake holders. 
Since any drastic change in the extant fertilizer subsidy policy would have 
huge bearing on the food security of the country, the committee would like 
to make the following recommendations:- 
 
i. Fertilizers subsidy policy of the Government helped the country in 
ensuring food security to the people of the country and any drastic 
change in the policy must be effected only after wider consultations 
and in depth study and no hasty decision should be taken in this 
regard.  
ii. Both the Department of Fertilizers and NITI Ayog should consult all 
the stake holders viz concerned Departments of the Union 
government, state Governments, fertilizer industry, farmers’ 
Associations, individual farmers, etc. before making any decision on 
change in the existing fertilizer subsidy policy.  

iii. Interests of small and marginal farmers should be firmly kept in 
mind while bringing in any change in the extant policy. 
iv.  Education and awareness of farmers about the over u se of any 
particular fertilizer and balanced use of fertilizers should be an 
integral part of fertilizer subsidy policy.  
v. Best practices in other countries should also be carefully studied 
while considering any change in the extant fertilizers subsidy 
policy.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“So far as the policies related with the urea subsidy scheme is concerned, 
it is the usual practice to consult all of the stake holders while framing the policies 
related to the urea subsidy scheme. Most of the policies have been prepared 
based on the repo rt/suggestions/recommendations of the committee/Group of 
Minister/Committee of Secretaries constituted specifically for that particular task. 
While submitting its report/recommendation/suggestions these committee use to 
consult with every stakeholder. Further, all of the major policies/amendments 
have been introduced only after due examination in consultation with PDIL, 
Fertilizer Association of India, urea manufacturing units and stake holding 
Departments/Ministries including NITI Aayog. 
 
As the MRP of  urea is statutorily controlled, consultation with farmers are 
not required if there is no major change in the MRP, availability and quality of 
urea to which farmers are concerned.   Department of Fertilizers is in process of 
doing evaluation of its urea su bsidy scheme by engaging a third party which will 
also consult to the farmers for the collection of primary data for preparing its 
report. While making any major revision/change in the existing policy provision 
the third party evaluation report will be taken into care. 
 
As regards to last point, it is stated that while making policies relating to 
the the domestic urea manufacturing units it is always taken care that the energy 
efficiency, installed capacity, technologies etc. should be at par with the other  
countries.”  
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No.  
H-11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
Recommendation  No.4 
Delay in Settlement of Subsidy Claims and Carry-forward Liabilities: 
  
“The Committee are concerned to note the huge carry -over liabilities of the 
Department of Fertilizers on subsidy expenditure at the end of  each 
financial year due to non -payment of subsidy bills received from 
companies. As on 31.03.2018, 2688 subsidy bills amounting to Rs. 19362.54 
crore were pending for settlement and as on 31.03.2019, 9223 subsidy bills 
amounting to Rs. 30,243.93 crore were pending for payment.  As per policy 
guidelines, DBT claims are to be settled within 7 working days from the 

date of submission of the claims and there is no time limit prescribed for 
settlement of non-DBT claims. There is no provision for payment of interest 
in case of delay in settlement of subsidy claims. According to Department 
of Fertilizers, non-receipt of Proforma B1/B2 from the co ncerned State, non 
submission of requisite documents/data by fertilizers companies as per 
policy guidelines and paucity of funds are the reasons for delay in 
settlement of arrears of subsidy claims. In Committee’s view, the paucity of 
funds due to inadequate budgetary allocation is the major reason for delay 
in settlement of subsidy arrears. To avert the financial difficulties of 
fertilizer manufacturing companies, the Government allows the fertilizer 
companies to take loans against the receivables of subsi dies from the 
banks and the government to bear the cost of interest. There is also a 
proposal to allow public sector fertilizer companies to borrow from 
National Small Saving Fund as a temporary measure with the bearing of 
interest by the Government. The C ommittee has taken note of the delays in 
settlement of subsidy claims. The Committee have strongly taken note of 
the specific cases brought out by some of the Members where the delay in 
payment of subsidy to the manufacturer is unusually long. The Committe e 
have also taken note of the fact that very often the amount held up due to 
such delays is fairly high while the amount that is disputed in the individual 
claim may be a small proportion of the total amount of subsidy claim by 
manufacturer. Since the pres ent situation is not conducive for the smooth 
functioning of fertilizer subsidy system, the Committee recommend the 
following:-  
(i) The Committee strongly recommend that the Department should 
develop a system by which a certain proportion of the amount of 
claim is paid to the manufacturer automatically within a period of 
seven working days. This amount could be 75% of the total claim of 
subsidy. The remaining amount should also be paid off in a fixed 
period of time subject to the completion of all documentatio n and 
clarifications by the manufacturer/importer. It is to be noted that the 
automatic payment should be really automatic and not subject to any 
scrutiny beyond a basic calculation checking. Such a system will 
eliminate financial stress on the manufacture rs which is often 
caused due to delay in payment of subsidy amounts. This will also 
bring in transparency and accountability on the Department and 
improvement in the governance standards. 
 
(ii) The Department should impress upon the Ministry of Finance at the 
highest level to make adequate amount of funds in the form of 
budgetary allocation for subsidy schemes and it is the responsibility 
of the Department of Fertilizers to place before that Mini stry of 
Finance the exact requirement of funds for meeting  the expenditure 
on fertilizers subsidies in a financial year. Sentiments expressed by 
this committee for the allocation of adequate amount of funds for 
subsidy schemes should be conveyed to the Ministry of Finance.  
 
(iii) One time Additional supplementary budgetary allocation to 
completely dismantle the recurring carry over liabilities may be 
sought from the Ministry of Finance particularly to avoid 

unnecessary expenditure on interest on loans borrowed by fertilizer 
companies to manage the situation arising out of delays in payment 
of subsidies by the Government.  
 
(iv) Department should initiate strong steps to settle the subsidy claims 
under DBT within 7 working days as stipulated under the policy 
guidelines. Definite time limit should also be fixed for non DBT 
subsidy claims and the progress made in this regard should be 
intimated to the Committee. 
 
(v) Before settlement of subsidy claims submitted by fertilizer 
companies, 30 days are presently given for B-1 proforma certification 
by the concerned state regarding short and substandard quantity of 
fertilizer supplied by fertilizer companies and 180 days are allowed 
for state certification for quality under B -2 proforma. This may be 
examined by the Department whet her these many days are 
necessary for certification as this may be one of the reasons for 
carry-over liabilities and appropriate action may be taken for 
reducing the number of days required for these certifications by the 
concerned states. “ 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(i) “As of now 100% subsidy is released to the fertilizers manufacturing / 
importing companies by Direct Benefit Transfer based on the actual sales. 
Periodical monitoring is being done to avoid any delay through Bill 
Monitoring module. 
The reas on for delay in the subsidy payments is lack of sufficient 
budgetary allocation.  
(ii) The Department of Fertilizers has time and again impressed upon the 
Ministry of Finance about the financial hardships faced by the fertilizers 
companies. In the current finan cial year i.e. 2020-21 also, this department 
took up the matter at the level of Secretary and Minister. Further, it is 
stated that Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers in its 7th 
Report dated 20.03.2020 recommended that henceforth there should b e 
no cut on the fertilizer subsidy budget sought by the Department of 
Fertilizers so that fertilizer companies are able to operate in a healthy 
environment and directed Department of Fertilizers to convey the 
recommendation to Ministry of Finance.  The sam e has been conveyed to 
Ministry of Finance vide this Dep artment’s D.O. No. 1(6)/2019 -Fin.I dated 
15th May, 2020.  
 
(iii) The Department had projected a requirement of Rs. 100349.50 Crore  for 
the financial year 2020 -21. However, Ministry of Finance has allocated 
only Rs.73975 Crore keeping in view the overall fiscal space and priorities 
of the government. As on 1.04.2019, the carry over liabilities in fertilizer 
subsidy were to the tune of Rs.32488.54 Crore, the Department has wiped 
up the carry over liabilities from the budget allocation of  
2019-20. In the absence of adequate budget allocation for 2020 -21, the 
Department would seek additional allocation in the supplementary 

demands and if  required it would seek the Special Banking Arrangement 
also besides any other measures. 
 
(iv) All the DBT payments are being processed in a time bound manner, 
though paucity of sufficient budgetary allocation is a major challenge for 
time bound payments.  
Periodical monitoring is being done to avoid any delay through Bill 
Monitoring module for DBT payments.  
Similarly, Non DBT subsidy payments are being affected due to lack of 
sufficient budgetary allocation.  
 (v) The Direct Benefit Transfer system was impleme nted w.e.f. 1.10.2016 for 
the fertilizer subsidy initially in 17 districts and gradually has covered all 
the districts in the country. In DBT system, there is no requirement of 
submission of certificates (B1 and B2 proforma) as 100% subsidy on 
various fert ilizer grades is released to the fertilizer companies, on the 
basis of actual sales made by the retailers to the beneficiaries 
The reason for carryover liabilities of fertilizer subsidy is inadequate 
budgetary allocation. The annual budget allocation for f ertilizer subsidy 
has been consistently less compared to the requirement projected by D/o 
Fertilizers.  This has resulted in continuing Carryover Liabilities of 
fertilizer subsidy.”  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No.  H-
11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.1.7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation  No.7 
 
Quantum of allocation of gas for fertilizer industry 
  
“The Committee note that out of 32 urea manufacturing plants, 30 were 
converted into gas based plants and the remaining two which are presently 
using Naphtha as feed stock, are in the process of conversion. Since 
Naphtha is an expensive feed stock, the Gov ernment took initiative and 
converted the plants into gas based Plants. Total production of gas in the 
country is 71 MMBTU. Out of this, the requirement for gas based fertilizer 
manufacturing units is 48 MMBTU. Out of this requirement, although the 
Government makes allocation of 31.5 MMBTU, only 16 MMBTU is being 
actually provided to fertilizer industry after meeting the requirements of 
city gas, power sector etc. Since the fertilizer industry is not getting the 
allocated quantum of gas, the gap between the  demand and supply is met 
by the import of RLNG which is costlier than domestically produced gas 
resulting in increased subsidy bill due to increase in cost of production. 

Since this is an important sector concerning agricultural productivity, the 
Committee recommend that the entire quantum of gas allocated for 
fertilizer manufacturing industry should be provided for use by fertilizer 
industry to ward off import of RNLG. The Department of fertilizer should 
take up issue with the concerned Ministry at the hi ghest level in this regard 
and the recommendation made by this Committee should also be conveyed 
to it for compliance.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
During the meeting of Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) on Gas 
Pricing and Commercial Utilization of gas held on 23.08.2013, it has been 
decided that the supply of domestic gas to the fertilizer sector to be maintained at 
31.5 mmscmd.  The details of supply of domestic gas to urea manufacturing units 
during the months of November 2019, December 2019 and January, 2 020 as 
against the allocation of 31.5 MMSCMD of gas in tabular form is as under:  
                                        (in MMSCMD) 
Month November 2019 December 2019 January, 2020 
Total Supply  43.421 43.801 43.776 
Supply of 
Domestic Gas 
14.090 13.025 11.047 
 
It is evident from the above table that as against the total gas supply of 
around 43-44 mmscmd of gas and the allocated quantity of 31.5 mmscmd of gas, 
the urea sector is currently being supplied domestic gas only at the level of 11 -15 
mmscmd. Vide D.O letter 4 th October, 2018, Hon’ble MoS for Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers has written to Hon’ble Minister of Petroleum & Natural 
Gas to ensure the supply of domestic gas at least to the extent of 31.5 mmsmcd 
to the urea sector as per EGoM decision dated 23.08.2013. Vide letters dated 
22nd October, 2018 and 5 th February, 2020, the matter regarding shortfall in 
supply of domestic gas has been again taken up with M/o P&NG.   
 
In view of the aforesaid facts, vide DO letter dated 28 th April, 2020,the 
issue has been taken up again with Hon’ble Minister of Petroleum & Natural Gas 
at the level of  Hon’ble Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers to intervene in the 
matter and ensure that the immediate steps may be taken for supplying 
domestic natural gas to urea manufacturing units at least to the extent of 31.5 
mmscmd. 
 
Further, the matter has been recently discussed in a high level meeting in 
the NITI Aayog under the chairmanship of the CEO, NITI Aayog on 18 th March, 
2020. During the meeting certain changes in the existing mechanism for the 
procurement of gas for the urea units has been recommended which are under 
consideration in consultation with the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas. 
 
It is evident from the above, that matter has been already taken up with 
the concerned Ministry from the highest level. Further, as recommended by the 
Committee the recommendation has been also forwarded to the concerned 
Ministry for its compliance vide OM dated 1st June, 2020 
 

[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. H -
11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
 (Please see Para No.1.10 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation  No.10 
 
Monitoring of Maximum Retail Price(MRP) of Phosphatic & Potassic Fertilizers: 
  
 
“The Committee note  that Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy is being 
implemented by Government of India for P&K fertilizers w.e.f. 01.04.2010. 
Presently 21 grades of P&K fertilizers are covered under this policy. 
Government provides a fixed rate of subsidy (in Rupees per Kg basis ) on 
each nutrient of subsidized P&K fertilizers. Unlike Urea, MRP of P&K 
fertilizers has been left open and fertilizer manufacturers/ marketers are 
allowed to fix the MRP at reasonable rates. The country is fully dependent 
on imports in Potassic sector an d to the extent of 90% in Phosphatic 
sector.  As such, prices of P&K fertilizers are fluctuating on the basis of 
international market prices. The Committee are concerned to note the 
submission of the Department of Fertilizers that the prices of P&K 
fertilizers had gone up substantially on account of increase in prices of raw 
materials/ finished fertilizers in international market, depreciation of Indian 
Rupee w.r.t. US Dollar and also due to larger profit margins by the 
companies. In this regard, the Commit tee note that it has been made 
mandatory for all the fertilizer companies to submit cost data along with 
their claims of subsidy so as to monitor the MRPs of P&K fertilizers. In 
Committee’s view it is very much necessary to monitor the MRP fixed by 
fertilizer companies on P&K fertilizers so as to protect the interests of 
farmers. The Committee, therefore, recommend the following:-  
 
(i)  Cost data of all P&K fertilizer companies should be scrupulously 
examined at the time of submission of their subsidy claim an d 
necessary action should be taken against those companies which 
indulge in over pricing of P&K fertilizers.  
 
(ii) Department of Fertilizers quickly finalize the guidelines for recovery 
of profit earned over and above 12% of companies above MRP on 
fertilizers and found to be unreasonable and implement the 
provisions of the guidelines in a time bound manner.  
 
(iii) Department of Fertilizers should take all possible steps to encourage 
indigenous production of Potassic and Phosphatic fertilizers 
including strengthening of Research and Development in the field of 
these fertilizers.” 
 

       REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
10 (i)  and (ii):  The guidelines for evaluation of reasonableness of MRP of P&K 
fertilizers and recovery of unreasonable profit have been issued on 15.11.2019 
(copy enclosed). The follow -up action is a continuous process and is regularly 
been done. Recovery orders are also being  issued for the companies whose 
MRP are not found reasonable.  
 
10 (iii): The Country is dependent on imports on different fertilizers either in the 
form of finished fertilizers or their raw material due to non -availability/scarce 
availability of resources as per details below: 
i. Phosphatic fertilizers  upto 90%  
ii. Potassic Fertilizers  upto 100% 
 
In view of almost complete dependency of the country on raw materials, it 
is not possible to do much to increase domestic production of non-urea fertilizers. 
Further, all non urea fertilizers are covered under Open General License regime 
and its import is being done by companies on commercially viable terms.  
 
However, in order to encourage indigenous production of P&K fertilizers 
the Department has taken up with the Ministry of Finance for reduction of 
customs duty on raw materials vide D.O Dated 31.3.2015 , 28.10.2016 and 
01.06.2020, which may help improve the production of these P&K Fertilizers 
indigenously more viable vis-à-vis import of these fertilizers.” 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No.  
H-11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
  

Recommendation  No. 12 
Scheme for promotion of City compost: 
   
“The Committee are happy to note that a policy on promotion of city compost was 
notified by the Department of Fertilizers on 10.02.2016 under which Market 
Development Assistance (MDA) in the form of fixed amount of Rs. 1500/- per tonne 
of city Compost is pr ovided on the sale of city compost to fertilizer Marketing 
companies as well as to city compost manufactures. This policy aims at 
conversion of city wastes into compost manure for use by farmers in place of 
chemical fertilizers. Since city compost is a uni que Bio organic soil enricher and 
its use reduces the use of chemicals fertilizers, the Committee recommend that 
that the Department of fertilizers should take necessary steps for increasing the 
production and use of city compost on a large scale so as to reduce the use of 
chemical fertilizers in the country. The Committee also recommend that the 
Department of Fertilizers should examine the feasibility of involving all fertilizer 
companies in the production and distribution of city compost along with 
chemicals fertilizers. Freight subsidy may also be considered for city compost 
The Committee has taken note of the problems associated with the use of 
excessive quantities of fertilizers by the farmers. The Committee has analysed the 
literature available on long -term environmental consequences of such excessive 
use of chemical fertilizers. While the Department has a scheme for providing 
financial assistance for city composting units, the Committee feels that the effort 
is too little to make a significant positive  environmental impact. The Committee 
observe that the flagship programme of the Government Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, 
is having a deeper penetration and is leading to significant changes in the manner 
in which urban solid waste is handled. The Committee note t hat there are a large 
number of good opportunities available for dove -tailing the city composting 
scheme by the Department with the urban waste management projects so that the 
dependence on chemical fertilizers gets reduced and as a society we are able to 
utilize the urban waste properly.   The Committee recommend that the Department 
should constitute an inter -Ministerial body comprising of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, 
Ministry of Drinking Water  and Sanitation as well as the Department of Fertilizers 
to set a clear roadmap for vastly expanding the city composting systems and 
taking the farmers to shift from using chemical fertilizers to using compost for 
their agriculture. The Committee advise the Department to take up this issue in the 
national interest immediately and set out a time frame of not more than six 
months for this inter-Ministerial Committee to submit its recommendations. “ 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 (i)       The Department of Fertilizers has taken various steps to promote and  
use of city compost on large scale. With the concerted efforts of DoF, the sale of 
city compost has increased over the years.   The sale of city compost on which 
Marketing Develo pment Allowance has been claimed during last 4 years has 
increased and is given below: 
  

 
Year  Total sale (in MT) 
2016-17 96584.00 
2017-18 199061.91 
2018-19 306630.47 
2019-20 326772.72 
 
 (ii)         As per the policy on promotion of city compost, all fertilizer companies 
are allowed to market city compost. At present, 22 marketing companies are 
involved in sale/distribution of city compost and 49 manufacturing companies 
have also permitt ed for bulk direct sale of city compost to farmers.  Vide 
guidelines dated 10.10.2016, any fertilizer company (manufacturer of Urea and 
P&K Fertilizer) is allowed to produce city compost and market as its own brand 
and claim MDA. However, no major chemical  fertilizer company has yet come 
forward   to produce city compost as it is a different sector and technology.  
(iii).    The very little amount of city compost are produced in the various cities 
which are easily distributed and consumed in the local nearb y areas of the city 
and hence consideration of freight subsidy for city compost is not required.  
(iv)      A Committee of Joint Secretaries of Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs and Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & 
Farmers Welfare has already been set up to resolve the coordinated related 
issues and promotion of city compost.  A communication has been sent to M/o 
DW&S for nomination of an officer for inclusion in the aforesaid Committee.“  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fert ilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. H -
11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.16 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation  No.13 
 
Education to Farmers for use of Soil Specific Fertilizers: 
 
  
“The Committee feel  that the nutrients based system (NBS) for fertilizer 
subsidy is far too complicated. Simultaneously, the Committee observes 
that there is very little knowledge and understanding available with the 
farmers on the use of appropriate nutrients in view of the soil conditions as 
well as the cropping patterns. The Committee have come to know of 
situations where the farmers are being encouraged to use a particular 
group of nutrients even when their soil or cropping pattern does not 
warrant so. It is suspected that this may be happening due to inappropriate 
promotion of use of fertilizers by some of the manufacturers who keep in 

view the amount of subsidy available on the basis of the nutrients 
contained in the fertilizers produced by them. The Committee observe th at 
the Government has successfully expanded the use of soil health cards 
across the country and therefore it should be possible to educate the 
farmers on the appropriate combination of nutrients which may be required 
to administer in their farms. The Commi ttee therefore, recommend that the 
Department should take up this subject with the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare and come up with a firm plan of action so that the use of 
nutrients by individual farmers gets rationalised on the basis of scien tific 
analysis. The Committee also recommend that steps be taken to identify 
States/UTs where fertilizers especially urea is used by farmers in a very 
high distorted ratio against the desirable NPK ratio of 4:2:1. Further, 
suitable preventive mechanism be evolved by the Movement Division of 
Department of Fertilizers to preclude supply of very high quantity of 
subsidized fertilizers to States/UTs based on their projection of annual 
demand for fertilizers. The Kisan Call Centres (KCC) may also be involved 
for tendering appropriate advice to the farmers regarding judicious use of 
soil specific fertilizers.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 “Department of Fertilizers has taken a initiative to jointly organize  the 
Fertilizer Application Awareness Programme for farmers biennially before Rabi 
and Kharif Seasons with Department of Agriculture Cooperation & Farmers 
Welfare (DAC&FW), Department of Agricultural Research & Education (DARE) to 
disseminate knowledge on optimum usage of fertilizer nutrients based on various 
parameters to sustain the agriculture productivity and to make farmers aware of 
new developments in the field of fertilizer usage and management along with 
State Governments.   Accordingly, the programme has been launched by Hon’ble 
Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers and Hon’ble Minister of Agriculture 
Cooperation and farmer’s welfare on 22.10.2019 before Rabi Season.  
Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) 
assessed the requirement/demand of fertilizers for Kharif and Rabi seasons in bi-
annual Zonal Conferences in consultation with the representatives of fertilizers 
companies, Fertilizer Association of India, Ministry of Railways, State 
Governments, Department of Fertilizers ( DoF) and other concerned agencies.  
The projected requirement is communicated to DoF.  DoF ensures availability of 
all fertilizers at State level as per requirement projected by DAC&FW.” 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M.  No.  
H-11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.19 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation  No.14 

Discrepancies in figures on consumption of fertilizers: 
  
 “The Committee find  some discrepancies in the figures provided by the 
Department of Fertilizers about the quantum of consumption of fertilizers in 
the country. As per figures given to show the pattern of consumption of 
fertilizers from 2000 to 2019, it has been stated that 5 26.46 Lakh metric 
tonnes (LMTs) of fertilizers have been consumed during 2018 -19. At some 
other place, it has been mentioned that 537.09 LMTs of fertilizers were 
consumed during 2018 -19. Since it is very important to maintain correct 
figures of consumption  of fertilizers for effective implementation of 
fertilizer subsidy schemes, the Committee recommend that the Department 
should develop a foolproof method of collection of exact data on 
production and consumption of various fertilizer in the country.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
“The recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance in the future.”  
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. H -
11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
  

CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION/ RECOMMENDA TIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY   
 
Recommendation  No.3 
Innovative Methods to contain expenditure on Subsidy: 
  
“The Committee note that the quantum of consumption of fertilizer in the 
country and the corresponding expenditure on fertilizers subsidy has been 
increasing over the years. During the last two financial years subsidy was 
given to the tune of Rs. 69198 cro re and Rs. 73435 crore respectively and 
the estimated expenditure for 2019 -20 is Rs. 83476 crore. However, the 
Committee are satisfied to note that the government was able to contain 
the quantum of expenditure on subsidy that goes to the fertilizer industr y 
by rationalizing the energy norms for urea manufacturing companies under 
New Pricing schemes and New Urea policy, 2015 without any adverse 
impact on fertilizers prices in the country. In this regard, the Committee are 
of the firm view that it is necessar y to make available fertilizer to farmers at 
affordable prices so as to safeguard the food security of the country and it 
is the responsibility of the government to contain this expenditure by 
adopting innovative ways without increasing the price of fertil izers. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should take all 
possible steps to reduce the expenditure on fertilizer subsidy by adopting 
best manufacturing practices, strict energy norms, modernization of 
fertilizers manufacturing plants a nd a strong research and development 
base for continuously upgrading the manufacturing 60 technology so as to 
reduce the manufacturing cost of fertilizers thereby reducing the fertilizer 
subsidy expenditure to the Government.”  
REPLY OF THE GOVERTNMENT 
 “With the objective to make available fertilizer to farmers at affordable 
prices in the country, urea is provided to the farmers at a statutorily 
notified Maximum Retail Price (MRP). The MRP of 45 kg bag of urea is 
Rs.242 per bag (exclusive of  charges towards neem coating and taxes 
applicable) and the MRP of 50 kg bag of urea is Rs.268 per bag (exclusive 
of charges towards neem coating and taxes applicable). The difference 
between the delivered cost of urea at farm gate and net market realizati on 
by the urea units is given as subsidy to the urea manufacturer/importer by 
the Government of India. Accordingly, all farmers are being provided urea 
at the subsidized rates.”  
Based on CCEA decision, Department of Fertilizers had notified 
New Urea Policy-2015 (NUP-2015) on 25th May, 2015 with the objective of 
maximizing indigenous urea production, promoting energy efficiency in 
urea production and rationalizing subsidy burden on the government.  

As per NUP -2015, based on the pre -set energy norms, 25 gas 
based urea units were classified into 3 groups and Energy norms of all 25 
units were revised. The 25 urea units were also given target energy 
consumption norms for the year 2018 -19. However, only 11 urea units 
could achieve the target energy consumption no rms. Therefore, vide 
notification dated 28 th March, 2018, target energy norms were enforced 
with effect from 1 st April, 2018 in respect of 11 urea manufacturing units 
and for remaining 14 urea manufacturing units existing norms were 
extended for further pe riod of 2 years i.e. till 31 st March, 2020 with certain 
penalties. The aforesaid target energy norms would continue upto 31st 
March, 2025.  
As per NUP -2015, urea units are incentivized to maximize their 
production beyond RAC. For production beyond RAC, the  units are 
entitled for their respective variable cost and a uniform per MT incentive 
equal to the lowest of the per MT fixed costs of all the indigenous urea 
units subject to import parity price plus weighted average of other 
incidental charges which the government incurs on the import urea. 
Accordingly, NUP-2015 has led to additional production of approximately 
20 LMT as compared to 2014 -15, from the existing gas based urea plants 
and the total production of urea during the year 2015 -16 was 244.75 LMT, 
i.e. the highest ever urea production in the country. The indigenous urea 
production for the years 2016 -17, 2017 -18 & 2018 -19 was 242.01 LMT, 
240.23 LMT & 240 LMT respectively which is significantly higher than the 
production in 2014-15.  
With the implementation of revised energy norms under NUP -2015, 
there has been mopping up of energy upto RAC resulting in savings in 
subsidy outgo. The additional production of 20 LMT during 2015 -16 has 
led to less import to that extent resulting in saving in foreign exchange.  
Naphtha based urea units are governed by Policy Notification dated 
17th June, 2015 which allows these units to produce urea using Naphtha 
as feedstock till gas availability and connectivity to these three units either 
by gas pipeline or by any other me ans. These units were also given target 
energy norm from 2018 - 2019, which has been extended vide notification 
dated 28.03.2018 for another two years i.e. till 31 stMarch, 2020. It may be 
mentioned here that after getting the gas pipeline connectivity, MFL -
Manali has started its production on natural gas feedstock since 29 th July, 
2019. As on date, only two units viz., MCFL -Mangalore and SPIC -
Tuticorin are naphtha based.  
Further, the Department of Fertilizers notified the New Investment 
Policy (NIP) -2012 on  2nd January, 2013 in order to facilitate fresh 
investment in urea sector and to reduce import dependency. NIP -2012 
(read with its amendment) has resulted in setting up of 7 
Greenfield/Brownfield/Revival Urea manufacturing units in the country. 
Out of whic h one unit namely Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited 
(CFCL)-Gadepan-III has started its commercial production on 1 st January, 
2019.While the Matix Fertilizers & Chemicals Ltd., Panagarh is non -
operational due to non -availability of the CBM/Natural Gas . Remaining 5 
units are revival units, setting up of which are under progress having the 

installed capacity of production of urea of 12.7 LMT/Year each. With the 
operationalization of all the aforementioned project, there will be additional 
production of urea of around 89 LMT/Year.” 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No.  
H-11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
Recommendation  No.5 
New Investment Policy:  
  
“The Government announced ‘New Investment Policy (NIP) – 2012’ on 02 -
01- 2013 to facilitate fresh investment in urea. Under NIP -2012, new plants 
are categorized as (i) Revamp projects, (ii) Expansion or Brownfield 
projects, (iii) Revival of closed urea units and (iv) Greenfield Projects. 
Separate floor and ceiling price (variable cost) is allowed for calculating the 
concession rate of urea produced from the new urea units. An amendment 
to NIP 2012 notified on 7th October 2014 provides inter -alia that subsidy is 
permissible only on domestic sale for 8 years from t he date of production. 
Setting up of seven urea projects were approved under NIP2012. Out of 
these seven projects, two are in private sector and rest of the five are in 
public sector. In this regard, the Committee are concerned to note that NIP, 
2012 could attract private investments for only two projects. Out of these 
two projects, the Matix Fertilizers and Chemicals Limited at Panagarh 
which started commercial production in on 01.10.2017 is presently non -
functional due to non -availability of Coal Bed Meth ane / Natural gas. As 
such the success of NIP -2012 cannot be rated highly. In this regard, the 
Committee would recommend that provisions made in NIP 2012 should be 
revisited for suitable amendments so as to attract private investments in 
this crucial sector. The committee also note that five projects for setting up 
of fertilizer manufacturing units under public sector are under progress 
which are Ramagundam, Talcher, Sindri and Gorakhpur units of FCIL and 
Barauni units of HFCL. In this regard, the Committee  recommend that 
concrete steps should be taken to complete these projects within the 
stipulated time period so as to meet the country’s requirements of urea 
domestically without resorting to imports. The Committee are of the view 
that self sufficiency in u rea products would help in reducing subsidy 
burden.” 
 
 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 

 “The Government  had announced New Investment Policy – 2012 on 2 nd 
January, 2013 to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector and to make India self -
sufficient in the urea sector. NIP-2012 (read with its amendment) has resulted in 
setting up of 7 Greenfield/Brownfield/Revival Urea manufacturing units in the 
country. Out of which one unit namely Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited 
(CFCL)-Gadepan-III has started its commercial production on 1 st January, 
2019.While the Matix Fertilizers & Chemicals Ltd., Panagarh is non -operational 
due to non -availability of the CBM/Natu ral Gas. Remaining 5 units are revival 
units, setting up of which are under progress. It stated that all the aforementioned 
have installed capacity of production of urea of 12.7 LMT/Year each. With the 
operationalization of all the aforementioned project, there will be additional 
production of urea of around 89 LMT/Year. It is mentioned here that during 2019 -
20, all the existing urea units (31 units) produced around 245 LMT of Urea. The 
requirement of urea as assessed by Department of Agriculture, Cooperati on & 
Farmers Welfare in consultation with State Governments, is met through the 
indigenous production and the gap between demand and supply is met through 
imports. Therefore, it is likely that the country will become self -sufficient with the 
operationalization of all the revival projects. Therefore, it can be concluded that 
the objective of NIP i.e. to achieve self -sufficiency would be achieved in near 
future. 
DoF is facilitating revival of four closed units of FCIL viz. Talcher, 
Ramagundam, Sindri and Gora khpur and one closed unit of HFCL viz. Barauni 
by setting up New Ammonia Urea plant of 12.7 LMTPA capacity each.  DoF is 
closely monitoring the revival process of these five units. In this connection, 
Secretary (Fertilizers) takes monthly meetings to revie w the status of above 
mentioned five revival projects, thereby extending all the necessary approvals / 
clearance required from Departments / Ministries or State Governments etc. 
Further, utmost efforts are being made so that these revival plants are 
commissioned within stipulated time period. 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No.  
H-11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
 
Recommendation  No.6 
 
Frequent changes in Urea Subsidy Policies 
  
“The Committee note that Urea Subsidy for indigenous urea is paid to urea 
manufacturing units through concession rates (Normative Cost of 
production under extant Urea Policies) comprising of two major 
components namely Fixed Cost and Variable Cost, which in cludes the cost 
of feedstock (Gas/Naphtha). The concession rates vary from unit to unit 
depending upon their vintage, energy norms, water norms, electricity, bag 
rates etc. The mode and methodology of computation and disbursement 
has been laid down in vari ous policies (approved by CCEA) issued from 
time to time. Retention Price Scheme was implemented till 31st March, 
2003. It was replaced by the New Pricing Scheme -I (NPS -I) implemented 
from 01 -04-2003 to 31 -03-2004, New Pricing Scheme -II (NPS -II), was 
implemented from 01 -04-2004 to 30 -09-2006, Subsequently, New Pricing 

Scheme-III (NPS -III) which was made effective from 01 -10-2006 to 31 -03-
2010 was notified on 08th March 2007. Thereafter, the Modified NPS -III 
notified on 02 -04-2014 to compensate the existing urea units, could not be 
implemented due to ambiguities in the notification. In the meantime, New 
Urea Policy (NUP) – 2015 was introduced for 25 existing gas based urea 
units from 1st June, 2015 with the objective of (i) maximizing indigenous 
urea producti on; (ii) promoting energy efficiency and (iii) rationalizing 
subsidy burden. The duration of NUP -2015 has been extended from 01 -04-
2019 till further orders. Under NUP -2015, 25 existing Gas based urea units 
were initially classified into three groups based on their preset energy 
norms and for attaining target energy norms in the range of 5.5 G Cal/MT to 
6.5 G Cal/MT w.e.f. 1st April, 2018. Further the aforesaid Target Energy 
Norms have been revised vide notification dated 28 -03- 2018 under which 
11 units are  to attain the Target Energy Norms w.e.f. 01 -04-2018.  For the 
remaining 14 units the existing energy norms are extended for further 
period of 2 years i.e, till 2020 with penalty provisions of 2% energy of 
difference between NUP Energy norms and Target Ene rgy norms of NUP -
2015, for the first year i.e. 2018 -19 and 5% for the second year. The 
aforesaid target energy norms may be continued upto 31st March, 2025 and 
an expert body under NITI Aayog would be engaged to recommend the 
energy norms to be achieved fr om 01st April, 2025. The Committee have 
been informed that since the concession rates are determined separately 
for each urea producing plant, the subsidy payable to different urea 
producing plants varies from unit to unit. The variation in subsidy will be  
minimized once the plants attain the Target Energy Norms. However, the 
Committee observe that at present, the subsidy rate is the highest for 
Chambal fertilizers and chemicals Ltd. - Gadepan (CFCL-III) which has been 
set up under New Investment Policy -2012. Further, the issue of 
compensation for 25 gas based urea units proposed under Modified NPS -III 
remains pending due to ambiguities. Under such circumstances, the 
Committee are of the view that frequent changes in pricing schemes may 
create difficulties fo r urea manufacturing companies in scrupulously 
adhering to the norms set under each pricing scheme. Moreover, frequent 
changes in urea subsidy schemes may be also be a hindrance for 
attracting private investment in urea sector. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the frequent changes in the fertilizer subsidy Policies may 
be avoided and that the fertilizer subsidy polices should be amended only 
after in depth study in consultation with all the stakeholders including 
fertilizer industry and the represen tatives of farmers for implementing 
simplified, streamlined and effective fertilizer subsidy policies.”  
  

 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 “New Pricing Scheme (NPS) was introduced w.e.f. 1st April, 2003. The Stage-I of 
NPS was of one -year duration from 1 st April, 2003 to 31 st March, 2004 and 
Stage-II was of two -year duration from 1 st April, 2004 to 31 st March, 2006. With 
the Stage-III of NPS being implemented w.e.f. 1 st October, 2006, the Stage -II of 
NPS stood extended upto 31st September, 2006. 
 
Department of Fertilizers had notified the policy for Stage -III of New 
Pricing Scheme for urea manufacturing units w.e.f. 01.10.2006 to 31.03.2020 on 
08.03.2007. The provisions of this Policy were extended upto 31.03.2010 till 
further orders. 
 
The Government had not ified the Modified NPS -III for existing urea units 
on 2nd April, 2014 in order to address the issue of under recoveries of the existing 
urea units due to freezing Fixed Cost at the level of costed year 2002 -03. The 
policy provides for the maximum additiona l fixed cost (towards increase in the 
four components, viz., salaries & wages, contract labour, selling expensed and 
repair & maintenance) of Rs.350/MT to existing urea units or actual increase in 
above four components of fixed cost during the year 2012 -13 as compared to the 
year 2002-03, whichever is lower.  However, in respect of KFCL and BVFCL -II 
units, for which cost data of four components is not available either for the year 
2002-03 or 2012 -13, the actual increase in these four components as per the 
certified cost data for the latest year over and above Rs. 521/MT (weighted 
industry average during 2002-03) subject to maximum of Rs.350/MT is allowed. 
 
Further, in order to protect the efficient units which have converted to gas 
and are more than 30 years  old, the policy has the provision of compensating 
these units by way of grant of the special compensation of Rs.150/MT. 
 
Therefore, the under recoveries in fixed cost were addressed through 
Notification dated 2.4.2014. Subsequently, with the approval of C CEA, NUP -
2015 was issued by DoF which specifically dealt with the energy norms 
prescribed for the urea units. As per NUP -2015, based on the pre -set energy 
norms, 25 gas based urea units were classified into 3 groups and Energy norms 
of all 25 units were re vised. T he 25 urea units were also given  target energy 
consumption norms for the year 2018 -19. However, only 11 urea units could 
achieve the target energy consumption norms. Therefore, vide notification dated 
28th March, 2018, target energy norms were enfo rced with effect from 1 st April, 
2018 in respect of 11 urea manufacturing units. However, for remaining 14 urea 
manufacturing units existing norms were extended for further period of 2 years 
i.e. till 31st March, 2020 with certain penalties. The aforesaid target energy norms 
would continue upto 31st March, 2025.   
 
 
  

 
 The Naphtha based urea units are governed by Policy Notification dated 
17th June, 2015 which allows these units to produce urea using Naphtha as 
feedstock till gas availability and connectivity to these three units either by gas 
pipeline or by any other means. These units were also given target energy norm 
from 2018-2019, which h as been extended vide notification dated 28.03.2018 for 
another two years i.e. till 31st March, 2020.  
 
 The Department of Fertilizers notified the New Investment Policy (NIP)-2012 
on 2 nd January, 2013 in order to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector  and to 
reduce import dependency. Concession rates of the units which have been set up 
under NIP-2012 is determined as per policy provisions of the NIP-2012. 
 
 In the nut shell broadly, the urea pricing policy has not been changed 
frequently. It may be see n from the above illustration that after NPS -III in 2007, 
MNPS-III was introduced was issued in 2014 which only talked about fixed cost. 
Thereafter, NUP was issued in 2015 where only the energy norms have been 
revised. Therefore, there has not been any overall change in the policy.  
 
Further, all of the major policies/amendments have been introduced only 
after due examination in consultation with PDIL, Fertilizer Association of India, 
urea manufacturing units and the various stake holding Departments/Minist ries 
including NITI Aayog.” 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No.  
H-11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
Recommendation  No.11 
 
Nutrient based subsidy for imported P&K fertilizers: 
   
“The Committee note that under the Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) 
scheme, an Inter -Ministerial Committee (IMC) chaired by Secretary 
(Fertilizers) recommends per nutrient subsidy for ‘N’, ‘P’, ‘K’ and ‘S’ before 
the start of the financial year for decision by  the Government (Department 
of Fertilizers). The IMC also recommends a per tonne additional subsidy on 
fortified subsidized fertilizers carrying secondary (other than ‘S’) and 
micro- nutrients. According to Department of Fertilizers, the basic principle 
adopted in fixation of subsidy rates for different nutrients, is the 
identification of benchmark international prices of major consuming 
fertilizers viz. Urea, DAP and MOP. Based on these benchmark prices, the 
delivered prices of these fertilizers are determ ined taking into account the 
prevailing exchange rate. NBS rates are same for imported and indigenous 
P&K fertilizers. Any company registered under NBS Scheme is eligible to 
get subsidy. There is no restriction on the entities to import P&K fertilizers 
as these fertilizers are placed under Open General License (OGL). However, 
the Committee feel that the NBS rates are notified annually but the price of 
NBS fertilizers may fluctuate on weekly and monthly basis. Taking these 
factors into account, the c ommittee have apprehensions that in case of 
lower cost at international market for imported P&K fertilizers as compared 

to cost price of domestically produced P&K fertilizers, private agencies 
which get import licence for P&K fertilizers, are better placed to make  
profits as they will be getting NBS subsidy in addition to profit margin due 
to lower prices in international market. Further, such eventuality will also 
make domestic production of P&K fertilizers economically unviable. The 
Committee, therefore, recommen d that the Department of Fertilizers shall 
take steps for continued monitoring the cost price of P&K fertilizers in the 
international market and in case of long -prevailing cheaper cost price for 
P&K fertilizers in the international market, necessary steps be taken to 
protect the interests of existing domestic companies.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 “The NBS Policy for P&K fertilizers is being implemented w.e.f . 1.4.2010 
by the Department of Fertilizers with one of the objectives to promote 
competitions amongst the industry leading to efficiencies in production and 
import. Under the said policy, a fixed amount of subsidy decided on annual basis, 
is provided on e ach grade of subsidized Phosphatic & Potassic (P&K) fertilizers 
(both for indigenously produced and imported) depending on its Nutrient Content.  
As the P&K fertilizers are decontrolled, the Maximum Retail Price (MRP) is fixed 
by Companies as per market dynamics at reasonable level.  
 
The evaluation of reasonableness of MRP is being done for both 
indigenously produced and imported P&K fertilizers wherein the average  costs 
over a year is used to do the exercise. The international prices are being 
monitored b y DoF time to time. Since, the reasonability evaluation of MRPs is 
ensured, any reduced international cost automatically gets factored in the 
reduced MRP of the P&K fertilizers which benefits the farmers.” 
  
 [Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Departmen t of Fertilizers) O.M. No.  
H-11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
  

CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION. 
 
Recommendation  No.9 
 
System of sale of fertilizers to Farmers: 
  
 
“The Committee note that presently the government is implementing Direct 
Benefit Transfer (DBT) system. Under this system 100% subsidy on various 
fertilizer grades is released to the fertilizer companies on the basis of 
actual sales made by retailers to the beneficiaries. Sa le of all subsidized 
fertilizers to the farmers/buyers is made through Point of Sale (POS) 
devices installed at each retailer shop and the beneficiaries are identified 
through Aadhaar Card, Kishan Credit Card, voter Identity Card etc. Under 
this DBT system , subsidized fertilizer is sold through POS devices on no 
denial basis with no fixed purchase quantity limit. One farmer is permitted 
to purchase fertilizers on behalf of many farmers after biometric 
verification. Presently there is no system to verify tha t the fertilizer 
purchased on behalf of other farmers actually reaches them or diverted 
elsewhere. In this regard it is pertinent to note here that there is possibility 
of subsidized urea diverted for use by chemical industries which may be 
around 10 lakh tones or 3.5 percent of total urea supplied in the system 
throughout the country. The Committee are of the view that the current 
system of fertilizer subsidy is inherently inefficient to administer. Although 
a fairly elaborate IT system has been put in pla ce to monitor the movement 
of fertilizers from the point of manufacture/import to the farmer, there is no 
system in place to prevent its diversion and misuse. The Committee do not 
agree with the views of the Ministry that the quantity reported to be 
diverted/misused is only a small proportion of the total quantity 
manufactured. Since the present system is prone to misuse by miscreants, 
the Committee recommend that the Department may issue instructions that 
the retailer may obtain the list of farmers alongwi th their signature/thumb 
impression and the quantum of fertilizers required by each of them for 
verification purposes. State Governments may also be requested to keep a 
vigil on diversion/misuse of subsidized fertilizer and for the purpose 
Integrated Ferti lizer Management System may be used by the authorities 
concerned. The Department of Fertilizers may also undertake random 
scrutiny of activities in this regard to find out any possible misuse of 
subsidized fertilizers.”  
 
  

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 “System of sale of fertilizers to farmers The Department has developed a 
dashboard which can be accessed at  http://urvarak.nic.in. The Dashboard 
facilitates easy monitoring by State Agriculture Departments, District Collectors 
and State Marketing Federations by providing various reports like list of top 20 
buyers (State-wise, District-wise), which is available for the State Agricult ure Dept. 
The State Governments have been empowered to take appropriate action as per 
FCO after examining each case.  
 
Further, vide letter No. D( FA)/DBT-NIC/2017-Pt. dated 22.04.2019, 
Department has written to all States to closely monitor fertilizer distribution & 
availability to ensure smooth implementation of DBT in all States using the 
services of iFMS and DBT Dashboards.” 
 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.1.13 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
  

CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL  REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE  STILL AWAITED. 
 
Recommendation  No.2 
 
Direct transfer of Subsidy to Farmers: 
  
“The current system of providing subsidy to the manufacturer, which is 
based on complex parameters of technologies and inputs used by the 
manufacturers, is economically and technologically lopsided. This is 
apparent from the variation in per metric tonne s ubsidy being given to 
different plants which ranges from Rs.5744 per metric tonne to Rs.25772 
per metric tonne. The Committee note that a number of plants have been 
operating with very old technology and systems and the subsidy based on 
the technology used  has not encouraged these plants to shift to modern 
methods. As a result, we continue to manufacture the fertilizers not 
necessarily with highest efficiency and the Government continues to bear 
the cost of this inefficiency in terms of higher subsidy. Whil e the 
Committee strongly feel that there is a need to continue subsidizing the 
fertilizers as they constitute the most critical input for the farmers, the 
Committee also believe that in an ideal situation, the farmers should get 
this subsidy directly in th eir accounts while the fertilizer manufacturers 
should be set free to manufacture, supply and sell the fertilizers as per 
their own system. The farmer should have a choice of buying from various 
brands of fertilizers while getting a subsidy amount credited  to his bank 
account directly on producing the purchasing vouchers, which as the 
Committee understands, are now linked through the PoS machines. The 
Committee are of the view that such a system will push the manufacturers 
to produce and sell the fertilizer s in the most cost effective manner and it 
will also push the inefficient manufacturers/importers out of the system.  
The Committee observe that the system of direct subsidy to the 
beneficiary has been incorporated into a number of schemes by the 
Government under various Ministries. This has been possible due to an 
efficient expansion of the unique 59 identifier, AADHAR, as well as an 
aggressive expansion of the reach of banking system to the farthest 
corners of the country. The Committee feel that time has  come for the 
Government to set out a clear and firm roadmap to switch over from the 
current system of subsiding fertilizers to a system where the subsidy 
amounts get credited directly to the account of the farmers and the 
manufacturing/importing of fertilizers is set free to the market forces.”  
 
 
 REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 

   “Direct Transfer of Subsidy to farmers As recommended by Committee of 
Secretaries (CoS) headed by Cabinet Secretary, the Department has constituted 
a Nodal Committee to formulate policy relating to implementation of Direct Cash  
 
Transfer of Fertilizer subsidy to farmers comprising of Dept. of Fertilizers, 
DAC&FW, NITI Aayog, D/o Expenditure, Cabinet Secretariat etc. The further 
actions initiated will be informed in the due course.” 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. H -
11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
 
Recommendation  No.8 
Freight Subsidy: 
 
“The Committee note that Government of India provides freight subsidy for 
all subsidized fertilizers to facilitate timely and easy availability of fertilizers 
in all parts of the country especially distant/remote corners of the country. 
The Department of Fertilizers implemen ted Uniform Freight Policy (UFP) 
with effect from April 1, 2008.  Under the Uniform Freight Subsidy policy, 
movement of fertilizers is categorized into two categories namely Primary 
Movement and Secondary Movement. Primary movement by road is 
allowed upto maximum distance of 500 Kms and by rail upto a maximum 
distance of 1400 Kms. Secondary movement is by road from Railwayrake -
point to District / Block Headquarters. Freight subsidy on primary 
movement is provided for Urea and NBS covered P&K fertilizers exc luding 
SSP. Freight subsidy on secondary movement is provided for urea only. In 
case of road journey, the Department of Fertilizers annually notifies the Per 
Tonne Per Kilometre (PTPK) slab rates for primary movement and PTPK 
rates for secondary movement. The said rates are escalated/de -escalated 
based on Tariff Committee recommendations for the same. Since it is very 
much necessary to eliminate carry –forward liabilities of subsidy payment, 
the Committee recommend that the annual PTPK slab -rates for primar y 
movement for a year may be notified before the start of the financial year 
so that arrear calculation exercises are avoided and subsidy claims and 
payments are completed within the financial year and not carried forwarded 
to next financial year for want revised rates. Further, steps may be taken to  
ensure that the retail -sale facility is also available at all Rail -rake-points by 
opening new retail-outlets / Model Fertilizer Shops, wherever necessary.” 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNEMNT 
“Policy for Uniform freight subsidy dated 17 th July, 2008, states that the 
normative per KM rate is annually escalated/de -escalated based on a Composite 
Road Transport index (weighted average of the WPIs of HSD oil, Motor Tyres, 
Truck Chassis and All Commodities). The Composi te Road Transport Index is 
calculated at the end of the financial year. Therefore, it is not feasible to notify the 

annual PTPK slab rates for primary movement for a year before the start of the 
financial year. 
On suggestions of the Committee for ensuring retail-sale facility at Rail -
rake points by opening new retail -outlets/Model Fertilizer Shops, the Fertilizer 
manufacturers will be requested to provide a feasibility plan.” 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. H -
11021/8/2020-Parl.  Dated 11.06.2020]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
                                                                   Chairperson 
8 February, 2021____               Standing Committee on  
19 Magha, 1942 (Saka)                  Chemicals and Fertilizers 
  
  

  
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 1.2 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT (S EVENTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(2019-20) ON THE SUBJECT ' STUDY OF SYSTEM OF FERTILIZERS SUBSIDY ' OF 
THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF 
FERTILIZERS).’ 
 
I. Total No. of Recommendations 14 
II. Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:   
 
 (Recommendation Nos. 1, 4, 7, 10, 12, 13 & 14 )   
07 
 
Percentage of Total 50.00% 
III. Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:-  
 
(Recommendation Nos. 3, 5, 6, & 11)   
04 
 
Percentage of Total  28.57% 
IV. Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:-      
 
(Recommendation No.  9)   
01 
Percentage of Total 07.14% 
V. Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
 
(Recommendation Nos. 2, & 8) 
02 
 
Percentage of Total 14.28% 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
MINUTES OF THE    FIRST SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 12th October, 2020 from 1100 hrs. to 1145hrs. in 
Committee Room  ‘B’,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
 
  Ms. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2. Shri Deepak Baij 
3. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
4. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
5. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
6. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
8. Shri Indra Hang Subba 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri  M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
10. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
11. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
12. Shri Arun Singh 
13. Shri A.D. Singh 
14. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
15. shri K. Vanlalvena 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora  - Officer on Special Duty (LSS) 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava - Director 
3. Shri Panna Lal   -  Under Secretary  
 
 
 
Session I  
 
XXXX    XXXX    XXXX     
Session-II  
 
  XXXX    XXXX   XXXX 
 

2. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption of following draft 
Action Taken Reports: 
 
(i) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019 -20 (Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals); 
(ii) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019-20 (Department of Fertilizers); 
(iii) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019 -20 (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals); 
(iv) Action Taken Report on Study of System of Fertilizer Subsidy (Department of 
Fertilizers). 
(v) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 (Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals); 
(vi) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2020-21 (Department of Fertilizers); 
(vii) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals). 
 
3. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Action Taken Report(s) 
unanimously without any change/amendments.  The Committee also authorized the 
Chairperson for finalize and present the Action Taken Reports to the Parliament. 
4. The Committee also decided to hold its next sitting tentatively in the second week of 
November, 2020. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________XXXX 
matters not related to this report. 
 
  
 