i 
 
 
 
 
22 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
    
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
STATUS OF COVID-19 VACCINE PRODUCTION IN INDIA 
 
TWENTY- SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  March, 2021/  Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
 


ii 
 
CC&F.No.22 
 
 
 
TWENTY - SECOND REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
STATUS OF COVID-19 VACCINE PRODUCTION IN INDIA 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17 March 2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17 March 2021 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
   March, 2021/  Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
 

iii 
 
 
 
INDEX 
 
CONTENTS 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) …………………………. (III) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………….. (V) 
REPORT  
CHAPTER-I INTRODUCTION 1 
CHAPTER-II
 
TECHNOLOGY, STEPS AND PROCESSES RELATED TO VACCINE 
DEVELOPMENT AND APPROVAL 
5 
CHAPTER-III 
 
COVID-19 VACCINE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AND  
PRODUCTION STATUS IN INDIA INCLUDING INTERNATIONAL 
PARTNERSHIP 
13 
CHAPTER-IV     
 
 
COVID-19 VACCINE ADMINISTRATION INCLUDING LOGISTICS FOR 
DISTRIBUTION AND DELIVERY OF VACCINE 
32 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 49 
APPENDICES  
I. MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (2020-21) HELD ON 15 MARCH 2021 
68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Deepak Baij 
4 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
5 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
6 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
7 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8 Shri Pakauri Lal 
9 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
11 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
12 Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
13 Shri Atul Kumar Singh alias Atul Rai 
14 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15 Shri M. Selvaraj 
16 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
17 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
18 Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
19 Shri Er. Bishweswar Tudu 
20 
21 
Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari# 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26 Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27 
28 
Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
Shri Arun Singh$ 
29 Shri A.D. Singh 
30 
31 
Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
Shri K. Vanlalvena 
  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
      1.    Shri Manoj K. Arora   - OSD (LSS) 
2.    Sh. N.K. Jha   - Director 
3.    Shri C. Kalyanasundaram -      Additional Director 
4.   Ms Sonia Sankhla  -      Assistant Executive Officer  
 
 
$Re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.12.2020. 
#Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 28.12.2020 vice Shri Nandigam Suresh. 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson (Acting), Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(2020-21) having been authorised by the Committee [as per Rule 277(3) of Procedure 
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha] to present the Report on their behalf, present the 
Twenty-Second Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Status of Covid -19 Vaccine 
Production in India’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals). 
2. The subject ‘Status of Covid -19 Vaccine Production in India’  has been selected 
by the Standing Comm ittee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2020 -21) for examination and 
report.    
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
15.03.2021. 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals), Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare (Department of Health and Family Welfare and Department of Health 
Research), Ministry of Science and Technology (Department of Biotechnology), Indian 
Council of Medicals Research (ICMR) and Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI) for 
furnishing necessary written replies, views and other material / information to the 
Committee for the examination of  the subject. 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciat ion for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations / recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end of the Report.  
 
 
New Delhi;                Uday Pratap Singh  
 15 March, 2021                                                           Chairperson (Acting) 
24 Phalguna 1942 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on 
                 Chemicals and Fertilizers

1 
 
CHAPTER -I 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 Overview of Corona Virus Disease (2019) 
 
1.1  Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID -19) is an infectious disease caused 
by a newly discovered corona virus.  COVID-19 is the cause of an outbreak of 
respiratory illness first detected in Wuhan city of Hubei province, China. The 
earliest date of symptom onset w as 1December 2019.   On 31 December 2019, 
World Health Organization (WHO) was informed of cases of pneumonia of 
unknown etiology (unknown cause) detected in Wuhan City. A novel corona  virus 
was identified as the causative virus by Chinese authorities on 7 January, 2020.  
WHO temporarily termed the new virus as novel corona -virus (2019-nCoV) on 12 
January 2020 and then officially named this infectious disease as Corona Virus 
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) on 12 February 2020.  Later, the International 
Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) officially designated the virus as 
Severe Acute Respiratory Synd rome Corona  virus 2  (SARS-CoV-2) based on 
phylogeny, taxonomy and established practice. Since COVID-19 initially emerged 
in China, the v irus has evolved for four months and rapidly spread to other 
countries worldwide as a global threat. WHO finally made th e assessment that 
COVID-19 can be characterized as a pandemic and declared the  COVID-
19 outbreak a pandemic on 11 March 2020.  COVID-19 pandemic is amongst the 
largest public health crisis faced by the World that is having unprecedented 
negative consequences on health, economy and our social lives.       
 
 1.2 A virus is a submicroscopic infectious agent  that replicates only inside the 
living cells of an organism.  It  is a small parasite that cannot reproduce by itself.  
Once it infects a susceptible cell, however, a  virus can direct the cell machinery 
to produce more viruses.   COVID-19 is a new strain of Corona virus that has not 
been previously identified in humans. Corona  viruses (CoV) are a large fami ly of 
viruses that can cause illness ranging from the common cold to a more severe 
disease such as Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS -CoV) and Severe 
Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS -CoV). Corona viruses are zoonotic, 
meaning they are transmitted betwe en animals and people.  Viral infections are 
either prevented by vaccines or treated  by Anti Viral Drugs.  Since SARS -CoV-2 
is a new virus and COVID 19 which is caused by the virus is a new disease, no 
vaccine or anti viral drug was available for this highly infectious disease.     
  
Pandemic 
1.3  The pandemic has severely impacted health systems, economic and 
social progress throughout the world. COVID-19 most commonly manifests as 

2 
 
fever, dry cough, shor tness of breath and tiredness. Most people (~80%) 
experience mild disease and recover without hospitalization, while around 20% 
may become more seriously ill . From a few thousand confirmed cases in 
January, the number of cases continues to grow globally.  As per WHO’s COVID 
19 Dash Board, as on 14th December 2020, across the world 7,10,51,805  cases 
have been reported  of which  98,84,100  cases (2 nd highest number of cases 
reported by a country after USA) have been reported from India. Of the total 
cases reported, 16,08,648 deaths have been reported across the world of which 
1,43,355 deaths have been reported from India. The country has responded 
proactively to this pandemic by multitude of measures following the principle of 
‘Test, Track and Treat’ and we have now begun seeing the decline in number of 
active cases and new cases reported. 
 Vaccine as an important tool in controlling COVID-19 
1.4 Department of Health Research in its back ground note has stated that 
COVID-19 being a new disease, difficult to treat with hardly any proven, 
therapeutic option. Fighting this pandemic requires strict non -pharmaceutical 
measures such as hand hygiene, use of mask and physical distancing. An 
effective vaccine will be an important tool in co ntrolling this pandemic.  
Vaccination is a simple, safe, and effective way of protecting people against the 
infectious diseases caused by viruses.  It uses our body’s natural defences to 
build resistance to specific infections and makes our immune system s tronger.  
When a person gets a vaccine, his/her immune system responds in the following 
manner:- 
• Recognizes the invading germ, such as the virus or bacteria. 
• Produces antibodies. Antibodies are proteins produced naturally by the 
immune system to fight disease. 
• Remembers the disease and how to fight it. If a person is then exposed to 
the germ in the future, his/her immune system can quickly destroy it before 
he/she becomes unwell. 
The vaccine is therefore a safe and clever way to produce an immune response 
in the body, without causing illness. Our immune systems are designed to 
remember. Once exposed to one or more doses of a vaccine, we typically remain 
protected against a disease for years, decades or even a lifetime.  This is what 
makes vaccines so effectiv e. Rather than treating a disease after it occurs, 
vaccines prevent the people in the first instance from getting sick.  
Herd Immunity 
1.5  When a person gets vaccinated against a disease, their risk of infection is 
also reduced – so they’re also far less likely to transmit the disease to others. As 
more people in a community get vaccinated, fewer people remain vulnerable, and 

3 
 
there is less possibility for passing the pa thogen to transmit from person to 
person. This is called “herd immunity.”  “Herd immunit y” exists when a high 
percentage of the population is vaccinated, making it difficult for infectious 
diseases to spread, because there are not many people who can be infected.  
Research and Development of Vaccine  
1.6 The Current pandemic of Covid-19 has affected the lives of millions of 
individuals globally. Lockdowns have created severe impact o n economies of 
many countries. Moreover, the restrictions on travel and social distancing coupled 
with the uncertain therapeutic outcomes have genera ted great interest in the 
speedy development of vaccine for protection against this disease. The Global 
pharmaceutical and vaccine research industry including that of our country has 
been expeditiously working on research and development of therapies and 
vaccines against COVID -19.  About 200 vaccine candidates on varied platforms 
are presently undergoing development  across the globe,  of which about 40 
candidates are in human clinical development.  
1.7   Our country is well recognized as a vaccine manufacturing hub at g lobal 
level. Presently, more tha n 60 % of world’s vaccine demand for immunization 
programmes is met by Indian manufacturers. In our country, both industry and 
academia are actively involved in vaccine development.   22 vaccine candidat es 
are in devel opment stage by vaccine industries  either through indigenous efforts 
or technology transfer, India n academia is also involved in research and 
development of 9 vaccine candidates,  4 vaccine candidates are being developed 
through repurposing of existing vaccines and 1 vaccine candidate is developed 
through bulk transfer/formulation method . 5 vaccine candidates are in advanced 
stage of development.  Two vaccine candidates viz. Covishield by Serum Institute 
of India, Pune  and COVAXIN by Bharat Biotech ltd., Hyderabad have been 
granted approval by Drug Controller General of India for  restricted use in 
emergency situation. 
Selection of the subject “Status of COVID 19 vaccine production in 
India” 
 1.8 Based on Worldometer elaboration of the latest United Nations data, the 
current population of India as on 11 January, 2021 is 138,71,60,324. In this 
context, a preliminary exercise of mapping the Manufacturing capacity for 
COVID-19 vaccine candidates by leading Indian Vaccine manufacturers was 
undertaken.  For a PAN -India coverage of the vaccine, there is  a requirement for 
at least 100 Crore doses of the vaccine demanding huge investments.  Since it is 
very much necessary that the people of the country are vaccinated by safe and 
efficacious vaccines in a time bound manner so as to create herd immunity 
against COVID 19 in the country, the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 

4 
 
Fertilizers selected the s ubject “Status of COVID 19 vaccine production in 
India” for examination and report on priority basis.      
Roles and Responsibilities 
 1.9 The following chart shows the roles and responsibilities of various 
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India for vaccine development, 
approval, manufacture and delivery  in the country:- 
  
 
In order to coordinate the work being done by above mentioned  
Ministries/Departments/organizations, an apex level group called National Expert 
Group on Vaccine Administration For COVID-19 (NEGVAC) has been constituted 
by the Government of India under the chairmanship of Dr V K Paul, Member NITI 
Aayog, with Secretary, Health & Family Welfare as Co -chair.  The following 
chapters deal with the subject in detail.  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


5 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
TECHNOLOGY, STEPS AND PROCESSES RELATED TO VACCINE 
DEVELOPMENT AND APPROVAL 
A.  Different technologies of vaccine development 
2.1 In reply to a query of the Committee about the different technologies being 
used in development of vaccines, the Department of Bio technology  (DBT) in its 
reply has stated that m ost of the candidate vaccines follow the mechanism s 
elaborated below, for killing or inactivating or destroying COVID 19 virus: 
(i) Inactivated vaccine  — The vaccine preparation consists of whole 
virus which is inactivated / killed using chemicals. Admin istration of 
the same induces production of protective antibodies in the 
individuals. 
 
(ii) Subunit vaccine  — A portion of the virus that is important for 
immunity, like the spike protein of COVID -19, is used to in vaccine 
preparation, so as to induce immunity.  
 
(iii) Replicating viral vector vaccine  — In this case, a virus that does 
not cause disease in people (cal led a vector virus) is engineered to 
encode the coronavirus spike protein. Administration of the vaccine 
causes the vector virus to multiply and generate the spike protein, 
thus inducing a protective immune response. 
 
(iv)  Non-replicating viral vector vac cine —Similar to replicating viral 
vector vaccines, the vector virus is engineered to encode the 
coronavirus spike protein, but the vector virus does not reproduce in 
the vaccine recipient. However, it can generate th e spike protein of 
coronavirus that could induce immunity. 
(v)  DNA vaccine  — The gene that codes for the COVID -19 spike 
protein is inserted into a small, circular piece of DNA, called a 
plasmid. The plasmids are then injected as the vaccine.  
(vi)  mRNA vaccine  — In this approach, the vacci ne preparation 
contains messenger RNA, or mRNA for the Spike protein. mRNA is 
processed in cells to make proteins. Administration of the vaccine 
preparation thus causes production of spike protein and subsequent 
generation of a protective immune response.              
  
   

6 
 
2.2    In regard to the above, the S ecretary, DBT in her power point 
presentation during informal discussion with the Chairperson and Members of 
the Committee showed the following slide about the vaccine strategies:- 
 
 
Vaccine type  Advantages Disadvantages 
Live  attenuated • Imitation of the whole 
infection  process  
• Both antibody and 
cellular immunity  
• Long lasting immunity 
• Low Stability  
• Risk of lack of attenuation  
• Risk of restoring pathogenicity  
• Potential for over-attenuation  
with  associated poor  
immunogenicity  
Inactivated • Stable  
• Low cost 
manufacturing  
• Reduced immunogenicity  
• Reactogenicity  
• Short immunity  

7 
 
 
2.3  The Secretary, DBT further apprised the Chairperson and Members 
about the advantages and disadvantages of various types of vaccines as under:- 
  
2.4  In a written reply to a question of the Committee about the differences of the 
above mentioned technologies and their suitability for vaccination, Department of 
Biotechnology furnished the following information:- 
“Inactivated vaccine formulation is a proven platform and consists 
of whole virus that is inactivated / killed using chemicals, which 
upon administration would elicit production of protective antibodies 
in the individuals. DNA vaccine formulation consists of the gene 
encoding the antigen, whic h upon administ ration will produce the 
protein that will induce an immune response. The vaccine 
preparation has the advantages of easier transport and minimal 
cold chain facility requirements. mRNA vaccine formulation  for 
COVID-19 consists of messenger RN A, or mRNA for the Spike 
protein which is processed in cells to make proteins. Administration 
of the vaccine preparation thus causes production of spike protein 
and subsequent generation of a protective immune response. Both 
the DNA and mRNA Vaccine candid ates are relatively new vaccine 
Split and  
subunits 
• Low reactogenicity  
• Easily developed  
• Reduced immunogenicity  
• Mostly antibodies rather than 
cellular  immunity  
• Short immunity  
• Need adjuvant  
Vector • Use pathways that 
induce robust and  
durable both cellular 
and humoral  
immunity  
• Easily engineered  
• Both antibody and 
cellular immunity  
• Act as adjuvant due to 
a vector  properties 
• Efficacy decreased by pre- 
existing  vector immunity  
• Vector-specific responses may 
limit  subsequent doses 
DNA/RNA  • Easily engineered  • Instability of the mRNA and  
manufacturing problems  
• Need delivery system  
• No one registered for human 
•  use 

8 
 
platforms. The suitability of the vaccine candidate is subject to 
successful demonstration of safety and efficacy in phase III clinical 
trials.” 
 2.5   The Committee brought to the notice of the concerned Departments that 
there are reports that genetic vaccines like DNA vaccine and mRNA vaccine 
particularly the later which is a new invention may intervene directly in genetic 
material of the person vaccina ted and alter his/her individual genes which is 
irreversible. In case of consequences or side effects, the vaccine receiver has to 
live with consequences as they cannot be cured.  In this regard,  the Committee 
enquired whether such consequences of genetic vaccines particularly mRNA is 
being examined by medical experts/scientists in the country so as to take a 
decision on using this vaccine in the country.    In reply, the Department of Bio 
Technology has given the following reply: 
“As per available knowledge  the DNA and mRNA Vaccines do not 
integrate the  DNA or mRNA of the virus into the cell nucleus of the 
recipient, but, instead inject part of the viral DNA/RNA into tissues 
to stimulate an immune response in the body. Hence, they would 
not intervene direct ly in genetic material of the person vaccinated. 
All matters pertaining to the ethical conduct of clinical trials, review 
of clinical trial data, and  occurrence of adverse events during the 
course of the trial, are periodically reviewed by the Drug Controller 
General of India(DCGI)”         
  
B. Steps in Vaccine Development 
2.6   Department of Health Research  (DoHR) in its background note  has 
depicted  vaccine development  in the following figure:- 
 
 


9 
 
  
2.7   Further the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) in its background note 
narrated the following steps in the vaccine development:- 
i. Manufacturing of test batches – The batches for examination, 
test or analysis   pre-clinical studies are manufactured.  
ii     Pre-clinical studies  – The Vaccine is tested in animal studies for 
efficacy and  safety, including challenge studies. 
 
iii. Clinical development : The p re-approval clinical development 
includes the  following phases:- 
 
a) Phase I clinical trial:  In this, a small group of healthy 
adult volunteers receive  the vaccine to test for 
safety and immunogenicity. 
b) Phase II clinical trial : The vaccine is given t o 
hundreds of people who have  characteristics 
(such as age and physical health) similar to those for 
whom the  new  vaccine is intended to assess the 
safety and immunogenicity. 
c) Phase III clinical trial :  The vaccine is given to large 
number of people and  tested for efficacy and 
safety. 
 
iv. Post-approval clinical  assessment -  These includes assessment 
of Adverse  Event Following Immunization (AEFI) and Adverse Events of 
Special Interest  (AESI) and /or Phase IV clinical trial/ post marketing 
surveillance under post  marketing scenario.                 
  
C.  Submission and Review Process of application s for vaccine 
production and quality testing: 
2.8  The Department of Pharmaceuticals has also stated in its background 
note about the submission and review process of vaccine applications as follows 
:  
i   Application for conduct of clinical trial or for approval of 
manufacture/ import and marketing of vaccines are submitted to 
Central Drugs Standards Control Organization (CDSCO). 
ii.       All such applications are evaluated in consultation with the 
Subject Expert Committee (SEC) of CDSCO. 
iii       Application for grant of manufacturing license for vaccines 
after approval by CDSCO is made to the concerned State Licensing 
Authority (SLA).  A joint inspection is carried out by experts of 

10 
 
Central Drugs Labo ratory (CDL), officials from SLA and CDSCO. 
Based on the inspection report, manufacturing license is granted by 
SLA and countersigned by the Drug Controller General of India 
(DCGI). 
iv     In case of imported COVID -19 vaccine, importer is required to 
submit application to CDSCO for Import Registration Certificate and 
Import License. 
v       Every batch of vaccines for clinical trial & marketing are tested 
/reviewed and released by Central Drugs Laboratory, Kasauli to 
ensure quality. 
2.9 CDSCO in its reply to a question of the Committee about its responsibilities 
with respect to Vaccines  has stated that it  is its responsibility to grant permission 
to conduct clinical trials, manufacturing/import for marketing, Registration 
certificate and license for import etc. under  the provisions of Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act, 1940, New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules (NDCT), 2019 and 
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.(CDSCO reply to Qn 1(a)) 
Drug Regulation Division of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in its 
background note has stated that It is important that adequate data on quality, 
safety, immunogenicity and efficacy is generated before appr oval of any vaccine 
to ensure the safety and effectiveness of the vaccine. Vaccines are required to be 
characterized and manufactured in compliance with the Good Manufacturing 
Practices (GMP).Manufacturing processes of every vaccine are validated, 
defined and controlled adequately to ensure batch to batch consistency.  In 
regard to the above submission of the Drug Regulation Division, the Committee 
desired to know      whether any steps have been made to manufacture COVID 
19 vaccines as per WHO-GMP quality standards.  In its reply, CDSCO has stated 
as follows:- 
  
“To manufacture and market Vaccines in the country, the applicant has to 
comply with the provisions under Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, New 
Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules (NDCT), 2019 and Drugs and Cosmetics 
Rules, 1945. There is no requirement to comply with WHO GMP 
standards”.  
          
D.  Fast track trial of vaccine candidates in extraordinary circumstances 
2.10 The availability of a safe and efficacious vaccine for COVID -19 is crucial in 
effective control of the pandemic. A vaccine for an infectious disease has never 
before been produced in less than several years and no vaccine exists for 
preventing a  corona vir us infection in humans. The pace at which vaccines are 
being developed both internationally and in the country is unprecedented.   
  

11 
 
2.11 In normal circumstances, vaccine development takes close to 10 years for 
any infectious disease. But presently extra -ordinary measures are being taken to 
fast-track the development and production of COVID -19 vaccine without 
compromising the rigor of science and safety and efficacy measures. The steps 
which are helping in the fast -tracking process are fruitful collaboratio n between 
organizations and companies, conducting the required studies in parallel rather 
than sequentially as are usually done, planning for next phase while the earlier 
one is being completed and streamlining the processes of application and 
approvals. 
2.12  In normal vaccine development each step is performed in sequence. In 
order to accelerate COVID-19 vaccine development, steps are done in parallel. In 
case of accelerated development, assessment of Adverse Event Following 
Immunization (AEFI) and Adverse Events of Special Interest (AESI)/Phase IV trial 
/post-marketing surveillance for side effects are critical.                                                
  
 
 
 
 
 


12 
 
 
  
E.  Measures for tackling post vaccination side effects 
    2.13 When the Committee  enquired about the   measures in place for tackling 
vaccine based side effects to some patients after vaccination during post 
approval period, CDSCO in its reply stated as follows:-  
 
“Post marketing, the Manufacturer is required to submit period ic safety 
update reports to CDSCO which contain the details of the adverse effects 
reported and assess these adverse effects if they are related to the 
vaccine to take necessary remedial measures. In case of vaccines supply 
through national immunization pr ogramme, these adverse effects are 
captured and appropriate measures are taken by the AEFI Secretariat 
under Immunisation division of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.” 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


13 
 
CHAPTER-III 
COVID-19 VACCINE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION   
STATUS IN INDIA INCLUDING INTERNATIONAL PARTNERSHIPS 
 
A. Efforts for vaccine development in India by Department of 
Biotechnology, Ministry of Science & Technology 
(a) Nodal Department for vaccine development in India 
 3.1 In India, the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) along with Indian Council 
of Medical Research (ICMR), Department of Health Research (DHR) is 
supporting vaccine development and manufacturing activities through both 
national efforts and international partnerships. At the national level, DBT has 
been identified as the Nodal Department by the PMO constituted Task Force, to 
consolidate efforts for vaccine development in India. 
  
(b) Request for Proposal (RFP) for COVID-19 Research Consortium 
3,2   On being asked about the  steps taken for the  development of  COVID-19 
vaccine in India, DBT in its written reply has stated as under:- 
“Early on during the pandemic, the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) 
and Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC) – a not -for-
profit Public Sector Unit (PSU) of DBT, have published a "Request for Proposal 
(RFP) for COVID-19 Research Consortium". The RFP focused on thematic areas 
inclusive of development of indigenous vaccines. Presently, the Department of 
Biotechnology is supporting the development of nearly 12 vaccine candidates for 
COVID-19, by both industry and academia. Support is also b eing provided for 
development of research resources to aid vaccine development. Additionally, 
nearly 11 GCLP compliant clinical trial sites for quick initiation of clinical trials are 
also being supported and enabling regulatory guidelines were issued for 
expedited vaccine development. More recently, as part of the third stimulus 
package for Atma Nirbhar Bharat, “Mission COV ID Suraksha- the Indian COVID-
19 Vaccine Development Mission”, to be led by the Department of Biotechnology 
(DBT), has been launched by  the Government of India. The Mission will focus on 
acceleration of the development of at least 5 -6 COVID -19 vaccine candidates 
and ensure that some of these are brought closer to licensure and introd uction in 
public health systems.                                                                         
(c) Multi Pronged Strategy 
3.3 In its background note, DBT has  further stated that it is involved in 
multipronged strategy alongwith BIRAC to encourage vaccine development. Both 

14 
 
national efforts and international partnerships are being leveraged to support 
vaccine development for COVID -19. In addition, DBT is supporting companies 
involved in vaccine development and also strengthening the eco system required 
for vaccine development The following efforts have been made by DBT for 
vaccine development:- 
 
• Through the DBT -BIRAC COVID -19 Research Consortium call, funding 
support has been extended to different vaccine candidates  and activities 
to support vaccine development  upto Phase I human clinical trials has 
been provided.  
• Seed funding is being provided to early stage candidates and in 
candidates at advanced preclinical stages; funding support may be made 
available up to Phase I trials.  
• Some major industry related projects being supported include Phase III 
trial of BCG vaccine by Serum Institute of India, mRNA vaccine (Gennova 
Biopharmaceuticals Ltd.), inactivated rabies vector platform (Bharat 
Biotech), protein subunit vaccine ( Biological E Ltd.) and  Vesiculo  Vax 
Platform vaccine (Aurobindo Pharma). 
• DBT is also working with the PM -Task force for supporting COVID -19 
vaccine development efforts through the PM CARES fund (Prime 
Minister's Citizen Assistance and Relief in Emergency Situations fund).  
• Additionally, the Department has set up COVID -19 Vaccine Expert 
Committee (VEC), including participation from Indian academia, industry, 
and international organizations, to provide oversight and monitoring for 
National COVID-19 vaccine development initiatives. 
  
(d) National Biopharma Mission (NBM) 
3.4   DBT also informed the Committee that t he National Biopharma Mission 
(NBM) being implemented by BIRAC, has been at the forefront of supporting 
COVID-19 vaccine development efforts in the nation. The Steering Committee 
which provides oversight for all the activities being supported under the aeg is of 
NBM, has representatives from Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP), 

15 
 
Department of Health and Family Welfare and Drugs Controller General of India 
(DCGI).                                                      
(e) Bio safety Regulations 
3.5 DBT has further informed the Committee that  considering the emerging 
situations of spread of Coronavirus and with the understanding on requirement of 
rapid research and development for COVID -19, the Department has proactively 
taken several steps to facili tate researchers and industries involved in research 
on COVID -19.  The following Bio safety Regulations for COVID 19 have been 
provided by the Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) and Drugs 
Controller General of India (DCGI): 
1. Rapid Regulatory Response Mechanism - to provide expedited regulatory  
approvals for all diagnostics drugs and vaccines. 
 
2. Interim Guidance Document on Laboratory Biosafety to Handle COVID -19 
Specimens- for compliance by all IBSCs and host institutions involved in 
research, development and handling of COVID-19 specimens.  
 
3. A Rapid Regulatory Pathway for COVID Vaccine developed to facilitate 
Vaccine Trials 
Also, the Department of Biotechnology has worked with the NITI Aayog to 
provide Guidelines for Sharing of Bio-specimen & Data for Research on 
COVID-19. 
  
(f) Mission COVID Suraksha 
3.6 As a part of the Government of India’s response to COVID -19 pandemic, 
the Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Ministry of Science and Technology, has 
been working with all stakeholders to address the urgent need for a COVID 
Vaccine. Therefore, to further accelerate these efforts DBT has launched a 
dedicated Mission for COVID -19 Vaccine Development Mission called “COVID 
Suraksha- the Indian COVID-19 Vaccine development Mission”. 
3.7 The goal of the Mission is to accelerate development of approximately 5 -6 
vaccine candidates for COVID -19 so as to ensure that within the next 12 months 
at least 2 -4 of these are closer to licensure and introduction in market for 
consideration of emergency use or for licensure by regulatory authorities.  The 
objectives of the Mission include: 

16 
 
1. Accelerating pre-clinical & clinical development and licensure of COVID-19 
vaccine candidates that are currently in clinical stages or re ady to enter clinical 
stage of development. 
2. Establishing clinical trial sites, immunoassay laborator ies, central labs and 
suitable facilities for animal studies, production facilities and other testing facilities 
to support  COVID-19 vaccine development. 
3. Supporting development of common harmonized protocols, trainings, data 
management systems, regulatory submissions,  internal and external quality 
management systems and accreditations, to accel erate clinical development and 
licensure of COVID-19 vaccine candidates that have targets identified. 
4. Supporting capabilities for process developm ent, cell line development 
and manufacturing of GMP batches for animal toxicology studies and clinical 
trials. 
5. Development of suitable Target Product Profile so that vaccines being 
introduced through the Mission have preferred characteristics applicable for India. 
3.8  The Mission will be led by Department of Biotechnology and will be 
implemented by a dedicated Mis sion Implementation Unit (MIU) at Biotechnology 
Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC), a Public Sector Undertaking of 
DBT, as per the proposal duly approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee 
(EFC). Also, action has been taken for implementation a nd the first set of 
requests for Expression of Interest (REOI) have been published for clinical 
development of COVID -19 vaccine candidates and enhancement of capacity fo r 
COVID-19 vaccine development. Phase I of the Mission has been duly approved 
by the EFC for implementation at a total cost of Rs. 900 crore for a period of 12 
months.  
(g)  Vaccine Expert Committee 
3.9 COVID-19 Vaccine Expert Committee (VEC), has also been constituted by 
DBT, with due approval of the Competent Authority, to ensure the adoption of a 
holistic approach for accelerating the vaccine development efforts. The VEC has 
been mandated with review and evaluation of COVID -19 vaccine  development 
projects, of both industry and aca demia. The VEC comprises of experts from 
Indian academia and science agencies.  
  
B.  Status of Vaccine development in India 
(a)  Efforts made by industry and academia 
 3.10  Nationally, nearly 30 groups, both academia and industry, are actively 
involved in development or collaboration or co-development and trials for COVID-
19 vaccine in India. About 5 vaccine candidates are in clinical trials, which include 
3 indigenously developed vacci ne candidates. The details of Indian industry and 

17 
 
academia engaged in developing/testing of COVID -19 vaccine candidates are as 
follows: 
I)  Vaccine Development Efforts by Industry 
(i) Indigenous efforts / Technology transfer  
S.No. 
COVID-19 Vaccine 
Developer / 
Manufacturer 
Vaccine Platform Stage of 
Development 
1. 
Serum Institute with 
Oxford University 
Astra Zeneca (ICMR)  
Non- Replicating Viral 
Vector 
(ChAdOx1-S) 
 Clinical (Phase III)  
2. Cadila Healthcare  
(Zydus Cadila) DNA Vaccine (ZyCoV-D)  Clinical (Phase III)  
3. Bharat Biotech – ICMR  
Inactivated whole virion 
candidate vaccine 
(BBV152)  
Clinical (Phase III)  
4. Biological E/ 
Collaboration  Subunit (RBD219-N1-C1) Clinical Trial (Phase 
I, II) 
5. Serum Institute –
Novavax 
Protein Subunit Nano 
particle based(NVX-
CoV2373) 
Clinical Trial under 
consideration 
6. 
Bharat Biotech & 
Thomas Jefferson 
University, USA  
Rabies vaccine platform 
(RABV-COV19-S1, 
CORORAB) 
Pre-clinical 
7. 
Bharat Biotech and 
FluGen Inc& University 
of Wisconsin  
Subunit Coroflu, an 
intranasal vaccine based 
on influenza 
platform(BBV150) 
Pre-clinical 
8. Serum Institute with 
Codagenix , USA  
Attenuated vaccine from 
Codagenix Pre-Clinical 
9. Gennova and HDT 
Biotech Corporation  mRNA (HGCO19) Pre-clinical  
10. 
Serum Institute with 
German Center for 
Infection Research 
(DZIF) 
Live attenuated 
Recombinant measles 
virus-based vaccine 
Pre-clinical 
11. 
Aurobindo Pharma 
Limited with Auro 
Vaccines  
Attenuated VSV-vectored 
Vaccine  Pre-clinical  
12. 
Premas Biotech in 
collaboration with 
Akers Biosciences  
Protein subunit (multi 
subunit) 
Viral proteins expressed 
in genetically engineered 
S. cerevisiae platform, D-
Crypt™. (PRAK-03202) 
Pre-clinical  
13. Luxmatra Innovations  
CCAMP, Bengaluru  
mRNA vaccine -Nano-
neo-mRNA platform  Pre-clinical 
14. Mynvax 
Subunit (RBD of S Protein 
produced in insect 
cells)(MYNVCOV1001) 
Pre-clinical  
 
 
15. Pentavalent Bio Synthetic attenuated Pre-clinical  

18 
 
Sciences vaccine platform for 
Influenza 
16. 
Indian Immunologicals 
with Griffith University, 
Australia  
Live attenuated with 
codon de-optimization  Early stage 
17. Seagull Bio Solutions 
Non-replicating measles 
virus vector in Active 
Virosome Platform  
Early Stage  
18. Epygen Biotech Pvt. 
Ltd with Dyadic, US 
C1-RBD based antigen 
vaccine  Early Stage  
19. Panacea Biotec Ltd. 
Whole inactivated virus 
(WIV) COVID-19 vaccine 
in collaboration with 
Refana 
Early Stage 
20. Intas Pharmaceuticals 
Ltd. 
Recombinant adeno-
associated virus [rAAV] 
based genetic vaccine  
Early Stage 
 
 
 
21. Reliance Life Sciences Recombinant protein-
based Covid-19 vaccine Early Stage 
22. Bharat Biotech Chimpanzee Adenovirus 
vectored vaccine Pre clinical 
 
ii) Bulk transfer / formulation 
 
S.No. 
COVID-19 Vaccine 
Developer / 
Manufacturer 
Vaccine Platform Stage of 
Development 
1. Dr Reddy's Laboratories 
Non-replicating viral 
vector 
(Sputnik V) 
Clinical Trial (Phase 
II, III)  
 
II. Vaccine Development Efforts by Academia 
 
S.No. 
COVID-19 Vaccine 
Developer / 
Manufacturer 
Vaccine Platform Stage of 
Development 
1. Centre for Stem Cell 
Research, CMC Vellore 
Spike mRNA 
encapsulated in lipid nano 
particles as a synthetic 
vaccine for SARS-CoV-2 
 Early pre-clinical 
2. Institute of Chemical 
Technology, Mumbai Intranasal vaccine Early  pre-clinical 
3. 
IISER, Trivandrum 
CCMB, Hyderabad  
ICAR-NIHSAD, Bhopal 
(DEC-VAC SARS) 
The project primarily 
focused on using S 
protein as a vaccine 
candidate 
R&D project 
4. IISER, Mohali 
Synthetic reconstruction 
of an attenuated SARS-
CoV-2 virus for vaccine 
R&D project 

19 
 
development and a high-
content inhibitor screen 
5. 
Translational Health 
Science And Technology 
Institute (THSTI) 
Self-amplifying RNA in a 
lipid nano particle Early preclinical 
6. 
International Centre for 
Genetic Engineering and 
Biotechnology (ICGEB) 
Recombinant subunit 
vaccine with hepatitis B Early preclinical 
7. National Institute of 
Immunology (NII) 
E. coli expressed RBD 
conjugated to CRM or 
pneumo 
Early preclinical 
8. 
National Institute of 
Biomedical Genomics 
(NIBMG) 
Baculovirus expressed 
virus-like particles Early preclinical 
9. NCCS, Pune  Synthetic antigen-based 
vaccine 
Early stage 
 
 
 
III. Repurposing of Existing Candidates– Indian Companies 
 
S. No. 
COVID-19 Vaccine 
Developer / 
Manufacturer 
Vaccine Platform Stage of 
Development 
1. Serum Institute of India 
Pvt. Ltd., Pune 
Recombinant BCG 
(VPM1002) 
 
Phase III CT 
2. 
Cadila Pharmaceutical, 
Ahmedabad 
and 
National Institute of 
Immunology, New Delhi 
MIP (Mycobacterium 
indicuspraniior Mw)Adjunct 
Phase III CT 
 
3. ICMR- NIRT BacilleCalmette Guerin 
(BCG) vaccine 
Multi-centric study 
in elderly (> 60 
years) 
4. Indian Institute of 
Science, Bangalore 
Validating 
BacilleCalmetteGuarin 
BCG vaccine for inducing 
immunity to SARS-CoV-2 
 
  
B.   Regulatory roles of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in 
development of vaccine candidates 
(a)  Initiatives taken by CDSCO for improving accessibility of the 
vaccine 
3.11  Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in their background note that the 
following Initiatives taken by  Central Drugs Standar ds Control Organization 
(CDSCO)  for improving accessibility of the vaccine:- 

20 
 
 
• CDSCO had issued a notice on 19.03.2020 that the applications pertaining 
to research and development of drug or vaccine for COVID -19 will be 
accorded high priority and will be processed on fast track basis. 
 
•  A Notice was issued on 25.03.2020 for streamlin ing of Lot release of 
consignments of imported Vaccines by port offices. 
 
• CDSCO has published draft regulatory guidelines for development of 
vaccines with special consideration for COVID-19 vaccine on 21.09.2020. 
 
• Circular has been issued on 03.04.2020 for  streamlining the procedure for 
lot release of domestically manufactured Human vaccine. 
 
• In order to assess the domestic availability of vials for making vaccines, 
meetings were held with vial manufacturers & their production capacities 
were assessed. It w as found that in India, domestic vial manufacturers 
have capacity of producing 2740 million of vials per annum which are 
required for COVID-19 vaccine. 
 
 
3.12  CDSCO has stated  in a written reply to question that it has granted 
permission for conducting clinical trial of COVID -19 vaccines to the following 
manufacturers in India:  
S. 
No. 
Name of 
company 
Phase of 
Clinical Trial 
Study 
Duration 
Status 
1 M/s Bharat 
Biotech 
International 
Ltd., 
Hyderabad  
Phase- I/II 
(Two trials 
i.e.Intramascular 
(IM) & 
Intradermal(ID) 
route)) 
IM route is 12 
months & ID 
route is 06 
months 
 
IM route clinical trial 
completed. 
& 
ID route is ongoing 
2 M/s Cadila 
Healthcare 
Ltd., 
Ahmadabad 
 
Phase- I/II Phase 
I:Approximately 
15 weeks & 
Phase II: 
Approximately 
34 weeks 
Trial is ongoing 
3 M/s Biological 
E limited 
Hyderabad 
Phase- I/II Approximately 
14 months 
 
Trial is ongoing 
4 M/s. Serum 
Institute of 
India Pvt. Ltd., 
Pune 
Phase- II/III Approximately 
7 months and 6 
months of 
follow up 
 
Trial is ongoing 

21 
 
 
CDSCO has further stated that the applicants have to generate Safety, 
immunogenicity and efficacy data in the country as per the provisions under the 
Rules and submit to CDSCO for evaluation for grant of Marketing Authorization.  
 
C.  Progress made by three Vaccine Candidates which are in advanced 
stage 
3.13  In its power point presentation on the subject, the representatives of the 
Ministry of health and Family Welfare showed the following slide on the prog ress 
made in three vaccine candidates which are in advanced stage:- 
Developer Type  Name Indian 
Manufacturer 
Phase I Phase II 
(ongoing) 
Phase III 
(ongoing) 
Oxford, UK Recombinant COVISHIELD Serum 
Institute of 
India Pvt. Ltd. 
Pune 
UK 
(completed) 
UK & South 
Africa  
Brazil  
India 
BBIL-ICMR Inactivated COVAXIN Bharat 
Biotech 
International 
Ltd. 
Hyderabad 
India 
Completed 
India 
Completed 
India   
Approved  
Cadila 
Healthcare 
DNA ZCoV-D Cadila 
Healthcare 
Ltd. 
Ahemdabad 
India 
Completed 
India 
Ongoing 
India  
Proposed 
                                                               
 
(a)  COVAXIN Vaccine Candidate 
3.14  The Department of Health Research its background note has stated as 
under about the development of COVAXIN which is a vaccine candidate 
indigenously developed in the country:-  
5 M/s Bharat 
Biotech 
International 
Ltd., 
Hyderabad 
Phase- III  12 months 
 
Trial is ongoing 

22 
 
“COVAXIN, which is a whole virion inactivated SARS CoV -2 vaccine 
(BBV152). This is being manufactured by Bharat Biotech in collaboration 
with NIV -ICMR. A well -characterized SARS -CoV-2 strain and an 
established vero cell (CCL -81) platform was used to produce this vaccine 
candidate. The seed virus (NIV 2020 -770 strain) was transferred from 
ICMR - NIV to Bharat Biotech.  The vaccine candidate was initially tested 
in smaller animals like rats, rabbits and mice. Thereafter, it was tested in 
other bigger animals like hamsters and monkeys. After safety and 
immunogenicity was demonstrated in these studies, the phases of human 
trial were started. An adaptive, seamless phase 1, followed by phase 2 
randomized, double -blind, multicenter study to evaluate the safety, 
reactogenicity, tolerability and immunogenicity of the whole -virion 
inactivated SA RS-CoV-2 Vaccine (BBV152) in healthy volunteers was 
approved by CDSCO and registered in Clinical Trial Registry of India. This 
study was giving two doses of the vaccine 14 days apart in 1125 
volunteers. After reviewing the findings of pha se I and II studie s, approval 
has been g iven for beginning the phase III  trial which will be done in 
approximately 25,000 volunteers”. 
3.15  The Committee asked about the out come of Phase III trial of COVAXIN .  
In this regard, CDSCO in its written reply stated as follows 
  
  “CDSCO in consultation with the experts of Subject Expert Committee 
(SEC) has granted permission to conduct phase III clinical trial of Whole -
Virion Inactivated SARS -CoV-2 Vaccine (BBV152) on 23.10.2020. As per 
information, M/s Bharat Biotech has started phase III clinical trial of Whole-
Virion Inactivated SARS -CoV-2 Vaccine (BBV152) in 21 sites across the 
country. The safety and immunogenicity data from phase I/II is being 
evaluated on continuous basis by CDSCO as and when submitted”. 
.                                                                         
 
(b)  Covishield Vaccine Candidate 
  
3.16 In regard to Covishield vaccine candidate, DoHR stated in its background 
has state as below:- 
“Covishield vaccine is being tested in India by Serum Institute of India. 
This is a recombinant vaccine developed by Oxford University, UK. A 
Phase 2/3, observer -blind, randomized, controlled study to determine 
the safety and immunogenicity of this vaccine is underway on  1600 
healthy adult volunteers”. 
  

23 
 
 
3.17 On being asked about the p rogress  made  in testing, production and 
launching of this vaccine in the country and in ensuring safety and efficacy of this 
vaccine candidate, CDSCO in  its written reply has stat ed that the safety data of 
Covishield vaccine is being evaluated on continuous basis by C DSCO as and 
when received. The manufacturer was granted manufacturing license to stockpile 
COVID-19 Vaccine with the condition the vaccine can be sold or distributed only 
after obtaining permission for marketing from Central Licensing Authority i.e. 
DCG(I).                                                 
  
 
(c)   ZyCoV-D  Vaccine Candidate 
 
3.18   DoHR stated in its background note that ZyCoV -D is  a plasmid DNA 
vaccine being tested by Zydus Cadila. This is newer technology and is being 
tested in phase I/II study.  As per the status report submitted by firm on 
04.12.2020, in Phase I clinical trial, a total of 48 subjects and further follow up of 
participating subjects is ongoing. Further, in P hase II clinical trial, a total of 1000 
subjects and as per the approved clinical trial protocol, further follows up of 
participating subjects is ongoing.  The Department of Biotechnology in their 
written note stated that this DNA vaccine candidate against SARS -CoV-2 being 
developed by Zydus Cadila, is a novel platform and has a 3 -dose regimen. The 
formulation can be stored at 2ºC to 8ºC. Phase I Clinical Tri als of the vaccine 
candidate showed that it is well tolerated in humans and no major safety 
concerns have been reported so far.  Phase II Clinical Trials are ongoing and are 
expected to be completed in December, 2020.          
(d)  Latest update in ICMR website 
3.19  There is a vaccine portal hosted by the ICMR website 
(https://vaccine.icmr.org.in) which gives updated information regarding COVID -19 
vaccines and Indian initiatives in COVID-19.    As per information available in this 
website, the following is the updated information about the above mentioned 
three vaccine candidates as on 10 January,  2021:- 
COVAXIN: Phase III human clinical trial ongoing.  D CGI approval for 
restricted use in emergency situation received. 

24 
 
COVISHIELD: Participants enrollment and vaccination of Phase II/III Human 
Clinical Trial completed.     DCGI approval for restricted use in emergency 
situation received. 
ZyCoV-D:  Phase II human trial ongoing.  D CGI approval for Phase III Human 
Clinical Trials received,                                    
D.  Safety and Efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines  
(a)  Uniformity in Safety and Efficacy of Multiple Vaccines 
 3.20  The Committee pointed out that considering large population size of our 
country, it is likely that one vaccine or vaccine manufacturer may not be able to 
fulfill the requirements of vaccinating entire population of the country.  In the 
event of launching of multiple vaccines in the country, when it was asked, how 
does the Government proposes to ensure evenness of safety, efficacy, 
reactogenicity, tolerability and immunogenicity of various vaccines so as to create 
strong immunity against COVID 19 virus in a n even manner amongst the people 
of various regions of the country who may receive different vaccines, CDSCO in 
its written comments stated as under:- 
 
“The applicant has to submit Chemistry, Manufacturing and Control 
(CMC), animal toxicity, safety, reacto genicity, immunogenicity and efficacy 
data as required under the provisions of New Drugs and Clinical Trial 
Rules, 2019. The data is examined by CDSCO in consultation with Subject 
Expert Committee (SEC) and accord approval for marketing, if found 
satisfactory. Further, each lot/batch of COVID -19 vaccine has to be tested 
& released by Central Drugs Laboratory (CDL), Kasauli before marketing 
in the country. The above provisions enable to ensure uniformity in the 
approvals granted for manufacture/import and ma rketing of COVID -19 
vaccines in the country”.              
  
 
3.21   Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in its reply to the aforesaid question of 
the Committee has stated that one of The ToRs of The National Expert Group on 
Vaccine Administration for COVID -19 (NEGVAC) is ‘Provide guidance on 
selection of COVID -19 vaccine candidates for the country. The National Expert 
Group will be assisted by the Standing Technical Sub -committee of National 
Technical Advisory Group on Immunization ( NTAGI) for this purpose’. 
Accordingly, the NEGVAC, supported by NTAGI, will review the available 
scientific evidence on safety, efficacy, reactogenicity, tolerability and 
immunogenicity of various vaccines while making a decision for selecting a 
vaccine for roll-out in India. In an event of multiple vaccines being identified for 
roll-out in the country, adequate operational planning will be done to maximize the 
impact of COVID-19 vaccine on mitigating the impact of ongoing pandemic.                                   
  

25 
 
3.22   Further, DBT in its reply to the same question has stated that t he National 
Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation ( NTAGI) has a mandate of providing 
technical advice to inform decision-making on matters pertaining to immunization.  
A COVID-19 Working Group has been constituted under the Standing Technical 
Sub Committee (STSC) of the NTAGI, comprising of technical experts fo r 
reviewing the safety, efficacy, tolerability and related issues of COVID -19 vaccine 
candidates, so as to provide recommendations to the Government.                                                                                         
  
3.23 Further it was asked, whether safety and efficacy of various vaccine 
candidates and their suitability to the people of the country have been analyzed 
by the Government of India and its agencies, the Department of Biotechnology in 
its written reply stated, "the safety and efficacy of all the candidate vaccines is 
determined based on the Phase III clinical trial data, which is monitored by the 
DCGI periodically.                            
 (b)  Efficacy of indigenous vaccine candidates viz-a-viz foreign vaccine 
candidates 
3.24 In reply to a question regarding i ndigenous vaccine candidates and their 
efficacy viz-a-viz foreign vaccine candidates, the Depa rtment of Biotechnology in 
its written reply stated as under: 
 
"The vaccine candidate (ChAdOx1-S), developed by Oxford University / 
Astra Zeneca and in -licensed to Serum Institute of India Pvt. Ltd. (SIIPL), 
has demonstrated an efficacy of 62 -90% in the global Phase III clinical 
trial, depending on the dose administered. The Russian Sputnik  V vaccine 
and the mRNA vaccine candidates of Pfizer and Moderna, have reported 
an efficacy of >92%, based on interim analysis of the Phase III clinical trial 
data. The efficacy of the indigenously developed inactivated vaccine 
candidate, COVAXIN, by Bhara t Biotech International Ltd. (BBIL) can be 
determined only after completion of the administration of the second dose 
in the Phase III trial." 
(c) Efficiency of Vaccines against  various COVID 19 virus strains 
3.25 On being asked about  types of COVID -19 virus strains  that have been 
reported till date in different parts of the country and how they are different from 
other strains reported globally , the Depa rtment of Biotechnology in its  written 
reply stated as under: 
"Based on available  information, so far four different lineages of SARS -
CoV-2 virus have been identified across the nation with a predominance of 

26 
 
the A2a haplotype (20A/B/C) with D614G mutation, which is found to be 
emerging in almost all regions of the country. This particu lar haplotype has 
also been reported globally." 
3.26 In this regard , further the Committee asked whether the present research 
by various vaccine candidates is taking place keeping in view multiple strains of 
COVID-19 virus so as to prevent spread of this deadly virus across the country, 
the Department of Biotechnology in thei r written reply stated, “ The research 
efforts of the scientists are directed towards development of a broad spectrum 
and viable vaccine candidate against COVID-19." 
E.   Vaccine Manufacturing Capacity in India 
(a)  India’s Strength as a Vaccine Manufacturing Hub 
3.27  India's strength as a Vaccine Manufacturing hub is well -recognized 
globally. More than 60% of Global Vaccine demand for the Immunization 
programmes is met by the Indian manufacture rs. India’s strength in the field of 
vaccines lies in the manufacturing cap acity of the Indian vaccine production 
industries, which could be potentially exploited to cater to not just India, but also 
to the world. Hon’ble Prime Minister has already indicated during the Vaccine 
Summit in London on 4th June, 2020 that the “ India not only has the capacity to 
contribute to the global health efforts, but also has the will to do so in a spirit of 
sharing and caring”.  
3.28   However, in the present scenario, where in diverse vaccine platforms are in 
advanced clinical stages of developme nt and there is considerable global 
demand for COVID vaccines, the existing manufacturing capacities of the Indian 
industry would have to be ramped up. Also, there may be a requirement for 
setting up of additional facilities as the existing facilities may not be able to 
support production of the specific vaccine platforms. This is especially significant, 
considering India’s intent to participate in the WHO solidarity trial, whereby there 
is a need to manufacture potential vaccine candidates being developed 
indigenously and globally, for trials in India. Considering the indigenous vaccine 
candidates apart from other international vaccine candidates set to enter the 
clinical trial stage, there is a substantial requirement for production of diverse 
vaccine candidates. 
3.29   In this context, a preliminary exercise of mapping the manufacturing 
capacity for COVID -19 vaccine candidates by leading Indian Vaccine 
manufacturers was undertaken by NEGVAC.    NEGVAC has also undertaken an 
exercise to estimate the possible  coverage and consequent requirement of 
vaccine in the first phase. Accordingly, the indications are that about 660 million 
doses of COVID -19 vaccine will be required in the first phase of vaccination 
program in India. However, given the uncertainties in d evelopment of natural 
immunity, the pattern of disease spread etc, it is quite possible that there may be 

27 
 
requirement for at least 1000 million doses of the vaccine demanding huge 
investments. 
3.30     Taking into account large -scale manufacturing requirem ents for Phase 
III trials and post -licensure manufacturing, the  Mission COVID Suraksha  is 
proposed to be implemented by DBT. The Concept note for the Mission has 
already been approved by Department of Expenditure (DoE). As part of the 
Mission, funds would be set aside for manufacturing capacities. This will include 
costs for scale -up and clinical trial material generation and large scale 
manufacturing for commercialization. These efforts would ensure access to 
COVID Vaccine not only for the Indian populatio n but also contribute to the 
requirement of the world. 
 3.31 The Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals while giving the power point 
presentation during the informal discussion held on   23.11.2020 informed the 
Hon’ble Chairperson and the members of the Committee who were present  
provided the following information about Vaccine Manufacturing Capacity in India: 
 
"India has strong and proven capacities in vaccine manufacturing for 
domestic and export  markets. There are about 20 Vaccine manufacturers 
in India including the world’s largest producer of vaccine (by number of 
doses).Indian vaccines are available for a number of diseases such as 
Influenza, TB, Hepatitis B, Tetanus, Measles etc. Indian manuf acturers 
account for 40 -70% of DPT and BCG vaccines and 90% of measles 
vaccine against WHO demand. The exports of vaccines from India were 
valued at Rs. 6500 crore in 2019 -20 (which is 2/3 rd of the total 
production)*. Covid -19 vaccine is under development globally and in India 
and is presently at the development and clinical trial stage.  
  
*industry estimates 
 
(b)  Present production capacity of COVID-19 Vaccines in the country 
3.32  CDSCO in their written reply to the Committee furnished the present 
production capacity of COVID -19 Vaccines as submitted by the manufacturers of 
COVID-19 vaccines: 
 
S. No. Name of Firm Production Capacity 
(in lakhs doses /Annum) 
1 M/a Serum Institute of India 
Pvt., Ltd., Pune 
4000-5000 
2 M/s Bharat Biotech 
International Limited, 
Hyderabad 
1000 
3 M/s Cadila Healthcare 
Limited, Ahmadabad  
 
80.4 

28 
 
  
(c)  License to stockpile COVID-19 vaccine 
 
3.33   I n its Background note, Drugs Regulation Section of Department of Health 
& Family Welfare stated that c onsidering the emergency and unmet need, 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW) has  issued  notification  vide 
G.S.R. 1511(E) dated 18.05.2020  under Section 26B of the Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act,1940 providing  that  manufacturer can manufacture and  stock 
any  vaccine for COVID -19, which is under clinical  trial, for sale or distribution 
after completion of clinical trial and  grant of  manufacturing  approval by CDSCO.  
In accordance with the above notification, CDSCO has gran ted manufacturing 
license to the following  manufacturers to manufacture & stock the COVID -19 
vaccine (under clinical trial) for the purpose of making it available after succe ssful 
completion of clinical trial to meet the emergency arisen due to COVID -19 
pandemic:- 
 
S.No. Name of applicant  Production capacity  (lakhs 
doses/Annum) 
1 M/s Serum Institute, Pune 
(Oxford vaccine) 
4000-5000 
2 M/s Bharat Biotech, Hyderabad 
(inactivated Bulk Vaccine) 
1000 
 
F.  Procurement Mechanism for COVID-19 vaccine 
3.34 On being asked about the procurement mechanism for COVID-19 vaccine, 
the Department  of Health and Family Welfare in their written reply stated as 
under: 
"Under the guidance of NEGVAC, the National Technical Advisory Group 
on Immunization ( NTAGI) has recommended regarding vaccine 
candidates which may be available in near future subject to  licensing by 
the DCGI and procurement will be done through company agnostic 
purchase agreement with vaccine manufacturers whose vaccine candidate 
is licensed by DCGI after ascertaining the safety and efficacy of the 
vaccine."  
3.35   The Committee pointed  that as per media reports the European Union, 
USA, UK, China and other countries have already entered into pre -agreements 
with world’s leading pharmaceutical players in order to secure enough vaccine 
capacity for their people once it becomes available.  I n this regard, whether the 
Government of India has entered into or proposes to enter into any agreements 
with any vaccine manufacturer for procuring enough quantity of vaccines for the 

29 
 
huge population of the country and vaccination of entire population of the country, 
to this query the Department of Health and Family Welfare in the ir written note 
stated, "The NEGVAC is engaging with the vaccine manufacturers on a one -to-
one basis to finalize the modality of securing adequate quantities of the vaccine 
for the beneficiaries requiring COVID-19 vaccine in a phased manner."  
 G.   International Partnerships for Vaccine Development and Procurement 
 
(a)  Strategic engagements with global public health alliances 
 
3.36     In the background note of Department of Pharmaceuticals it has been 
stated that , the Department of Biotechnology is also involved in key strategic 
engagements with global public health alliances to further vaccine development 
activities and  keeping India engaged at the Global fora for COVID Vaccine 
development through International partnerships. 
3.37   In the international arena, the Department of Biotechnology is leveraging 
efforts through the Ind -CEPI mission, titled - ‘India Centric Epidemic 
Preparedness through Rapid Vaccine Development: S upporting Indian Vaccine 
Development. This mission being implemented as part of the Atal Jai 
Anusandhan Biotech Mission - Undertaking Nationally Relevant Technology 
Innovation (UNaTI)  aimed at strengthening the development of vaccines and 
associated compet encies/technologies for the diseases of epidemic potential in 
India. The strategic engagement of DBT with CEPI through Ind-CEPI will facilitate 
funding of proposals from Indian researchers; involved in two key engagements 
for COVID-19: 
▪ CEPI’s call for ‘Proven vaccine technologies, applicable for large scale 
manufacturing, for rapid response against novel coronavirus, SARS -
CoV-2’ for rapid development and manufacture of proven vaccine 
candidates for SARS- CoV-2. 
▪ CEPI’s call on ‘Centralized laboratory for mea surement of immune 
responses elicited by SARS -CoV-2 vaccine candidates’ for 
establishment of common protocols and provide robust assays for 
regulatory purposes. Under this call, the DBT -Translational Health 
Science and Technology Institute (THSTI) Bioassay  laboratory 
supported under the Ind-CEPI Mission of DBT has been recognized by 
CEPI as one of the 06 global network of laboratories for centralized 
assessment of COVID- 19 Vaccines. 
3.38.   Also, the Department of Biotechnology, un der the Indo -US Vaccine 
Action Programme (VAP), is facilitating access to NIH resources and expertise to 
enable accelerated development of COVID -19 vaccines. One of the vaccine 
developers being supported by DBT -BIRAC, Gennova Biopharmaceuticals Ltd. 

30 
 
(Pune, India), is involved in t he development of a lipid encapsulated mRNA 
Vaccine for COVID-19 in active partnership with HDT Biotech Corporation, USA.  
(b)  Strengthening Clinical Trial Capacity in Neighbouring Countries:  
3.39.   Department of Biotechnology in partnership with Ministry of External 
Affairs (MEA) and Indian Missions abroad is enabling strengthening of clinical 
trial capacity in neighbouring countries, for facilitating Phase III trials for COVID 
vaccines. Two sessions  have been held for over 90 participants from 
Afghanistan, Bhutan, Nepal, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Maldives and Mauritius. 
(c)  India’s Participation in ACT and COVAX:  
3.40 In the wake of the COVID -19 outbreak, the World Health Organization 
(WHO), along with accordant public and private global health partners, launched 
the Access to COVID-19 Tools (ACT) Accelerator on 24 April 2020, to accelerate 
the development, production and equitable access to new COVID -19 diagnostics, 
therapeutics and vaccines.  Considering India’s focal and established role in 
global vaccine manufacturing, the intent for participation in the ‘ Vaccine Pillar’ of 
the ACT Accelerator (also known as COVAX), was conveyed by the Hon’ble 
Minister for H&FW, whereby, the vaccine manufact uring capacity of India was 
pledged, for making available vaccines for the world. The COVAX facility aims to 
get 2 billion doses of COVID vaccine by the end of 2021 and assures the 
participating countries for vaccine doses to cover 20% of their country’s 
population. COVAX is co-led by Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations 
(CEPI) and Gavi (The Vaccine Alliance).With nearly 29 vaccine candidates in 
various stages of clinical trials globally, and about 6 of them in Phase III trials, 
participation in the COVAX facility is beneficial in providing access to the global 
candidates in advanced stages, for their further utilization in the country. Also, 
India’s pre -existing engagement strategy with CEPI and the well -established 
partnership with Gavi would be beneficial in meeting the COVAX targets. 
 3.41   In regard to the above, t he Department of Health and Family Welfare in 
its written note to the Committee further stated that the  ACT-Accelerator partners 
are collaborating under four pillars, one amongst which is COVAX facility led by 
Coalition of Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), Gavi, the vaccine 
alliance and World Health Organization (WHO) that is working on Development & 
manufacturing of vaccines, Policy & Allocation, and  Procurement & Delivery. 
COVAX facility aims to ensure vaccine availability through connecting pooled 
demand of countries with pooled supply from manufacturers.  There are two type 
of participation in Ga vi COVAX facility - one is for Self -Financing Participants 
(SFP) and other is for Low Income Countries (LICs) and Low and Middle Income 
Countries (LMICs) with Gross National Income (GNI) per capita income up to 
US$4000 who will get donor subsidized doses. Under Advanced Market 
Commitment, Gavi is supporting 92 middle & lower income countries including 

31 
 
India. The quantity of vaccines to be supplied from COVAX facility to India is yet 
to be finalized; however, advocacy with COVAX facility is ongoing to alloca te 
India a fair share of vaccines. 
 3.42 The Committee asked  about the details of initiatives taken by the 
Government of India to get the country’s share of vaccines from COVAX facility, 
in this regard the Department of Health and Family Welfare in their w ritten note 
stated as under: 
"Yes, the Government of India is constantly advocating for its fair share in 
the COVAX AMC supported COVID -19 vaccines at par with other AMC 
countries. In the Programme and Policy Committee (PPC) meeting of Gavi 
on 28 -29 Octobe r 2020, COVAX AMC Support to India was discussed. 
Additional Secretary & Mission Director (National Health Mission) who 
represents Asia -Pacific Constituency, made a strong case to provide 
vaccine doses to India on pro -rata basis of population as done for r est of 
the AMC91 countries which is 35% of the total vaccine doses in COVAX 
AMC which will amount to covering 12.8% of our population.  For securing 
these doses under COVAX Facility, we have taken parallel advocacy 
efforts through MEA and directly. Hon’ble HFM has written to his 
counterparts in UK & Australia as both countries are the members of Gavi 
Board and were not very supportive of India’s stand as per information 
received from MEA (PMI Geneva). Hon’ble HFM has also written to 
Director General, WHO for  supporting India stand in the upcoming Gavi 
Board is meeting in December. MEA has reached out to UNICEF 
headquarter in New York to solicit the support in the December Gavi 
Board meeting." 
  
  
 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
COVID-19 VACCINE ADMINISTRATION INCLUDING LOGISTICS FOR 
DISTRIBUTION AND DELIVERY OF VACCINES 
 
A. National Expert Group o n Vaccine Administration For COVID-19 
(NEGVAC) 
 
(a)  Constitution and Composition of NEGVAC 
 
4.1 The Government of India has set up a National Expert Group on Vaccine 
Administration for COVID -19 (NEGVAC) on 7 th August, 2020 under the 
chairmanship of Dr V K Paul, Member NITI Aayog, with Secretary, Health & 
Family Welfare as Co-chair and Secretaries of Ministries/Departments of External 
Affairs, Biotechnology, Health Research, Pharmaceuticals, Electronics & IT and 
other experts as members.  
 
4.2   During her power point presentation during informal discussion on the 
subject, the Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals showed the following 
slide on the composition of NEGVAC:- 
 
National Expert Group on Vaccine Administration for COVID 19 
(NEGVAC)
• NEGVAC has been constituted under chairpersonship of Dr. V K
Paul, Member NITI Aayog and Secretary, H&FW as Co-chairperson
and following members:
Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs Director General,  ICMR
Secretary, Department of Biotechnology Dr Randeep Guleria, Director, AIIMS
Secretary, Department of Health Research Dr Samiran Panda, Director,
National AIDS Research
Institute (NARI)
Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals Dr Rakesh Aggarwal, member, 
National Technical Advisory Group 
on Immunization (NTAGI) & Dean, 
JIPMER Puducherry
Secretary, Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology
Director General Health Services  (DGHS) Representatives from Five State
Governments (Assam, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu
& Uttar Pradesh )
Representative from Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance
 

33 
 
 Responsibilities of NEGVAC 
 4.3  As per the details given in the background note of Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, NEGVAC is tasked with the following responsibilities :- 
(i)  Providing  guidance on selection of COVID -19 vaccine candidates 
for the country and on procurement mechanism of COVID -19 
vaccine, both indigenous and international ; 
 
(ii) Responsibilities of preparing a strategy for conceptualiz ation and 
implementation mechanisms for creation of a digital infrastructure for 
inventory management and delivery mechanism of the vaccine 
including tracking of vaccination process (last mile delivery) to 
ensure equitable and transparent delivery of vaccine ;  
 
(iii)  NEGVAC will also provide guidance on financial resources required 
for procurement of COVID -19 vaccine and various options of 
financing the same; 
 
(iv)  Selection of delivery platforms, on cold chain and associated 
infrastructure for roll out of COVID-19 vaccination; 
 
(v) Vaccine safety and surveillance; creating awareness and 
dissemination information. 
 
(vi) Further NEGVAC will provide guidance on the role of India in 
supporting its key neighbours and development partners and on 
leveraging domestic vaccine manufa cturing capacity for meeting the 
national and international needs of COVID-19 vaccines. 
 Accordingly, the various Departments and agencies of Government are working 
on vaccine development with a view to enable vaccine production and 
vaccination in a systematic manner.                   
4.4  During Power point presentation on the subject, repr esentatives of 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare stated that a Standing  Technical Sub -
committee of National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization (NTAGI)  has 
been constituted under NEGVAC with the following terms of references: 
• Detailed planning of vaccine delivery to priority groups. 
• Arranging logistics and cold chain mechanism for grass root delivery 
• Instituting trained manpower for vaccine delivery. 
                                                       

34 
 
(c )   Work done by NEGVAC 
4.5  The Committee was informed  by the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare in their written note that under NEGVAC following major decisions have 
been taken during first ten  meetings that were held after its establishment  
wherein decisions pertaining to various activities of COVID -19 v accine roll -out 
have been taken:-  
"Formation of two sub-groups for: 
a. Formally engaging with vaccine manufacturers. 
b. For medical supplies logistics - consumable, Vials, syringes, 
transportation etc.(Responsibility of Dept. of P harmaceuticals (DoP), Dept. 
of Biotechnology (DBT)) 
• Scaling up for beneficiary identification and logistics outreach. 
(Responsibility of MoHFW) 
• Expedite engagements on Diplomatic front for support for COVID -
19 vaccine. (Responsibility of MEA, DBT and Dept.  of Health Research 
(DHR) 
• Fast tracking the commitments of finances and policy for supporting 
vaccine candidate and commitment of assurance supply of vaccine from 
Indian Manufacturers. (Responsibility of Dept. of Expenditure (DoE), DBT 
and  MoHFW),  
• ICMR to provide progress report on point of care antibody test to be 
provided in next meeting of the Expert group. (Responsibility of DHR) 
• Engagement with neighbouring countries for provision of COVID 
vaccines and support on clinical trials.(Responsibility of MEA, DBT, DHR) 
• Essential Health Services should not be compromised while 
conducting COVID  vaccinations. (Responsibility of MoHFW) 
• DHR and DBT to guide on potential Emergency Use Authorization 
scenario. (Responsibility of DHR & DBT) 
• Cold Chain strengthening for COVID Vaccination and preparation 
for supply of  syringes and other logistics. (Responsibility of MoHFW) 
• Develop robust Communication Plan for the people and reach out 
to the  opinion makers well before scaling up of vaccinatio n. 
(Responsibility of MoHFW) 
• Adaptation and enhancement of existing eVIN platform for real time 
monitoring.  (Responsibility of MoHFW) 
• Prioritization of Health Care Workers, Front Line Workers,  elderly 
population (aged 50 years and above) and people aged less than 50 years 
with co-morbidities for COVID-19 vaccination.  (Responsibility of MoHFW) 

35 
 
• Advance Market Commitment has to be company agnostic & 
framework should  be applicable to even potential vaccines in future. 
(Responsibility of MoHFW) 
• Strengthen the AEFI Committees and surveillance and factor in the 
training for  crisis management at state/district level. (Responsibility of 
MoHFW) 
• AYUSH doctors could be considered as vaccinators if injections 
administration is among their competencies. (Responsibility of MoHFW) 
 
These decisions during the various meetings of NEGVAC are being utilized for 
operationalizing various aspects of roll-out of COVID-19 vaccine."  
4.6   The Committee stated that the COVID -19 was recognized by the 
Government as a biological disaster during March 2020 under Disaster 
Management Act 2005 but the National Expert Group on Vaccine Administration 
for COVID -19 (NEGVAC) was set up on 7 th August, 2020. In view of this, the 
Committee asked about the reasons for the delay of n early five months in 
constitution of this expert group, to this the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare in their written reply stated as under: 
 "Since, the beginning of COVID -19 pandemic, the Department of Health & 
Family Welfare has been proactively involved in managing the pandemic 
through health system strengthening measures. The roll -out of COVID -19 
vaccine is one of the many measures for controlling the pandemic in the 
country. The constitution of NEGVAC has been done to guide the roll -out 
of COVI D-19 vaccine in the country when the possibility of a vaccine 
against COVID -19 being available was seen in terms of global research 
and development efforts. Hence, there has been no delay in constitution of 
NEGVAC." 
4.7  The Committee asked about the specific challenges before the NEGVAC in 
the fight against spread of COVID -19 and measures that are being taken or 
proposed to be taken to address these challenges, in this regard the Department 
of Health and Family Welfare in their written reply stated as under: 
 "The specific challenges before the NEGVAC are identification of vaccine 
candidates for roll -out in the country and prioritizing the beneficiaries for 
the same. To address these challenges, NEGVAC is reviewing the 
available scientific evidence, co nsulting with technical experts and 
engaging with the vaccine manufacturers for providing guidance to the roll-
out of COVID-19 vaccine in India."  
  

36 
 
(d)  Role of Department of Pharmaceuticals 
4.8   In this regard, the Committee asked about the role/responsibility that has 
been assigned to the Department of Pharmaceuticals by NEGVAC and the steps 
that have been taken by the Department in fulfillment of that role/responsibility. 
The Department of Pharmaceuticals in its  written reply stated as under:        
"Secretary DoP, as member of larger group of NEGVAC is heading the 
Sub Group -II on logistics and distribution which is mandated to look into 
the effective co-ordination of logistic aspects of COVID -19 vaccination. So 
far eleven meetings of this Sub-Group have taken place and the group has 
co-ordinated the logistic aspects like syringes, cold chains, their 
transportation with different ministries like MoHFW, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, DBT etc. The Sub -Group also reviews the co -ordination between 
MoHFW and various State Governments."                                   
B.  Role of Department of Health and Family Welfare 
(a)  Responsibilities of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
 4.9    In a written reply to a question on its responsibilities, Department of Health 
& Family Welfare stated that u nder the guidance of National Expert Group on 
Vaccine Administration for COVID -19 (NEGVAC), Department of Health and 
Family Welfare is involved i n the following activities for distribution of COVID -19 
vaccine and vaccination of beneficiaries: 
• Development of operational guidelines including communication 
strategy for  COVID-19 vaccination. 
• Liaison with central line ministries for support in operatio nal 
planning and communication strategy for COVID-19 vaccination. 
• Development of Co -Win software for individualized tracking of 
beneficiaries and real time information on COVID -19 vaccine stocks and 
their storage  temperatures. 
• Enlisting of the beneficiari es for COVID -19 vaccination in 
collaboration with States/UTs and central line ministries. 
• Assessment of Cold Chain Network for storage and distribution of 
COVID-19 vaccine and its strengthening. 
• Assessment of requirement of syringes and other logistics for  
COVID-19 vaccination and streamlining the supplies for the same in timely 
manner. 
• Regular monitoring of States/UTs for various activities pertaining to 
planning and preparedness for COVID-19 vaccination. 
 
(b) Preparedness of Department of Health and Family We lfare for 
distribution/delivery chain and associated logistics infrastructure 

37 
 
The details of preparedness of Department of Health and Family Welfare for 
distribution/delivery chain and associated logistics infrastructure for COVID -19 
vaccine in India  are given below:- 
(i) Prioritization of beneficiaries and their identification: 
 
4.10 In view of the global scale of pandemic, there will be huge demand for 
vaccine upon its availability. Accordingly, the National Expert Group on Vaccine 
Administration for COVID-19 (NEGVAC) has been discussing the prioritization of 
various groups in terms of Health Care Workers (HCWs), Front Line Workers 
(FLWs), elderly population (aged 50 years and above) and people aged less than 
50 years with co -morbidities who could be covered first. States/UTs and central 
line ministries are creating the database of HCWs working in their respective 
health facilities/hospitals/laboratories etc. This database of HCWs will be used for 
vaccinating them, once the vaccine fo r COVID -19 is available.  Similarly, 
databases for other priority groups are also being prepared.                                         
4.11 In this regard, the Committee sought  the  details about the progress made 
with respect to the data base  of elderly population, elderly population with co -
morbidities, people living in dense localities of cities and towns, slum areas, etc. 
created for vaccination followed by vaccination of Health Care Workers, the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare in their written reply stated as under: 
"The decision on prioritization of groups for COVID -19 vaccination will be 
taken by NEGVAC. Presently deliberations of NEGVAC pertain to 
prioritization of Health Care Workers (H CWs), Front Line Workers (FLWs), 
elderly population (aged 50 years and above) and people aged less than 
50 years with co -morbidities. The process of creation of database of 
HCWs and FLWs is ongoing. The decision on additional groups to be 
prioritized for C OVID-19 vaccination will be taken based on evolving 
scientific evidence to maximize the impact of this drive."    
4.12 Further, the Committee asked about the concrete steps that are proposed 
to be taken by the Government of India to ensure required quantity of COVID -19 
vaccines to vaccinate the entire population of the country at the earliest and the 
quantum of funds required for the same, the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare in their written note stated as under:- 
"Initially the vaccine will be prioritized for Health Care Workers (HCWs), 
Front Line Workers (FLWs), elderly population (aged 50 years and above) 
and people aged less than 50 y ears with co -morbidities. For covering 3 
crore HCWs and FLWs with two doses of vaccine, around 6.6 crore doses 
will be required which is estimated to cost around Rs 1485 crore. 

38 
 
However, the total fund required for vaccinating all those requiring vaccine 
will depend on the estimated number of total prioritized beneficiaries and 
the prevailing cost of vaccine. The procurement of vaccines by MoHFW 
will be done using domestic funds." 
4.13 The Committee also asked about the proposal to vaccinat e all the people 
residing in hot s pot areas in various States/Union Territories on priority basis to 
contain the spread of the pandemic,  the Department  of Health and Family 
Welfare in their written reply stated , "No, presently there is no proposal to 
vaccinate all people residing in Hot Spot areas. The decision on including any 
population group is based on the objective to minimize mortality and spread of 
COVID-19 pandemic taking in view the available scientific e vidence. There is no 
concrete evidence on vaccinating people residing in hot spot areas." 
4.14 On the issue of covering the people in rural and remote areas on priority 
basis and steps that have been taken to protect the people of rural/remote areas, 
the Department of Health and Family Welfare in their written reply  stated, "The 
prioritized beneficiaries in all areas will be covered for COVID -19 vaccination 
including rural and remote areas." 
4.15  Further the Committee also asked about the proposal to vacci nate Indian 
population for free of cost, the  Department of Health and Family Welfare in their 
written reply  stated, "The financing mechanism for vaccinating the entire 
population of the country has not been finalized yet." 
4.16 During the informal discussion held on 23.11.2020, a  representative of 
Indian Council of Medical Research informed the Committee that instead of mass 
vaccination, the proposal is to go for smart vaccination.  
To understand this, the Committee asked about the  meaning of smart 
vaccination along with effectiveness of this approach when the country is 
experiencing rising cases of COVID -19 infection in various parts of the country, 
the Department of Health and Family Welfare in their written note stated as 
under: 
 "Smart vaccination pertains to vaccinating those individuals who are at 
highest risk of contracting COVID -19 infection or mortality due to COVID -
19 infection. Through vaccinating such prioritized groups, maximum 
benefit can be achieved in mitigating the impact of the pandemic in view of 
limited availability of the vaccine during the initial phases." 
4.17 The Committee further asked about the ability of the smart vaccination to 
arrest the spread of COVID-19 caused by asymptomatic cases and steps that are 
proposed for an effective and universal vaccination programme to eliminate 
COVID-19 pandemic from the country, the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare in their written note stated as under: 

39 
 
 "Smart vaccination will maximize the benefit for mitigating the impact of the 
pandemic in view of limited availability of vaccine in initial phases. Through 
this approach, further reduction in number of symptomatic as well as 
asymptomatic cases is expected to achieve. However, vaccination as a 
stand-alone measure cannot curtail the pandemic and other 
pharmacological as well as non -pharmacological measures like physical 
distancing, use of masks and hand hygiene have to be practiced to reduce 
the number of cases of COVID-19." 
(ii) Use of Information Technology B ased Platform for beneficiary 
management and supply chain management of vaccines 
 
4.18 Under the Universal Immunization Programme, electronic Vaccine 
Intelligence Network (eVIN) is being used across states/UTs for real -time 
information on vaccine stocks and their storage temperature. A software named 
Co-WIN [earlier named as COVID -19 Vaccination Beneficiary Management 
system (CVBMS)] has been created as an enhancement of existing electronic 
Vaccine Intelligence Network (eVIN) module for individuali zed tracking of all 
beneficiaries receiving COVID-19 vaccine. Presently, the States/UTs and 
central line ministries are uploading the database of Health Care Workers on the 
Co-WIN software. Use of this software will help in efficient planning of manpower, 
vaccines and logistics for smooth introduction of COVID -19 vaccine.The working 
of Co-WIN software at various levels is as follows: 
• National level: national level users at MoHFW and central line 
ministries will be able to create users for State/UT and/or si milar levels 
within their organization for creating the database of beneficiaries. 
These users will also be able to view the dashboard having information 
on various activities pertaining to registration of beneficiaries, their 
vaccination status, available  stocks of vaccines and their storage 
temperature 
 
• State level: State level users will be able to create users for district 
within their respective state for creating the database of beneficiaries. 
These users will also be able to view the dashboard having  information 
on various activities pertaining to registration of beneficiaries, their 
vaccination status, available stocks of vaccines and their storage 
temperature. 
 
• District and Local level: District level users will be able to enter details 
about regist ration of beneficiaries, create database of health facilities 
and vaccinators. The district level users will then do the session 
planning in the Co -WIN software which will allocate the registered 
beneficiaries to session sites and vaccinators. The local le vel will be 

40 
 
able to conduct the vaccination sessions and view vaccination status of 
the beneficiaries.  Both District and Local level users will be able to 
view the progress of the vaccination drive in their catchment area. They 
will also be able to view vaccine stocks and storage temperature. 
 
(iii) Planning for Cold Chain and Syringes 
 
4.19 Vaccines are thermo -sensitive products that needs to be stored at 
specified temperature at all levels from manufacturer to the site of vaccine 
administration.In view of introduction of COVID -19 vaccine, an assessment of 
Cold Chain Space requirement has been carried out for the entire country on the 
basis of which procurement process is being initiated for Cold Chain 
Equipment.An estimation of req uirement of syringes has also been done under 
the guidance of National Expert Group on Vaccine Administration for COVID -19 
(NEGVAC) and timely action is being initiated to align their supplies. On the issue 
of adequacy of the present infrastructure and logi stics to provide seamless 
distribution of COVID -19 vaccine across the country, the  Department of Health 
and Family Welfare in their written reply stated as under: 
 "The present infrastructure and logistics are adequate to provide 
vaccination to Health Care  Workers and Front Line Workers which are 
around 3 crore. An assessment of Cold Chain Infrastructure and logistics 
has been carried out and strengthening measures for the same are 
underway for seamless distribution of COVID -19 vaccine across the 
country for subsequently identified beneficiaries."                    
4.20 On being asked about the details on the Government study on the 
preparedness of big countries like China, USA, European Union, Brazil, Russia 
etc. for administering COVID vaccine supply chain and the corresponding 
measures being taken/proposed to be taken to manage the stupendous task of 
distribution/delivery of COVID Vaccines throughout the country, the Department 
of Health and Family Welfare in their written reply stated as under:  
"Under the guidance of NEGVAC, the Government of India is watching the 
fast evolving scenarios closely. The Government of India is taking all 
measures for best vaccine supply practice from manufacturer to session 
sites to manage the stupendous tasks of distribution / delivery of COVID 
vaccine throughout the country. Quality cold  chain equipment s are 
supplied for storage capacity augmentation. The cold chain technician and 
the vaccine and cold chain handler are trained regularly on the equipment 
maintenance and on good storage and distribution principles."                                               
 

41 
 
4.21   When  the Committee asked about the steps that are being taken by 
NEGVAC on cold chain and associated infrastructure for roll out of COVID -19 
vaccination, the Department  of Health and Family Welfare in their written reply 
stated as under:  
"For the additional requirement of Cold Chain Equipment, purchase orders 
have been placed for 3089 Deep Freezers (DF) and 8767 Ice -lined 
refrigerators (ILR) while UNICEF is supporting supply of 20 Walk -in 
Freezers (WIF), 40 Walk -in Coolers (WIC), 620 Deep Freezers and 2984 
Ice-lined refrigerators. Further tenders have been floated for 18  Walk-in 
Freezers, 53 Walk -in Coolers, 6897 Deep Freezers and Department of 
Public Enterprises has been requested for 14 Walk -in Freezers, 12 Walk -
in Coolers, 1869 Deep Freezers and 1866 Ice -lined refrigerators under 
CSR initiative. The supplies of the pro cured equipment to the states have 
begun from last week of November 2020."                                                                   
4.22 With respect to the assessments that has been made about the 
requirement of cooled transport facility in the c ountry for transporting vaccine 
according to the specific temperature requirements and steps that are being 
taken to meet the cooled transport requirement of various state/UTs for 
transporting vaccines,  the Department of Health and Fam ily Welfare in their 
written reply stated as under: 
 "There is an established mechanism of vaccine transportation in the 
country from primary vaccine stores to the session sites maintaining 
required temperature. Manufacturers supply directly to 41 primary stores in 
the States/UTs/. Government Medical Stores Depot supply vaccines to 19 
primary stores in the country. There are insulated vaccine vans, supplied 
by the Govt. of India to all States for vaccine transportation. Cold boxes 
and vaccine carriers are used for vaccin e transportation to intermediary 
stores and session sites respectively.  The same mechanism will also be 
used for COVID-19 vaccine transportation."                      
4.23 On the steps that are being taken for creation of requisite amount of cold 
chain space (both central storage capacity and peripheral storage requirement) 
and procurement of related equipment, syringes, etc. throughout the country, 
specifying about its funding mechanism between central / state / union territories 
and its implementation p rocedure in all states / union territories, the Department 
of Health and Family Welfare in their written reply stated as under:  
"The cold chain equipment s are regularly procured to address the 
replacement of ageing equipment, change from CFC refrigerant to non CFC 
refrigerant, creation of new vaccine stores with cold chain equipment and 

42 
 
capacity augmentation to accommodate new vaccines under the Universal 
Immunization Program. Orders have  been placed for  procurement of cold 
chain equipment by M/s HLL (for MoHFW) and UNICEF (under KfW 
assistance). A landscape analysis was conducted by UNICEF and BMGH to 
identify potential private cold storage service provider s and there may be 
engagement with the private service providers if any need arises." 
4.24 The Department of Health and Family Welfare has furnished State/UT 
wise information about present status of availability of cold chain space  (both 
central storage ca pacity and peripheral storage require ments) and related 
equipments and shortfall assessed in cold chain space and related equipments  
which is as under:-                                                                                            
"The requirement of Cold Chain equipments as per Gap ana lysis for COVID-
19 vaccination p rogram and availability of Cold Chain Equipment in the 
Country is given under in tabular form:- 
Requirement of Cold Chain Equipment as per Gap Analysis for COVID-19 
Vaccination Program 
S.N. State/UT  WIC* ILR(L)& ILR(S)& 
1 Andaman & Nicobar Islands   3   
2 Andhra Pradesh 3 102   
3 Arunachal Pradesh   2   
4 Assam 1 90   
5 Bihar   444 183 
6 Chandigarh   7   
7 Chhattisgarh   74   
8 Dadara& Nagar Haveli   3   
9 Daman & Diu   2 4 
10 Delhi 1 76 11 
11 Goa   9   
12 Gujarat 1 190   
13 Haryana   87 6 
14 Himachal Pradesh   27   
15 Jammu and Kashmir   43   
16 Jharkhand 1 101 28 
17 Karnataka 2 240   
18 Kerala 1 106   
19 Lakshadweep       
20 Madhya Pradesh   121 4 
21 Maharashtra 5 460   
22 Manipur   10   
23 Meghalaya   7   
24 Mizoram       
25 Nagaland   8   

43 
 
26 Odisha   55   
27 Puducherry   2 1 
28 Punjab   104   
29 Rajasthan 3 85   
30 Sikkim       
31 Tamil Nadu   289 13 
32 Telangana 1 112 6 
33 Tripura   9   
34 Uttar Pradesh 4 742 314 
35 Uttarakhand   20   
36 West Bengal 5 194   
Total 28 3824 570 
Note: * WIC is Walk-in Cooler; & ILR is Ice-lined Refrigerators, (L )for large and (S) for Small 
Availability of Cold Chain Equipment in the Country 
S.No. Name of State ILR (L) ILR (S) DF (L)# DF (S) # WIC WIF^ 
1 Andaman & Nicobar Islands 22 31 29 27 1 0 
2 Andhra Pradesh 121 2257 244 1907 9 6 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 62 189 35 191 2 0 
4 Assam 276 912 222 810 5 2 
5 Bihar 614 1040 382 550 19 4 
6 Chandigarh 13 56 10 48 1 0 
7 Chhattisgarh 265 644 230 786 5 2 
8 Dadara& Nagar Haveli 13 17 4 29 0 0 
9 Daman & Diu 7 19 1 15 0 0 
10 Delhi 156 664 34 445 1 0 
11 Goa 25 51 4 56 1 0 
12 Gujarat 902 1700 605 1861 9 2 
13 Haryana 172 917 46 842 16 5 
14 Himachal Pradesh 69 497 24 556 5 1 
15 Jammu and kashmir 119 919 65 769 5 1 
16 Jharkhand 261 423 201 498 5 3 
17 Karnataka 389 3375 266 3214 9 5 
18 Kerala 169 1941 68 1769 6 1 
19 Lakshadweep 4 22 3 12 0 0 
20 Madhya Pradesh 817 1531 482 1706 12 5 
21 Maharashtra 850 3583 740 3471 22 13 
22 Manipur 20 92 12 93 2 0 
23 Meghalaya 21 184 31 198 3 0 
24 Mizoram 40 89 21 87 1 0 
25 Nagaland 30 93 24 101 1 0 
26 Odisha 365 1434 223 1491 13 2 
27 Puducherry 21 56 19 57 0 0 
28 Punjab 167 983 155 887 6 3 
29 Rajasthan 609 2920 403 3073 14 3 

44 
 
30 Sikkim 13 94 6 82 0 0 
31 Tamil Nadu 365 2430 460 2232 20 6 
32 Telangana 186 1012 208 927 7 3 
33 Tripura 62 129 37 180 2 1 
34 Uttar Pradesh 1442 2149 1108 2965 30 10 
35 Uttarakhand 133 566 107 502 5 1 
36 West Bengal 512 2071 242 1697 23 8 
  Grand Total 9312 35090 6751 34134 260 87 
Note: ^ WIF is Walk-in Freezers; # DF is Deep Freezer, (L) for Large and (S) for Small   
(iv) Operational Planning 
 
4.25 Under guidance of National Expert Group on Vaccine Administration for 
COVID-19 (NEGVAC), operational guidelines are also being formulated to guide 
the states and districts on  various aspects of COVID -19 vaccine introduction like 
capacity building of human resources, micro -planning of sessions, planning for 
other logistics, vaccine distribution, communication planning etc.   
4.26   The states have also been communicated to create State Steering 
Committee, State Task Force and District  Task Force for oversight on planning 
and implementation of various activities and ensuring inter -departmental 
coordination with all the departments and mobilization of resources .  In this 
regard, the representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare showed 
the following slide during informal discussion with the Hon’ble Chairperson and 
Members of the Committee on 23/11/2020:- 
NEGVAC
COVID-19 
Vaccine 
Cell
National 
Steering 
Committee
State 
Steering 
Committee
State Task 
Force
District 
Task Force
Coordination Mechanism for Operational Planning
Development Partners 
like WHO, UNICEF, 
UNDP and others to  
support at all levels
High level groups established across all levels to provide oversight to planning and
implementation of COVID-19 vaccine introduction
National Steering Committee – Under the Chairmanship of Secretary, H&FW
• Coordinating activities among government ministries /departments/ institutions
State Steering Committee – Under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary State
• Mobilize human/other resources
• Coordinate with other government departments and partner agencies
• Feedback to the National Steering Committee
State Task Force – Under the Chairmanship of Principal Secretary, Health
• Provide technical and logistic support to plan, implement, monitor and evaluate
• Provide oversight to ensure proper planning and implementation
• Ensure interdepartmental coordination
District Task Force– Under the Chairmanship of District Magistrate
• Stocktaking of entire implementation processes.
 

45 
 
  
4.27    The Committee also asked about the States/UTs that have created State 
Steering Committee, State Task Force and District Task Force for oversight on 
storage and distribution of vaccine and the details of the States/UTs which have 
responded positively,  the Department  of Health and Family Welfare in their 
written reply stated as under: 
 "Yes, the States/UTs have created State Steering Committee, State Task 
Force and District Task Force for oversight on storage and distribution of 
vaccine. As on 10 th December 2020, State Steering Committees have 
been formed and meetings held in all the States/UTs, State Task Forces 
have been formed in all the States/UTs and meetings held in 32 
States/UTs, District Task Forces have been formed in 735 districts/urban 
areas and their meetings have been held in 553 districts/urban areas. The 
States/UTs are advised during all interactions to proactively hold the 
meetings of above mentioned committees and task forces."                 
  
4.28    The Committee  further  asked about the effective measures that  are 
being taken by the Government of India in coordination with all states/union 
territories to ensure optimum preparation on various aspects like capacity 
building of human resources, micro -planning of sessions, p lanning for other 
logistics, vaccine distribution/delivery chain, communication planning etc. with 
respect to COVID -19 vaccination programme so as to ensure that each and 
every citizen of the country gets vaccination at the earliest,  the Department  of 
Health and Family Welfare in its written reply stated as under: 
 "Government of India, in coordination with s tates is regularly reviewing the 
preparedness on various aspects like capacity building of human 
resources, micro-planning of sessions, planning for other logistics, vaccine 
distribution/delivery chain, communication planning etc. with respect to 
COVID-19 vaccination programme. For this purpose multi -level 
coordination mechanism has been established in form of State Steering 
Committee chaired by Chief Se cretary, State Task Force chaired by 
Principal Secretary (H&FW), District Task Force chaired by District 
Magistrate and Block Task Force chaired by Sub -Divisional 
Magistrate/Tehsildaar/Block Development Officer have been established 
across all levels for c onvergence of all stakeholders, review of progress 
and providing guidance to the preparatory steps and implementation of 
COVID-19 vaccine roll-out." 
4.29    In regard to its preparedness as part of operational planning , Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare  in its written reply stated, “ Virtual orientation of senior 
officials and development partners across the states/UTs has been done on 

46 
 
Operational and Communication planning for COVID -19 vaccination. Further, a 
virtual National Training of Trainers has bee n conducted for Programme 
Managers across the States who will be managing the entire process of roll-out of 
COVID-19 vaccine. These training will be cascaded down to districts and sub -
districts for capacity building of all stakeholders who will be involved in the roll-out 
of COVID-19 vaccine”.                                    
                                   
4.30   The Committee asked whether WHO or any other international 
organization has prepared /issued any guidelines for safe storage transportation 
and distribution of COVID -19 vaccine from manufacturing facility to the 
vaccination point and the steps that are being taken / proposed to be taken for 
following those guidel ines scrupulously for the covid 19 vac cination program of 
the country.  In this regard, Immunization Division of Department of Health and 
Family Welfare in its reply stated as under:- 
“WHO and UNICEF continue to provide interim guidance on vari ous 
aspects of COVID -19 vaccine. In continuation to this,  WHO and UNICEF 
have issued an interim document “Guidance on developing a national 
deployment and vaccination plan for COVID -19 vaccines” dated 16th 
November 2020 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-2019-nCoV-
Vaccine_deployment-2020.1), where countries are advised to have 
standard operating procedures in place for the supply chain, training of 
supply chain staff, assessment of cold chain capacity and gaps for 
fulfillment and data management systems for recording and reporting for 
vaccines and cold chain. These strategies are suggested in anticipation of 
a COVID-19 vaccine introduction. This interim guidance assumes that the 
majority of the vaccines under development will need to be stored at +2 to 
+8 Degree Centigrade.  
As part of the Universal Immunization Program in India, standard 
operating procedures are already developed and implemented for safe 
storage, transportation and distribution of vaccine. Accordingly, India has 
undertaken the fol lowing strategies to ensure preparedness for safe 
storage, transportation and distribution of COVID -19 vaccines during the 
vaccine roll out: 
Capacity gap assessment of cold chain capacity at all supply chain levels 
with procurement of cold chain equipment initiated to implement need -
based augmentation of cold chain capacity gap at all levels.  
Procurement, supply and installation of cold chain equipment as per 
assessed need. Development of the Operational Guidelines for COVID -19 
vaccine roll out with standa rd operating procedures for cold chain and 
vaccine management as per the SOPs in the Vaccine and Cold Chain 
Handlers Module 2016 and current assumptions of the anticipated COVID -

47 
 
19 vaccine. This includes guidelines for safe storage, transportation and 
distribution of COVID-19 vaccines. 
Roll out of training based on the operational guidelines for staff likely to be 
involved in COVID -19 vaccine operationalization, including Vaccine Cold 
Chain Handlers and Cold Chain technicians, at state, district, block and 
field levels. 
Preventive and curative maintenance of cold chain equipment through the 
district Cold Chain Technicians. Standard monitoring checklists in place for 
monitoring of cold chain points at all levels to supervise the quality of 
storage and transpo rtation of vaccines. Real time monitoring of vaccine 
stocks at all levels of the supply chain with real time monitoring of cold 
chain equipment temperature to maintain storage quality through the 
electronic web and mobile based system integrated in CoWIN application”. 
4.31   Further, the Committee sought information regarding the availability of 
adequate strength of human resources in all states/union territories for 
implementation of guidelines of NEGVAC, and the course of action for such 
states/union territories,  the Department  of Health and Family Welfare in thei r 
written reply stated, “ Yes, adequate strength of human resources is available in 
all States/UTs for COVID-19 vaccination as per the guidance from NEGVAC."       
4.30 With respec t to adequacy and availability of the skilled Health Care 
Workforce to deliver COVID -19 vaccine, the  Department of Health and Family 
Welfare in their written reply stated as under: 
 "Yes, adequate skilled Health Care Workforce is available to deliver 
COVID-19 vaccine. However, to minimize disruption of routine health 
services due to COVID -19 vaccination drive, additional potential 
vaccinators are being identified on CO -Win software whose services may 
be utilized as per the need."  
4.32 On the issue of adequate production capacity for Personal Protection 
Equipment Kits and steps taken for their adequate and timely availability in 
Government Hospitals across the country, the Department of Health and Family 
Welfare in their written reply stated as under: 
"At the beginning of the COVID -19 pandemic, there were no 
manufactures of COVID – 19 specification PPE coveralls in India. There 
were only suppliers of imported PPE Coveralls. With the efforts of the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (M oHFW) and Ministry of Textile 
(MoT), there are a large number of PPE coverall manufacturers, approx. 
1100 in India. Further, a large number of manufacturers of PPEs are on 
boarded on GeM and, therefore, and sufficient quantity of quality certified 
Personal Protective Equipment is now available on GeM portal. 

48 
 
 As regards to BIS certification, there are presently more than 70 
BIS certified manufactures of PPE coveralls and more than 220 BIS 
certified manufacturers of N - 95 masks. A large number of manufacture s 
are also in process of attaining the BIS certification. Therefore, the 
availability and affordability of quality certified PPE coveralls, and N -95 
masks does not appear to be a constraint anymore."   
  
 
 
  

49 
 
OBSERVATIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS 
1.  Availability of Safe, Secure and Effective Vaccine for COVID 19 
The Committee have noted that COVID 1 9 is an infectious disease 
caused by a newly discovered Corona virus SARS -COV 2.   It was first 
detected in Wuhan city of Hubei province in China during December 2019.  
Since then the virus evolved and spread to other countries as a major 
health threat  affecting the socio economic life of the people at the global 
level.  World Health Organ ization declared the outbreak of this highly 
infectious disease a pandemic on 11 March 2020.  The pandemic has 
affected our country as well.  As of now, our country is the second most 
affected in the world after the USA in respect of number of cases.  However, 
the Committee are satisfied to note that our country  has  responded 
proactively to this pandemic through multitude of measures  including 
imposition of nationwide lock down, social distancing, wearing  mask, 
maintaining hand hygiene   and above all  fol lowing the principle of  test, 
track and  treat so as to control the spread.    As a result of strong 
measures taken in our country with the cooperation of  the people, there is 
decline in number of new cases reported and the active cases across the 
country. As it is a new viral disease, no therapeutic solution or vaccine was 
available for this highly infectious disease.  Since this pandemic disrupted 
the normal lives o f the people throughout the world  and gravely affected 
the economy of many countries, great interest has been generated among 
scientists across the world to invent a vaccine for this disease,  About 200 
vaccine candidates on varied platforms are presently  undergoing 
development across the globe,  of which about 40 candidates are in human 

50 
 
clinical development. It is heartening to note that nearly 30 groups, both 
academia and industry, are actively involved in development or 
collaboration or co -development an d tria ls for COVID -19 vaccine in our 
country.    As per the information available in the vaccine portal of Indian 
Council for Medical Research  (ICMR), Drug Controller General of 
India(DGCI) has granted approval for restricted use in emergency situation 
for two vaccine candidates viz, Covishield which is tested and 
manufactured by Serum Institute  of India Pvt Ltd ., Pune  in collaboration 
with Oxford University/ Astra Zeneca and COVAXIN which is  manufactured 
indigenously  by M/s Bharat Biotech Ltd., Hyderabad  in collaboration with 
National  Institute of Virology  (NIV) and Indian Council for Medical 
Research(ICMR).   As per the preliminary exercise undertaken by NEGVAC, 
about 66  million doses of COVID -19 vaccine will be required in the first 
phase of vaccination program in India. However, given the uncertainties in 
development of natural immunity, the pattern of disease spread etc, it is 
quite possible that there may be requireme nt for at least 100 crore doses of 
the vaccine demanding huge investments.  According to  CD SCO, current 
production capacity of  vaccine manufac turers  in the country is  nearly 
60.84 crore  doses/annum which include s 40 to 50 crore  doses/annum of 
Covishield vaccine,  10 crore doses/annum of Covaxin vaccine  and 84 
lakhs doses/annum of  ZyCoV-D vaccine  by Cadila Healthcare Limited, 
Ahmadabad which is still under  Phase III Human Clinical Trials .   Central 
Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) has given permission for 
the stockpile of first two vaccines to the tune of 100 crore doses per 
annum.   In the initial phase of vaccination, 3 Crore Health care workers and 

51 
 
frontline workers are likely to be covered. Currently the population of the 
country is about 138.7 crore .  With the present production capacity in t he 
country, it  may take more than four years    to meet the requirements of 
vaccinating whole or majority of the population in the country as every 
person has to be given two doses.  So, there is an urgent need to ramp up 
the manufacturing capacity of COVID -19 vaccine for successf ul 
implementation of programme of vaccination in the country . In view of the 
above observations, the Committee would like to make the following 
recommendations:- 
(i) The Government should chalk out a definite  time  schedule  for 
vaccination for the  whole or majority  of the  population in the 
country so as to create a strong herd immunity against COVID 19 
at the earliest  particularly in the wake of spreading of highly 
infectious UK and South  African strains of  COVID 19 virus. 
(ii) The Government should take all the steps necess ary for  the large 
scale manufacturing of COVID 19 vaccines in the country  for 
meeting the vaccine requirements of the country as per the time 
schedule.  
(iii) Particular attention should be given for the implementation of  
“COVID Suraksha - the Indian COVID -19 Vaccine development 
Mission”  in letter and spirit  for  accelerating the research and 
development  of  safe and efficacious vaccines   so as to meet  the 
vaccine needs  of the country  in a time bound manner and also to 
fulfil the demands  of other countries. 

52 
 
(iv) Proper monitoring as well as execution mechanism be evolved to 
ensure the vaccination of all. 
(v) Steps should also be taken for getting country’s share of vaccines 
from  WHO’s  COVAX facility which  aims to get 2 billion doses of 
COVID vaccine by the end of 2021  and  has assured  the 
participating countries  to deliver vaccine doses to cover  upto 
20% of their country’s population.  
(vi) Foolproof measures should be taken to ensure safety and efficacy 
of vaccines to be procured from both indigenous and foreign 
sources. 
2.  Critical Analysis of Vaccine Candidates in Case of Parallel Studies : 
 
The Committee have noted that normally vaccine development 
takes close to 10 years for any infectious disease. But presently due to 
utmost urgency extra-ordinary measures are being taken to fast -track the 
development and production of COVID -19 vaccine with out compr omising 
the rigor of science,  safety and efficacy measures. The steps which are 
helping in the fast -tracking process are fruitful collaboration between 
organizations and companies, conducting the required studies in parallel 
rather than sequentially as are usually done, planning for next phase while 
the earlier one is being completed and streamlining the processes of 
application and approvals. In normal vaccine development , each  step is 
performed in sequence.   In order to accelerate COVID -19 vaccin e 
development, steps are being done in parallel. The Committee are sure that 
our scientists and the regulators would  leave no stone unturned  to ensure 

53 
 
safety and efficacy of vaccines being developed in the county even  though 
they are following the fast track ap proach of parallel studies  to make 
available vaccines to the people at the earliest.  Since ours is a large 
country with huge population, multiple vaccines may have to be used for 
vaccinating the people  for creating  strong immunity against C OVID 19 
virus in an even manner amongst the people of various regions of the 
country who may receive different vaccines   and to prevent post 
vaccination  side effects ,  the Committee strongly recommend that Drugs 
Controller General of India(DCGI) and Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organization(CDSCO) will critically analyze the  quality, safety, 
immunogenicity,  efficacy  and other mandatory requirements before 
granting  approval of  vaccine candidates   so as to create strong immunity 
against COVID 19 virus in an even manner amongst the people of various 
regions of the country ,  who may receive different vaccines , without any 
post vaccination side effects .   In case of import of vaccines, the same 
rigorous process should  be followed before granting their  approval fo r 
import into the country.   
The Committee also feel that until the efficacy and safety of the 
COVID-19 vaccine is attained completely, it is responsibility of the 
Government of India to provide medical and life insurance cover to all 
persons vaccinated during Emergency Use Authorization phase of 
vaccination in case the consumers suffer post vaccination side effects. 
  

54 
 
4. Restricted Emergency Use Authorization  of Vaccine Candidates: 
 
 The Committee note that there are three  vaccine candidates  in the 
country which are in advanced  stage of development viz. COVAXIN, a 
whole virion inactivated SARS CoV-2 vaccine (BBV152),  Covishield, a Non- 
Replicating Viral Vector  vaccine(ChAdOx1-S) ; and  ZyCoV -D, an 
indigenously developed DNA vaccine being tested by M/s Zydus Cadilla.   
While comparing the  efficacy of indigenous vaccine s viz-a-viz foreign 
vaccine candidates, the Department of Biotechnology in their written reply 
stated that t he vaccine candidate Covishield Vaccine has demonstrated an 
efficacy of 62 -90% in the global Phase III clinical trial, depending on the 
dose administered. The Russian Sputnik V vaccine and the mRNA vaccine 
candidates of Pfizer and Moderna, have reported an efficacy of >92%, based 
on interim analysis of the Phase III clinical trial data. The efficacy of the 
indigenously developed vaccine candidate, COV AXIN can be determined 
only after completion of the administration of the second dose in the Phase 
III trial.  As per latest information av ailable in the Vaccine Portal hosted by  
ICMR in its website ,  Drugs Controller General of India has accorded 
approval for restricted use of  COVISHIELD after completion of Phase III 
Human Clinical Trial.   However, DCGI has   given approval   for restricted 
use of COVAXIN in emergency situation while Phase III Human C linical trial  
is still going  on. The Committee note that NEGVAC Provides guidance on 
selection of COVID -19 vaccine candidates f or the country and  NEGVAC is  
assisted by the Standing Technical Sub -committee of National Technical 
Advisory Group on Immunization (NTAGI) for this purpose. Accordingly, the 
NEGVAC, supported by NTAGI,  is responsible for reviewing  the available 

55 
 
scientific evidence on safety, efficacy, reactogenicity, tolerability and 
immunogenicity of various vaccines while making a decision for selecting a 
vaccine for roll -out in the country.  Since the   safety and efficacy of an y 
vaccine is established only after  the satisfactory completion of third phase 
of human  clinical trials, the  Committee recommend  that only those 
vaccines candidates which prove safe and efficacious after completion of 
their phase -III  human clinical trials should be given Emergency Use 
Authorization by Drugs Controller General of India .  Further, the Committee 
recommend that NEGVAC and NTAGI should carefully examine all the 
aspects viz. safety, efficacy, reactogenicity, tolerability and immunogenicity 
of various vaccine candidates before  the decision on  their roll out for 
vaccination particularly keeping in view the DCGI approval only for 
restricted use  in emergency situation.   
5. Strengthening  Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI)  
Processes 
 
 The Committee  note that  in case of accelerated development  of 
vaccine candidates, assessment of Adverse Event Following Immunization 
(AEFI) and Adverse Events of Special Interest (AESI) /Phase IV trial /post -
marketing surveillance for side effects are critic al after successful 
completion of Phase III Human trials.  The Committee also note that in the 
post marketing  phase, the m anufacturer is required to submit perio dic 
safety update reports to Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
(CDSCO) which contain the details of the adverse effects reported and 
CDSCO assess these adv erse effects for taking necessary remedial 
measures. In  the cases of vaccines supplied  through national 

56 
 
immunization programme, these adverse effects are captured and 
appropriate measures are taken by the Adverse Event Following 
Immunization (AEFI)  Secretariat under Immunization Division in Ministry of 
Health and Fam ily Welfare.  Though the Committee understand that it is 
necessary to accelerate the processes of vaccine development, testing and 
approval processes in view of  the present situation of COVID 19 pandemic,  
the Committee  are of the firm view that  it is mandatory to monitor whether 
there is any adverse side effects to the people who have been vaccinated.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that DCGI and CDSCO should obtain 
from vaccine m anufacturers the weekly safety reports   which should  
contain the details of the  post vaccination adverse effects/events reported 
and the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare/DCGI/CDCCO should initiate 
immediate corrective measures thereon.  Since it is a mass vaccination 
programme initiated by the Government of Indi a, immediate and 
appropriate corrective measures should be taken  by the AEFI Secretariat 
under Immunisation division in the cases of post vaccination adverse 
effects/events so as to ensure safety and efficaciousness of vaccines in the 
country. In this regard, AEFI Secretariat should obtain weekly reports from 
CDSCO and vaccine manufacturers for prompt action at their end.  If 
necessary, AEFI Secretariat in the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare may 
be strengthened for the purpose.   
6. Compliance of WHO Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) Standards 
while Manufacturing Vaccines 
 
The Committee  are concerned to note the different stands taken by 
two wings under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on the important 
matter of quality of vaccines.    Drug Regulation Division of  the Ministry of 

57 
 
Health and Family Welfare in its submission to the  Committee stated   that 
vaccines are required to be characterized and manufactured in compliance 
with the Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP).  Manufacturing processes of 
every vaccine are validated, defined and controlled adequately to ensure 
batch to batch consistency.  In regard to the above submission of the Drug 
Regulation Division, the Committee desired to know      whether any steps 
have be en taken  to manufacture COVID 19 vaccines as per WHO -GMP 
quality standards.  In its reply, CDSCO  has stated that the applicant has to 
comply with the provisions unde r Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940;  New 
Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules (NDCT), 2019 and Drug s and Cosmetics 
Rules, 1945 to manufacture and market Vaccines in the country and there is 
no requirement to comply with WHO GMP standards .  In this regard, the 
Committee feel that there is no doubt that it is necessary for the applicant 
to comply with the above mentioned law and the rules enacted therein but it 
is also necessary to comply with WHO GMP standards while producing 
vaccines.  Generally all the drugs are expected to be manufactured in 
compliance with WHO GMP standards and the same standards may be 
followed for the manufacture of vaccines as well.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that this matter of different perceptions about the 
quality standards of vaccines between Drug Regulation Division and 
CDSCO may be looked into and ensure that all the vaccines for COVID 19 
are  manufactured in accordance with  WHO-GMP standards also. 
  

58 
 
7. Testing of Batches of Vaccines by Central Drug Laboratory (CDL) 
The Committee note that every batch of COVID 19 vaccines for clinical trial 
and marketing  are tested /reviewed and released by Central Drugs 
Laboratory, Kasauli to ensure quality  of the vaccines .  In this regard, it is 
not clear whether   samples of all the batches of COVID 19 vaccines meant 
for vaccination programme in the country will be tak en to CDL, Kaushali 
which is in Himachal Pradesh or they will be tested in six other  
Central/Regional Drugs Testing Laboratories of Central Drugs Standard 
Control Organization (CDSCO)  functioning in  Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai, 
Hyderabad, Guwahati and Chan digarh as per their proximity to vaccine 
manufacturer.   Since it is very much essential to ensure the quality of  
vaccines before their release for vaccination, the Committee strongly 
recommend  that necessary arrangements should be made  by CDSCO to 
mandatorily test  the quality of every batch of vaccines  either  domestically 
manufactured  or  imported before releasing for vaccination.    In case CDL, 
Kaushali is facing  any difficulties in timely  clearance of  batches of 
vaccines, CDSCO may consider utili zing the services of other six 
laboratories under its jurisdiction.   
 7. Need for Timely C reation of  Beneficiary Identification D ata by  
NEGVAC:  
 The Committee note that the Government of India has set up a 
National Expert Group on Vaccine Administration for COVID -19 (NEGVAC) 
on 7 th August, 2020 under the chairmanship of Dr V K Paul, Member NITI 
Aayog, with Secretary, Health & Family Welfare as Co -chair and Secretaries 

59 
 
of Ministries/Departments of External Affairs, Biotechnology, Health 
Research, Pharmaceuticals, Electronics & IT and other experts as 
members. One of the mandates of this Group for COVID -19 vaccine roll out 
is prioritization of population groups.  The Committee while examining the 
challenges faced by NEGVAC was informed that the  specific challenges 
before the NEGVAC are identification of vaccine candidates for roll -out in 
the country and prioritizing the beneficiaries for the same.   In this regard, 
the Committee note that the, there will be huge demand for vaccine upon its 
availability in view of the global scale of p andemic.  Accordingly,  NEGVAC  
has been discussing the prioritization of various groups in terms of Health 
Care Workers (HCWs), Front Line Workers (FLWs), elderly population (aged 
50 years and above) and people aged less than 50 years with co-morbidities 
who could be covered first. States/UTs and central line ministries are 
creating the database of HCWs working in their respective health 
facilities/hospitals/laboratories etc. This database of HCWs will be used for 
vaccinating them in the first phase of vaccination. Similarly, databases for 
other priority groups are also being prepared.  The Committee note that 
NEGVAC is able to create only the database of  about 3 crore   HCWs and  
FLWs in the country since its creation five months ago.  In this regard,  the 
Committee feel that authentic databases of various priority groups are very 
much necessary for timely and successful execution  of COVID-19 
vaccination programme,  The Committee, therefore,  would like to make the 
following recommendations:- 
(i) Creation of databases of various priority groups viz. elderly 
population, people with co -morbidities, women and children should  

60 
 
be expedited by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in 
coordination with states/UTs and this work may be completed within 
a definite time frame.   NEGVAC may coordinate this work on priority 
basis.  
(ii) Immediate attention should be paid  for  timely enumeration and 
vaccination of elderly population (aged 50 years  and above) and 
people aged less than 50 years with co -morbidities throughout the 
country for their vaccination i n the second  phase of vaccination   as 
they are  vulnerable for the disease and mortality. 
(iii)  Further HCWs and FLWs may constitute workers from both the 
organized and unorganized sectors .  In this regard, particular care 
may be taken by both the Union and States/UT Governments to 
vaccinate the workers from private/unorganized sectors particularly 
the temporary/casual/contractual workers.   
8. Priority Vaccination of People living in Dense Localities and Hot S pot 
Areas 
The Committee note the stand taken by the Government that the decision 
on prioritization of additional groups such as  people living in dense 
localities of cities and towns, slum areas, etc.  for COVID-19 vaccination will 
be taken based on evolving scientific evidence to maximize the impact of 
vaccination drive.  COVID 19 is an infectious disease mainly spread 
through the non maintenance of social distancing.  In our country, there are 
plenty of densely populated areas in cities and towns including slum areas 
where soc ial distancing norm is very  difficult to  be followed  and those 
areas remain breeding grounds for COVID 19.   Moreover, there are hot spot 

61 
 
areas where COVID 19 cases are more when compared to other areas.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend to NEGVAC to  cover the densely 
populated areas in cities and towns, slum areas  and hot spot areas under 
COVID 19 vaccination programme on priority basis to contain the spread of 
the disease in an effective manner.   
9. Smart Vaccination Programme 
The Committee note the proposal of the Indian Council for Medical 
Research that smart vaccination rather than mass vaccination is beneficial 
at the initial stages of vaccination programme due to limited availability of 
vaccines.  Such smart vaccination pertains to vaccinating those individuals 
who are at the highest risk of contracting COVID 19 infection or mortality. 
Through this approach, further reduction in number of symptomatic as well 
as asymptomatic cases is expected to achieve. In this regard, the 
Committee note that the Government of India  has started the first phase of  
COVID 19 vaccination programme for vacc inating three crore Health Care 
Workers  who are in direct contact with COVID 19 patients and also front 
line workers who at the greater risk of infection due to their nature of 
duties.  While the Committee is agreeing with the proposal that smart 
vaccination is beneficial at the initial stages of vaccination programme, the 
Committee are of the firm view that the goal of the COVID 19 vaccination 
programme should be  universal  vaccination of entire   population of  the 
country with safe and efficacious vacci nes so as to create strong herd 
immunity in the country against COVID 19.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should chalk out a definite programme for 

62 
 
mass vaccination of all the people in the country with safe and efficacious 
vaccines and execute the same in a time bound manner. 
10. Need for Increasing Number of Primary and Intermediary Vaccine 
Stores 
 
 The Committee note that there is an established mechanism of 
vaccine transportation in the country from primary vaccine stores to the 
session sites for maintaining required temperature of the vaccines. 
Manufacturers supply directly to 41 primary stores in the States/UTs/ and 
the Government Medical Stores Depots supply vaccines to 19 primary 
stores in the country. There are insulated vaccine vans supplied by the 
Govt. of India to all States for vaccine transportation. Cold boxes and 
vaccine carriers are used for vaccine transporta tion to intermediary stores 
and session sites respectively.  The same mechanism will also be used for 
COVID-19 vaccine transportation .  In this regard, the Committee are 
constrained to note that there are only 60 primary stores in 29 States/ 7 UTs 
with nearly 741 Districts in the country. That means roughly a primary store 
is catering to  the requirements of nearly 12 Districts in the country. This 
storage facility might have been sufficient for handling the  existing 
immunization programmes  which are meant for targeted groups of persons 
like children in case  of  Polio vaccine programme.  But, p resent number of 
primary stores may not be sufficient for handling the COVID 19 vaccination 
programme as almost entire population of the country has to be 
vaccinated.  The Committee, therefore , recommend  that NEGVAC may 
make a comprehensive study/assessment of the number of primary stores 
and the number of intermediary stores required for hassle free storage and 
distribution of COVID 19 vaccines and take immediate necessary steps for 

63 
 
the creation of requisite infrastructure to increase  the number of primary 
and intermediary stores as required by the States/Union Territories.  
Necessary allocation of funds for the purpose may also be considered.    
11.  Need to Bridge the Cold Chain Equipment Gap in all 36 States/UTs 
The Committee note that an assessment of Cold Chain Space requirement 
has been carried out for the entire country on the basis of which 
procurement process is being initiated for Cold Chain Equipment. In this 
regard, the Department  of Health and Family Wel fare has informed the 
Committee that under the guidance of NEGVAC, the Government of India is 
taking all measures for best vaccine supply practice from manufacturer to 
session sites to manage the stupendous tasks of distribution / delivery of 
COVID vaccine  throughout the country. Quality cold chain equipment is 
supplied for storage capacity augmentation. The cold chain technician and 
the vaccine and cold chain handler are trained regularly on the equipment 
maintenance and on good storage and distribution p rinciples. The 
Committee were also  informed that for the additional requirement of Cold 
Chain Equipment, purchase orders have been placed for 3089 Deep 
Freezers (DF) and 8767 Ice -lined refrigerators (ILR) while UNICEF is 
supporting supply of 20 Walk -in Freezers (WIF), 40 Walk -in Coolers (WIC), 
620 Deep Freezers and 2984 Ice -lined refrigerators. The supplies of the 
procured equipment to the states have begun from last week of November 
2020. Th e Committee observe  that total cold chain equipments that are 
available to 36 states/UTs include  9312 ILR (Large), 35090 ILR(Small), 6751 
DF(Large), 34134 DF(Small), 260 WIC and 87 WIF.  However, 28 Walk -in 
Coolers (WIC), 3824 Ice -lined Refrigerators (Large) and 570 Ice -lined 

64 
 
Refrigerators (Small) are still needed as per the cold chain equipment gap 
analysis done specifically for COVID -19 vaccination programme by the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.   In this regard, t he Committee 
recommend that the Ministry of Health and Fam ily Welfare in coordination 
with states/UTs should bridge these  gaps in the requirements of cold chain 
equipments within a fixed time frame so that all 36 stat es/UTs possess the 
required number of various kinds of cold chain equipments mainly Walk in 
Coolers and Ice -lined Refrigerators both large and small in size for safe 
storage and application of the vaccines.  
12.  Need for Pan India Consumer Awareness Programme by NEGVAC: 
 The Committee note that Drug Controller General of India  (DGCI) has 
granted approval for restricted use in emergency situation for two vaccine 
candidates viz, Covishield  and Covaxin .  Subsequently, the Government of 
India has decided to roll out the first pha se of vaccination programme for  
the Health Care Workers and the Frontline Workers in  the cou ntry.   
However, there are several reports in media about safety and efficacy of  
these vaccines particularly  about COVAXIN which has been given 
emergency use authorizatio n before completion of Phase III human trials.  
In this regard, the Committee are confident that the Government must have 
taken this conscious decision to roll out these two vaccines based on 
scientific evidence of their safety and efficacy.  However, t he Committee 
feel that it is necessary to keep the public informed about the credentials of 
these vaccines.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a pan India 
Consumer Awareness Programme needs to be launched by NEGVAC in 

65 
 
coordination w ith States/UTs to eliminate apprehensions  in the minds of 
the people about the safety and efficacy of these vaccines. 
13. Need to Allocate Separate Budgetary Support for  COVID -19 
Vaccination Programme:     
  The Committee note that the Government proposes to vaccinate 
Health Care Workers (HCWs) and Front  Line Workers (FLWs ) during the  
first phase of vaccination. For covering 3 crore HCWs and FLWs with two 
doses of vaccine, around 6.6 crore doses will be requir ed which is 
estimated to cost around Rs 1485 crore. The procurement of vaccines by 
MoHFW will be done using domestic funds.   However, the Department of 
Health and Family Welfare in their written note  stated that  the total fund 
required for vaccinating all those requiring vaccine will depend on the 
estimated number of total prioritized beneficiaries and the prevailing cost 
of vaccine . As per the statement of the Prime Minister, the entire cost of 
vaccinating three  crore HCWs and FLWs will be borne by the Union 
Government.  The Committee observe that for nearly 138 crore popula tion 
of the country, nearly 276 crore  doses of vaccine would be required and 
approximately Rs.68310 crore would be necessary  for covering every  
person in the country (ded uced from 138 crore multiplied by Rs. 495 crore  
per crore population).  In regard to vaccination  of entire population free of 
cost, the Committee note the reply of the Government that t he financing 
mechanism for vaccinating the entire population of the country has not 
been finalized yet.  In case the Government find it difficult to mobilize funds 
for vaccinati ng entire population free of cost, the Committee recommend 
that  all the people belonging to lower middle class and the poor people 

66 
 
living in urban and rural areas including the Below Poverty Line should  be 
given vaccination free of cost.   
14.  Submission of Action Taken Replies to above 
observations/recommendations 
Since this subject involves  more than one Central Ministries/ Departments 
viz. Ministry of Science and Technology (Department of Biotechnology),  
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers(Department of Pharmaceuticals) etc., the Committee desire that 
the respective Ministry/Department may furnish their Action Taken Replies 
to the above observations/recommendations to the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals who may compile the replies and furnish the same within 
the stipulated time period of three months. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                Uday Pratap Singh  
 15 March, 2021                                                           Chairperson (Acting) 
24 Phalguna 1942 (Saka)                                   Standing Committee on 
                 Chemicals and Fertilizers

67 
 
MINUTES OF THE  FIFTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 1 5th March, 2021 from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in 
Committee Room No.139, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Uday Pratap Singh, Chairperson (Acting) 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
    
2. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
3. Shri   Satyadev Pachauri 
4. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
5. 
6. 
Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
7. 
8. 
Shri Indra Hang Subba 
Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
Dr. Anil Jain 
Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
Shri Arun Singh 
Shri A.D. Singh 
Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
Shri K. Vanlalvena  
SECRETARIAT 
            1. Shri Manoj K. Arora     - OSD (LSS) 
         2. Shri  N.K Jha   - Director 
            3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram -           Additional Director  
4. Shri Panna Lal  - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee.   
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration and adoption the following draft    
Report(s): 
(i) 'Demands for Grants 2021 -22'  of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertil izers (Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals); 
(ii) 'Demands for Grants 2021 -22' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers  (Department 
of Fertilizers); 
(iii) 'Demands for Grants 2021 -22' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers  (Department 
of Pharmaceuticals); and 
(iv) ‘Status of Covid -19 Vaccine Production In India’ pertaining to the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals. 
  
4. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the above four Draft Report(s) unanimously   
without any change/amendment.  

68 
 
5. The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to make consequential changes, if any, 
arising out of the factual verification of the Re port(s) by the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals, Department of Fertilizers and Department of Pharmaceuticals of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers and present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 