1 
9 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
   
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Second Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2019-2020) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
  
 
 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 


2 
REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second 
Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2019-2020) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.02.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.02.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
FEBRUARY, 2021 /MAGHA, 1942 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20) and (2020-21) (iv) 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
Chapter I Report    
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
  
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
  
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee  
  
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
  
 
APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (201 9-20) and (2020 -21) held on 11.08.2020 
and 12.10.2020 respectively. 
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the  Second Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
on  Demand for Grants ( 2019-2020) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizer s (Department of  
Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

4 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2019-20) 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
4 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
5 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
6 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
7 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
8 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
9 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
10 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
11 Shri M. Selvaraj 
12 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
13 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
14 Shri Nandigam Suresh 
15 Er. Bishweswar Tudu 
16 Shri H. Vasanthakumar 
17 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
18 Dr. M.K Vishnu Prasad. 
19 Shri Deepak Baij  
20 Dr. Manoj Rajoria 
21 Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil  
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
26 Shri Arun Singh 
27 Shri P. Selvarasu^ 
28 Shri A.D. Singh^ 
29 Shri K. Vanlalvena^ 
30 Vacant* 
31 Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora    -  Officer on Special Duty 
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava    -  Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram   -  Additional Director 
4.            Shri Gagan Kumar   - Committee Officer 
 
^Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 22.07.2020. 
*Shri Amar Singh expired on 01.08.2020. 
 

5 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Deepak Baij 
4 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
5 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
6 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
7 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8 Shri Pakauri Lal 
9 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
11 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
12 Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
13 Shri Atul Kumar Singh alias Atul Rai 
14 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15 Shri M. Selvaraj 
16 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
17 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
18 Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
19 Shri Er. Bishweswar Tudu 
20 
21 
Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari# 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26 Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27 
28 
Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
Shri Arun Singh$ 
29 Shri A.D. Singh 
30 
31 
Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
Shri K. Vanlalvena 
  
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Majoj K. Arora  - Officer on Special Duty 
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava  - Director 
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
4. Shri  Gagan Kumar  - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
$Re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.12.2020. 
#Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 28.12.2020 vice Shri Nandigam Suresh . 
 
 

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2020-2021) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on 
their behalf, present this Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken 
by the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the 
Second Report  (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (2019-20) on Demands for Grants (2019 -20) pertaining 
to the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. 
 
2. The Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok  Sabha on 12.12.2019  and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2019.  The Action Taken replies of Government to 
all observations / recommendations contained in the Report were received on 
17.03.2020.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2019 -20) 
and (2020 -21) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
11.08.2020 and 12.10.2020 respectively. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the further Comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                               KANIMOZHI  KARUNANIDHI 
 08 .February, 2021                                                                                      Chairperson 
19 Magha, 1942 (Saka)                                              Standing Committee on 
         Chemicals and Fertilizers 
Report 

7 
Chapter I 
 
     This report of the standing committee on chemicals and fertilizers deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the 2nd report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Commi ttee on the Demand 
for Grants 2019 -20 of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers ( Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) which was presented to  Lok Sabha on 
12.12.2019. The Committee made a total of 15 Observations/Recommendations 
in the report. 
 
1.2 Ministry of chemicals and fertilizers ( Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) were r equested to furnish replies to the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Seco nd report within three months from the 
date of presentation of the report is  11.03.2020. The action taken replies of the 
Government in respect of the 15 Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the report have been received from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Pe trochemicals) vide O.M. No. 23003/1/2019-IFD 
dated 17.03.2020. These replies have been categorised as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/ Recommendations that have been a ccepted by the 
Government:- Sl No. 1,2,4,5,9,10,11,&12                                  (Total 8) 
Chapter-II 
 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government reply:- Sl No. 7&14              (Total 2) 
          Chapter-III 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been ac cepted by the Committe e and require 
reiteration:- Sl No 13 &15      (Total 2) 
          Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observations Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Sl No. 3,  6 & 8      (Total 3 ) 
             Chapter-V 
 
 
 

8 
1.3 The C ommittee expect that the action taken notes on the 
observations / recommendations contained in chapter I and V of 
this report should be furnished expeditiously  and within three 
months from the presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4 The committee will now deal with action taken by the government on 
the Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or 
merit comments. 
 
Recommendation Sl no. 1 
Production of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
 
1.5 While, pointing out the growing domestic requirement of chemicals and 
petrochemicals and increasing foreign exchange outgo on imports of 
chemicals and petrochemicals the committee had recommended as 
under:- 
"The Committee note that chemicals and Petrochemicals industry occupies 
a pivotal position in meeting basic needs of the people and in improving 
quality of life. This industry  is the main stay of industrial and agricultural 
development of the country and provides building blocks for several 
downstream industries such as textiles, papers, paints, varnished, soaps, 
detergents etc. The Committee are happy to note that the country has 
exported chemicals and petrochemical products worth Rupees 8.44 lakh 
crore during the period from 2015 -16 to 2018 -19 but the Committee is 
constrained to note that the foreign exchange outgo from the country was 
Rupees 12.09 lakh crore due to imports of  these products during the same 
period. In this regard, the Committee are concerned to note that the gap 
between the indigenous production capacity and the demand for Chemical 
and Petrochemical products in the country is widening. Moreover, the 
existing ca pacity utilization in the country is going down due to cheap 
imports as the domestic industry is not able to compete with cheap 
imported products. In committee’s view, immediate attention should be 
paid by the Government to boost domestic production of che micals and 
Petrochemicals according to the growing requirements of the country and 
to initiate anti-dumping measures against cheap imports.  
In this regard the Committee recommend the following: - 
(i) Immediate steps should be taken to install five crackers of 1.5 million 
capacities in various regions of the country before 2025 to cater to the 

9 
growing demand for polymers, synthetic rubbers, manmade fibres, 
elastomers etc. 
(ii) Concrete steps should be taken for the commissioning of these mega 
projects which are either under implementation or under planning viz. 
HMEL, Bathinda, HPCL Rajasthan Refinery Limited and Ratnagiri 
Refinery and Petrochemicals Ltd.  
(iii) Expeditious completion of projects which are under exe cution to 
increase domestic production of Naphtha viz revamp of Panipat 
Naphtha Cracker, PX_PTA plant at Panipat and new PX -PT plant, 
Paradip 
(iv) In view of the extremely high foreign exchange outgo in this sector, it is 
critical that the Department should put in place a concrete plan of action 
to boost domestic production. Department should immediately get a 
study done on the incentives being provided by countries like Thailand, 
Vietnam, China, Japan etc. for the new units in their countries 
Simultaneously, De partment should set up high level Committee to 
examine and record steps to create an enabling environment so that 
new units can be established in this sector. The Committee is of a 
strong view that since the consumption in this sector is going to 
persistently increase in future, this may be accorded highest priority." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.6 In reply to the above -mentioned Recommendation of the committee the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 
"(i) The Petrochemical sector is delicensed and deregulated and as such the 
Department has no direct role to play in establishment of crackers. However, 
Government is facilitating the industry to come forward for establishment of more 
number of crackers. Some of the steps taken are as under: 
a)    Promoting Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions 
(PCPIR) 
b)    Regularly organising Investor meets. India-Chem events, holding road-shows, 
etc.  

10 
           c)    Recommending appropriate tariff & non-tariff measures.  
 
Recent announcements made by Govt. for reducing corporate tax rates 
and removal of dividend distribution tax and also likely to help in improving 
investment climate.  
(ii) These mega projects are being implemented under Joint Venture and there is no 
direct control of the Department on implementation of these projects. However, as per 
information available from open source, HMEL is likely to be commissioned by April 
2021.  
 
 Barmer Refinery is an upcoming public sector refinery and petrochemical complex 
in the  Barmer district  of Rajasthan. It is jointly owned by  Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation Limited and the Government of Rajasthan. The project is expected to 
be completed by 2022-23.  
 
 The Maharashtra State Government is exploring to shift the Ratnagiri 
refinery project site to Raigad district. 
(iii)  The target dates for completion of revamp of Panipat Naphtha Cracker, PX_PTA 
plant at Panipat and new PX -PT plant, Paradip are as follows, as per the information 
received from IOCL: 
 
(a) Panipat Naphtha Cracker: 2020-21 
(b) PX / PTA Plant expansion: 2021-2022 
(c) New PX/PTA Plant at Paradip: 2023-24 
(iv) Realizing the need to augment petrochemical production capacity, preparation of a 
Perspective Plan for the petrochemical industry, including scaling up the value chain in 
synthetic fibres, has already been undertaken by the D/o C&PC in consultation with the 
stakeholders. Based on the same, the existing capacity expansion for MEG & PX/PTA 
both by private as well as public sector is likely to happen in the near future. " 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.7. The Committee note the reply given by the Department that the 
Petrochemical sector is delicensed and deregulated and as such the 
Department has no direct role to play in establishment of crackers.  
However, Government is facilitating the industry to come f orward for 

11 
establishment of more number of crackers in the country.  While noting the 
steps taken by the Department to augment petrochemical production 
capacity in the country, the Committee are of the firm view that it is 
necessary to put in place a concr ete plan of action to boost domestic 
production keeping in view the extremely high foreign exchange out go in 
this sector. In this regard, the Committee note that the Department had 
prepared a perspective plan for the petrochemical industry in consultation  
with various stake holders and based on the same , the existing capacity 
expansion of MEG and PX/PTA both by private as well as public sector is 
likely to happen in the near future.  Even though the Committee appreciate 
the steps taken by the Department, the Committee recommend that a study 
be conducted on the incentives being provided by countries like Thailand, 
Vietnam, China, Japan, etc.  for new units in their countries and based on 
that study appropriate steps should be taken to create an enabling 
environment so as to attract foreign investment in this crucial sector. 
 
Recommendation Sl no. 4 
Scheme of Plastic Parks 
 
1.8. The committee while expressing dissatisfaction about the effectiveness of 
plastic Park scheme in attracting entrepreneurs mainly  ha d recommended as 
under:- 
 
“The Committee are constrained to note that the Plastic Park scheme of 
Department is not able to attract investors owing to lukewarm response from the 
entrepreneurs mainly due to high cost of land in the parks. The Committee note 
that the special purpose vehicles created by State governments to establish and 
run these parks are finding it difficult to contain the cost of acquisition of land, 

12 
cost of development, plastic allocation cost etc. As per the information furnished 
by the Department, none of the parks have so far been able to start functioning in 
a full fledged manner. Under the scheme, the Government of India provides 
grants funding up to 50% of the project cost subject to a ceiling of Rs.40 crore 
per project. This seems to  be inadequate and may also be a reason for 
lackadaisical performance of the scheme. Since it is an important scheme for 
creating state of the art infrastructure with enabling common facilities through 
cluster development approach for consolidating and synergizing the capacities of 
downstream plastic processing industry, the co mmittee recommend the 
following:-  
 
(a)  The Scheme Steering Committee should hold separate meeting with the 
Chief Secretary of the respective State Government regarding cost of 
plots in the Plastic Parks and they should be impressed upon the need 
for fixing the cost of the plot at a reasonable level as to make it 
affordable to the entrepreneurs. 
 
(b)The Department should also impress upon the industrial associations about 
the state of the art facilities being provided in these parks and the importance of 
such parks to become hubs of development for plastic industry. 
 
(C)The Department should consider increasing its share of total cost of the 
project from 50% of the project cost with the ceiling of Rs.40 crore per project to 
at least 50% of the project cost without any ceiling so as to make it attractive for 
the State Government to come forward to set up such parks. 
(d) The Department may consider incentives along with State Governments for 
attracting more entrepreneurs." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.9 In reply to the aforementioned recommendation of the Committee, Department of 
chemicals and petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 
" (a) The Secretary (C&PC) met the Chief Secretary of Odisha for discussing the 
matters concerning Paradeep Plastic park and took up the issue of cost of land in the 
Plastic Park.  In this regard, it is mentioned that the Scheme Steering Committee (SSC), 
is holding regular meetings with the Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) in which 
representatives of concerned State Governments also participate. The matter relating to 
fixing cost of plots, at a reasonable rate, are also taken up in the meetings.  State 
Governments/SPVs are offering land at rates based on size of land/ Industry etc. 
Further, based on inputs received from the stakeholders, the Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals has written letters to all the concerned Plastic Park authorities to 

13 
explore the possibility of annual base rent to reduce the cost of land and blocking of 
working capital.  
 
(b) The Department holds regular meetings of all Industry Associations and impresses 
upon them about the state of the art facilities being provided in these Plastic Parks and 
the opportunity of making them hubs of development for plastic industry. The SPVs of 
Plastic Parks also participate in events organised by the Industry associations and 
showcase the likely benefits of investing in their Plastic Parks. 
 
(c) A committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri Hemant Sharma, Secretary 
(Industries), Govt. of Odisha has submitted its report on the issue. The report of the 
committee is being examined by the Scheme Review Committee chaired by AS&FA of 
the Dept. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals. 
 
(d) The Department is offering grants - in- aid to State Governments, which, in turn, are 
passing on the benefits to the entrepreneurs in  the form of land subsidy along with 
provision of state-of-the-art facilities in each of the six Plastic Parks being established in 
the country. The Department is also requesting the State Governments to offer separate 
incentives to entrepreneurs, so that they could establish their Units at the Plastic Parks 
and run them successfully." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.10 The Committee note   that the Department has addressed the concerns 
expressed by the Committee regarding lukewarm response received from 
entrepreneurs to the plastic park scheme mainly due to high cost of land and the 
inadequacy of incentives being offered to the entrepreneurs.  The Department has 
written to all the concerned Plastic Park Authorities to explore the possibilities of 
changing annual lease rent to reduce the cost of land.   Secretary (Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) also discussed the issue with   Chief Secretary of Odhisa.  While 
appreciating the above efforts by the Department, the Committee are failed to 
understand as to why Secretary  (Chemicals and Petrochemicals) discussed the 
issue only with the Chief Secretary of Odisha.  As none of the Pl astic Parks have 
so far been able to start functioning, the  Committee recommend  that the 
Department will vigorously pursue with all concerned plastic park authorities 

14 
including Chief Secretaries of all the concerned States to explore the possibility 
of annual base rent so as to reduce the cost of land which would provide more 
working capital to the entrepreneurs. 
 The Committee also note that the Scheme Review Committee of 
Department is presently examining the report submitted by the 
Secretary(Industries), Government of Odhisha on the recommendation made by 
the Committee that Government of India’s share of total cost of the project should 
atleast 50% of the project without any ceiling.    The Committee hope that the 
Scheme Review Commi ttee shall examine the Report expeditiously and the 
Department would inform the Committee about the decision taken in the matter 
which shall be uniformly applicable for all the   Plastic Parks.  In this regard, the 
views of other concerned States should also be taken into consideration. 
 
Recommendation no. 11 
Alternative for single use plastics 
 
1.11. While noting that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals had 
constituted an Expert Committee to suggest alternatives for single use plastics, the 
committee had recommended as under:- 
 
" The Committee note that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has 
constituted an Expert Committee to suggest alternatives for single use plastics. 
In this regard, the Committee urge the Department to come up wit h alternative 
bio-degradable material so as to completely eliminate single use plastics in the 
country. CIPET being expert organizations in this field of plastics should work 
actively with other research organization to develop material like bio-plastics, bio-
degradable plastics, and compostable plastics etc. which are easily degradable in 
nature. The Government should also consider giving incentives to entrepreneurs 
who are forthcoming to invest in making of bio -degradable/recyclable carry 
bags." 
 
 
 

15 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.12. In reply of the above -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals had stated as under:- 
"CIPET is actively carrying out Research & Development on various compostable 
polymers deri ved from starch, natural fibre, and other bio -resources with desired 
properties to substitute the single use plastics. CIPET has also been implementing the 
mechanical recycling of post -consumer commodity plastics waste by optimizing the 
properties for various household applications.   
Technology pertaining to utilization of recycled content to virgin materials as well 
as designing a single polymer family for various Multi -Layer Plastics, for high end 
application with improved properties, are also being unde rtaken for R & D to substitute 
single use plastics." 
Comments of the Committee 
1.13 The Committee note that CIPET is actively carrying out research and 
development on various compostable polymers derived from starch, natural fibre, 
and other bio resources with desired properties to substitute the single use 
plastics.  But the reply given by the Department is silent on the status of work 
done by the Expert Committee to suggest alternatives for single use plastics.  
The Committee expect that specifi c reply would be furnished by the Department 
on this aspect of the recommendation.  The Department  has also not given any 
specific reply to the suggestion of the Committee that the Government should 
consider giving incentives to entrepreneurs who are fort hcoming to invest in 
making of bio -degradable/recyclable carry bags.  The Committee would also like 
to have specific reply  from the Department in this regard. 
 While CIPET’s initiatives in development of alternative to single use plastic 
is appreciable , the Committee recommend that the research being  done by 
CIPET and other organizations should be coordinated by a designated agency for 
achieving better results in development of effective alternative to single use 

16 
plastic.  Recommendations of the Expert Committee in this regard should also be 
taken into account in the development of substitute to single use plastic. 
Recommendation No. 13 
Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
1.14. Expressing concern about the reduced budgetary allocation to Institute of 
Pesticides Formulation Technology (IPFT), the committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that a budgetary allocation of Rs.3 core has been 
made as Grants -in-aids for creation of capital Assets by Institute of Pestici des 
Formulation Technology (IPFT) during 2019 -20 even though the institute 
proposed an amount of Rs.5 crore for the purpose. Since this institute is engaged 
in development of environment and user friendly pesticides formulation 
technologies and it is neces sary to support the initiatives of the institute in 
developing bio -pesticides which are safe for human beings, the Committee 
recommend that additional fund requirement of the institute under this head may 
be considered by the Department of Chemicals and Pe trochemicals and the 
Ministry of Finance at Revised Estimate stage.  
The Committee also urge the Department and IPFT to make all efforts to 
develop environment and user friendly bio -pesticides viz neem based pesticides 
etc. so as to produce more and more b io pesticides in the country which are very 
effective against all pests as that of Chemical pesticides. " 
Reply of the Government 
1.15. In reply of the aforementioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals had stated as under:- 
" The amount of Rs. 3.00 crore allocated in BE -2019-20 is being used to procure 
equipment namely ‘Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)’ required for creation of GLP 
(Good Laboratory Practices) facility in IPFT. Other Capita l assets will be created in a 
phased manner. Now an amount of Rs. 5.00 crore has been allocated for this purpose 
in BE-2020-21." 

17 
Comments of the Committee 
1.16.  The Committee made two recommendations regarding Institute of 
Pesticides Formulation Technology(IPFT).  First was the consideration of 
additional fund requirement of the institute for creation of capital assets to the 
tune of Rs.2 crores at Revised Estimat es stage as only Rs.3 crore was allocated 
to the institute in BE 2019 -10 against its requirement of Rs.5 crore.  In the regard, 
the Committee note that Rs.5 crore has now been allocated to the institute for 
2020-21 under the same head.  But the Department has not acceded to 
Committee’s recommendations to allocate additional fund to the tune of Rs. 2 
crore in the RE of 2019 -20.  The Committee therefore recommend to provide an 
additional sum of Rs. 2 crore in the Supplementary Demands of Grants to enable 
IPFT for creating other capital assets. 
 As per the second recommendation of the Committee, IPFT should make 
all efforts to develop environ ment and user friendly bio -pesticides viz. Neem 
based pesticides etc.  The Committee are constrained to note that the Act ion 
Taken Reply furnished by the Department was silent on this important 
recommendation.  Since it is very much necessary to develop environment and 
user friendly bio -pesticides in the country which are very effective against all 
pests as that of chemical pesticides, the Committee reiterate the earlier 
recommendation that IPFT should develop bio -pesticides for use in the entire 
country so as to completely eliminate the dependence on chemical pesticides.  
Specific Action Taken Reply should be given in this regard.   
 
 

18 
Recommendation No. 15 
Removal of toxic waste lying in UCIL Complex, Bhopal 
1.17. The committee while expressing anguish over the toxic waste lying at UCIL 
Complex, Bhopal  had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee are deeply anguished over the delay in disposing off the toxic 
waste lying at UCIL complex in Bhopal for the last 34 years and subsequent 
remediation of the area. In this regard, the Committee urge the Department to take 
up at highest level with the Government of Madhya Pradesh to take immediate 
necessary action to dispose off toxic waste and to remediate the entire area 
within a definite period of time." 
Reply of the Government 
1.18. In reply to the aforementioned recommendation of the Committee, the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals had stated as under:- 
"As per the decision of the Cabinet in June, 2010, the matter of providing oversight and 
support to all remediation actions including disposal of waste is being dealt with by the 
Oversight Committee consti tuted in the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change (M/o EF&CC). A Review meeting was held under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary, Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals (DCPC) on 9 th December, 2019 
wherein the issue of disposal of toxic waste l ying at UCIL premises was discussed with 
the officials of the State Government of Madhya Pradesh. It was decided in the meeting 
that State Government of Madhya Pradesh will take up the issue with M/o EF&CC at the 
highest level for resolving the issues related to disposal of toxic waste." 
Comments of the Committee 
1.19.  The Committee are disappointed to note that this urgent matter of public 
health and environmental hazard has been lingering on for the last 35 years due 
to the lackadaisical approach of the Government of India and the Government of 
Madhya Pradesh.   In this regard, the Committee note that  the  matter of 
providing oversight and support to all remediation actions including disposal of 

19 
waste is being dealt with by the Oversight Committee c onstituted in the Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (M/o EF&CC).   A Review meeting 
was held under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals (DCPC) on 9 th December, 2019 wherein the issue of disposal of 
toxic waste lying at UCIL premises was discussed with the officials of the State 
Government of Madhya Pradesh.  The Committee are of the opinion that inter -
ministerial disputes and lack of coordination with the State Government of 
Madhya Pradesh and other ag encies is lingering this issue of vital importance.  It 
was decided in the meeting that State Government of Madhya Pradesh will take 
up the issue with M/o EF&CC  at the highest level for resolving the issues related 
to disposal of toxic waste.  The Committ ee are disgruntled to note that the matter 
is still in discussion  stage among the M/oEF&CC, Dept. o f Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals and the Go vernment of Madhya Pradesh.  The Committee 
therefore  strongly recommend that the Department should take up the matter  at 
the highest level with the M/o EF&CC and also with the Government of Madhya 
Pradesh for immediate necessary action in this regard and if required Cabinet 
Secretary may be requested to use his office to resolve the issue. 
  

20 
Chapter ll 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation no. 1 
2.1 The Committee note that chemicals and Petrochemicals industry occupies 
a pivotal position in meeting basic needs of the people and in improving quality 
of life. This industry is the main stay of industrial and agricultural development of 
the country and provides building blocks for several downstream industries such 
as textiles, papers, paints, varnished, soaps, detergents etc. The Committee are 
happy to note that the country has exported chemicals and petrochemical 
products worth Rupees 8.44 lakh crore dur ing the period from 2015 -16 to 2018-19 
but the Committee is constrained to note that the foreign exchange outgo from 
the country was Rupees 12.09 lakh crore due to imports of these products during 
the same period. In this regard, the Committee are concerne d to note that the gap 
between the indigenous production capacity and the demand for Chemical and 
Petrochemical products in the country is widening. Moreover, the existing 
capacity utilization in the country is going down due to cheap imports as the 
domestic industry is not able to compete with cheap imported products. In 
committee’s view, immediate attention should be paid by the Government to 
boost domestic production of chemicals and Petrochemicals according to the 
growing requirements of the country and  to initiate anti -dumping measures 
against cheap imports.  
In this regard the Committee recommend the following: - 
(v) Immediate steps should be taken to install five crackers of 1.5 million 
capacities in various regions of the country before 2025 to cater to the 
growing demand for polymers, synthetic rubbers, manmade fibres, 
elastomers etc. 
(vi) Concrete steps should be taken for the commissioning of these mega 
projects which are either under implementation or under planning viz. 
HMEL, Bathinda, HPCL Rajasthan Refi nery Limited and Ratnagiri 
Refinery and Petrochemicals Ltd.  
(vii) Expeditious completion of projects which are under execution to 
increase domestic production of Naphtha viz revamp of Panipat 
Naphtha Cracker, PX_PTA plant at Panipat and new PX -PT plant, 
Paradip 

21 
(viii) In view of the extremely high foreign exchange outgo in this sector, it is 
critical that the Department should put in place a concrete plan of action 
to boost domestic production. Department should immediately get a 
study done on the incentives being prov ided by countries like Thailand, 
Vietnam, China, Japan etc. for the new units in their countries 
Simultaneously, Department should set up high level Committee to 
examine and record steps to create an enabling environment so that 
new units can be establishe d in this sector. The Committee is of a 
strong view that since the consumption in this sector is going to 
persistently increase in future, this may be accorded highest priority. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 (i) The Petrochemical sector is delicensed and d eregulated and as such the 
Department has no direct role to play in establishment of crackers. However, 
Government is facilitating the industry to come forward for establishment of more 
number of crackers. Some of the steps taken are as under: 
a)    Promoting Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions 
(PCPIR) 
b)    Regularly organising Investor meets. India-Chem events, holding road-shows, 
etc.  
           c)    Recommending appropriate tariff & non-tariff measures.  
 
Recent announcements made by Govt. for reducing corporate tax rates 
and removal of dividend distribution tax and also likely to help in improving 
investment climate.  
(ii) These mega projects are bei ng implemented under Joint Venture and there is no 
direct control of the Department on implementation of these projects. However, as per 
information available from open source, HMEL is likely to be commissioned by April 
2021.  
 
 Barmer Refinery is an upcom ing public sector refinery and petrochemical complex 
in the  Barmer district  of Rajasthan. It is jointly owned by  Hindustan Petroleum 
Corporation Limited and the Government of Rajasthan. The project is expected to 
be completed by 2022-23.  
 

22 
 The Maharashtra State Government is exploring to shift the Ratnagiri 
refinery project site to Raigad district. 
(iii)The target dates for completion of revamp o f Panipat Naphtha Cracker, PX_PTA 
plant at Panipat and new PX -PT plant, Paradip are as follows, as per the information 
received from IOCL: 
 
(d) Panipat Naphtha Cracker: 2020-21 
(e) PX / PTA Plant expansion: 2021-2022 
(f) New PX/PTA Plant at Paradip: 2023-24 
(iv) Realizing the need to augment petrochemical production capacity, preparation of a 
Perspective Plan for the petrochemical industry, including scaling up the value chain in 
synthetic fibres, has already been undertaken by the D/o C&PC in consultation with th e 
stakeholders. Based on the same, the existing capacity expansion for MEG & PX/PTA 
both by private as well as public sector is likely to happen in the near future.  
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
 
Recommendation no. 2 
 2.3 The Committee note that the Ministry of Finance was able to allocate only 
Rs.263.65 crore at BE stage for 2019 -20 to the Department of Chemicals’ and 
Petrochemicals against the requirement of Rs.510 crore by the Department. In 
this regard it is noted that the fund requirements for central sector schemes of 
the Department, Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP), Autonomous organizations 
under the Department viz. Central Institute of Plastic Engineering Technology 
(CIPET) and Institute of Pesticides Formulation Tec hnology have reduced at 
Budget estimate (BE) stage by Ministry of Finance. The Committee are concerned 
to note the submission of the Department that pace of developmental activities 
for Brahmaputra crackers polymer limited (BCPL) which is implementing AGCP  
and CIPET are likely to be affected to that extent due to curtailed budgetary 
allocation. The Committee also note that the Ministry of Finance allocated funds 
at BE stage to the Department based on the expenditure trend in the last few 
years and according  to the Medium Term Expenditure Frame work. Additional 
requirement, whenever required by the Department will be provided at 

23 
supplementary/Revised Estimate (RE) stage. In view of the above, the Committee 
strongly recommends that the Department should take p roactive steps for timely 
utilization of funds allocated under various Heads for 2019 -20 so that it enables 
the Ministry of Finance to allocate all the necessary funds for the Department. 
The Committee also recommend that proper demand should be placed bef ore the 
Ministry of Finance for allocation of rest of the funds required for developmental 
activities during 2019 -20 at supplementary/RE stage and the recommendation of 
this Committee may also be sent to the Ministry of Finance for adequate 
allocation of funds to the Department. The Committee recommend that enhanced 
budgetary allocation should be provided at RE stage under the above budget 
heads.  
Reply of the Government 
2.4 It is stated that the Department has taken proactive steps to ensure timely 
release of funds under various heads. The status of utilisation as on 10.03.2020 is as 
under:- 
Budget Allocation  and Expenditure 2019-20             (Rupees in Cr) 
Sl. 
No. 
Head BE Expenditure 
(As on 
13.03.2020) 
RE 
1. Central Sector Schemes    
1.1 Assam Gas Cracker Project (AGCP) 100.00 100.00 200.00* 
1.2 New Schemes of Petrochemicals (NSP) 31.65 31.65 31.65 
1.3 Chemical Promotion & Development Schemes (CPDS) 3.00 2.83 3.00 
 Total: 134.65 134.48 234.65 
2. Other Central Expenditure     
2.1 Secretariat 19.58 16.89 18.08 
A. Statutory Body    
2.2 Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (BGLD) 21.42 20.68 27.95* 
B. Autonomous Bodies    
2.3 Central Institute of Plastic Engineering & Technology (CIPET) 80.00 80.00 81.50* 
2.4 Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology (IPFT) 8.00 8.00 8.00 
 Total (B) 129.00 125.57 135.53 
 Grand Total (A+B) 263.65 260.05 370.18 
 
BCPL:   Out of Rs. 5,239.45 crore Capital Subsidy approved by Government of India for 
Assam Gas Cracker Project implemented by BCPL, an amount of Rs. 4,990 crore was 
released till F.Y. 2018 -19 and balance Rs. 249.45 crore was sought during B.E. 2019 -
20.  However, M/o Finance allocated only Rs. 100 crore for FY 2019-20. Due to Vote on 
Account period, out of Rs. 100 crore Capital Subsidy for FY 2019 -20, Rs. 77.78 crore 
has been released to BCPL during May, 2019 and balance Rs. 22.22 crore has been 
released in Septemb er, 2019. Balance amount of Capital Subsidy of Rs. 149.45 crore 

24 
(without interest adjustments) was requested in RE 2019 -20. It is understood that an 
amount of additional Rs. 100 crore has been allocated under second supplementary 
demand for grants RE 2019-20.  
IPFT:   An amount of Rs.8 crore has been allocated to IPFT under GIA -general, GIA-
Salary and GIA-CCA for financial year 2019-20. 
S.No. Head BE-2019-20 (Allocated)         Rs. in Crore 
1 Grant-in-Aid-Salary 3.50  
2 Grant-in-Aid-General 1.50  
3 Grant-in-Aid-CCA 3.00 
  Total 8.00* 
  
* All amount was released to IPFT in time.  
 
CIPET:   In BE 2019 -20, Rs. 80.00 crore were allocated to the Central Institute of 
Plastics Engineering and Technology (CIPET)and the same was released to CIPET 
upto 30.12.2019, in three instalments. An additional requirement of Rs. 30.00 crore was 
also intimated to the Ministry of Finance through the Internal Finance Division (IFD) of 
this Department, out of which only an amount of Rs. 1.50 crore has been allocated to 
CIPET at R.E. 2019-20. The additional amount will be released after getting approval of 
Supplementary Demands for Grants of the Department from the Parliament in current 
Financial Year. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
 
Recommendation no. 4 
 2.5 The Committee are constrained to note that the Plastic Park scheme of 
Department is not able to a ttract investors owing to lukewarm response from the 
entrepreneurs mainly due to high cost of land in the parks. The Committee note 
that the special purpose vehic les created by State governments to establish and 
run these parks are finding it difficult to contain the cost of acquisition of land, 
cost of development, plastic allocation cost etc. As per the information furnished 
by the Department, none of the parks h ave so far been able to start functioning in 
a full fledged manner. Under the scheme, the Government of India provides 
grants funding up to 50% of the project cost subject to a ceiling of Rs.40 crore 
per project. This seems to be inadequate and may also be  a reason for 
lackadaisical performance of the scheme. Since it is an important scheme for 
creating state of the art infrastructure with enabling common facilities through 
cluster development approach for consolidating and synergizing the capacities of 

25 
downstream plastic processing industry, the committee recommend the following 
:-  
 
(b)  The Scheme Steering Committee should hold separate meeting with the 
Chief Secretary of the respective State Government regarding cost of 
plots in the Plastic Parks and they sh ould be impressed upon the need 
for fixing the cost of the plot at a reasonable level as to make it 
affordable to the entrepreneurs. 
 
(b)The Department should also impress upon the industrial associations about 
the state of the art facilities being provide d in these parks and the importance of 
such parks to become hubs of development for plastic industry. 
 
(C)The Department should consider increasing its share of total cost of the 
project from 50% of the project cost with the ceiling of Rs.40 crore per proj ect to 
at least 50% of the project cost without any ceiling so as to make it attractive for 
the State Government to come forward to set up such parks. 
(d) The Department may consider incentives along with State Governments for 
attracting more entrepreneurs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.6 (a) The Secretary (C&PC) met the Chief Secretary of Odisha for discussing the 
matters concerning Paradeep Plastic park and took up the issue of cost of land in the 
Plastic Park.  In this regard, it is mentioned that the Scheme Steering Committee (SSC), 
is holding regular meetings with the Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) in which 
representatives of concerned State Governments also participate. The matter relating to 
fixing cost of plots, at a reasonable rate, are also taken up in the meetings.  State 
Governments/SPVs are offering land at rates based on size of land/ Industry etc. 
Further, based on inputs received from the stakeholders, the Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals has written letters to all the concerned Plastic Park authorities to 
explore t he possibility of annual base rent to reduce the cost of land and blocking of 
working capital.  
 
(b) The Department holds regular meetings of all Industry Associations and impresses 
upon them about the state of the art facilities being provided in these Pl astic Parks and 
the opportunity of making them hubs of development for plastic industry. The SPVs of 
Plastic Parks also participate in events organised by the Industry associations and 
showcase the likely benefits of investing in their Plastic Parks. 
 

26 
(c) A committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Shri Hemant Sharma, Secretary 
(Industries), Govt. of Odisha has submitted its report on the issue. The report of the 
committee is being examined by the Scheme Review Committee chaired by AS&FA of 
the Dept. of Chemicals & Petrochemicals. 
 
(d) The Department is offering grants - in- aid to State Governments, which, in turn, are 
passing on the benefits to the entrepreneurs in the form of land subsidy along with 
provision of state-of-the-art facilities in each of the six Plastic Parks being established in 
the country. The Department is also requesting the State Governments to offer separate 
incentives to entrepreneurs, so that they could establish their Units at the Plastic Parks 
and run them successfully. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
2.7 The Committee note that Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
Investment Regions (PCPIRs) have been conceptualized as a cluster approach to 
promote Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals sectors in an integrated and 
environment friendly manner on a larg e scale. Policy as PCPIRs was formulated 
in 2007 and the first approvals for setting up of Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh 
PCPIRs were given in February 2009 and the approval for PCPIR Odisha and 
Tamil Nadu were given in December 2010 and July, 2012 respectivel y. 
Considerable progress in setting up of PCPIR has been made only in respect of 
Gujarat PCPIR followed by Odisha PCPIR. Progress of establishment of PCPIRs 
in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu is not satisfactory as appointment of Anchor 
Tenant, commissioning  of Anchor Project, development of Master Plan, 
Environment clearance etc. are yet to be done in respect of both these PCPIRs . 
As per information provided by the Department, it is projected that all the four 
PCPIRs together will create employment to more than 33 lakh persons but all the 
four PCPIRs have together generated only about 3.3 lakh jobs so far i.e. about 
90% less than the projected level of employment. Moreover, these PCPIRs are 
expected to attract investment of around Rs.7.63 lakh crore but inve stments 
worth Rs.1.90 lakh crore approximately have been made/committed in these 
regions so far. Above facts show that these PCPIRs have to go a long way to 

27 
reach their full potential. Since these regions have large scale potential for 
development of Petro leum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals industries in the 
country, the Committee strongly recommend that the Union government along 
with the State Governments concerned should initiate concrete steps for the 
establishment of these regions in a time bound manner . The Department should 
review the progress of establishment of each PCPIR with the senior officers of 
the State Government and the other Ministries of the Union Government so as to 
sort out the difficulties in establishing the PCPIRs. 
Reply of the Committee 
2.8 The Department has noted the suggestions of Hon'ble Committee and would pursue 
the matter in a holistic way with State Governments concerned to take concrete 
steps for the establishment of PCPIRs in a time bound manner.  
 
● This Department reviews the implem entation of PCPIRs from time to time. The 
Government has also initiated the process to review the PCPIR policy with an 
objective to attract more investments and faster implementation. In this regard, 
Steering Committee for the PCPIRs was constituted under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals to promote investments 
and to expedite the implementation of PCPIRs. 
 
● The Steering Committee meeting was last held under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary, DCPC on 19.11.2019 with Princi pal Secretaries (Industries) of all four 
PCPIR states and industries associations to discuss the amendments in PCPIR 
policy and concerned issues thereof. 
 
● A Sub -Committee was constituted under chairmanship of Special Chief Secretary 
(Industries), Govt. of AP, Shri Rajat Bhargava, to discuss with State 
Governments/SPVs and with industry associations on the proposed amendments in 
PCPIR Policy. 
 
● Shri Rajat Bhargava submitted the 1 st draft PCPIR policy/amendments for review by 
the Steering Committee. The draft policy was also shared with the Principal 
Secretaries of Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and Odisha for offering their inputs/suggestions. 
 
● Recently a review meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Secretary, DCPC to 
discuss the status / progress of PCPIRs on 04.02 .2020. During the meeting, a 
presentation was made by Shri Rajat Bhargava on the suggested amendments in 
PCPIR Policy. After the deliberations the following were agreed to: 
 

28 
(i) A meeting to be organized by the Sub -Committee headed by Special Chief 
Secretary ( Industries), AP at Ahmedabad for discussion with stakeholders 
and industry associations on the proposed amendments in PCPIR Policy, 
2007. The recommendations should be in the form of proposed amendments 
to the existing policy. Similar meetings may be organ ized subsequently at 
other PCPIR location also. 
 
(ii) All 4 PCPIRs should prepare and submit their “VISION DOCUMENT. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
2.9 The Committee are happy to note that HIL (India) Ltd is continuously 
making profits since 2013 -14. Originally incorporated to manufacture DDT, the 
company diversified into manufacturing of chemicals to ensure supply o f quality 
pesticides at reasonable prices to agricultural sector and production and 
marketing of certified seeds for crops and vegetables and also fertilizer trading 
business. In committee’s view, such Public Sector Undertakings which are 
functioning well should be encouraged by the government with financial 
assistance etc. whenever they require funds for further expansion/diversification 
of their activities. In this case, the Committee note that HIL is facing working 
capital shortage mainly due to delay in  DDT related payments by National Vector 
Borne Disease central programme (NVBDCP). The Committee take a serious note 
of such delays and recommend that the Department should immediately take up 
the matter with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare at Mi nister/secretary 
level to direct NVBDCP to immediately clear the payment dues to HIL. Department 
should convey this recommendation made by the Committee to both the Ministry 
of Health and Family welfare and NVBDCP for their compliance.  
Reply of the Government 
2.10 In view of OM dated 3.2.2016 of the Ministry of Finance which instructs that the 
window of investment and working capital loan to CPSEs from Govt. of India is closed, it 

29 
is not feasible for the Department to provide any financial assistance to HI L for 
expansion/diversification activities. However, the Department is extending all possible 
assistance to further improve the performance of HIL. For example, the Department in 
January, 2019 approved  HIL’s proposal for mortgage of the company’s surplus l and at 
Zakhira, Delhi, to nationalized/public sector banks as collateral security for 
raising/borrowing funds to meet the operational and business requirements of HIL. 
Efforts are also being made to monetise the surplus land assets of HIL which will 
facilitate improvement in working capital position of the company. HIL is also setting up 
a Long Lasting Insecticidal Net (LLIN) manufacturing facility (initial capacity 50 lakh nets 
per annum) at its Rasayani unit with financial assistance from UNIDO. The LLIN facility 
is expected to become operational shortly and would contribute to the company’s 
profitability. 
 
As regards the delays in DDT related payments by the NVBDCP/ Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare (MoH&FW), Secretary (C&PC) vide DO letter dated 
05.02.2020 has conveyed the Committee’s concern and recommendation to the 
Secretary, MoH&FW, along with the request to expedite the DDT related payments of 
HIL. A copy of the DO letter is enclosed for reference at Annexure-I. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
RECOMMENDATION No. 10  
2.11 The Committee note that Central Institute of Plastics Engineering 
Technology (CIPET) is a premier national Institution fully devoted to skill 
development, technology support, academic and research activities for the 
growth of polymer and allied industries in the country. CIPET conducts is 
different long term training programs including undergraduate, Post graduate and 
doctoral programmes and also conducts vocational skill development 
programmes in the entire gamut of Plastics Engineering Technology in line with 
the Skill India Mission of the government of India. CIPET has been operating on 
self- sustainable mode since 2008 -09 onwards and the Government of India 

30 
provides funds only for strengthening CIPET’s civil and technical facilities. In this 
regard, CIPE T has requested Rs.149.97 crore for 2019 -20. However, only Rs.80 
crore been allocated in Budget 2019 -20. CIPET has requested further Rs.30 crore 
for its expansion activities during 2019 -20. The Committee recommend that the 
Department Ministry of Finance sh ould consider allocating this additional fund 
requirement of Rs.30 crore to CIPET at R.E. stage during 2019 -20, in view of the 
services being rendered by CIPET in its field of Activities.  
Reply of the Government 
2.12 Rs. 149.97 crore was sought for the Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and 
Technology (CIPET) at B.E. 2019 -20 from the Ministry of Finance. However, only Rs. 
80.00 crore were allocated to CIPET in BE 2019-20. The allocated fund was released to 
CIPET by 30.12.2019. An additional requir ement of Rs. 30.00 crore was also intimated 
to the Ministry of Finance through the Internal Finance Division (IFD) of this 
Department, out of which, only Rs.1.50 crore has been allocated to CIPET at R.E. 2019-
20. 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
 
  

31 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11  
2.13 The Committee note that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
has constituted an Expert Committee to suggest alternatives  for single use 
plastics. In this regard, the Committee urge the Department to come up with 
alternative bio -degradable material so as to completely eliminate single use 
plastics in the country. CIPET being expert organizations in this field of plastics 
should work actively with other research organization to develop material like 
bio-plastics, bio -degradable plastics, and compostable plastics etc. which are 
easily degradable in nature. The Government should also consider giving 
incentives to entrepreneurs w ho are forthcoming to invest in making of bio -
degradable/recyclable carry bags.  
Reply of the Government 
2.14 CIPET is actively carrying out Research & Development on various compostable 
polymers derived from starch, natural fibre, and other bio -resources with desired 
properties to substitute the single use plastics. CIPET has also been implementing the 
mechanical recycling of post -consumer commodity plastics waste by optimizing the 
properties for various household applications.   
Technology pertaining to u tilization of recycled content to virgin materials as well 
as designing a single polymer family for various Multi -Layer Plastics, for high end 
application with improved properties, are also being undertaken for R & D to substitute 
single use plastics. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
  

32 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12  
2.15 The Committee also note that stress is now being given on recycling of 
plastics that can be used again and that the usage of plastics made of new 
materials, composites and nano composites has to increase considerably in the 
country as the usage is much les s vis -a-vis other countries. In this regard, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the Department should gear up research 
and development activities for the development and use of new plastic in the 
country, in this regard it is imperative that a definite role should be given to 
CIPET and the Centres of Excellence be established for the development and 
promotion of new plastics in the country.  
Reply of the Government 
2.16 CIPET has three Schools for Advanced Research in Polymers (SARP) - R & D 
Centres in the country, which have been undertaking various sponsored research 
project activities for development of new plastics of different category such as (a) high 
efficiency towards bio -degradation; (b) high recycle potential; (c) plastics from 
renewable / non-petroleum materials; (d) hybrid composites; (e) smart polymers; and (f) 
nano-composites. These units are: 
(i) Advanced Research School for Technology and Product Simulation 
(ARSTPS) at Chennai; 
(ii) Laboratory for Advanced Research in Polymeric Materials  (LARPM) at 
Bhubaneswar; and 
(iii) School for Advanced Research in Polymers -Advanced Polymer Design & 
Development Research Laboratory (SARP – APDDRL) at Bengaluru.  
CIPET has developed various new plastics to fulfil the requirement of 
Automobiles, Aviation, Coat ing, Adhesive, Packaging and Medical application. Various 
prototypes were developed at different sectors and validated for commercial application. 
DCPC is promoting research for ecologically sustainable and green alternatives of 
plastics through Centres of Excellence (CoE) at CIPET, IIT and NCL. 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
 

33 
Chapter III 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT WANT TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
3.1 The Committee are happy to note that Kochi Plant of HOCL is functioning 
well as a stand alone project after closing of Rasayani unit of HOCL and made a 
profit of Rs.22 crore during 2018 -19. In view of the above, the Committee urge the 
Government to reconsi der its decision to disinvest HOCL’s Kochi unit and 
instead the Government may consider modernization of the plant and strengthen 
its diversification initiatives so as to enable it to remain continuously profit 
making and competitive in the field of its activities.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 The profitability of Kochi unit of HOCL is dependent on the prices of main 
products viz. Phenol and Acetone, and the cost of the inputs (raw material) of the 
Phenol plant. Phenol/Acetone prices are mainly governed b y the global market demand 
and supply position and the input prices (Benzene and LPG) are governed by the 
international crude prices. As such, the performance of Kochi unit is to a large extent 
dependent on global factors which are beyond the control of HO CL. This is reflected in 
the unit’s performance in the last two years. During 2018 -19, Kochi unit achieved 
turnover of Rs.472 crore and profit of Rs.22 crore due to spurt in global demand for 
Phenol and Acetone and stable raw material/crude prices. However , with large scale 
imports of Phenol at unremunerative prices in the first half of FY 2019 -20, the unit could 
achieve turnover of only Rs.213 crore and incurred a loss of Rs.58 crore (Prov.) during 
the 9 month period April –December, 2019. Though the prices  of Phenol/ Acetone have 
been improving since January 2020, the Kochi unit is expected to suffer an estimated 
loss of Rs.82 crore in the current FY 2019-20. 
 
HOCL does not presently have funds to undertake modernisation of the Kochi 
unit plants. Also, in view of OM dated 3.2.2016 of the Ministry of Finance which instructs 
that the window of investment and working capital loan to CPSEs from Govt. of India is 
closed, it is not feasible for the Department to provide any financial assistance to HOCL 
for moderni sation or diversification of Kochi unit plants. However, depending on the 
availability of surplus funds (after repayment of GoI loans/interest and other dues) from 
land sale proceeds of Rasyani unit, the company plans to change the catalyst used in of 
the Cumene plant (intermediary product of Phenol plant) to Zeolite (instead of solid 

34 
Phosphoric), at an estimated cost of Rs.80 crore which would improve the productivity 
of the Phenol plant.  
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
 
                                          RECOMMENDATION NO. 14 
 
3.3 The Committee note that the Government of India is making payment of 
compensation and ex -gratia to the victims of Bhopal Gas victims through the 
Office of Welfare Commissioner, Bhopal Gas Victims. 60712 cases have been 
decided and an amount of Rs.822.53 cr ore has been awarded till March, 2019. 
Further ex-gratia of Rs.830 crore has been disbursed to 5,63,112 claims as pro -
rata compensation. Even though it is a judicial process and it takes time in 
adjudication of all the claims, the Committee recommend that all initiatives 
should be made by the Department and the office of Welfare Commissioner to 
complete the entire process of providing compensation and ex -gratia to all the 
eligible victims within a definite period of time.  
 
Reply of the Government 
3.4 Office of the Welfare Commissioner, Bhopal Gas Victims, Bhopal has disbursed 
an amount of Rs.1549.32 crore as original compensation in 5,74,393 awarded cases, 
Rs.1517.85 crore as pro-rata compensation in 5,63,116 awarded cases and ex-gratia of 
Rs.837.11 crore in 61,575 decided (out of which 50,082 awarded) cases till February 
2020. As per decision of the Cabinet in June, 2010, a sum of Rs.179 crore was 
sanctioned for 12,000 cases (10 ,550 Cancer and 1 ,450 Total Renal Failure). The 
applications claiming ex -gratia are still being received . A total of 21, 200 applications 
(14,779 Cancer and 6420 TRF) have been received till 29.02.2020. No cut-off date has 
been fixed for receiving these applications. 
 
The claims filed by the victim s are decided through Judicial  procedure under the 
Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Processing of Claims) Act, 1985 and the Scheme framed 
there under, which provides the claimants the right to appeal. lf the claimant is 

35 
dissatisfied with the decision of Dy. Welfare Commissioner , he is entitle d to file an 
appeal as well as revision under the Act. All the services of the Officers adjudicating the 
claims are obtained on deputation from Judicial Services . The pending appeals/  
revisions as of 29 February, 2020 in various courts are indicated below:- 
Appeal Court 1276 
Revisional Court 522 
Supreme Court 21 
  
Unless these appeals/revisions are decided by competent Court , no probable 
date of settlement of Ex-gratia claims can be given. 
The Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster  (Processing of Claims), Act - 1985 provides the 
provision of Appeal to the claimants, thus, the claimants are challenging the Category 
granted to them at the original stage. Therefore, after the original approval of cases , 
many claimants have filed appeals  /revisions in the Courts of A ddl. Welfare 
Commissioner/ Hon'ble Welfare Commissioner, as also before the High Court of 
Madhya Pradesh seeking change of Category awarded to them. 
                The adjudication of these cases ha s resulted in increase of cases in the 
Permanent Partial Disability Category, after the commencement of ex -gratia Scheme. 
Under Permanent Partial Disability Category , 4902 cases were sanctioned for payment 
to the claimants. According to an estimate done by O/o Welfare Commissioner, a rise of 
1000 cases in coming 3 years is anticipated under this Category. 
Curative Petition (C) No. 345-347/2010 in CA No.3187-88/1988 has been filed by 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals against Union Carbide Corpora tion 
and others seeking enhanced compensation against the  earlier amount settled at US $ 
470 million. The Petition is at hearing stage in the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. 
Due to the above reasons, no time frame can be given for settlement of all 
claims. 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
  

36 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
4.1 The Committee note that a budgetary allocation of Rs.3 core has been 
made as Grants -in-aids for creation of capital Assets by Institute of Pesticides 
Formulation Technology (IPFT) during 2019 -20 even though the institute 
proposed an amount of Rs.5 crore for the purpose. Since this institute is engaged 
in development of environment and user friendly pesticides formulation 
technologies and it is necessary to support the initiatives of the institute in 
developing bio -pesticides which are safe for human beings,  the Committee 
recommend that additional fund requirement of the institute under this head may 
be considered by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals and the 
Ministry of Finance at Revised Estimate stage.  
The Committee also urge the Department an d IPFT to make all efforts to 
develop environment and user friendly bio -pesticides viz neem based pesticides 
etc. so as to produce more and more bio pesticides in the country which are very 
effective against all pests as that of Chemical pesticides. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 The amount of Rs. 3.00 crore allocated in BE -2019-20 is being used to procure 
equipment namely ‘Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)’ required for creation of GLP 
(Good Laboratory Practices) facility in IPFT. Other Capital assets wi ll be created in a 
phased manner. Now an amount of Rs. 5.00 crore has been allocated for this purpose 
in BE-2020-21. 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
 

37 
Recommendation No. 15 
Removal of toxic waste lying in UCIL Complex, Bhopal 
4.3 The Committee are deeply anguished over the delay in disposing off the 
toxic waste lying at UCIL complex in Bhopal for the last 34 years and subsequent 
remediation of the area. In this regard, the Committee urge the Department to take 
up at highest level with the Government of Madhya Pradesh to take immediate 
necessary action to dispose off toxic waste and to remediate the entire area 
within a definite period of time 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 As per the decision of the Cabinet in June, 2010, the matter of providing 
oversight and support to all remediation actions including disposal of waste is being 
dealt with by the Oversight Committee constituted in the Ministry of Environment , Forest 
and Climate Change (M/o EF&CC). A Review meeting was held under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals (DCPC) on 
9th December, 2019 wherein the issue of disposal of toxic waste lying at UCIL premises 
was discussed with the officials of the State Government of Madhya Pradesh. It was 
decided in the meeting that State Government of Madhya Pradesh will take up the issue 
with M/o EF&CC at the highest level for resolving the issues rela ted to disposal of toxic 
waste. 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
 
  

38 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendations No. 3 
 
5.1 The Committee are dismayed to note that GST on Pesticides has increased 
to 18% after roll out of GST from around 12% VAT in most of the important states 
where the pesticides are consumed on a large scale. GST on fertilizers is only 
5%and pesticide being another agro -input deserves to be put under 5% slab of 
GST. In this regard, the committee note the recommendation of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals to bring down the GST slab to 5 percent. Since it 
is disheartening to note that the crops worth Rs.90,000 crore are lost annually 
due to pests and diseases, the committee recommend that GST on pesticides 
should be reduced from 18% to 5% so as to benefit the farmers and to increase 
the agricultural production in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 The Department has noted the suggestion of Hon’ble Committee and would 
pursue the matter in a holistic way with the Ministry of Finance for reducing GST on 
pesticides from 18% to 5%. 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
5.3 The Committee note that all the plants of Rasayani Unit of Hindustan 
Organic chemicals Ltd. (HOCL) have been closed down and the Di -Nitrogen 
Teraxide plants along with its employees has been transferred to Indian Space 
Research Organization. Subsequently P ehnol/Acetone plant of HOCL at Kochi 

39 
has started functioning as stand alone unit since July, 2017. This has enabled 
HOCL to achieve net turnover of Rs.472 crore and net profit of about Rs.22 crore 
from Kochi unit operations during the financial year 2018 -19. However, during 
current financial year, HOCL along with other two domestic industries are 
affected due to cheap imports of Phenol from countries like USA and Thailand. 
Presently anti-dumping duties have been imposed by the Government on imports 
from some countries but not on all countries. Sin ce it is very much necessary to  
protect the domestic industry from such dumping by foreign countries, the 
committee recommend that immediate necessary steps should be taken by the 
Department in coordination with the  Ministry of Commerce to impose anti -
dumping /safeguard duty on phenol imports.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 M/s Deepak Phenolics Ltd., had submitted an application to DGTR for levy of 
safe guard duty on import of Phenol and also requested DCPC to take u p the matter 
with DGTR. Accordingly, the Department had recommended imposition of safeguard 
duty on import of Phenol vide OM No. C.II -13012/04/2019- Chem.II dated 30th October 
2019.  
Further, a meeting was held on 18.02.2020 under the Chairmanship of Hon’b le 
Minister (C&F), wherein DGTR was requested to expedite the disposal of Antidumping 
duty cases on Phenol, taking into consideration the market scenario of phenol industry 
in the Country. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 
 
5.5 The Committee are concerned to note that Hindustan fluorocarbon Limited 
(HFL) is continuously making losses since 2013 -14. Efforts made by the 
Department for strategic disinvestment of this PSU were not successful. 
Moreover, HFL’s operations would become unviable from 2020 onwards due to 
reduced quota allocation for manufacture of HCFC -22 as per Montreal protoco l. 
While noting the view of the Department that the company has to be closed down 
after March, 2020, the Committee take a serious view of such pathetic condition 
of Central Public Sector Undertakings which are being closed one after the 
another due to un -viability of operations, obsolete technology, cheap imports 
from abroad etc. Presently there are 150 employees in the company and the 
Committee urge the Department to take effective steps to fully protect the 
interests of employees of the company in event o f its closure. In this regard, the 
Committee note that the Department requires Rs.77 crore to settle the statutory 
dues of the employees who would be offered VRS before closing down and to 
settle the bank dues. The Committee recommend to the Ministry of Fi nance to 
allocate the funds required by the Department for settling the dues of the 
employees either at RE stage or through supplementary demand for grants. The 
Department should submit their demand in time for the consideration of the 
Ministry of Finance so as to protect the interest of the employees.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.6 The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting on 
22.01.2020 has approved shutting down the operations of the plant/unit of Hindustan 
Fluorocarbons Limited (HFL) and closure of the company. The CCEA decision includes 
grant of interest free loan of Rs.77.20 crore by the Govt. of India to HFL for settling the 
immediate closure related liabilities of the company, including for separating the 88 
employees (except around 11 skeletal staff to be retained temporarily for implementing 
the closure) through VRS/VSS after payment of all their salary & statu tory dues. The 

41 
loan of Rs.77.20 crore, along with other Govt. of India dues of HFL, is to be repaid from 
the disposal of land and other assets of HFL after settling all closure related liabilities. 
 
 Since HFL’s operations are not likely to be sustainable after March, 2020, it is 
imperative to close down the operations of the company and separate its employees 
through VRS/VSS by 31.03.2020, so as to protect their interests and also to avoid 
additional liabilities on account of payment of idle wages after March, 2020. In this 
regard, Secretary, D/o Chemicals & Petrochemicals, on 24.01.2020 has written to the 
Secretary, D/o Economic Affairs, for providing budgetary support/loan of Rs.77.20 crore 
to HFL in the Department’s budget for 2019 -20so that the separation of employees can 
be completed by March-April, 2020. Minister (C&F) vide DO letter dated 12.02.2020 has 
also requested Hon’ble Finance Minister to include the loan provision for HFL in the 
Second & Final Batch of Supplementary Grants 2019 -20. The Supplementary proposal 
for loan to HFL was separately sent by this Department to DEA on 17.01.2020  and is 
being regularly pursued. 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC ID No.23003/01/2019-IFD dated: 17th March 2020] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                     KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
 ..... February, 2021                                                                                    Chairperson 
…...Magha, 1942 (Saka)                                              Standing Committee on 
              Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
***** 
 
                                           

42 
Appendix II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2019-20) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2019-2020)’ OF 
THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND 
PETROCHEMICALS). 
 
I Total Number of Recommendations 15 
II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Vide Recommendation No. 1,2,4,5,9,10,11 & 12 
 
 Percentage 53.3% 
III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government reply:- 
Vide Recommendation No. 7 &14 
 
 Percentage 13.3% 
IV Observation/Recommendation in respect of which reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:- 
Vide Recommendation No. 13 & 15 
 
 Percentage 13.3% 
V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government is still awaited:- 
Vide Recommendation No. 3, 6 & 8 
 
 Percentage 20% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
Appendix I 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2019-20) 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11 th August, 2020 from 1100 hrs. to 1430 hrs. in 
Committee Room No. 1 Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe Building, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Ms Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
3. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
4. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
5. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
6. Dr. Manoj Rajoria 
RAJYA SABHA 
7 Dr. Anil Jain 
8 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
9 Shri Arun Singh 
10 Shri A. D. Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
           1.         Shri Manoj K. Arora                -          OSD (LSS)              
           2.         Shri A. K. Srivastava              -           Director 
               3.         Shri C. Kalyanasundaram      -           Additional Director       
 
 2.         First the Hon’ble Chairperson expressed  her deep sorrow on the sad demise of Rajya 
Sabha Member  Shri Amar Singh who was also a sitting Member of the Committee.  The 
Committee observed two minutes silence as a mark of respect to the departed soul. 
 
3.  The Hon'ble Chairperson then   welcomed three Rajya Sabha Members viz. Shri 
P.Selvarasu, Shri A.D.Singh and Shri Vanlalvena   who have been nominated as Members of 
the Committee.   
4.         The Committee thereafter took up for considerati on and adoption the following draft 
Action Taken Reports: 
(i)      Draft Action Taken Report on 'Demands for Grants 2019 -20'  (Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals);  

44 
  
(ii)        Draft Action taken report on 'Demands for Grants 2019 -20' (Department 
of Fertilizers); and 
  
(iii)       Draft Action Taken report on 'Demands for Grants 2019 -20' (Department 
of Pharmaceuticals. 
   
5.         After deliberations, the above mentioned Draft Action Taken Reports were unanimously 
adopted by the Committee without any changes/amendments.  
Session II 
xxx    xxx    xxx        xxx  
 
Session-III 
 
xxx    xxx    xxx       xxx 
  
         A copy of the recording of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
  
            The Committee then adjourned. 
  
___________________________________________________________________  
xxx matters not related to this report.   
 
 
  

45 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE    FIRST SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 12th October, 2020 from 1100 hrs. to 1145hrs. in 
Committee Room  ‘B’,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
 
  Ms. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2. Shri Deepak Baij 
3. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
4. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
5. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
6. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
8. Shri Indra Hang Subba 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri  M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
10. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
11. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
12. Shri Arun Singh 
13. Shri A.D. Singh 
14. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
15. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora  - Officer on Special Duty (LSS) 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava - Director 
3. Shri Panna Lal   -  Under Secretary  
 
 
Session I  
 
XXXX    XXXX    XXXX     
Session-II  
 
  XXXX    XXXX   XXXX 

46 
 
2. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption of following draft 
Action Taken Reports: 
 
(i) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019 -20 (Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals); 
(ii) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019-20 (Department of Fertilizers); 
(iii) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019 -20 (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals); 
(iv) Action Taken Report on Study of System of Fertilizer Subsidy (Department of 
Fertilizers). 
(v) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2020-21 (Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals); 
(vi) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2020-21 (Department of Fertilizers); 
(vii) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals). 
 
3. After deliberatio ns, the Committee adopted the draft Action Taken Report(s) 
unanimously without any change/amendments.  The Committee also authorized the 
Chairperson for finalize and present the Action Taken Reports to the Parliament. 
 
4. The Committee also decided to hold its next sitting tentatively in the second week of 
November, 2020. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________XXXX 
matters not related to this report. 
 
  
 
  
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 