i 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS (2020-21) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF  PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHARMACEUTICAL EDUCATION AND 
RESEARCH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021. 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
   
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
    AUGUST, 2021 /SRAVANA, 1942 (SAKA) 


ii 
 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHARMACEUTICAL EDUCATION AND 
RESEARCH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021. 
 
 
  
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  04.08.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 04.08.2021 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST 2021 /SRAVANA, 1942 (SAKA) 
 


iii 
 
 
INDEX 
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) (iv) 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
Chapter I INTRODUCTON 1 
Chapter II PRESENT STATUS OF FUNCTIONING OF NIPERS 2 
Chapter III CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION OF THE BILL 
 
10 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 21 
 
APPENDICES  
                  1. National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research (Amendment) Bill, 2021 
28 
2. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2020-21) held on 29.06.2021 
47 
3. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2020-21)  held on 29.07.2021 
51 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS (2020-21) 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Deepak Baij 
4 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
5 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
6 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
7 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8 Shri Pakauri Lal 
9 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
11 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
12 Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
13 Shri Atul Kumar Singh alias Atul Rai 
14 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15 Shri M. Selvaraj 
16 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
17 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
18 Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
19 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
20 Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
21 VACANT 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26 Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27 
28 
Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
Shri Arun Singh 
29 Shri A.D. Singh 
30 
31 
Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
Shri K. Vanlalvena 
  
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora    -  Officer on Special Duty 
2. Shri N.K. Jha     -  Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram   -  Additional Director 
4 Shri Gagan Kumar    -          Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf 
present this Twenty third Report on The National In stitute of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research (Amendment) Bill, 2021 of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
2.  The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 15 March 2021 and was referred to 
the Committee by the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha under Rule 331E (b) of the Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha for examination and report 
within three months from the date of publication of the reference of the Bill in Bulletin 
Part-II of Lok Sabha dated 16  April 2021. At the request of the Committee, Hon’ble 
Speaker granted extension of two months for the presentation of the Report. 
3.  The Committee at their sitting held on 29.06.2021 heard the views of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) and The National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research the provisions of the Bill. The Committee considered and adopted the Bill 
on 29.07.2021. 
4.  The Committee also wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers ( Department of Pharmaceuticals)  for placing before 
them detailed  written notes on the subject and for furnishing the desired information 
in connection with the examination of the Bill.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                            KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
29 July, 2021                                                                       Chairperson 
07 SRAVANA, 1942 (Saka)                                  Standing Committee on 
                 Chemicals and Fertilizers

1 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 The National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research Act, 1998 
(13 of 1998) was enacted to declare the National Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research (NIPER) at Mohali, Punjab to be an institute of national 
importance and to provide  for its incorporation and  matters connected therewith. 
The Act came into force w.e.f. 26 June, 1998.  
 
1.2.  The Act was subsequently amended in 2007 to empower the Central 
Government to establish similar institutes in different parts of the country.  
Thereafter, six new institutes at Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Hajipur, Hyderabad, Kolkata 
and Raebareli were established during 2007-08. 
 
1.3.   Over the years, a need was felt to bring clarity that the six institutes so 
established as well as any other similar ins titute to be established under the said Act 
shall be institutes of national importance.  In order to coordinate the activities of all 
such institutes, to ensure coordinated development of pharmaceutical education and 
research and maintenance of standards, etc., there is a need to establish a central 
body, to be called the Council.  Also, there is a need to rationalise the Board of 
Governors of each such institute and to widen the scope and number of courses run 
by such institutes. 
 
1.4. In order to address the above needs, the National Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research (Amendment) Bill, 2021 was introduced in Lok Sabha by 
the Union Chemicals and Fertilizers Minister on 15 th March, 2021 to amend the 
NIPER Act, 1998.  Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabh a referred the Bill, as introduced in 
Lok Sabha,  to Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers on 16 April, 2021 
for examination and Report on the Bill within three months.  Since the Committee 
could not hold their sittings due to extraordinary situa tion created due to COVID 
pandemic.  The Committee, therefore, at their sitting held on 29 June, 2021 decided 
to request the Hon’ble Speaker to grant extension of three months time for 
presentation of the Report.  
 
1.5.   The Bill has been proposed under E ntry 64 –“Institutions for scientific or 
technical education financed by the Government of India wholly or in part and 
declared by Parliament by law to be institutions of national importance” of List I - 
Union List of the Seventh Schedule of the Constituti on of India. The Bill seeks to 
grant status of institutes of national importance to existing six National 
Pharmaceutical Institutes located in Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Hajipur, Hyderabad, 
Kolkata and Raebareli. This also aims to empower the Central government to 
establish a Council for these institutes and to rationalise their Board of Governors for 
better administration. The following chapters examine the present status of 
functioning of NIPERs and the provisions of the Bill to meet the present extraordinary 
situation arising in the country out of COVID -19 pandemic and the future challenges, 
similar or otherwise, in the field of Pharmaceutical sector.  

2 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
PRESENT STATUS OF FUNCTIONING OF NIPERS 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHARMACEUTICAL EDUCATION & RESEARCH 
 
Indian Pharma Industry has been a global leader in Generic drugs. In order to 
acquire leadership position in drug discovery and development and to continue to 
excel in the formulations, Government recognized that human resources/talent pool 
is very cr itical. Thus Government of India has set up National Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Education & Research (NIPER) at SAS Nagar Mohali as a 
registered society under the Society Registered Act 1860, Subsequently the Institute 
was given statutory recognition by a n act of Parliament, NIPER Act, 1998 and the 
Institute was declared as an Institute of National Importance.  During 2007 -08, six 
new NIPERs were started at Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Hajipur, Hyderabad, Kolkata 
and Raebareli. 
 
The main aims and objectives of NIPER are: 
 
i. to nurture and promote quality and excellence in pharmaceutical education 
and research; 
ii. to concentrate on courses leading to master’s degree, doctoral and post -
doctoral courses and research in pharmaceutical education; 
iii. to hold examinations and grant degrees; 
iv. to confer honorary awards or other distinctions;  
v. to cooperate with educational or other institutions having objectives wholly or 
partly similar to those of the Institute by exchange of faculty members and 
scholars and gener ally in such manner as may be conductive to their 
common objective; 
vi. to conduct courses for teachers, pharmaceutical technologies, community 
and hospital pharmacists and other professionals; 
vii. to collect and maintain world literature on pharmaceutical and rel ated 
sciences and technology so as to develop an information centre of its own 
kind for other institutions within the country and in the developing world; 
viii. to develop a world level centre for creation of new knowledge and 
transmission of existing informatio n in pharmaceutical areas with focus on 
national, educational professional and industrial commitments; 
ix. to develop a multi -disciplinary approach in carrying out research and training 
of pharmaceutical manpower so that the larger interests of the profession 
academia and pharmaceutical industry are better served and a 
pharmaceutical work culture is evolved which is in tune with the changing 
world trends and patterns of pharmaceutical education and research;  
x. to organise national or international symposia, semi nars and conferences in 
selected areas of pharmaceutical education, from time to time; 
xi. to arrange courses catering to the special needs of the developing countries; 
 
xii. to act as nucleus for interaction between academic and industry by 
encouraging exchange of  scientist and other technical staff between the 

3 
 
Institute and the industry and by undertaking sponsored and funded research 
as well as consultancy projects by the Institute;  and  
xiii. to pay due attention to studies on the distribution and usage of drugs by t he 
rural masses, taking into account the socio-economic spectrum in the country 
 
2.2 NIPERs impart postgraduate and doctorate education and conduct high end 
research in various streams of pharmaceutics.  They have a combined annual intake 
capacity of about 1,000 post - graduate students [M Pharma, M Tech Pharma and 
MBA Pharma] and 185 PhD fellows. The NIPERs at Mohali, Hyderabad and 
Ahmedabad have been ranked as respectively 3 rd, 5th and 8th best in the country in 
the ‘Pharmacy’ category in the National  Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) 
released by the Ministry of Education for the year 2020. The Government of India 
has supported the NIPERs with financial grants of more than Rs.   800 cr. during the 
last five years. In order to further equip the NIPE Rs and strengthen their education 
and research capabilities in Pharma and medical devices sectors, the Cabinet has 
approved few specific changes in the existing Act due to passage of time and 
changed circumstances. 
 
PRESENT STATUS OF FUNCTIONING 
 
2.3 In regard to a query of the Committee about  the present status of functioning 
of each of the seven institutes mentioned in the Schedule of NIPER (Amendment) 
Bill, 2021, the Department of Pharmaceuticals stated in a written reply as under:-   
 
“NIPER, Mohali is functioning in its own well developed campus since its           
inception in 1998. After amendment of the NIPER Act in April, 2007, six new 
NIPERs at Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Hajipur, Hyderabad, Kolkata and 
Raebareli were set up during 2007-08 with the help of Mentor Institutes as per 
details as under:  
 
NIPER Mentor Institute Academic session 
started in the year 
Mohali - 1998 
Ahmedabad B.V. Patel Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
Development (PERD) Centre, Ahmedabad. 
2007 
Guwahati  Medical College, Guwahati 2008 
Hajipur ICMR - Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of 
Medical Science, Patna 
2007 
Hyderabad CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, 
Hyderabad 
2007 
Kolkata CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata 2007 
Raebareli CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow 2008 
  
With appointment of regular Directors and setting up individual Board of Governors, 
all the seven NIPERs are functioning in a full-fledged manner independently”.                                              
 
PRESENT STATUS REGARDING CONSTRUCTION OF OWN CAMPUS 
 
2.4 On being asked about  the present status of construction of own campus for 
each of the seven institutes with permanent building and state of the art laboratory 
facilities,  Department of Pharmaceuticals   furnished the following written reply: 

4 
 
 
 NIPER State of the art 
laboratory facilities 
Status of land/construction 
Mohali   
All the NIPERs have 
state of the art laboratory 
facilities. 
  
Rs. 100.00 crore each 
has been approved by 
the Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) in 
2018 for NIPERs at 
Ahmedabad, Hyderabad 
and Guwahati and Rs. 
55.00 cr. each for 
NIPERs at Hajipur, 
Kolkata and Raebareli. 
  
Substantial funds have 
been released, out of the 
approved amount, for 
purchase of equipment 
for labs for the NIPERs.  
  
The Department is 
seeking additional funds 
for up -gradation of 
laboratories facilities and 
up-gradation of facilities 
at NIPER Mohali. 
  
It is also proposed to set 
up one Centre of 
Excellence each in 
NIPERs at Mohali, 
Ahmedabad and 
Hyderabad. 
NIPER, Mohali has its own full -fledged 
campus at 129.25 acres of land. 
  
Ahmedabad 
  
60 acres land has been allocated by the 
Government of Gujarat. M/s Hindustan 
Steelworks Corporation Limited (HSCL) 
has been selected as Project Management 
Consultant (PMC). NIPER, Ahmedabad 
has shifted to temporary constructed 
building on the allocated land.  
After approval of construction by EFC in 
March, 2018, the construction activities 
have started. 
  
Guwahati 
  
Out of 89 acres of land allocated by the 
Government of Assam, only 51.42 acres 
was handed over by District Administration. 
M/s Engineering Project (India) Limited has 
been appointed as  Project Management 
Consultants. About  90% of construction 
has been completed. Institute has started 
functioning from the newly constructed 
campus. 
  
Hajipur Government of Bihar has allotted 12.5 
Acres of Land free of cost. The Institute is 
functioning from an existing building at the 
site.  The construction activities have not 
started due to deferment of decision by 
EFC in March, 2018 regarding construction 
of campus. Proposal has again been 
submitted for consideration and 
recommendation of EFC.  
 
  
  
Hyderabad 
  
Government of Telangana has allotted 50 
Acres of Land at District Medak free of 
cost. The Institute is presently functioning 
from rented campus at IDPL, a PSU under 
the aegis of the Department. As IDPL is 
under closure, it has been decided to 
transfer the 50 acres of IDPL’s land for 
setting up regular campus of the Institute. 
M/s National Project Construction 
Corporation Limited (NPCC) has been 
selected as Project Management 
Consultant (PMC).  
The construction activities have not started 
due to deferment of  decision by EFC in 
March, 2018 regarding construction of 

5 
 
campus. Proposal has again been 
submitted for consideration and 
recommendation of EFC. 
Kolkata Government of West Bengal allotted 10 
acres of Land at Kalyani, Nadia District for 
NIPER, Kolkata dur ing January 2018. 
NIPER, Kolkata is currently functioning in 
the lease premises of M/s. Bengal 
Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals Limited 
(BCPL), a PSU under the aegis of the 
Department. As BCPL is under strategic 
disinvestment, it has been decided to 
transfer about 20 acres of BCPL’s land for 
setting up regular campus of the Institute.  
The construction activities have not started 
due to deferment of decision by EFC in 
March, 2018 regarding construction of 
campus. Proposal has again been 
submitted for consideration and 
recommendation of EFC. 
Raebareli Government of Uttar Pradesh has provided 
about 50 acres of Land in District 
Raebareli. The institute is currently 
functioning from a Transit Campus at 
Lucknow.  
  
The construction activities have not started 
due to deferment of decision by EFC in 
March, 2018 regarding construction of 
campus. Proposal has again been 
submitted for consideration and 
recommendation of EFC. 
         
 
2.5 During briefing on the subject, the Secretary, Department of Pharmace uticals 
briefed the Committee on the status of construction of regular campuses to NIPERs 
as below:-  
 
“Regarding the construction, while we are very grateful for those States which 
have already allocated land for the NIPERs that were announced, the Central 
Government makes the provisions for the funds for the capital expenditure, 
that is, for construction and purchases of equipment, and of course, the 
recurring expenditure. It would not be, I would humbly submit, correct to say 
that Ministry has not done anything. Ministry had prepared a very ambitious 
proposal of Rs.4,300 cror ensuring that construction ca n be taken up in all the 
NIPERs, and the same was submitted to the Ministry of Finance; discussions 
were held. Ministry has advised us to take it up in a phased manner. 
Therefore, in the first round, we have received an approval for three years, 
2018-2020; and we have an EFC which we have proposed for the next five 
years, 2021-26. In the first phase, whatever we received as approval from the 
Ministry under the EFC -II, we have taken up the construction in Ahmedabad 
and in Guwahati; and we have taken up the u pgradation of all the labs in all 
the NIPERs and filling up of post…. I am very happy to report to you, in the 
last two years or so, not only we have almost completed 85 per cent 

6 
 
construction of NIPER Guwahati –it should be ready in a couple of months. 
We are able to start the work in Ahmedabad. I would say that that was 
delayed because as I pointed out in my earlier intervention because the local 
NIPER was not able to align with the approvals given by EFCs. So, we have 
to make them come back to the approva l given; that took time. As I said, we 
did not have the powers to make them do it immediately; we will have to 
persuade them, discuss, etc. …. So, all of them have got existing 
construction; they are either in rented premises or in the premises of our 
erstwhile PSU building. So, they are housed and we are able to provide them 
grants for the equipment”.                
 
SCOPE AND NUMBER OF COURSES/PROGRAMS BEING UNDERTAKEN 
 
2.6    The Department of Pharmaceuticals (Department of Pharmaceutical) was 
requested to furnish the details of courses and programmes being conducted by 
each of the seven institutes. In its written reply, Department of Pharmaceuticals 
stated that  NIPERs conduct Master’s and PhD programmes under various 
specializations of pharmaceuticals and medical devices, as under:  
 
S.No. Department Mohal
i 
Ahmedaba
d 
Hyderaba
d 
Guwahat
i 
Hajipu
r 
Kolkata Raebare
li 
1. Medicinal 
Chemistry 
√ √ √ √   √ √ 
2. Natural 
Products 
√ √ √     √   
3. Traditional 
Medicine 
√             
4. Pharmaceutic
al Analysis 
√ √ √ √ √     
5. Pharmacolog
y and 
Toxicology 
√ √   √ √ √ √ 
6. Regulatory 
Toxicology 
√   √       √ 
7. Pharmaceutic
al Technology 
(BT) 
√             
8. Pharmaceutic
al Technology 
(Form.) 
√     √       
9. Pharmaceutic
al Technology 
(PC) 
√   √         
10. Pharmaceutic
s 
√ √ √ √ √ √ √ 
11. Biotechnology √ √   √ √   √ 
12. Pharmacy 
Practice 
√     √ √     
13. Clinical √             

7 
 
Research 
14. Pharmacoinfo
rmatics 
    √     √   
15. Pharmaceutic
al 
Management 
√ √ √         
16. M. Tech 
(Medical 
Device) 
√ √ √ √   √   
17. Regulatory 
Affairs 
    √         
Total   15 8 10 8  5 6 5 
  
2.7 During br iefing on the subject, a representative of the Department informed 
the Committee as follows on the specific query of a member about inclusion of 
Pharmacognosy in the syllabus of courses/programmes conducted by NIPERS:  
 
“For your specific question regarding the pharmacognosy, this was one of the 
ancient subjects, but very very important subject. Since takers are very very 
less, we have to keep on modifying the syllabus according to job opportunity 
and industrial opportunity. This is being taught in three NIPE Rs in the form of 
natural products, traditional medicines. More than 50 per cent of the 
pharmacognosy is taught in that course and the rest of the things like 
pharmacology, toxicology including pharmaco informatics where NIPER, 
Kolkata and NIPER, Mohali ar e doing, one chapter is there about the 
pharmacognosy. That is root of the pharmacy. We have taken care of it. It is 
there in the syllabus”.                                 
 
PRESENT ANNUAL INTAKE CAPACITY 
 
2.8 As it had been stated in the background note that these institutes have a 
combined annual intake capacity of about 1000 post graduate students and 185 PhD 
fellows, the Committee asked for the details of student intake capacity, actual 
number of students en rolled and passing out under each of the courses and 
programmes offered by each of the seven institutes during each of the last three 
years.   In its written reply, Department of Pharmaceuticals furnished the following 
details of the students enrolled and passed out during last three years:  
 
Student Enrolment-  
  
  2018-20 2019-21 2020-22  
  MS PhD MBA MS PhD MBA MS PhD MBA 
Mohali 192 22 42 207 17 44 216 9 46 
Ahmedabad 102 9 - 112 12 - 145 24 -  
Hyderabad 105 10 30 116 18 33 134 30 38 
  

8 
 
Guwahati 65 9 - 70 10 - 103 16 - 
  
Kolkata 27 1 - 21 1 - 55 9 - 
  
Hajipur 36 6 - 42 5 - 52 6 - 
  
Raebareli 58 5 - 60 6 - 77 6 - 
  
    TOTAL 585 62 72 628 69 77 782 100 84 
719 774 966 
   
Student Pass-out – 
 
   2016-18 2017-19 2018-20 
  
  MS PhD MBA MS PhD MBA MS PhD MBA 
  
Mohali 209 29 35 201 9 42 185 19 36  
Ahmedabad 69 2 - 72 4 - 96 6 - 
  
Hyderabad 80 * 29 120 1 * 127 17 * 
  
Guwahati 35 4 - 39 3 - 65 2 - 
  
Kolkata 42 * - 44 2 - 27 * - 
  
Hajipur 35 3 - 23 1 - 36 3 - 
  
Raebareli 34 * - 37 * - 56 * - 
  
  
 TOTAL 
504 38 64 536 20 42 592 47 36 
606 598 675 
 
 * Pursuing 
Duration of Masters’ course - 2 to 3 years  
Duration of PhD course         - 3 to 5 years  
 
ACHIEVEMENTS IN RESPECT OF RESEARCH   
 
2.9 When asked about the achievements made in respect of research and 
development during each of the last three years by each of the seven institutes, 
Department of Pharmaceuticals furnished the details of research publications and 
patents filed by each of the seven NIPERs during the last three years are as below: 
 
    Moha
li 
Ahmedab
ad 
Guwaha
ti 
Hyderab
ad 
Hajip
ur 
Kolkat
a 
Raebar
eli 
TOTA
L 
Research 
publicatio
ns 
2018
-19 
127 131 51 86 8 31 24 458 
2019
-20 
126 122 62 114 3 24 49 500 
2020 125 140 78 132 10 46 77 608 

9 
 
-21 
Patents 
filed 
2018
-19 
3 3 3 1 - - 1 11 
2019
-20 
3 2 13 - 1 - 7 26 
2020
-21 
6 5 6 17 4 1 8 47 
  
 
ADDITIONAL INITIATIVES TO BE TAKEN  
 
2.10 In regard to a query of the Committee, whether more institutes are proposed 
to be set up in the country as per the requirements of the country particularly in the 
regions where it felt necessary to set up this institute, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals stated in written reply that in addition to existing seven NIPERs, it is 
proposed to set up five more  NIPERs at Madurai (Tamil Nadu), Jhalawar 
(Rajasthan), Nagpur (Maharashtra), New Raipur (Chhattisgarh) and Bengaluru 
(Karnataka).  In regard to the progress made in setting up of these NIPERS, the 
secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals informed the Commi ttee as below during 
the briefing on the subject:- 
  
“At the same time, we have also tried to and have the approvals, Government 
announcements for increasing the geographical spread of the NIPERs and we 
had the announcement for one NIPER in Madurai in Tami l Nadu and one 
NIPER in Bengaluru, Karnataka. However, we could not get the financial 
resources during the last few years for setting up the NIPERs, but we 
continue to take up the matter with Ministry of Finance through our 
Expenditure Finance Committee an d try to receive some more funds, so that 
we can fulfil that announcement also …. It may not be possible to have 
NIPER in every State, but we will try to have a programme by which we are 
taking the strength of every State in terms of development of drugs a nd 
pharmaceutical medicines”. 
 
2.11 Further during the course of briefing, the secretary responded as under when 
the Committee enquired about the reasons for delay in setting up of Madurai and 
other NIPERs:- 
 
“Sir, all these NIPERs were in Rajasthan, Banga lore, Madurai and 
Chhattisgarh. Except Bangalore, one was announced way back in 2012 and 
the other three in 2015 -16. However, we have received the land in Rajasthan 
and also in Tamil Nadu. Since we did not get the funds, we are now pursuing 
the funds very r igorously…. Madam, none of them which were announced in 
2012 have started functioning. All those which have started are of 2007 -08 
vintage. Then we had a slew of announcements in 2012-13 onwards, of which 
three NIPERs came in the budget announcement and two more came from 
the other advisory bodies. These are the five NIPERs that we are trying to 
operationalise. I may share with you the details. This time for the budget 
discussion for financial yea r 2021 -22 also, we have made a request. 
However, because of the current situation, the progress is slow”. 
             
 

10 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION OF THE BILL 
 
The Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers has given the following statement of 
objects and reasons for the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research (Amendment) Bill 2021:- 
 
(i)  Amendment of section 2 to declare that - 
a)  each such Institute is an institution of national importance; 
b)  every Institute established under sub -section (2A) of section 4 
on and after the commencement of the National Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research (Amendment) Act, 
2021 shall also be an institution of national importance; 
 
(ii)  Amendment of section 4 to rat ionalize the Board of Governors of each 
such institute from its existing strength of 23 to 12 members; 
 
(iii)  Amendment of section 7 to widen the scope and number of courses 
run by such institutes, including graduate and post-graduate degrees, doctoral 
and post -doctoral distinctions and research in pharmaceutical education, 
integrated courses, certificate courses and executive courses; 
 
(iv)  Insertion of new sections 30A, 30B, 30C, 30D, 30E to provide for 
establishment of Council, term of office, etc., of members of Council, functions 
of Council, Chairman of Council and power to make rules by Central 
Government, respectively; 
 
(v)  Insertion of a new section 33A to empower the Central Government to 
issue directions to the Institute for efficient administration of the Act. 
 
DEFINATION OF INSTITUTION OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE 
 
3.2 The proposed amendments and justification thereof as furnished by the 
Department in its background material is as under:  
 
" I. Amendment of section 2 to declare that – 
 
a. Each such Institute is an institution of national importance; 
b. Every Institute establis hed under sub -section (2A) of section 4 on and 
after the commencement of the National Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research (Amendment) Act, 2021 shall also be an 
institution of national importance." 
 
3.3  The original 1998 Act was for setting up an individual institute of national 
importance, viz., the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research at 
SAS Nagar (Mohali), Punjab. The Act was amended in the year 2007 permitting 
establishment of similar institutes in different parts of the country [Section 4 (2A)] and 
other centers in different locations within its jurisdiction [Section 4 (4A)]. Six new 
NIPERs were accordingly set up in 2007 -08. The amendment is to bring clarity that 

11 
 
these institu tes and any other similar institutes set up subsequently would be 
institutes of national importance.  
 
3.4     On being asked to provide the definition of 'An Institution   of National 
Importance', the Department of Pharrmaceuticals in a written reply state d that t he 
definition of Institution of National Importance is given in the following entries  of the 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution: 
 
“62. The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as 
the National Library, the Indian Museum, the Imperial War Museum, the 
Victoria Memorial and the Indian War Memorial, and any other like 
institution financed by the Government of India wholly or in part and 
declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance. 
 
63. The  institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as 
the Benares Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim University and the 1 
[Delhi University; the University established in pursuance of article 371E;] 
any other institution declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of 
national importance. 
 
64. Institutions for scientific or technical education financed by the 
Government of India wholly or in part and declared by Parliament by law to 
be institutions of national importance.” 
 
IMPACT OF DECLARING NIPER AN INSTITUTE OF NATIONAL IMPORTANCE 
 
3.5   When it was asked,    how this designation assist an institute in terms of 
academics, administration and financial aid from the Government of India, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals in its written reply  stated that the   NIPERs are 
institutes providing scientific and technical education, financed by the Government of 
India and declared as institutes of national importance. Section 2 of the NIPER Act, 
1998 reads as under:  
" Declaration of National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research as an institution of national importance .—Whereas the objects 
of the institution known as the National Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research, Sector -67, S.A.S. Nagar ( Mohali), District 
Ropar, Punjab are such as to make the institution one of national 
importance, it is hereby declared that the institution known as the 
National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research is an 
institution of national importance.” 
Subsequently, NIPER Amendment Act, 2007 incorporated the following 
provision:   
"(2A) the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish similar Institutes in different parts of the country." 
Thereafter, six new NIPERs were set up by the Central Government. The 
Institutes of National Importance receive special recognition and funding 
from the Government of India.  

12 
 
  
3.6 On being asked further, whether all the seven institutes are presently 
functioning with the status of institutions of national importance, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals in its written reply stated as under:- 
 
 “Yes, all NIPERs are functioning with the status of institutions of national 
importance. In this regard, may please refer reply to Question No. 8(i) above. 
The proposed amendment is to bring clarity that these institutes and any other 
similar institutes set up subsequently would be institutes of n ational 
importance”.  
 
 RATIONALIZATION OF COMPOSITION OF BOARD OF GOVERNORS 
 
3.7  In the background note furnished by Department of Pharmaceuticals, it has 
been stated that the present strength of Board of Governors (BoG) of NIPERs  is 23, 
whereas the strength of BoG of Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs), on which the 
NIPERs have been modeled is 9. The strength of BoG of Indian Institutes of Science 
Education & Research (IISERs) is 13. It is proposed to rationalize the strength of 
BoG of NIPERs to 12 members. Most of the members proposed to be deleted have 
been included in the Counci l proposed to be set up as per Sections 30 A (2) of the 
Bill. 
 
 3.8   On being asked about  whether this reduction of 11 Governors in BoG of an 
institute would result in effective functioning of the institutes, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals in its written reply furnished the following:- 
 
“The rationalization of the strength of BoG to 12 members is in line with 
composition of other similar institutes of national importance and would 
result in effective functioning of the Institutes, as the existing compositio n 
of the BoGs of NIPERs is too large and unwieldy. It was noted that senior 
members like Financial Advisor of the Department, Member Secretary, 
AICTE, Director, AIIMS, Director, CSIR Labs, and Presidents of Industry 
Associations were not being able to spar e time for attending meetings of 
the BoGs of the seven NIPERs, which ordinarily meet thrice a year. As 
simultaneously a NIPER Council at apex level is being created, most of 
the members being deleted from the BoGs will find a place in the proposed 
Council. As such, institutional views of the  respective organizations being 
excluded from BoG will be available for the benefit of the proposed NIPER 
Council”.  
  
3.9 When it was further asked, whether this reduction in number of Governors is 
likely to result in dearth in various shades of opinions in the Board meetings and the 
manner in which this issue is likely to be addressed, Department of Pharmaceuticals 
clarified in its written submission, “The reduction will not result in dearth of opinion for 
BoG a s the individual pharma educationists/ scientists/ researchers / industrialists 
will continue to be members of BoGs.   Further, two Professors of the Institute(s) are 
being proposed to be included in the respective BoGs, who will provide the internal 
academic inputs to the Board” 
 

13 
 
3.10 Clarifying further, the Department of Pharmaceuticals replied during the 
evidence as under:  
“As per Section 4(3)(m) of the principal Act,  three eminent public 
persons or social workers one of whom shall be either from the   Scheduled 
Castes or Scheduled Tribes to be nominated by the Visitor out of a panel 
prepared by the Central Government to the Board of Governors of the 
NIPERS. This provision has been removed in the present Bill“. 
  
3.11   As per the proposed substitution of sub-section 3 of Section 4 of NIPER Act 
1998, Chairperson of the Board of Governors of an institute shall be an eminent 
academician, scientist or technologist or professional to be nominated by the Visitor 
(President of India).  In this regard, Department of Pharmaceuticals was requested to 
provide the present procedure being followed by it for the nomination of 
Chairpersons to the Board of Governors of various institutes.  In reply, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals stated as under: 
 
“A panel o f eminent academician, scientist, technologist or 
professional, with approval of the Hon’ble Minister (Chemicals & Fertilizers) is 
forwarded to the President of India as Visitor of the India for appointing as 
Chairperson of the Board of Governors of NIPERs”.  
 
3.12 On being further asked, whether there is any proposal for the identification of 
chairpersons of the BoGs  by the proposed Council, Department of Pharmaceuticals 
stated in its written reply,  
 
“Presently, there is no proposal for identification of the Chairperson of the 
BoGs by the proposed Council.”   
  
WIDENING OF SCOPE OF NUMBER OF COURSES/PROGRAMMES RUN BY 
NIPERS   
 
3.13  In the background note furnished by Department of Pharmaceuticals on the 
Bill, it has been stated that the existing provision  [Section 7(ii) of the Act] prescribes 
that the Institute should concentrate on courses leading to master’s degree, doctoral 
and post -doctoral course and research in pharmaceutical education. NITI Aayog 
while evaluating the NIPERs has recommended for star ting the undergraduate 
courses immediately. The government is also keen to develop courses as per the 
need of the Industry and to develop skills of the work force. The enabling provisions 
for initiating integrated PG and PhD courses, short term certificate courses, one - 
year executive courses, etc. is a step in that direction. Accordingly, the following 
amendment to clause (ii) of Section 7 of the principal Act has been proposed in the 
Bill:- 
“(ii) to develop courses leading to graduate and post graduate deg rees, 
doctoral and post -doctoral distinctions and research in pharmaceutical 
education or to develop integrated courses relating thereto; 
 
40 (iia) to conduct executive education courses, short-term certificate courses, 
training programmes, online or distant education, diploma courses and such 
other short-term executive courses;” 
 

14 
 
3.14 Since the proposed amendment is silent on conduct of the 
courses/programmes.  Hence, the comments of the Department whether it would be 
appropriate to word the above pro posal as “to develop and conduct courses leading 
to graduate and post graduate degrees .....”, Department of Pharmaceuticals in its 
written reply stated, “The existing Sub Section 7(iii) of the Original Act prescribes that 
one of the functions of the Insti tute is ‘to hold examinations and grant degrees’. As 
such the amended sub-section 7(ii) read with existing 7(iii) implies that the Institute is 
mandated to ‘develop and conduct courses”. 
 
3.15    As per the information provided in the background note, all existing 
M.Pharma/PhD students/fellows in NIPERs are paid fellowships.   The new courses 
would be fully paid for revenue generation to NIPERS and assist in making them 
self-reliant to some extent.   In this regard, Department of Pharmaceuticals was 
requested to furnish the details of paid courses/programmes of each of the institute 
along with the fee structures.  In its written reply, Department of Pharmaceuticals 
stated that the qualifying Graduate Pharmaceuticals Aptitude Test (GPAT) is one of 
the pre -requisite for admission to NIPERs. The Master’s students are paid a 
fellowship of Rs. 12,400 per month whereas PhD scholars are paid fellowship in the 
range of Rs. 31,000 -33,000 per month. All the existing M. Pharma/PhD courses are 
paid courses. The tuition fee  is Rs. 18,700 per semester of six months. SC/ST 
students are exempted from payment of Tuition Fees. Master’s Program in 
Pharmaceutical Management (MBA Pharm a) is fully paid course where no 
fellowships are paid to students and tuition fee is Rs. 80,465 per  semester of six 
months. 
 
ESTABLISHMENT OF A COUNCIL  
 
3.16 In the NIPER(Amendment) Bill, 2021 it is proposed to  new sections 30A, 
30B, 30C, 30D, 30E to provide the establishment of Council, term of office, etc, of 
members of Council, functions of Council , Chairman of Council and power to make 
rules by Central Government.  In regard to the above, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals in its background note has stated that the original Act of 1998 was 
enacted for one single Institute at Mohali. Subsequently, six mo re NIPERs were set 
up at Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Hajipur, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Raebareli after 
amendment of the NIPER Act in 2007 -08. As per Section 8 of the existing NIPER 
Act, BoGs of the Institutes are responsible for the general superintendence, directi on 
and control of the affairs of the Institute. The proposed Council is to be set up under 
the chairmanship of the Minister in charge of the Department of the Pharmaceuticals. 
It would co-ordinate the activities of all NIPERs and advise them on issues relating to 
duration of the courses, lay down policy, examine development plans, examine the 
annual budget estimates of each Institute, recommend the Central Government 
regarding allocation of funds and advise the Visitor in respect of any function to be 
performed by him under this Act. The composition, powers etc. of the proposed 
Council are similar to those prescribed for IIT Council as per IIT Act. It is reiterated 
that NIPERs are modeled on IITs. 
 

15 
 
3.17  On being asked about  the challenges being faced by di fferent NIPERs 
presently in the absence of such Council, Department of Pharmaceuticals in a 
written submission to the Committee stated as under:- 
 
“ As per provisions of Section 8 of the NIPER Act, 1998, which was enacted 
for NIPER Mohali, the Board of Governors of the Institute  is responsible for 
the general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the 
Institute.  While, with amendment of the Act in the year 2007, the six new 
NIPERs were set up in 2007 -08, but their first Board of Govern ors was set up 
only in March, 2019. During the interim period, with approval of the Cabinet, a 
Steering Committee of NIPERs was set up under the chairmanship of 
Secretary of the Department for policy and coordination issues of NIPERs. 
This arrangement made  at executive level permitted the Committee to 
perform functions of BoG of individual NIPERs as well as deal with common 
policy and coordination issues of NIPERs. With setting up of BoGs for 
individual NIPERs, there is a need to have an Apex body having st atutory 
backing for policy making, performing advisory role, maintaining uniformity 
and ensuring coordination amongst various NIPERs." 
 
3.18 In regard to the  improvements  expected to be brought to the functioning of 
the NIPERs after the establishment of the Council, Department of Pharmaceuticals 
informed the Committee as follows:-  
 
“The Council will ensure planned and coordinated development of 
pharmaceutical education and research and maintain standards thereof. It will 
lay down policies, examine and approve development plans of the NIPERs 
and advise them on various matters. The Council headed by the Hon’ble 
Minister with senior functionaries from various departments, industry 
associations and other agencies will provide the necessary support, guidance  
and lead to improvement in performance of NIPERs”. 
 
 
3.19 Proposed provisions in Section 30 C (2) deal with the functions of the Council. 
In this regard, when it was observed that one of the functions of the Council should 
be monitoring or reviewing the p erformance of each of the institutes and enquired 
whether any provisions are proposed to be made in this regard in the Bill, 
Department of Pharmaceuticals replied as follows:- 
 
“As per Section 30(C)(1) of the Amendment Bill, the general duty of the 
Council is to coordinate the activities of all the Institutes and to take all 
such steps as to ensure planned and coordinated development of 
pharmaceutical education and research and maintenance of standards. 
The main objectives of the Council includes to lay dow n policy, perform 
advisory functions and to examine development plans and annual budget 
estimates.” 
 
PARTICIPATION OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT IN THE COUNCIL 
 
3.20   It is proposed to drop the Members of Parliament from the Board of 
Governors of the Institute  but to include three MPs (two from Lok Sabha and one 
from Rajya Sabha) in the proposed Council.   In this regard, the following reasons 
were furnished by Department of Pharmaceuticals:- 

16 
 
 
“  Joint Committee of Parliament on Office of Profit in its 9 th Report (Fifteenth 
LokSabha) presented to LokSabha on 2 nd May, 2013, concurring with the 
views of Ministry of Law and Justice, came to conclusion that unless NIPER is 
exempted from disqualification under the Parliament (Prevention of 
Disqualification) Act,  1959, no exemption can be granted to the Members, 
who are proposed to be nominated on Board of Governors and as such, the 
nomination to the Board of Governors attracts disqualification on the ground 
of holding an office of profit. The Committee was furthe r of the view that there 
should be an express provision either in the Act - requiring 
nomination/election of Members of Parliament for appointment to the 
Government body or in the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act, 
1959, exempting them from d isqualification under Article 102(1) (a) of the 
Constitution.  The matter was considered at various levels and it was decided 
to exclude the Members of Parliament from the Board of Governors of 
individual NIPERs and instead include them in the proposed Cou ncil to be set 
up under the chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers.  
Section 30 (A) ( 3) of the Amendment Bill declare that the office of a member 
of the Council shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen as or for being, a 
member of either House of Parliament”. 
 
3.21 When asked, whether it is proposed to specify that the MPs proposed to be 
nominated to the Council should have exposure to medical/pharmaceutical field so 
as to be benefitted of their experience, Department of Pharmac euticals in a written 
reply stated as below:- 
 
“Section 30(E) (1) (a) of the proposed Amendment Bill prescribes that the 
Central Government may make rules about the manner of filling vacancies 
among the members of the Council. The Department does not propose to 
prescribe that the MPs who are nominated to the Co uncil should have 
exposure to medical/pharmaceutical field”.  
 
SUGGESTIONS BY MEMBER OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
3.22      A member of the Committee made the following suggestions:-  
 
i) There is no provision in the NIPER Act regarding inter-NIPER 
transfer of D irector and faculty members. We may incorporate 
suitable provisions in the proposed amendment of NIPER Act 
enabling the Department to have power of inter-NIPER transfer of 
Directors and faculty members. 
ii) This w ill help in brining administrative and academic efficiency 
and it wi ll further increase interactions between various NIPERs. 
The time bound transfer and exchange of faculties may help in 
mutual sharing and learning among the faculties and Directors of 
NIPERs. 
iii) As per existing NIPER Act (Section16(1), Director of an institute is 
appointed by BoG with prior approval of Visi tor (President of 
India). Now, a NIPER Council is being proposed to be set up 
under Minister. In IITs, the Director is appointed by the Council 
with prior approval of Visitor . Similar provision may be 

17 
 
incorporated in Amendment Bill that Director is appo inted by 
Council (instead of BoG). 
 
   
EMPOWERING THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT THROUGH SECTION 33A 
 
3.23 In the background note furnished to the Committee it has been stated that the 
NIPERs are autonomous institutions with their individual Boards responsible for the 
general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the Institute, 
However, in number of instances, the Central Government found itself constrained in 
taking actions(s) for ensuring smooth administration of the institute. Although under 
Rule 11 of the existing Act, the Visitor does possess powers to give directions, based 
on reports of the Inquiry conducted on the work and progress of the Institute, but is 
not practically possible to approach the highest office of the land every time. NIPERs 
being largely financed by Government, directions are required to be issued in rare 
cases, mainly relating to administrative and financial matters. There academic 
autonomy wou ld, however, not be impinged. The proposed amendment was 
discussed in length with the Chairman, Board of Governors as well as Directors of 
NIPERs. Further, the proposed amendment seeking these powers is not unique. 
Such power to the Central Government to issue directions to the Institutes of national 
importance is specifically prescribed in various other Acts passed by the Parliament, 
as indicated hereunder: 
 
a. Rajiv Gandhi National Inst. of Youth Development Act, 2012 (Section 41) 
b. National Institute of Design Act, 2014 (Section 36) 
c. Indian Institutes of Information Technology Act, 2014 (Section 46) 
d. Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy Act, 2017 (Section 41) 
 
  
3.24 Department of Pharmaceuticals also furnished t he extracts of relevant 
provisions in other Central Acts where such powers exist are as under:- 
 
THE RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF YOUTH 
DEVELOPMENT ACT, 2012 
 
“41. Power of Central Government to give directions to Institute. —(1) 
The Central Government may give such directions, as it may deem 
necessary, to the Institute for the effective administration of this Act and 
the Institute shall comply with such directions. (2) In case of dispute 
between the Institute and the Central Government, in connection with 
the exercise of its powers and di scharge of its functions by the Institute 
under this Act, the decision of the Central Government on that dispute, 
shall be final.” 
 
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DESIGN ACT, 2014 
 
“36. Powers of Central Government to issue directions. —The Central 
Government may give such directions as it may deem necessary to the 

18 
 
Institute for effective administration of this Act and the Institute shall 
comply with such directions.” 
THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 
2014 
“46. Power of Central Government to is sue directions. —The Institute 
shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it from time to time 
by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.” 
 
THE INDIAN INSTITUTE OF PETROLEUM AND ENERGY ACT, 2017 
 
“41. Control by Central Government.—The Institute shall carry out such 
directions as may be issued to it from time to time by the Central 
Government for the efficient administration of this Act”.  
 
3.25 Department of Higher Education has informed the Powers of the Visitor as per 
Clause 9 of the Institute of Technology Act, 1961 are as under: 
 
 “9. Visitor:- 
(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of every Institute. 
(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to review the work and 
progress of any Institute and to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to 
report thereon in such manner as the Visitor may direct. 
(3) Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take such action and 
issue such directions as he considers necessary in respect of any of the 
matters dealt with in the report and the Institute shall be bound to comply 
with such directions”. 
 
 
3.26 Further, the Committee were informed about the necessity of this provision as 
under:- 
“The NIPERs are autonomous institution with their individual Boards 
responsible for the general superintendence, direction and control of the 
affairs of the Institute. However, in some recent instances, the Central 
Government found itself constrained in taking actions(s) for ensuring 
smooth administration  of the institute. As such, a provision has been 
proposed whereby the Institute shall be bound to carry out such directions 
as may be issued from time to time by the Central Government for efficient 
administration of the Act”. 
 
3.27 On being asked whether this provision may infringe the autonomous 
functioning of these institutes, Department of Pharmaceuticals in a written 
submission stated as below:-  
 
“The suggestion has been incorporated after detailed discussions and 
deliberations with the Chairperson, B oard of Governors and the Directors 
of all the NIPERs. The provision will be used in exceptional circumstances 
and autonomy of NIPERs is not going to be infringed. As per Section 11 of 
the existing Act, the Visitor does possess powers to give directions, b ased 
on reports of the Inquiry conducted on the work and progress of the 
Institute, but is not practically possible to approach the highest office of the 

19 
 
land every time. The proposed provision would be exercised in exceptional 
circumstances/cases only, if so warranted”.  
  
3.28 When asked to  furnish  the details of   instances  where the Central 
Government found it necessary to take such action(s) during the last three years for 
the smooth administration of the institutes,  Department of Pharmaceuticals 
furnished the following few of the instances where Department found constrained to 
take action for smooth functioning of Institutes, as under: 
 
a. Board of Governors, NIPER Mohali had prescribed/enhanced the service 
conditions (retirement age) of faculty, which was not within its power. The 
Department, after taking advice of M/o Law, Department of Personnel & 
Training and M/o Finance, had to file an appeal in the matter at the High Court 
of Punjab & Haryana. 
 
b. Despite the retirement age of staff, faculty and Director having been 
subsequently notified by the Department with approval of the Visitor (Hon’ble 
President of India), the Board of Governors, NI PER Guwahati passed a 
resolution for enhancement of retirement age of Director of the Institute. 
 
 
c. Director, NIPER Mohali was issued a Show Cause Notice with approval of 
Minister (Chemicals & Fertilizers) and after examining his reply thereto and 
obtaining approval of the Visitor, he was placed under suspension. High 
Court, Punjab considering the plea of Director that the initial action of 
issuance of Show Cause Notice (by Hon’ble Minister) was not by the 
competent authority, stayed the suspension order iss ued with approval of the 
President of India. 
 
d. The Resolution passed by the Board of Governors, NIPER Mohali for passing 
a revised order for relieving of Registrar of the Institute was not implemented 
by the Director after the term of the Board got over. De spite the Department 
obtaining advice of Additional Solicitor General endorsing the Resolution 
passed by BoG and repeatedly advising the Director to implement the 
Resolution passed by the BoG, instead of doing so, the matter was no one or 
other pretext was referred back by him to the Department. 
 
 
e. Director, NIPER Hajipur failed to implement the directions/ advice of the 
Department / Board of Governors of the Institute relating to various 
administrative/ financial issues and despite her being counselled by 
Secretary/Hon’ble Minister, things did not improve. Ultimately, she had to be 
placed under suspension with approval of Minister. 
 
3.29 During briefing on the Bill by the representatives of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, when the Committee asked about th e necessity of this provision, 
the Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals informed the Committee as under:- 
 
“As regards powers, we did not have such a provision earlier. We faced 
certain constraints in the smooth functioning of the institute in the last  3-4 
years. As you are aware, we are not intending to use this largely for 
academic purposes. So, the academic autonomy in terms of syllabus 
setting, conduct of examinations, admission, etc. continues to be with the 

20 
 
institutes. The purpose is to be able to  have the legislative mandate to be 
able to guide the institutes largely in terms of financial and administrative 
functions where most of the financing is done by the Government at the 
moment. Since they are institutes of higher post -Degree courses, they d o 
not have large revenue streams though we are trying to correct that also. 
Since there is a lot of Government money being spent through these 
institutes, it is necessary to have some powers to ensure that the money is 
spent well."  
 
3.30  In this regard, when the Committee observed during briefing that It should be  
very clearly defined that these are the areas where the Government will give 
instructions and these are the areas where the Government will not interfere, but this 
is a general  provision where you have not specified these things, the Secretary, 
Department of Pharmaceuticals responded as follows:- 
 
“I will give some examples where we faced problems in the last 2 -3 years. 
In one case, the Board of Governors itself prescribed and enhanced the 
service conditions of the faculty including the retirement age. We do not 
want a situation where the retirement age is different in each of these 
institutes. This is also one of the reasons why we have now the Apex 
Council suggested here. We had to file an appeal against our own institute 
in the court because we did not have the powers to direct them that they 
maintain some kind of uniformity across institutes. Similarly, we had a 
case where financial approvals for construction were not taken or were not 
being followed as per the approval of the EFC when we got the resources 
from the Ministry of Finance. There again, we had to issue advice to the 
Director --because at the moment we can only issue advice -- that this 
must be as per  the approvals given by the EFC and they cannot make 
changes. So, largely, we will continue to use this for ensuring the smooth 
administration. As regards the language that we have taken here, we have 
kept it similar to that is there in some of the other A cts of institutes of 
national importance in which we found similar languages. So, we did not 
find it necessary to specify exactly what we should use it for because it is 
very difficult to foresee what may be the challenges in the future”. 
  

21 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. The Committee note that the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education 
and Research Act, 1998 (13 of 1998) was enacted to declare the National Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER) at Mohali, Punjab to be an 
institute of national importance and to provide for its incorporation and  matters 
connected therewith. The Act came into force w.e.f. 26 June, 1998.  The Act was 
subsequently amended in 2007 to empower the Central Government to establish 
similar institutes  in different parts of the country.  Thereafter, six new institutes at 
Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Hajipur, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Raebareli were established 
during 2007-08.    Over the years, a need was felt by the Government to bring clarity 
that the six instit utes so established as well as any other similar institute to be 
established under the said Act shall be institutes of national importance.  In order to 
coordinate the activities of all such institutes, to ensure coordinated development of 
pharmaceutical education and research and maintenance of standards, etc. a need 
was also felt to establish a central body, to be called the Council, to rationalise the 
Board of Governors of each such institute and to widen the scope and number of 
courses run by such insti tutes. The Committee examined the present status of 
functioning of NIPERs and various provisions of the proposed amendments in the 
Bill. The observations/recommendations of the Committee are given in the following 
paragraphs. 
 
SECTION 2 OF THE AMENDMENT BILL 
2. Each NIPER have been declared as an Institution of National importance and 
thus regain special recognition and funding from the Government of India. However 
the Committee are not satisfied at their present annual intake capacity which is 1185. 
Given the huge population of country and India being the Pharmacy of the 
world, the Committee are of the view that the combined annual intake capacity 

22 
 
of the NIPERs should be enhanced significantly, so that we can train more and 
more people in the important field of Pharmaceutical education and Research. 
 
3. The Committee also note that in spite of all the NIPERs being an Institution of 
National importance there is huge disparity among them in terms of infrastructure, 
courses offered, campus area and the academic  and research output.  The 
Committee therefore also recommend that there should be a standard for all 
their parameters which every NIPERs should strive to meet giving justification 
to its tag of Institution of National importance.  
 
4. The Committee note th at out of seven NIPERS only NIPER, Mohali has its 
own full-fledged campus.    Out of other six NIPERS set up during 2007 -08, 90% of 
construction has been completed only in respect of Guwahati NIPER and 
construction activities have been started for Ahmedaba d NIPER.  Construction of 
campus for other four NIPERs viz. Hajipur, Hyderabad, Kolkatta and Raebareli has 
not been started due to deferment of decision by Economic Finance Committee 
(EFC) in March, 2018.  In this regard, the Committee note that fresh prop osals have 
been submitted by the Department of Pharmaceuticals for the consideration of EFC.  
Since it is very much necessary for these NIPERs to function in their own campus to 
achieve the full potential as Institutions of National Importance , the Committ ee 
recommend that the Department should pursue vigorously  at the highest level 
with the Ministry of Finance  for the early EFC approval along with the 
appropriate financial outlay for the construction of own campuses for all these 
NIPERs in a time bound m anner. At the same time, the Committee also 
recommend that the EFC under Ministry of Finance should take appropriate 
action to expedite the approval process in respect of construction of 
permanent campuses for all NIPERs. 
 

23 
 
5. The Committee note that all NI PERs have state-of-the-art laboratory facilities.  
Rs. 100.00 crore each was approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) 
in 2018 for NIPERs at Ahmedabad, Hyderabad and Guwahati and Rs. 55.00 crore 
each for NIPERs at Hajipur, Kolkata and Raebareli.  Out of the approved amount, 
substantial funds have been released for the purchase of equipment for labs for the 
NIPERs. Further, the Department is seeking additional funds for up -gradation of 
laboratories facilities in NIPERs.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that 
concrete proposals for upgradation of laboratory facilities in all NIPERs should 
be prepared and placed before EFC for its early approval. EFC under the 
Ministry of Finance also should examine the proposals of the Department in a 
time bound manner for according early approvals on priority basis. 
 
6. The Committee note that specialization programme on Natural Products is 
conducted by NIPERs at Mohali, Ahamedabad, Hyderabad and Kolkata and 
specialization programme on traditional medic ine is conducted by Mohali NIPER 
only.  In this regard, the Committee note that pharmacognosy which is an ancient 
subject on the root of pharmacy is being taught in the above mentioned NIPERs in 
the form of natural products and traditional medicines.   In t his regard, the 
Committee recommend that these programmes on Natural Products and 
traditional medicine further strengthened in coordination with the Ministry of 
AYUSH.  The Department may also consider introducing the Programme on 
traditional medicine in o ther NIPERs as well.  Likewise, the course on natural 
products may also be conducted in all the NIPERs. Ministry of AYUSH may 
also bring a separate Bill namely NIPER (AYUSH) dedicated solely for the 
promotion and development of research in the field of ind igenous medical 
system. 
 

24 
 
7. The Committee are concerned to note that the proposal to set up five more 
NIPERs at Madurai (Tamil Nadu), Jhalawar (Rajasthan), Nagpur (Maharashtra), New 
Raipur (Chattisgarh) and Bengaluru (Karnataka) is remaining on paper since  2012.  
Since the present coverage of NIPERs is  hardly sufficient to create a talented pool 
of pharmacists in the country,  the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals should chalk out concrete proposals for the 
timely setting u p of these NIPERs and place the same before the Ministry of 
Finance for the allocation of necessary budgetary allocation for the same.  
 
SECTION 4- BOARD OF GOVERNORS 
8. The Committee note that the Section 4 of the Parent Act is proposed to be 
amended to rationalize the present strength of Board of Board of Governors (BoG) of 
each of NIPERs from 23 to 12 members in line with the other similar institutes of 
national importance viz.  Indian Institute of Technology (IITs) and Indian Institute of 
Science Education and Research(IISER). Even though this proposal is aimed at 
effective functioning of the institutes, the Committee  recommend the following:- 
“As per Section 4(3)(m) of NIPER Act,1998,  three eminent public persons or 
social workers one of w hom shall be either from the  Scheduled Castes or 
Scheduled Tribes to be nominated by the Visitor out of a panel prepared by 
the Central Government to the Board of Governors of the NIPERS. This 
provision has been removed in the present Bill.   Since it is very much 
necessary from the point of view of social inclusion, the Committee 
recommend that the Department of Pharmaceuticals should reconsider 
this omission and ensure at least one public person or a social worker 
from the Scheduled Caste /Scheduled Trib e should be included in the 
Board of Governors and suitable provision may be made in the Bill for 
the purpose.“ 
 

25 
 
SECTION 7- WIDENING SCOPE AND NUMBER OF COURSES/PROGRAMMES 
9. The Committee are glad to note the Amendment of Section 7 of the Principal 
Act to widen the scope and number of courses run by such institutes to include 
graduate and integrated courses, certificate courses and executive courses in 
addition to earlier cour ses leading to masters’ degree, doctoral and post –doctoral 
course and research in Pharmaceutical education. The Committee also 
recommend that B.Pharma courses should be started at all the NIPERs so that 
a healthy pool of graduates for the Industry needs an d further research in the 
field of Pharma may be created. 
 
10. The Committee further recommend that students pursuing integrated 
PG and PhD courses should also be given fellowship to bring in parity with the 
existing PG and PhD students at the NIPERs and t he Integrated PG and PhD 
students at IISERs and other institutes of National importance who are paid 
fellowships.  
 
SECTIONS 30A TO 30E – ESTABLISHMENT OF A COUNCIL 
11. The Committee note that now it is proposed to drop the Members of 
Parliament from the Board of Governors of the Institute (unlike the Section 4(3)(o) of 
the Principal Act) and instead it is proposed to include three MPs (two from Lok 
Sabha and one from Raj ya Sabha) in the proposed Council.  However, it is not 
specified in the Bill whether they should have exposure/experience in the field of 
medical/pharmaceutical field.   In this regard, the Committee note that Section 30(E) 
(1)(a) of the proposed Amendment Bill prescribes that the Central Government may 
make rules about the manner of filling vacancies among the members of the Council. 
The Department does not propose to prescribe that the MPs who are nominated to 
the Council should have exposure to medical/ph armaceutical field.  Since it is very 
much necessary to specify that the MPs proposed to be nominated to the Council 

26 
 
should have exposure to medical/pharmaceutical field so as to be benefitted of their 
experience, the Committee recommend that the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
either incorporate a suitable provision in the present Bill in this regard or 
appropriate Rules should be framed for the purpose.  
 
12. The Committee understand the need of a central body to be called the 
Council in order to coordinate  the activities of all the NIPERs to ensure coordinated 
development of Pharmaceutical education and research and maintenance of 
standards etc. The Committee note that the NIPERs are modeled on IITs and the 
composition, powers etc. of the proposed Council a re similar to those prescribed for 
IIT Council as per the IIT Act. However, the Committee note that as per existing 
NIPER Act, Section 16(1), Director of an Institute is appointed by Board of 
Governors with prior approval of visitor (President of India). N ow, the Council is 
being proposed to be set up under the chairmanship of the Minister of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers and in IITs since the Director is appointed by the Council with prior 
approval of visitor, the Committee, therefore, recommend that similar p rovision 
may be incorporated in the amendment Bill so that Directors of NIPERs are 
also appointed by the council instead of Board of Governors with the prior 
approval of the Visitor. 
 
13. The Committee also note that the proposed Council is required to mee t at 
least once every year under Section 30c clause (3) of the Amendment Bill. The 
Committee are of the view that the proposed council being the apex body for all the 
NIPERs and having many erstwhile members of the Board of Governors should 
meet more frequently for better coordination and administration of the NIPERs.  The 
Committee therefore recommend that the clause (3) of Section 30c of the 
Amendment Bill be changed to read as:  

27 
 
“The Council shall meet at least once every sixth months and follow 
such procedure in its meetings as may be prescribed.” 
 
14. The Committee note that at present there is no provision in the NIPER Act 
regarding inter -NIPER transfer of Directors and faculty members. This will help in 
bringing administrative and academic efficiency a nd it will further increase 
interactions between various NIPERs. The time bound transfer and exchange of 
faculties may help in mutual sharing and learning among the faculties and Directors 
of NIPERs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that suitable provis ion may 
be incorporated in the Bill to enable the Department to have power of inter -
NIPER transfer of Directors and other faculty members. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  
29 July, 2021                                                 Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
07 SRAVANA, 1942 (Saka)                                            Chairperson 
                         Standing Committee on 
             Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 

1
THE NA TIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHARMACEUTICAL EDUCATION
AND RESEARCH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
A
BILL
further to amend the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research Act, 1998.
   BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and
Research (Amendment) Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 54 of  2021
5

2
2. In the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research Act, 1998
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the  long title, the following long title shall be
substituted, namely:—
“An Act to declare certain institutions of pharmaceutical education and research
to be institutions of national importance and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.”.
3. In section 1 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the word “Institute”, the word
“Institutes” shall be substituted.
4. For section 2 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“2. (1) Whereas the objects of the institutions mentioned in the Schedule, are
such as to make them institutions of national importance, it is hereby declared that
each such Institute is an institution of national importance.
 (2) It is hereby declared that every Institute established under sub-section (2A)
of section 4, on and after the commencement of the National Institute of Pharmaceutical
Education and Research (Amendment) Act, 2021, shall be an institution of national
importance.”.
5. In section 3 of the principal Act,––
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:––
‘(a) “appointed day”, in relation to an Institute mentioned in column (3) of
the Schedule, means the date of its establishment as mentioned against it in
column (4) of that Schedule;’;
(ii) in clauses (b) and (c), for the words “the Institute”, the words “an Institute”
shall be substituted;
(iii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(ca) “Council” means the Council established under sub-section ( 1) of
section 30A;’;
(iv) in clauses (d), (e) and (f), for the words “the Institute”, the words “an Institute”
shall be substituted;
(v) for clause (g), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(g) “Institute” means any of the institutions mentioned in column (3) of
the Schedule;
(ga) “member” means a member of the Council nominated or elected under
sub-section (2) of section 30A;
(gb) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(gc) “Schedule” means the Schedule to this Act; ’;
(vi) in clauses (h) and (j), for the words “the Institute”, the words “an Institute”
shall be substituted.
6. In section 4 of the principal Act,––
(i) in the marginal heading, for the words “Establishment of Institute”, the words
“Establishment and incorporation of Institutes” shall be substituted;
(ii
) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Each of the Institutes mentioned in column (3) of the Schedule shall
be a body corporate.”;
Amendment
of long title.
Amendment
of section 1.
13 of 1998.
Amendment
of section 3.
Declaration of
certain
institutions as
institutions of
national
importance.
Amendment
of section 4.
Substitution of
new section for
section 2.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(iii) in sub-section (2),  for the words “The Institute”, the words “Each Institute”
shall be substituted;
(iv) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) The Board of Governors of an Institute shall consist of the following
persons, namely:—
 (a) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent academician or scientist
or technologist or professional, to be nominated by the Visitor;
(b) the Director of the institute, ex officio;
(c) the Joint Secretary to the Government of India in Department of
Pharmaceuticals dealing with the national institutes of pharmaceutical
education and research, ex officio;
(d) the Secretary, dealing with medical or technical education in the
State Government concerned, ex officio;
(e) the representative of Drug Controller General of India, Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare of the Government of India, ex officio;
(f) three eminent pharmaceutical experts, at least one of whom shall
be a woman, having special knowledge or practical experience in education,
research and biotechnology, to be nominated by the Council;
(g) two pharmaceutical industrialists to be nominated by the Council;
(h) two professors of the institute, to be nominated by the Senate.”;
(v) in sub-section (4), the proviso shall be omitted.
7. In section 4A of the principal Act, the words “within its jurisdiction” shall be omitted.
8. Section 5 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
9. In section 6 of the principal Act,––
 (i) for the words “On and from the appointed day”, the words “On and from the
appointed day, in relation to the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and
Research, Mohali” shall be substituted;
(ii) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(aa) all property, movable and immovable of, or belonging to, the Society,
shall vest in that Institute;”;
(iii) for the words “the Institute”, wherever they occur, the words “that Institute”
shall be substituted.
10. In section 7 of the principal Act,––
(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “Institute”, the word “Institutes” shall
be substituted;
(b) for clause (ii), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:––
“(ii) to develop courses leading to graduate and post graduate degrees,
doctoral and post-doctoral distinctions and research in pharmaceutical education
or to develop integrated courses relating thereto;
(iia) to conduct executive education courses, short-term certificate courses,
training programmes, online or distant education, diploma courses and such
other short-term executive courses;”;
Amendment of
section 4A.
Omission of
section 5.
Amendment
of section 6.
Amendment
of section 7.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(c) in clause (v), for the words “ by exchange of faculty members”, the words “by
promoting collaborative research, exchange of faculty members, researchers” shall be
substituted;
(d) after clause (x), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(xa) to establish Centres of Excellence for drug discovery and development
and medical devices;”.
11. In section 8 of the principal Act, for the word “Board”, wherever it occurs, the
words “Board of an Institute” shall be substituted.
12. In section 9 of the principal Act,––
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “Institute”, the word “Institutes” shall
be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (1), for the words “The Institute”, the words “Every Institute”
shall be substituted;
(iii) in sub-section (2), for the words “the Institute”, the words “any Institute”
shall be substituted.
13. In section 10 of the principal Act,––
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “Institute”, the word “Institutes” shall
be substituted;
(ii) for the words “the Institute”, the words “each of the Institutes” shall be
substituted.
14. In section 11 of the principal Act,––
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “the Institute”, the words “every Institute”
shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 2), for the words “the Institute”, the words “any Institute”
shall be substituted.
15. In section 12 of the principal Act,––
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “Institute”, the word “Institutes” shall
be substituted;
(ii) in the opening portion, for the words “the Institute”, the words “an Institute”
shall be substituted.
16. In section 13 of the principal Act, in the opening portion, for the words “the
Institute”, the words “each Institute” shall be substituted.
17. In section 14 of the principal Act, for the words “senate of the Institute”, the words
“senate of each Institute” shall be substituted.
18. In section 16 of the principal Act, for the words “Director of the Institute”, the
words “Director of each Institute” shall be substituted.
19. In section 17 of the principal Act, for the words “the Institute”, the words “each
Institute” shall be substituted.
20. In section 18 of the principal Act, for the words “Registrar of the Institute”, the
words “Registrar of each Institute” shall be substituted.
21. In section 20 of the principal Act,––
(i) for the words “enabling the Institute”, the words “enabling the Institutes”
shall be substituted;
Amendment
of section 8.
Amendment
of section 9.
Amendment
of section 10.
Amendment
of section 11.
Amendment
of section 12.
Amendment
of section 13.
Amendment
of section 14.
Amendment
of section 16.
Amendment
of section 17.
Amendment
of section 18.
Amendment
of section 20.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(ii) for the words “pay to the Institute”, the words “pay to each Institute” shall
be substituted.
22. In section 21 of the principal Act,––
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “Institute”, the word “Institutes” shall
be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 1), for the words “The Institute shall”, the words “Every
Institute shall” shall be substituted.
23. In section 22 of the principal Act, for the words “the Institute”, the words “every
Institute” shall be substituted.
24. In section 23 of the principal Act,––
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “The Institute”, the words “Every Institute”
shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “the Institute”, the words “every Institute”
shall be substituted;
(iii) in sub-section ( 3), for the words “accounts of the Institute”, the words
“accounts of any Institute” shall be substituted;
(iv) in sub-section (4), for the words “the Institute”, the words “every Institute”
shall be substituted.
25. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “The Institute”,
the words “Every Institute” shall be substituted.
26. In section 25 of the principal Act, for the words “the Institute”, the words “an
Institute” shall be substituted.
27. In section 27 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “the Institute”,
the words “every Institute” shall be substituted.
28. In section 28 of the principal Act, for the words “Ordinances of the Institute”, the
words “Ordinances of each Institute” shall be substituted.
29. After Chapter II of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:––
“CHAPTER II-A
THE COUNCIL
30A. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall be established for all the
Institutes specified in column (3) of the Schedule, a central body to be called the
Council.
(2) The Council shall consist of the following members, namely:––
(a) Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central
Government having administrative control of the Pharmaceuticals, ex officio, as
Chairperson;
(b) Minister of State in the Ministry or Department of the Central
Government having administrative control of the Pharmaceuticals, ex officio, as
Vice-Chairperson;
(c) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government having administrative control of the
Pharmaceuticals, ex officio;
Amendment
of section 21.
Amendment
of section 22.
Amendment
of section 23.
Amendment
of section 24.
Amendment
of section 25.
Amendment
of section 27.
Amendment
of section 28.
Insertion of
new Chapter
II-A.
Establishment
of Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

6
(d) the Chairperson of every Board of Governors, ex officio;
(e) the Director of every Institute, ex officio;
(f) the Chairperson, All India Council for Technical Education, ex officio;
(g) the Director General, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research,
ex officio;
(h) four Secretaries to the Government of India,  to represent the Ministries
or Departments of the Central Government dealing with Biotechnology, Health
Research, Higher Education and Science and Technology, ex officio;
(i) not less than three, but not more than five persons to be nominated by
the Visitor, at least one of whom shall be a woman, having special knowledge or
practical experience in education, pharmaceutical industry, medical devices
industry or pharmaceutical research;
(j) three members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected by the House
of the People and one by the Council of States, from amongst its members;
 (k) the President, Indian Drugs Manufacturing Association,  ex officio;
(l) the President, Organisation of Pharmaceutical Producers of India,
ex officio;
(m) the President, Pharmacy Council of India, ex officio;
(n) the Financial Advisor of the Ministry or Department of the Central
Government dealing with Pharmaceuticals, ex officio;
(o) the Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government having administrative control of the
Pharmaceuticals, ex officio, as Member-Secretary.
(3) It is hereby declared that the office of a member of the Council shall not
disqualify its holder for being chosen as or for being, a member of either House of
Parliament.
30B. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, the term of office of a
member of the Council shall be three years from the date of his nomination or election,
as the case may be.
(2) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue so long as he holds
the office by virtue of which he is a member.
  (3) The term of office of a member elected under clause (j) of sub-section (2) of
section 30A shall come to an end as soon as he becomes a Minister or Minister of State
or Deputy Minister, or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People,
or the Deputy Chairperson of the Council of States or ceases to be a member of the
House which elected him.
 (4) The term of office of a member nominated or elected to fill a casual vacancy
shall continue for the remainder of the term of the member in whose place he has been
nominated or elected.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section an outgoing member
shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, continue in office until another
person is nominated or elected as a member in his place.
(6) The members of the Council shall be paid such travelling and other allowances
by the Central Government as may be determined by that Government, but no member
shall be entitled to any salary by reason of this sub-section.
Term of office
of, vacancies
among, and
allowances
payable to,
members of
Council.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
30C. (1) It shall be the general duty of the Council to coordinate the activities of
all the Institutes and to take all such steps as to ensure planned and coordinated
development of pharmaceutical education and research and maintenance of standards
thereof.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Council shall
perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) to advise on matters relating to the duration of the courses, the degrees
and other academic distinctions to be conferred by the Institutes, admission
standards and other academic matters;
(b) to lay down policy regarding cadres, methods of recruitment and
conditions of service of employees, institution of scholarships and free-ships,
levying of fees and other matters of common interest;
(c) to examine the development plans of each Institute and to approve
such of them as are considered necessary and also to indicate broadly the
financial implications of such approved plans;
(d) to lay down policy or guidelines for promoting research and
development in pharmaceuticals and related areas, fostering collaboration and
overseeing developments and on matters incidental thereto;
(e) to examine the annual budget estimates of each Institute and to
recommend to the Central Government the allocation of funds for that purpose;
(f) to advise the Visitor, if so required, in respect of any function to be
performed by him under this Act; and
(g) to perform such other functions as are assigned to it by or under this
Act.
(3) The Council shall meet at least once every year and follow such procedure in
its meetings as may be prescribed.
30D. (1) The Chairperson of the Council shall ordinarily preside at the meetings
of the Council:
Provided that in the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall
preside at the meetings of the Council:
Provided further that in the absence of both the Chairperson and the
Vice-Chairperson, any other member, chosen from amongst themselves by the members
present at the meeting shall preside at that meeting.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Chairperson of the Council to ensure that the
decisions taken by the Council are implemented.
(3) The Chairman shall exercise such other powers and perform such other
duties as are assigned to him by this Act.
30E. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Chapter.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner of filling vacancies among the members of the Council;
(b) the disqualifications for being chosen as, and for being, a member of
the Council;
(c) the circumstances in which, and the authority by which, members may
be removed;
Functions of
Council.
Chairman of
Council.
Power to
make rules in
respect of
matters in this
Chapter.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
(d) the meetings of the Council and the procedure of conducting business
thereat;
(e) the travelling and other allowances payable to members of the
Council; and
(f) the functions of the Council and the manner in which such functions
may be exercised.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Chapter shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.”.
30. In section 31 of the principal Act, for the words “No act of the Institute”, the words
“No act of the Council or any Institute” shall be substituted.
31. In section 32 of the principal Act,––
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “Institute”, the word “Institutes” shall
be substituted;
(ii)  for the words “the Institute”, the words “every Institute” shall be substituted.
32. In section 33 of the principal Act, for the words “Whenever the Institute”, the
words “Whenever an Institute” shall be substituted.
33. After section 33 of the principal Act, the following section  shall be inserted,
namely:––
“33A. The Institute shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it from
time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act.”.
34. In section 35 of the principal Act, for clause ( b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:––
“(b) until the first Statutes and the Ordinances in relation to the Institutes
mentioned in column (3) of the Schedule are made under this Act, the Statutes and the
Ordinances of the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research,
Sector-67, S.A.S. Nagar (Mohali), District Ropar, Punjab as in force, shall apply to
those Institutes with the necessary modifications and adaptations in so far as they are
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.”.
Amendment of
section 31.
Amendment of
section 32.
Amendment of
section 33.
Insertion of new
section 33A.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Amendment
of section 35.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

9
THE  SCHEDULE
[See sections 2, 3(a), (g), (gc), 4(1), 30A and 35(b)]
Sl. Location of Name of institutions incorporated under Date of
No. this Act institute and the State establishment of
Institute
(1)( 2)( 3)( 4)
1. Mohali, Punjab The National Institute of Pharmaceutical 8th July, 1998
Education and Research Society, Mohali
2. Ahmedabad, Gujarat The National Institute of Pharmaceutical 6th September, 2007
 Education and Research, Ahmedabad
3. Hajipur, Bihar The National Institute of Pharmaceutical 6th September, 2007
Education and Research, Hajipur
4. Hyderabad, T elengana The National Institute of Pharmaceutical 6th September, 2007
Education and Research, Hyderabad
5. Kolkata, West Bengal The National Institute of Pharmaceutical 6th September, 2007
Education and Research, Kolkata
6. Guwahati, Assam The National Institute of Pharmaceutical 5th August, 2008
Education and Research, Guwahati
7. Raebareli, Uttar Pradesh The National Institute of Pharmaceutical 26th September, 2008
Education and Research, Raebareli

10
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research Act, 1998 (13 of 1998)
was enacted to declare the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research at
Mohali, Punjab to be an institute of national importance and to provide for its incorporation
and matters connected therewith.
2. The Act was subsequently amended in 2007 to empower the Central Government to
establish similar institutes in different parts of the country. Thereafter, six new institutes at
Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Hajipur, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Raebareli were established during
2007-08.
3. A need is felt to bring clarity that the six institutes so established as well as any
other similar institute to be established under the said Act shall be institutes of national
importance. In order to coordinate the activities of all such institutes, to ensure coordinated
development of pharmaceutical education and research and maintenance of standards, etc.,
there is a need to establish a central body, to be called the Council. Also, there is a need to
rationalise the Board of Governors of each such institute and to widen the scope and number
of courses run by such institutes.
4. The National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (Amendment)
Bill, 2021, inter alia, seeks to provide for —
(i) amendment of section 2 to declare that—
(a) each such Institute is an institution of national importance;
(b) every Institute established under sub-section (2A) of section 4 on and
after the commencement of the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education
and Research (Amendment) Act, 2021 shall also be an institution of national
importance;
(ii) amendment of section 4 to rationalise the Board of Governors of each such
institute from its existing strength of  23 to 12 members;
(iii) amendment of section 7 to widen the scope and number of courses run by
such institutes, including graduate and post-graduate degrees, doctoral and
post-doctoral distinctions and research in pharmaceutical education, integrated
courses, certificate courses and executive courses;
(iv) insertion of new sections 30A, 30B, 30C, 30D, 30E to provide for establishment
of Council, term of office, etc., of  members of Council, functions of Council, Chairman
of Council and power to make rules by Central Government, respectively;
(v) insertion of a new section 33A to empower the Central Government to issue
directions to the Institute for efficient administration of the Act.
5.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; D.V . SADANANDA  GOWDA.
The 5th March, 2021.

11
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to insert new Chapter II-A, and new sections 30A to 30E, in
the principal Act. Proposed section 30E empowers the Central Government to make rules to
provide for (i) the manner of filling vacancies among the members of the Council; (ii) the
disqualifications for being chosen as, and for being, a member of the Council; ( iii) the
circumstances in which, and the authority by which, members may be removed; ( iv) the
meetings of the Council and the procedure of conducting business thereat; (v) the travelling
and other allowances payable to members of the Council; and ( vi) the functions of the
Council and the manner in which such functions may be exercised.

12
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHARMACEUTICAL EDUCA TION AND RESEARCH
ACT, 1998
(13 OF 1998)
An Act to declare the institution known as the National Institute of Pharmaceutical
Education and Research to be an institution of national importance and to provide for its
incorporation and matters connected therewith.
* * * * *
CHAPTER I
P
RELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and
Research Act, 1998.
* * * * *
2. Whereas the objects of the institution known as the National Institute of
Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Sector-67, S.A.S. Nagar (Mohali), District Ropar,
Punjab are such as to make the institution one of national importance, it is hereby declared
that the institution known as the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research
is an institution of national importance.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appointed day” means the date of establishment of the National Institute of
Pharmaceutical Education and Research under sub-section (1) of section 4;
(b) “Board” means the Board of Governors of the Institute constituted under
sub-section (3) of section 4;
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Institute nominated under
clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section (4);
(d) “Dean” means the Dean of the Institute appointed under section 17;
(e) “Director” means the Director of the Institute appointed under section 16;
 (f) “Fund” means the fund of the Institute to be maintained under section 21;
(g) “Institute” means a National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and
Research established under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2A) of section 4;
(h) “Senate” means the Senate of the Institute referred to in section 13;
* * * * *
(j) “Statutes” and “Ordinances” mean the Statutes and the Ordinances of the
Institute made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
T
HE INSTITUTE
4. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint, the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research
shall be constituted as a body corporate by the name aforesaid.
Declaration of
National
Institute of
Pharmaceutical
Education and
Research as an
institution of
national
importance.
Definitions.
Short title and
commencement. 13 of 1998.
Establishment
of Institute.

13
(2) The Institute shall have perpetual succession and a common seal with power,
subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract,
and shall, by that name, sue and be sued.
* * * * *
(3) The Institute shall consist of the Board of Governors having the following persons,
namely:—
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent academician, scientist or technologist
or professional, to be nominated by the Visitor;
(b) the Director of the Institute, ex officio;
(c) the Joint Secretary, incharge of Pharmaceutical Industries in the concerned
Ministry or Department of the Government of India, ex officio;
(d) the Secretary, Technical Education, Government of the State within which the
Institute is situated, ex officio;
 (e) the Financial Adviser of the Ministry or Department of the Government of
India dealing with the pharmaceutical industries, ex officio;
(f) the Drug Controller General of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of
the Government of India, ex officio;
(g) the Member Secretary, All-India Council for Technical Education, ex officio;
 (h) the Director of any one of the national laboratories of the Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research to be nominated by the Director General of Council of Scientific
and Industrial Research, New Delhi;
 (i) the Director of either the All-India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
or the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, to be
nominated by rotation by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of the Government
of India;
 (j) the President, Indian Drugs Manufacturers’ Association, ex officio;
(ja) a representative of the Pharmacy Council of India;
(k) the President, Organisation of Pharmaceutical Producers of India, ex officio;
(l) three eminent pharmaceutical experts, one of whom shall be an educationist,
a research scientist and a biotechnologist, to be nominated by the Central Government;
 (m) three eminent public persons or social workers one of whom shall be either
from the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes to be nominated by the Visitor out
of a panel prepared by the Central Government;
(n) two pharmaceutical industrialists to be nominated by the Visitor out of a
panel prepared by the Central Government;
(o) three Members of Parliament, two from Lok Sabha to be nominated by the
Speaker of Lok Sabha and one from Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the Chairman of
Rajya Sabha.
 (4) The term of office of the Chairperson and Governors other than ex officio Governors
shall be three years and they shall be entitled for such allowances as may be determined by
the Central Government:
Provided that the term of office of a member nominated under clause ( o) of
sub-section (3) shall come to an end as soon as he becomes a Minister or Minister of State
or Deputy Minister, or the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, or the
Deputy Chairman of the Council of States, or ceases to be a member of the House from which
he was nominated.
* * * * *

14
4A. An Institute, with the prior approval of the Central Government, may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, establish one or more centres in different locations within its jurisdiction.
5. On and from the appointed day, subject to the other provisions of this Act, all
properties which had vested in the Society, immediately before the commencement of this
Act, shall, on and from such commencement, vest in the Institute.
6.  On and from the appointed day,—
 (a) any reference to the Society in any contract or other instrument shall be
deemed as a reference to the Institute;
 (b) all the rights and liabilities of the Society shall be transferred to, and be the
rights and liabilities of, the Institute; and
(c) every person employed by the Society immediately before the appointed day
shall hold office or service in the Institute by the same tenure, at the same remuneration
and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to
pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other matters as he would have held the
same if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to be so unless and until his
employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and condition
are duly altered by the Statutes:
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his
employment may be terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of the
contract with the employee or, if no provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment
to him by the Institute of compensation equivalent to three months’ remuneration in
the case of permanent employee and one month’s remuneration in the case of other
employee.
7. The functions of the Institute shall be—
* * * * *
(ii) to concentrate on courses leading to master's degree, doctoral and post-doctoral
courses and research in pharmaceutical education;
* * * * *
(v) to cooperate with educational or other institutions having objects wholly or partly
similar to those of the Institute by exchange of faculty members and scholars and generally
in such manner as may be conducive to their common objective;
* * * * *
 (x) to develop a world level centre for creation of new knowledge and transmission of
existing information in pharmaceutical areas, with focus on national, educational, professional
and industrial commitments;
* * * * *
8. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall be responsible for the
general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the Institute and shall exercise
all the powers not otherwise provided for by this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, and
shall have the power to review the acts of the Senate.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Board shall—
(a) take decisions on questions of policy relating to the administration and
working of the Institute;
(b) fix, demand and receive fees and other charges;
(c) supervise and control the residence and regulate the discipline of students of
the Institute and to make arrangements for promoting their health, general welfare and
cultural and corporate life;
Centres  of
Institute.
Vesting of
properties.
Effect of
incorporation
of Institute.
Functions of
Institute.
Powers of
Board.

15
(d) institute academic and other posts and to make appointments thereto
(except in the case of the Director);
(e) frame Statutes and Ordinances and to alter, modify or rescind the same;
(f) institute and award fellowship, scholarship, prizes and medals;
 (g) consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, the annual accounts
and the budget estimates of the Institute for the next financial year as it thinks fit
together with a statement of its development plans; and
 (h) do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the
attainment of all or any of the aforesaid powers.
(3) The Board shall have the power to appoint such committees as it considers necessary
for the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties under this Act.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2) of section 4, the Board
shall not dispose of in any manner any immovable property without the prior approval of the
Central Government.
9. (1) The Institute shall be open to persons of either sex and of whatever race, creed,
caste or class, and no test or condition shall be imposed as to religious belief or profession
in admitting or appointing members, students, teachers or workers or in any other connection
whatsoever.
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by the Institute
which in the opinion of the Board involves conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit
and object of this section.
10. All teaching at the Institute shall be conducted by or in the name of the Institute in
accordance with the Statutes and the Ordinances made in this behalf.
11. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the Institute.
(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress of
the Institute and to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in such
manner as the Visitor may direct.
* * * * *
12. The following shall be the other authorities of the Institute, namely:—
13. The Senate of the Institute shall consist of the following persons, namely:—
14. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Senate
of the Institute shall have the control and general regulation, and be responsible for the
maintenance of standards of instruction, education and examination in the Institute and shall
exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed
upon it by the Statutes.
* * * * *
16. (1) The Director of the Institute shall be appointed by the Board with the prior
approval of the Visitor.
 (2) The Director shall be the principal academic and executive officer of the Institute
and shall be responsible for the proper administration and academic performance of the
Institute and for imparting of instruction and maintenance of discipline therein.
 (3) The Director shall submit annual reports and accounts to the Board.
Institute to be
open to all
races, creeds
and classes.
Teaching at
Institute.
Visitor.
Authorities of
Institute.
Senate.
Functions of
Senate.
Director.

16
 (4) The Director shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as
may be assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes or the Ordinances.
17. (1) The Dean of the Institute shall be appointed on such terms and conditions as
may be laid down by the Statutes and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as
may be assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes or the Director.
(2) The Dean shall report to the Director.
18. (1) The Registrar of the Institute shall be appointed on such terms and conditions
as may be laid down by the Statutes and shall be the custodian of records, the common seal,
the funds of the Institute and such other property of the Institute as the Board shall commit
to his charge.
(2) The Registrar shall act as the Secretary of the Board, the Senate and such committees
as may be prescribed by the Statutes.
 (3) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Director for the proper discharge of his
functions.
 (4) The Registrar shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as
may be assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes or the Director.
* * * * *
20.  For the purpose of enabling the Institute to discharge its functions efficiently
under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, pay to the Institute in each financial year such sums of money and in such
manner as it may think fit.
21. (1) The Institute shall maintain a Fund to which shall be credited—
(a) all moneys provided by the Central Government;
(b) all fees and other charges;
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations,
benefactions, bequests or transfers; and
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other manner or from any other
source.
* * * * *
22. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 21, the Central Government may
direct the Institute to—
 (a) set up an endowment fund and any other fund for specified purpose;
(b) transfer money from its Fund to endowment fund or any other fund.
23. (1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and
prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance-sheet, in such form as may
be specified, in accordance with such general directions as may be issued by the Central
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
 (2) The accounts of the Institute shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be
payable by the Institute to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
 (3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Institute shall have the same rights, privileges
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have
the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other
documents and papers and to inspect the offices of the Institute.
Dean.
Registrar.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Fund of
Institute.
Setting up of
endowment
fund.
Accounts and
audit.

17
(4) The accounts of the Institute as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report
thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Government shall
cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
24. (1) The Institute shall constitute, for the benefit of its employees, including the
Director, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes,
such pension, insurance and provident funds as it may deem fit.
* * * * *
25.  All appointments of the staff of the institute except that of the Director, shall be
made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statutes—
(a) by the Board, if the appointment is made on the academic staff  in the post of
Assistant Professor or above or if the appointment is made on the non-academic staff
in any cadre, the maximum of the pay-scale for which  is the same or higher than that of
Assistant Professor; and
(b) by the Director, in any other case.
* * * * *
27. (1) The first Statutes of the Institute shall be framed by the Board with the previous
approval of the Visitor and a copy of the same shall be laid as soon as may be before each
House of Parliament.
* * * * *
28. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of the
Institute may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
M
ISCELLANEOUS
31.  No act of the Institute or Board or Senate or any other body set up under this Act
or the Statutes, shall be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in, the constitution thereof, or
(b) any  defect in the election, nomination or appointment of person acting as a
member therefo, or
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case.
32. Notwithstanding anything contained in the University Grants Commission Act, 1956
or in any other law for the time being in force, the Institute shall have power to grant degrees
and other academic distinctions and titles under this Act.
33. Whenever the Institute receives funds from any Government, the University Grants
Commission or any other agency sponsoring a scheme to be executed by the Institute,
notwithstanding anything in this Act,—
 (a) the amount received shall be kept by the Institute separately from the Fund
of the Institute and utilised only for the purpose of the scheme;
(b) the staff required to execute the same shall be recruited in accordance with
the terms and conditions stipulated by the sponsoring organisation:
Provided that any money remaining unutilised under clause (a) shall be transferred
to the endowment fund created under section 22 of this Act.
* * * * *
Pension and
provident
fund.
Statutes how
made.
Ordinances.
Appointments.
Grant of
degrees, etc.,
by Institute.
3 of 1956.
Sponsored
schemes.
Acts and
proceedings
not to be
invalidated by
vacancies.

18
35. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,—
* * * * *
(b) until the first Statutes and the Ordinances are made under this Act, the
Statutes and the Ordinances of the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and
Research, Sector-67, S.A.S. Nagar (Mohali), District Ropar, Punjab as in force,
immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall continue to apply to the
Institute in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
* * * * *
Transitional
provisions.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research Act, 1998.
————
(Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda, Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers )
MGIPMRND—1540LS(S3)—08-03-2021.

MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 29th June, 2021 from 1400 hrs. to 1530 
hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Smt.  Kanimozhi Karunanidhi-  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
3 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
4 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
5 Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad 
6 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
7 Er. Bishweswar Tudu 
8 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
9 Shri  G.C. Chandrashekhar 
10 Shri Anil Jain 
11 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
12 Shri M. V. Shreyams Kumar 
13 Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
14 Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
15 Shri Arun singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
            1. Shri Manoj Kumar Arora       - Officer on Special Duty(LSS) 
            2. Shri N. K. Jha     - Director 
  3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram     - Additional Director 
            4. Shri Panna Lal     - Under Secretary 
 
 
Part I 
1. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee and informed the Members that the sitting had been convened 
to consider and select two additional subjects for examination and report , 
in addition to the subjects already selected, du ring the year 2020 -21. 
Accordingly, the  Committee decided to select the following  two additional 
subjects for examination and report during 2020-21:-  
 
(i) “Availability of Medicines and Medical devices for COVID management .” 
(ii)       “Fertilizer prices and availability of DAP.”     
 

2 
 
2. Hon’ble Chairperson also informed the Members that the Hon’ble Speaker 
has referred the ‘The National Institute of Pharmaceuticals Education and 
Research (Amendment) Bill, 2021’ to the Committee on 16 th April, 2021 
for examination and report within three months .  Since the sittings of  the 
Committee could not be held due to  extraordinary situation prevailed due 
to the second wave of COVID pandemic  in the country , Committee  felt 
that more  time is required  for examina tion and report on the Bill and 
hence decided to request the Hon’ble Speaker to grant three months 
extension of time to present the Report on the Bill. 
Part-II 
Briefing by the representatives of Department of Pharmaceuticals on 
The National Institute of Pharmaceuticals Education and Research 
(Amendment) Bill, 2021’   
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
S.No Name of the Officer/Officials Designation 
1. Ms S. Aparna Secretary 
2. Sh. Rajneesh Tingal Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Krishna Pilli Director 
 
II REPRESENTATIVE OF NIPER 
 
 
1. 
 
Dr. U S N Murty  
 
Director (NIPER-Guwahati) 
 
3. Thereafter, representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals) and other officials  were invited to the sitting to 
brief the Committee on the National Institute of Pharmaceuticals Education and 
Research (Amendment) Bill, 2021. Their attention was invited to the provisions 
contained in Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker regarding 
confidentiality of the Committee's proceedings.  
4. After the witnesses introduced themselves, Secretary of the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals made power point presentation and briefed the Committee 
on the Bill.  After the briefing,  Chairperson and Members  of the Committee 
raised various queries  on the Bill which were answered by the S ecretary and 
other witnesses. The following were the important Points discussed during 
briefing:- 

3 
 
 
I. Omission of SC & ST  members from the Board of Governors of the 
Institute in the Bill. 
II. Creation of a Council to coordinate the activities of all seven NIPERs 
III. Intake capacity of the NIPERs and need to enhance the same. 
IV. Importance of plant based medicine development and traditi onal 
medicine. 
V. New provision in the Bill to empower the Government of India  to issue 
directions to the NIPERs. 
VI. Promotion of R&D and drug discovery by collaborating with Ministry of 
AYUSH and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.  
VII. Timely Completion of Construction of own campuses for NIPERs  to avoid 
cost overruns. Etc. 
VIII. Delays in setting up of new NIPERs. 
5. The Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals and other officials 
responded to the aforesaid issues raised by the Committee.  
6. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee 
as well as for furnishing valuable information to the Committee. They were also 
asked to provide written replies to questions asked by the Members during 
discussion.  
7. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been 
kept. 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  

4 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 29 th July, 2021 from 1015 hrs. to 1045 
hrs. in Committee Room B, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Ms Kanimozhi Karunanidhi-  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Deepak Baij 
3 Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhalikar 
4 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
5. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
6. Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad 
7. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
8. Shri M. Selvaraj 
9. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
10. Shri Indra Hang Subba 
11. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
12 Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar 
13 Dr. Anil Jain 
14. Shri M. V. Shreyams Kumar 
15 Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
16 Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
17 Shri Arun Singh 
18 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
19 Shri K. Vanlalvena 

5 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
            1. Shri Manoj K. Arora     - OSD 
         2. Shri N. K. Jha           - Director 
            3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram -           Additional Director 
  4. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcom ed the Members of the 
Committee to the sitting. 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption the draft 
Report on “The National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
(Amendment) Bill, 2021” (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
4. After deliberations , the Draft Report on NIPER (Amendment), Bill 2021, 
was unanimously adopted by the Committee without any amendment.  
5. The Committee authorised the Chairperson to make consequential 
changes, if any, arising out of the factual verification of the Report by the Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) and present the 
same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 