1 
 
15 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF  PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the  
Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  
on "Demands for Grants 2020-21” of the Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers (Department of  
Pharmaceuticals)] 
   
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
   FEBRUARY, 2021/MAGHA, 1942 (SAKA) 


2 
 
 
REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the  
Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  
on "Demands for Grants 2020-21” of the Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers (Department of  
Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.02.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.02.2021 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2021/MAGHA, 1942 (SASKA) 
 


3 
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ( 2020-21) (iv) 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
Chapter I Report   
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government' s  
replies 
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee  
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of  Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2020-21) held on12.10.2020 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (17 th 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers on   Demands for Grants 2020 -21 pertaining to 
the Ministry  of Chemicals and Fertilizers ( Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
4 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
5 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
6 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
7 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
8 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
9 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
10 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
11 Shri M. Selvaraj 
12 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
13 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
14 Shri Nandigam Suresh 
15 Er. Bishweswar Tudu 
16 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
17 Dr. M.K Vishnu Prasad. 
18 Shri Deepak Baij  
19 Dr. Manoj Rajoria 
20 Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
21 Vacant$ 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
26 Shri Arun Singh 
27 Shri P. Selvarasu^ 
28 Shri A.D. Singh^ 
29 Shri K. Vanlalvena^ 
30 Vacant* 
31 Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora    -  Officer on Special Duty 
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava    -  Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram   -  Additional Director 
4.         Ms  Sonia Sankhla                              -          Assistant Committee Officer 
 
^Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 22.07.2020. 
*Shri Amar Singh expired on 01.08.2020. 
 $ Shri H. Vasanthakuma expired on 28.08.2020 
 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on  Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2020-2021) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report 
on their behalf, present this Fourteenth Report (S eventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report ( Seventeenth Lok Sa bha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2020-21) on Demand for Grants 
(2020-21) pertaining to the Department of Pharmaceuticals. 
 
2. The Eighth Report (Seventeenth  Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Chemicals and Fertilizers was p resented to  Lok Sabha on   20.03.2020 and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.03.2020.  The Action Taken replies of Government to 
all observations / recommendations contained in the Report were received  on 
29.06.2020.  The Standing Committee on  Chemicals and Fertilizers (2020 -21) 
considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 12.10.2020. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the further Comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                 KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
 8 February, 2021                                                                               Chairperson 
 19 Magha, 1942 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on 
        Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

6 
 
INTRODUCTORY  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2019 -
20) deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Eighth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2020 -21)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
20.03.2020. In all, the Comm ittee made 12 Observations / Recommendations in 
the Report. 
1.2 The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
were requested to furnish replies to the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Eighth Report within three months from the date of presentation of 
the Report, i.e. by 21.06.2020. The Action Taken Replies of the Government in 
respect of all the 12 Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report 
have been received from  the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertil izers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) vide their OM. No. 23003/3/2020 - IFD dated 29.06.2020. These 
Replies have been examined and categorized as follows:-  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
             Rec. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7 and 10                        (Total =08) 
 Included in Chapter-II of the Report 
    
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 
Rec. Nos.    Nil                                                                              (Total=Nil) 
 
   Included in Chapter-III of the Report      
     
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of the      
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration-  
 
  Reco. Nos.11                                                                               (Total=01) 
   Included in Chapter IV of the Report  
                                                                                        
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited- 
 
Reco Nos. 8, 9 &12                                                                 (Total =03)                                                                                                                           
  Included in Chapter V of the Report      
     

7 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and the Final 
Replies in respect of Observations / Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-V for which final replies are still awaited shou ld be furnished 
expeditiously.  
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their Observations / Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit 
comments as enumerated in Chapter I. 
  

8 
 
 CHAPTER 1  
RECOMMENDATIONS ON WHICH FURTHER COMMENTS HAVE BEEN MADE BY 
THE COMMITTEE 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
 
PROMOTION OF BULK DRUG /API INDUSTRY IN THE COUNTRY 
  
1.5 While stressing on the need to promote bulk drugs/API industry in the 
country, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
           "The Committee are concerned to note that  Active Pharmaceuticals 
Ingredients (API)/Bulk drugs and intermediates form 63% of India’s total 
pharma imports. Even production of some of the NLEM formulations is 
dependent on im ported APIs and intermediates. India imports bulk drugs 
and intermediates largely on economic considerations as imports are 
cheaper than domestic production. China with a share of 67.6 % is the 
major source of API for the country.    India, being one of the  largest 
manufacturers of medicines and exporting to over 200 
countries, dependence on a single source for import of API is a matter of 
concern as any disruption in the supplies could jeopardize the entire 
pharma sector and affect supplies of medicines bot h for domestic use and 
exports. The Committee note that the Department has constituted a Task 
Force on API under the Chairmanship of the Minister of State (Chemicals & 
Fertilizers) on 18.04.2018 to formulate a roadmap for the enhanced 
production of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) in the country.  The 
Committee also note that Department has taken some steps viz instructions 
issued to the State Governments to increase the API production capacity, 
timely permission by State Governments and Central Drug s Standard 
Control Organization (CDSCO) for setting up of API Plants and diversifying 
import of API from countries like Italy etc. rather than relying solely on 
China.   The Department has also planned to revive 21 API plants which 
were operating in 2005   and were closed down because of stiff competition 
from China but the revival process likely to take one and a half year. The 
Committee  further note that the Department has made efforts in promoting 
Domestic API/Bulk drugs production under a sub -scheme 'As sistance to 
Bulk Drug Industry for Common Facility Centre' as part of the Department's 
umbrella scheme namely ‘Scheme for Development of Pharmaceutical 
Industry’. Under this sub -scheme, financial assistance would be provided 
for creation of common faciliti es in any upcoming Bulk Drug Park promoted 
by State Governments/State Corporations. The Scheme would be 
implemented through a one -time grant -in-aid to be released to a State 
Implementing Agency (SIA) set up for the purpose. This sub -scheme has 

9 
 
received onl y an allocation of Rs 21.52 crore at BE stage   of 2020 -21 
against the proposed fund requirement of Rs.100.00 crore. The Department 
has stated that the proposals received from State Governments of Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, Himachal Pradesh and Assam have b een given ‘in -
principle’ approval. However, State Government of Assam has stated that it 
will not be financially viable for them to establish a Bulk Drug Park in their 
State. The remaining three proposals will be considered for final approval 
after receipt  of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) and the respective State 
Governments have been reminded to send Detailed Project Report at the 
earliest. In this regard, the Committee are dismayed to note that there is no 
concrete effort to reverse the trend of over -dependence on imports for the 
API.  The Scheme of Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common Facility 
Centre was launched only during 2017 -18, but the setting up of Bulk 
drug parks in four states under the Scheme is only at approval stage even 
after two yea rs of implementation of the Scheme.   It is also a matter of 
concern that only Rs. 21.52 crore has been allocated for the Scheme 
against the requirement of Rs. 100 crore.   Since it is high time specially in 
view of spread of corona virus from China the Gove rnment pays due 
attention for the promotion of bulk drug industry in the country, the 
Committee strongly recommend that swift action should be taken to 
establish the proposed Bulk drug parks in four states and the feasibility of 
setting up these parks in o ther states should also be examined in a time 
bound manner so as to create a strong bulk drug/API manufacturing base in 
the country instead on relying on a foreign country on this critical sector. 
Immediate steps should also be initiated for revival of 21 API plants which 
were closed due to competition from China.   The Committee is also 
concerned about this approach to give grants to the States to implement 
some kind of a cluster approach.   The Committee would like the 
Department to examine if such a cluste r approach of boosting industrial 
activity has resulted in any concrete benefit in any other sector.   The 
Committee would also like the Department to examine if a new approach 
involving concrete benefits in the form of say, subsidized finance, free 
industrial land, assured buy back contracts, etc. can be formulated so that it 
becomes economically viable for the pharmaceutical units to procure API 
locally.  Since this is a critical sector for the economic and physical well -
being of the country, the Committee  would like the Department to seriously 
examine the issue of creating tariff barriers so that it becomes attractive to 
produce API in the country.   This may be taken up with Ministry of 
Commerce and Ministry of Finance at the highest level." 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
1.6  In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 

10 
 
 
 "Various options to reduce the country’s over dependence on imports from 
a single country have been examined in the departmen t. 
Regarding diversifying sources of import of API , it is observed that  APIs 
produced in other source countries such as Germany, France, Italy are 
priced relatively much higher and Indian formulations would be rendered 
less cost -competitive if the critical APIs used in their preparations are 
procured at higher costs from these countries. All the critical APIs are also 
not produced by these countries. 
  
In order to address the issue of drug security in the country in 
the background of an expected disruption of imports of APIs owing to 
the COVID-19 crisis, the  Department of Pharmaceuticals constituted a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. S. Eswara Reddy, Joint Drug 
Controller, CDSCO. The committee has identified a list of 58 APIs for w hich 
India is heavily dependent on imports from a single country. 
  
A Technical Committee was constituted by DoP on 02.03.2020 under the 
chairmanship of Dr. Eswara Reddy, Joint Drugs Controller, Central Drugs 
Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) to make r ecommendations for the 
revival of fermentation industry, new technologies for manufacturing of APIs 
including its backward integration, costing of the projects and identification 
of strategic business models. The Technical Committee has examined all 
the 58  APIs/KSMs identified by the Drug Security Committee. The 
committee observed that in order to have self -sufficiency in manufacturing 
of these 58 KSMs/APIs, huge investment is required for setting up their 
manufacturing facilities. Further, depending on the  nature of API/KSM, the 
manufacturing process, investment, facility required, etc will vary. 
   
The Technical Committee also deliberated at length to access the feasibility 
of revival of closed API plants. The committee observed that most of these 
manufacturing facilities are completely surrounded by residential colonies, 
manufacturers do not have technology and technical manpower to 
manufacture fermentation-based products, building and civil structures are 
old, facilities of utilities, ETP, supply lines, e lectricity supplies, power 
backup are completely required to be replaced. Production of Fermentation-
based products releases lot of foul smell by virtue of biomass produced 
during the process and the production capacities are not commercially 
viable. Therefore the committee concluded that revival of such old facilities 
is not commercially viable in the present context. Only Green Field projects 
need to be taken up with Large Volume Fermenters to ensure viable 
indigenous supply of such important KSMs. 
  

11 
 
On the basis of recommendations of the Technical Committee, the existing 
sub-scheme called  “Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common facility 
Centre” under the umbrella scheme of ‘Development of Pharmaceutical 
Industry’ has been revised. The revised scheme has been approved by the 
Union Cabinet on 20.03.20 and is now termed as “Promotion of Bulk Drug 
Parks”. The total size of the Scheme is Rs. 3000 Crore and tenure of the 
Scheme will be five years (FY 2020-21 to FY 2024-25). 
  
The scheme will provide grant -in-aid to 3 Bulk Drug Parks with a maximum 
limit of Rs.1000 Crore per park or 70% of the project cost of Common 
Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is less. In case of hilly states and North 
East Region, the grant -in-aid would be Rs.1000 Crore per park or 90% of 
the project cost of Common Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is less.   The 
Common Facilities at the Park would provide easy access to standard 
testing and infrastructure facilities and reduce the manufacturing cost 
significantly.  
 
  
The Technica l Committee identified 53 KSMs/APIs  based on the 
therapeutic criticality, essentialit y, technology involved and feasibility to 
manufacture indigenously. Based on its recommendations, DoP prepared a 
new scheme viz.  Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme f or promotion 
of domestic manufacturing of critical Key Starting Materials (KSMs) / Drug 
Intermediates and Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) In India.  Under 
the scheme, financial incentive will be given to eligible manufacturers of 53 
KSMs/Drug Inter mediates and APIs on their incremental sales over the 
base year (FY 2019-20). For fermentation based eligible products, incentive 
for the first four years (2022 -2023 to 2025 -2026) would be 20%, for fifth 
year (2026-27) 15% and for sixth year  (2027-2028) 5% on incremental sale 
of KSMs/Drug Intermediates/APIs. For chemically synthesized eligible 
products incentive for six years (2021 -2022 to 2026 -2027) would be 10% 
on incremental sales of KSMs/Drug Intermediates/APIs.   A total outlay of 
Rs. 6,940 Crore has been approved for the scheme. 
 
Regarding the Committee’s recommendation for the Department to 
seriously examine  the issue of creating tariff barriers  so that it becomes 
attractive to produce API in the country, it is to mention that this aspect has 
also been examined while drafting the Production Linked Incentive scheme 
and once sufficient domestic manufacturing starts happening only then the 
imposition of trade barriers will be considered. With the successful 
implementation of these schemes, it is expected t hat India would be well -
positioned as a global hub for manufacturing of critical KSMs/Drug 
Intermediates and APIs along with the final drug formulations." 

12 
 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.7   The Committee note that various options to reduce the country’s over 
dependence on imports of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) 
from a single cou ntry have been examined by the D epartment 
particularly to address the issue of drug security in the country at this 
juncture of  disruption in  imports of API s owing to the  COVID-
19 crisis. In this regard,    a Technical Committee was  constituted by 
the Department of Pharmaceuticals to make recommendations for the 
revival of fermentation industry, new technologies for manufacturing 
of APIs including its backward  integration, costing of the projects and 
identification of strategic business models.  On the basis of 
recommendations of the Technical committee , the Department  has 
revised the earlier Scheme of  “Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for 
Common facility Centr e” and renamed it as  “Promotion of Bulk Drug 
Parks” with an  enhanced budget of Rs. 3000 Crore for implementation 
during the period of five years from 2020 -21 to 2024-25.  The Technical 
Committee also identified 53 Key Starting Materials  
(KSMs)/APIs based on the the rapeutic criticality, essentiality , 
technology involved and feasibility to manufacture indigenously . In 
this regard, Department of Pharmaceuticals has floated a new scheme 
with an outlay of Rs. 6,940 Crore viz. Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
Scheme for the promotion of domestic manufacturing of critical 
KSMs/ Drug Intermediates/ APIs i n India.  The Committee feel that it is  
high time for working in a war footin g manner to create a strong base 
for manufacturing of above mentioned 53 KSMs/APIs which are 
critically essential for drug manufacturing in the country as the 
dependence on a single foreign country for APIs/KSMs has put the 
country’s drug  security in dang er in the wake of present COVID -19 
pandemic.      The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals should take necessary steps for the 
effective implementation of the above two schemes in a time bound 
manner and  to conti nuously  monitor the  effectiveness of 
implementation of both the  schemes so as to take corrective  

13 
 
measures in case of any lacunae in the implementation.  The progress 
made in regard to implementation of  both the Schemes may be 
intimated to the Committee.   
 
1.8   The Committee made a specific recommendation to the Department to 
examine if the cluster approach of boosting industrial activity has 
resulted in any concrete benefit in any other sector.   In this regard, no 
reply has been given by the Department.   The Committee, ther efore,  
would like to   emphasize  again that the Department  may  examine  
whether a new approach involving concrete benefits to the 
entrepreneurs viz. subsidized finance, free industrial land, assured 
buy back contracts, e tc. can be formulated so that it becomes 
economically viable for the pharmaceutical units to procure API 
locally. Specific replies may be given by the Department on the above 
recommendations.   
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.3 
 
TECHNOLOGICAL UPGRADATION OF PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY 
 
 1.9 While stressing on the technological up -gradation of the Pharmaceuticals 
Industry, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee note that  the World Health Organization - Good 
Manufacturing Practices (WHO -GMP) certificate is a mandatory 
requirement in most global markets for companies to be able to sell their 
medicines. It is difficult for the pharmaceutical Micro Small and Medium 
Enterprises (MSMEs) to establish and operate world class quality 
manufacturing and testi ng facilities on their own due to huge financial and 
technical investment involved. It is roughly estimated that 80% of the 
pharmaceutical MSMEs in the country are not WHO -GMP 
compliant.  Upgrading to such standards require investment to the tune of 
Rs. 5 -10 crore per unit as per the feedback from the stakeholders. The 
Committee observe that the Department has    launched a scheme 
viz. Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme 
(PTUAS) to facilitate pharmaceutical MSMEs to upgrade their plant a nd 
machinery to World Health Organization (WHO) -Good Manufacturing 
Practices (GMP) standards so as to enable them to participate and 
compete in global markets.   Under the scheme, assistance in the form of 

14 
 
interest subvention against sanctioned loan by any scheduled commercial 
bank/financial institution, both in Public and Private sector will be provided 
to 250 pharmaceutical MSMEs of proven track record.   The country 
requires Rs. 500 crore to Rs. 600 crore to convert the Pharma units in the 
country into WHO -GMP compliant.  However the Committee are dismayed 
to note that the Department has been getting only a token allocation of Rs. 
2 lakh for the scheme since 2018 -19 including  2020-21 at BE stage which 
is a miniscule amount to start this important scheme fo r improving the 
standards of vast number of pharmaceutical MSMEs in the country and 
scheme has been a non -starter as no Public Sector Financial 
Institution(PSFI) has come on board to implement this scheme.   After 
discussing with various stake holders, guid elines of this scheme have been 
revised by the Department including the selection of PSFI.  The Committee 
would like the Department to appreciate the fact that technology 
upgradation to the level of WHO -GMP compliance will not happen unless 
the pharmaceutic al SMEs are physically and financially assisted.   The 
Committee would simultaneously want the Department to appreciate that 
WHO-GMP compliance not only helps the exporting pharmaceutical units 
but also enhances the quality of drugs available for domestic 
consumption.  Therefore, the Committee would like the Ministry to formulate 
a concrete scheme involving real assistance to the SMEs for making them 
WHO-GMP compliant.   Even if the scheme provides assistance to a few 
units each year (in view of paucity of fu nds), it should extend substantial 
assistance to the units beyond encouragement and guidance.   The 
Committee in this regard recommend that swift action should be taken by 
the Department to implement the scheme in a time bound manner. For this 
to take place, the Committee strongly recommend that the Finance Ministry 
should enhance the budgetary allocation for this scheme so that the 
Department can implement this scheme for technology up -gradation of the 
pharmaceutical MSMEs. The Department shall also take up  this matter at 
the highest level with the Ministry of Finance and this recommendation 
made by the Committee should be conveyed to Finance Ministry for 
necessary action at its level.   In case of funding difficulties, the Department 
may consider to create a Special purpose Vehicle (SPV) in partnership with 
Private Pharmaceutical Industry who are dependent on the MSMEs sector 
to produce their pharmaceutical products so that a specific investment fund 
may be created  for the technological up-gradation of  Pharma MSMEs." 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
1.10 In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 

15 
 
" The department has prepared a revised Pharmaceuticals Technology 
Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS)  based on the feedback received 
from Industry Associations and other stakeholders.   In the revised scheme, 
the number of pharma MSMEs to be covered is  about 4,500 units.   The 
financial implication for supporting 4500 Pharma MSMEs will be of R s. 
5,000 crores for seven-year period from 2020 -2027.  Further, in the revised 
scheme, provision is made to engage Public Sector Financial Institution 
(PSFI) by nomination basis as well. The department will take up the matter 
of enhancement of budgetary al location with the ministry of Finance after 
approval of the revised scheme." 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.11 The Committee note that the D epartment has prepared a revis ed 
Pharmaceuticals Technology  up gradation Assistance Scheme 
(PTUAS)  with an  enhanced financial outlay of  Rs. 5,000 Crore for 
seven-years period from 2020 -2027 with the objective of assisting 
about 4500 units.    This Scheme has been prepared  by the 
Department   on the basis of feedback received from Industry 
Associations and other stakeholders.  The Department has also stated 
that it will take up the matter of enhancement of  budgetary allocation 
with the Ministry of Finance after approval of the revised scheme. The 
Committee feel that the revised scheme if implemented effectively and 
efficiently has the potential to enhance the standards of  
pharmaceutical MSME  units  in the country particularly  to facilitate  
them  to upgrade their plant and machinery to  the standards of World 
Health Organization (WHO)- Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)  so 
as to enable them to participate and compete in global markets.      
The Committee hope that the Department would take concrete and 
timely steps for the early approval of the Scheme and for requisit e 
amount of budgetary allocation for the successful implementation of 
the revised scheme.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard. 
 
  

16 
 
RECOMMENDATION  NO 4 
 
PROMOTION OF ADVANCED RESEARCH IN DRUGS AND MEDICAL DEVICES 
FIELDS 
  
1.12  While observing that there is need to promote advanced research in drugs 
and medical devices fields, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee note that Pharmaceutical industry is a knowledge intensive 
industry and needs continuous development of new Chemical/ biological 
entities, updating/improvement in the processes, develop new drug delivery 
systems etc. to remain competitive. To sustain its edge in domestic and 
export markets, Pharma industry has to invest contin uously in R& 
D.  Besides, academia -Industry linkage has been identified as a basic 
requirement for translating research into development (commercialization) 
and Innovation. The Committee note that the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has also constituted an I nter-Departmental Committee 
(IDC) on 9th January, 2019 to institutionalize a robust mechanism to ensure 
economy, efficiency, effectiveness and transparency in the arena of 
Pharmaceutical research. Since it is very much necessary to have a strong 
Research a nd Development base in the country to remain competitive at 
the global level and to meet the medicines needs of this huge country, the 
Committee would like to recommend that the Department should take 
concrete steps for promoting advance research in drugs and medical 
devices fields in collaboration with National Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Education and Research (NIPER), Public Sector Undertakings like BCPL 
and KAPL and  private research laboratories.  In this regard the Committee 
strongly recommend that th e Department shall request the Ministry of 
Finance to make separate budgetary allocation for Research and 
Development segment for pharmaceuticals sector." 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.13  In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the Committee, th e 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
" A new Sub -head of Research and Development in Pharma Sector under 
the Umbrella Scheme has been opened in Detailed Demand for Grants 
2020-21 so that a proper account of funds allocated/utilized for R& D could 
be maintained. Department has proposed in EFC to establish a Center of 
Excellence in Anti -virus Discovery and Development at NIPER -Mohali at 
estimated cost of Rs. 160.73 crore, Centre of Excellence in Medical Device 
with estimated cost of Rs. 149.8 5 crore at NIPER -Ahmedabad and 
Establishment of a National Centre of R&D in Bulk Drugs (NCRDBD) with 

17 
 
estimated cost of Rs. 99.31 crore at NIPER -Hyderabad. These centres will 
augment R&D in Pharma Sector. A committee comprising experts from 
eminent Governme nt as well as Private Organizations has been duly 
constituted with the approval of Hon’ble Minister (Chemicals and Fertilizers, 
Government of India) to draft and finalize policy on R&D and Innovation 
including Academia -Industry linkage in Pharmaceuticals a nd medical 
Devices on 29 th May 2020 in pursuance of the decision taken in the 
presentation of the Sectoral Group of the Secretaries before the Council of 
Ministers, with a mandate to give its Report in three months." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.14   The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals has 
opened a new Sub -head of Research and Development in Pharma 
Sector under the Major Head for the Umbrella Scheme  on 
‘Development of Pharmaceuticals Industry’  in Detailed Demand for 
Grants 2020 -21. However, no budgetary allocation has been made 
under this new sub -head for the year 2020 -21.  Actually, the 
Committee recommended that the Department shall request the 
Ministry of Finance to make separate budgetary allocation for 
Research and Development  segment for pharmaceuticals sector. In 
this regard, the Committee note that the Department has proposed in 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) to establish a Center of 
Excellence in Anti -virus Discovery and Development,   a  Centre of 
Excellence in Medical  Device and a National Centre of R&D in Bulk 
Drugs (NCRDBD) at a  total cost about Rs.410 crore.  Since the 
presence of such central level research institutions/centers would 
provide the right platform and an enabling environment for  the 
promotion of R&D i n pharma sector, the  Committee urge   the 
Department to take immediate   steps for early approval of these R&D 
projects in EFC and thereafter pursue the matter vigorously with the 
Ministry of Finance for making budgetary allocation for these projects 
in 20 21-22 budget.    Specific reply may be given on the progress 
made in this regard for the information of the Committee.  The 
Committee also note that   a committee comprising experts from 
eminent Government as well as Private Organizations has  been  
constituted  to draft and finalize policy on R&D and Innovation 

18 
 
including Academia-Industry linkage in Pharmaceuticals and medical 
Devices.  This Committee has been mandated to give its Report by the 
end of August, 2020.  In this regard, the Committee hope that the 
Department would take necessary follow -up steps on the basis of 
recommendations of that Committee for finalizing R&D and 
innovations in the Pharmaceutical sector.  T he Committee would like 
to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 5 
ASSISTANCE TO MEDICAL DEVICES INDUSTRY 
 1.15  While observing on the necessity to extend assistance to the medical 
device industry, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 "The Committee note that the country imports almost 85% of al l its medical 
device needs. The country largely imports high technology medical 
equipments and electronics which constitute 66 % of the country’s import 
basket. The Committee note that for the year 2020 -21 the Department had 
proposed an amount of Rs 30.00 crore under the sub -scheme ‘Assistance 
to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility Centre’ but the Finance 
Ministry has allocated only Rs 7.50 crore. The Committee note that in 
principle approvals have been given for four proposals under this sub -
scheme. The Department stated that under this sub -scheme, the proposals 
received from State Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil 
Nadu and Kerala have been given ‘in -principle’ approval. Also, the proposal 
of Andhra Pradesh has been given final approva l for financial assistance of 
Rs. 25 crore. The other three proposals will also be considered for final 
approval after receipt of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for which the 
concerned State Governments have been reminded by the Department. 
The Committee feel that the setting up of common facility for Medical 
Device Industry would play major role in promotion of medical device 
industry in the country. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that 
the Department should take concrete steps in coordination  with State/UT 
Government concerned to implement this sub scheme effectively.   The 
steps to be taken by the Department should involve a dedicated 
infrastructure with free or nearly free land, easy access to low cost finances 
and technological assistance as  without these basic ingredients, it is not 
possible to motivate any entrepreneur to set up new business in a sector 
where imports have a lower cost in general. The Department should also 
pursue with the Ministry of Finance to increase budgetary allocation  for this 
scheme keeping in mind the priority of medical devices industry for the 

19 
 
health sector. The Department shall also take up this matter at the highest 
level with the Ministry of Finance and this recommendation made by the 
Committee should be conveye d to Finance Ministry for necessary action at 
its level." 
 
  
Reply of the Government 
1.16 In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendations of the committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
"The sub -scheme termed as “Assistance to Medical Device Industry for 
Common Facility Centre” is a Central Sector Scheme under the umbrella 
scheme for Development of Pharmaceutical Industry. The total size of the 
above sub -scheme was Rs.100 Crores for 2018 -2020. The sub -scheme 
proposed to provide a one -time grant-in-aid to the tune of Rs. 25 Crore or 
70% of the project cost, whichever is less, to be released for creation of 
identified infrastructure and common facilities to a State Implementing 
Agency (SIA) set up for the purpose.   The purpose of the grant was to 
render the financial assistance for establishment of common facilities in any 
upcoming Medical Device Parks promoted by State Governments/State 
Corporations. 
However, it was realized that creation of common facilities require s much 
more investment and the Department proposed revision of the existing sub -
scheme. The revised sub -scheme is termed as “Promotion of Medical 
Device Parks” with an outlay of Rs. 400 Crore for financing 4 medical 
device parks from financial year 2020-21 to 2024-25. 
The revised sub-scheme will provide grant-in-aid to 4 Medical Device Parks 
with a maximum limit of Rs. 100 Crore or 70% of the project cost of 
Common Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is less.   In case of Hilly States 
and North East Region, the grant-in-aid would be Rs. 100 Crore per Park or 
90%   of the project cost of Common Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is 
less.  The Scheme would be implemented through a State Implementing 
Agency (SIA) to be formed by the concerned State Government .  The 
Scheme has been approved by the Union Cabinet on 20.03.2020.   The 
detailed guidelines of the scheme are under preparation. For allocation of 
sufficient funds, the Department will take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Finance at the appropriate time." 
 
 
 
 
  

20 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.17  The Committee note that the  Union Cabinet has approved the  revised 
sub-scheme of “Promotion of Medical Device Parks”  in place of the 
existing sub -scheme “Assistance to Medical Device Industry for 
Common Facility Centre” with an enhanced outlay of Rs. 400 Crore for 
financing 4 medical device parks from  the financial year 20 20-21 to 
2024-25.  As per the reply given by the Department,  it will take up the 
matter of sufficient allocation of funds for the scheme with the 
Ministry of Finance at the appropriate time.   The Committee could not 
understand the logic of seeking funds from the Ministry of Finance at 
the appropriate time when the approved scheme is to  be implemented 
from the current financial year onwards.    Since the  Scheme would  
remain only on paper  due to delays in getting the requisite amount of 
funds for its implementation,   the Committee urge the Department to 
take up at the highest level wi th the Ministry of Finance for the 
allocation  of funds at RE stage/supplementary demands  for  the 
implementation of the Scheme from the current financial year onwards 
as envisaged under the Scheme.   
 
 1.18   The Committee also note that the detailed gui delines for 
implementation of the scheme are under preparation in the 
Department.  While formulating the guidelines, the Department should 
examine the feasibilities of providing    a dedicated infrastructure in 
Medical Device Parks with free or nearly free  land, easy access to low 
cost finances and technological assistance as without these basic 
incentives, it may be difficult to motivate any entrepre neur to set up 
new manufacturing units in this sector where imports have a lower 
cost in general when compar ed to domestic ability to manufacture the 
same medical devices.  The Action Taken Reply in this regard should 
be furnished to the Committee.  
 
  

21 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 11 
 
DISINVESTMENT OF PROFIT MAKING PHARMA PSUS 
 
 1.19  While impressing upon the need to rel ook at disinvestment of profit making 
PSUs, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
" The Committee are concerned to note that out of five Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs) under the Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ka rnataka 
Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals (KAPL) and Bengal Chemicals & 
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (BCPL) are profit making PSUs.   The Government 
has decided for strategic sale of BCPL and strategic disinvestment of 100% 
Government of India equity in KAPL.  As regards BCPL, Hon’ble High Court 
of Kolkata set aside the decision of its strategic sale.   Now an appeal has 
been made before the Division bench of the Court.   The Department of 
Pharmaceuticals opposed the strategic disinvestment of KAPL as the 
company is profit making and has been assigned the responsibility of being 
the sole manufacturer of Oxytocin for domestic consumption.  This matter of 
sole Oxytocin production rights to KAPL is presently  sub-judice in the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court.  The Committee are perturbed to note the decision 
of NITI Aayog to sell/ disinvest these two profit making PSUs of this priority 
sector which is concerning the health of huge population of this vast 
country.  Entirely leaving drug manufacturing at the hands of private sector  
may not be a prudent step as these PSUs may provide required quantity of 
essential medicines at affordable prices at times of needs particularly during 
epidemic and pandemic outbreak of diseases.   The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the deci sion for the strategic sale/ disinvestment 
of KAPL and BCPL should be revisited by the Government in the public 
interest.  The Committee should be informed of the action taken in this 
matter.  This recommendation of the Committee should also be sent to NIT I 
Aayog for its specific reply within three months." 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.20 In reply to the afore -mentioned recommendations of the committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 

22 
 
" The recommendation of the Committee was forwarded earlier to M inistry 
of Finance (DIPAM) and NITI Aayog on 14.02.2020 for reconsideration of 
the decision of strategic sale of KAPL and BCPL. Further, as directed by 
the Committee, the matter is again being taken up with NITI Aayog/ Ministry 
of Finance for reconsideration of strategic sale of profit making PSUs." 
  
  
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.21  The Committee are concerned to note the Action Taken Reply given 
by the Department that the matter is again being taken up with NITI 
Aayog/ Ministry of Finance for reconsideration of strategic sale of 
profit making PSUs. Eighth Report of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants, 2020-21 pertaining to the Department of Pharmaceuticals was 
presented to Parliament on 20 March 2020 wherein the Committee 
made a specific recommendation that the that the decision on the 
strategic sale/ disinvestment of  Karnataka Antibiotics & 
Pharmaceuticals (KAPL) and Bengal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals 
Ltd. (BCPL) should be revisited by the Government in the public 
interest.  In this regard, the Committee directed that the above 
recommendation of the Committee should be sent to NITI Aayog for 
its specific reply within three months. Even  though this matter was 
taken up by the Department with NITI Ayog on 14 February, 2020, it 
seems from the reply given by the Department that the above 
recommendation of the Committee is yet to be sent to NITI Ayog. The 
Committee are of the strong view that e ntirely leaving drug 
manufacturing at the hands of private sector may not be a prudent 
step as these PSUs may provide required quantity of essential 
medicines at affordable prices at times of needs particularly during 
epidemic and pandemic outbreak of diseases .  T he Committee, 
therefore, reiterate the   earlier recommendation that the decision for 
the strategic sale/ disinvestment of profit making PSUs viz. KAPL and 
BCPL should be revisited by the G overnment.  T his recommendation 
of the Committee should be sent to the Ministry of Finance (DIPAM ) 
and NITI Ayog for their specific replies within three months.   

23 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1: 
 
NEED FOR ENHANCEMENT OF BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
 
  The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals was created 
on 1st July, 2008 under the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers with the objective to 
give greater focus and thrust on the development of pharmaceutical sector in the 
country and to regulate various complex issues related to pricing and availability of 
medicines at affordable prices, research & development, protection of intellectual 
property rights and international commitments related to pharmaceutical sector 
which required integration of work with other ministries. The total size of Indian 
drugs and medical devices    industry   is around USD 43 Billion and it is currently 
having a growth rate of 7 -8 % in drugs sector and 15 -16 % in medical device 
sector. Total exports of drugs and medical devices are to t he tune of USD 20.15 
billion with drugs contributing around 90 % of the total exports. Imports around 
USD 10.4 billion of which medical devices constitute around 52 %. Pharma sector 
is currently contributing US$ 47.28 billion which is around 1.72% of count ry’s 
GDP.  It is expected that the sector can contribute between USD 85 to 100 bil lion 
to Indian Economy by 2024.   However, the Committee are concerned to note that 
there are certain issues viz. dependence on import of API mostly from China, 
import of more than 50% of medical devices needs of the country, non -compliance 
of WHO GMP standards by most of the drug manufacturers in the country, etc. 
which have to be immediately addressed by the Government for continuous march 
as a frontline drug manufacturing co untry. The Committee note that the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has initiated a few schemes for setting up of 
Common Facility Centres for Pharmaceutical industry, Bulk drug (API) industry 
and medical devices so as to promote the holistic growth of the Pha rma sector in 
the country particularly to reduce the import of bulk drugs and medical 
devices.  There is also an ambitious scheme for technology upgradation of 4500 
pharma SMEs to make them comply with WHO GMP standards.   In this regard, 

24 
 
the Committee are constrained to note the inadequate budgetary allocation of only 
Rs. 333.58 crore as against the demand of Rs.694.05 crore made by the 
Department.  Notwithstanding huge responsibilities of the Department to ensure 
quality medicines at affordable prices to t he entire population of the country, 
budgetary allocation is hardly sufficient to fulfill this huge responsibility. The 
Committee also note the views expressed by the Department that the reduction in 
outlay would have an adverse impact on the implementatio n of various Schemes 
and will not be sufficient to achieve the targets fixed by the Department for its 
major Central Sector Schemes.    Since it is very much necessary to make 
adequate level of budgetary support to the Department to enable it achieve the 
goals before it particularly to enable the poor and deprived sections of the society 
to have basic access to affordable quality medicines.    The Committee further note 
that during the year 2019 -20 the Department could utilise only 64.34 per cent of 
the total  allocated budget i.e. Rs. 361.81 crore (as on 17.01.2020) out of Rs. 
562.33 crore available at revised estimate stage.   The Committee are dismayed to 
note the underutilization of funds by the Department, which reflects poorly on their 
planning and scheme implementation capabilities.  Therefore, the Committee feel 
that on one hand the Department has to work hard effectively towards utilization of 
allocated funds and on the other hand there is need to enhance the budget 
allocation commensurate with the socia l mandate of the Department.   The 
Department shall also take up this matter at the highest level with the Ministry of 
Finance and this recommendation made by the Committee should be conveyed to 
that Ministry of Finance for necessary action at its level. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 As aptly pointed out by the Committee, the reduced budgetary allocation of 
Rs. 333.58 Crore to the department for the FY 2020 -21 against the demand of Rs. 
694.05 Crore is grossly inadequate in view of the pressing requirements of 
ongoing and new schemes. The recommendation of the Committee for taking up 
the matter with Ministry of Finance has been noted for compliance. 
 However, with regard to the concern expressed by the Committee that 
during FY 2019 -20 the Departm ent could utilize the funds only to the extent of 
64.34% as on 17.01.2020, reflecting poorly on the planning and implementation 
capabilities of the Department, it is stated that Department has been allocated Rs. 

25 
 
562.33 crore in Revised Estimates 2019 -20. The Department was able to utilize 
99.63% of its RE (i.e Rs. 560.25 crore) as on 31.3.2020. 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
 
PROMOTION OF BULK DRUG /API INDUSTRY IN THE COUNTRY 
  
     The Committee are concerned to note that  Active Pharmaceuticals 
Ingredients (API)/Bulk drugs and intermediates form 63% of India’s total pharma 
imports. Even production of some of the NLEM formulations is dependent on 
imported APIs and intermediates. India imports bulk drugs and intermediates 
largely on economic consid erations as imports are cheaper than domestic 
production. China with a share of 67.6 % is the major source of API for the 
country.   India, being one of the largest manufacturers of medicines and exporting 
to over 200 countries, dependence on a single source for import of API is a matter 
of concern as any disruption in the supplies could jeopardize the entire pharma 
sector and affect supplies of medicines both for domestic use and exports. The 
Committee note that the Department has constituted a Task Force on API under 
the Chairmanship of the Minister of State (Chemicals & Fertilizers) on 18.04.2018 
to formulate a roadmap for the enhanced production of Active Pharmaceutical 
Ingredients (APIs) in the country. The Committee also note that Department has 
taken some steps viz instructions issued to the State Governments to increase the 
API production capacity, timely permission by State Governments and Central 
Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) for setting up of API Plants and 
diversifying import of API from countries like Italy etc. rather than relying solely on 
China.   The Department has also planned to revive 21 API plants which were 
operating in 2005   and were closed down because of stiff competition from China 
but the revival process likely to take one and a half year. The Committee   further 
note that the Department has made efforts in promoting Domestic API/Bulk drugs 
production under a sub -scheme 'Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common 
Facility Centre' as part of the D epartment's umbrella scheme namely ‘Scheme for 
Development of Pharmaceutical Industry’. Under this sub -scheme, financial 
assistance would be provided for creation of common facilities in any upcoming 
Bulk Drug Park promoted by State Governments/State Corporations. The Scheme 
would be implemented through a one -time grant-in-aid to be released to a State 
Implementing Agency (SIA) set up for the purpose. This sub -scheme has received 
only an allocation of Rs 21.52 crore at BE stage   of 2020-21 against the proposed 
fund requirement of R s.100.00 crore. The Department has stated  that the 
proposals received from State Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, 
Himachal Pradesh and Assam have been given ‘in -principle’ approval. However, 
State Government of Assam has stated that it will not be  financially viable for them 
to establish a Bulk Drug Park in their State. The remaining three proposals will be 
considered for final approval after receipt of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) and 
the respective State Governments have been reminded to send Detailed Project 
Report at the earliest. In this regard, the Committee are dismayed to note that 
there is no concrete effort to reverse the trend of over -dependence on imports for 

26 
 
the API.   The Scheme of Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common Facility  
Centre was launched only during 2017 -18, but the setting up of Bulk drug  parks in 
four states under the Scheme is only at approval stage even after two years of 
implementation of the Scheme.   It is also a matter of concern that only Rs. 21.52 
crore has be en allocated for the Scheme against the requirement of Rs. 100 
crore.  Since it is high time specially in view of spread of corona virus from China 
the Government pays due attention for the promotion of bulk drug industry in the 
country, the Committee stro ngly recommend that swift action should be taken to 
establish the proposed Bulk drug parks in four states and the feasibility of setting 
up these parks in other states should also be examined in a time bound manner so 
as to create a strong bulk drug/API ma nufacturing base in the country instead on 
relying on a foreign country on this critical sector. Immediate steps should also be 
initiated for revival of 21 API plants which were closed due to competition from 
China.  The Committee is also concerned about this approach to give grants to the 
States to implement some kind of a cluster approach.   The Committee would like 
the Department to examine if such a cluster approach of boosting industrial activity 
has resulted in any concrete benefit in any other sector.   The Committee would 
also like the Department to examine if a new approach involving concrete benefits 
in the form of say, subsidized finance, free industrial land, assured buy back 
contracts, etc. can be formulated so that it becomes economically viable for the 
pharmaceutical units to procure API locally.   Since this is a critical sector for the 
economic and physical well -being of the country, the Committee would like the 
Department to seriously examine the issue of creating tariff barriers so that it 
becomes attractive to produce API in the country.   This may be taken up with 
Ministry of Commerce and Ministry of Finance at the highest level. 
  
Reply of the Government: 
 
  Various options to reduce the country’s over dependence on imports from a 
single coun try have been examined in the department.  Regarding diversifying 
sources of import of API , it is observed that  APIs produced in other source 
countries such as Germany, France, Italy are priced relatively much higher and 
Indian formulations would be rendere d less cost -competitive if the critical APIs 
used in their preparations are procured at higher costs from these countries. All 
the critical APIs are also not produced by these countries. 
  
In order to address the issue of drug security in the country in 
the background of an expected disruption of imports of APIs owing to the  COVID-
19 crisis, the Department of Pharmaceuticals constituted a Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Dr. S. Eswara Reddy, Joint Drug Controller, CDSCO.  The 
committee has id entified a list of 58 APIs for which India is heavily dependent on 
imports from a single country. 
  
A Technical Committee was constituted by DoP on 02.03.2020 under the 
chairmanship of Dr. Eswara Reddy, Joint Drugs Controller, Central Drugs 
Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) to make recommendations for the revival 
of fermentation industry, new technologies for manufacturing of APIs including its 
backward integration, costing of the projects and identification of strategic 
business models. The Technical C ommittee has examined all the 58 APIs/KSMs 
identified by the Drug Security Committee. The committee observed that in order 

27 
 
to have self-sufficiency in manufacturing of these 58 KSMs/APIs, huge investment 
is required for setting up their manufacturing facil ities. Further, depending on the 
nature of API/KSM, the manufacturing process, investment, facility required, etc 
will vary. 
   
The Technical Committee also deliberated at length to access the feasibility 
of revival of closed API plants. The committee obse rved that most of these 
manufacturing facilities are completely surrounded by residential colonies, 
manufacturers do not have technology and technical manpower to manufacture 
fermentation-based products, building and civil structures are old, facilities of  
utilities, ETP, supply lines, electricity supplies, power backup are completely 
required to be replaced. Production of Fermentation-based products releases lot of 
foul smell by virtue of biomass produced during the process and the production 
capacities ar e not commercially viable. Therefore the committee concluded that 
revival of such old facilities is not commercially viable in the present context. Only 
Green Field projects need to be taken up with Large Volume Fermenters to ensure 
viable indigenous supply of such important KSMs. 
  
On the basis of recommendations of the Technical Committee, the existing 
sub-scheme called  “Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common facility 
Centre” under the umbrella scheme of ‘Development of Pharmaceutical Industry’ 
has been revised. The revised scheme has been approved by the Union Cabinet 
on 20.03.20 and is now termed as “Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks”.  The total size 
of the Scheme is Rs. 3000 Crore and tenure of the Scheme will be five years (FY 
2020-21 to FY 2024-25). 
  
The scheme will provide grant -in-aid to 3 Bulk Drug Parks with a maximum 
limit of Rs.1000 Crore per park or 70% of the project cost of Common 
Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is less. In case of hilly states and North East 
Region, the grant -in-aid would be Rs.1000 Crore per park or 90% of the project 
cost of Common Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is less.   The Common 
Facilities at the Park would provide easy access to standard testing and 
infrastructure facilities and reduce the manufacturing cost significantly.  
  
The Technical Committee identified 53 KSMs/APIs  based on the 
therapeutic criticality, essentially, technology involved and feasibility to 
manufacture indigenously. Based on its recommendations, DoP prepared a new 
scheme viz. Production Linked Incentive (PL I) Scheme for promotion of domestic 
manufacturing of critical Key Starting Materials (KSMs) / Drug Intermediates and 
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) In India.  Under the scheme, financial 
incentive will be given to eligible manufacturers of 53 KSMs /Drug Intermediates 
and APIs on their incremental sales over the base year  (FY 2019 -20). For 
fermentation based eligible products, incentive for the first four years (2022 -2023 
to 2025 -2026) would be 20%, for fifth year (2026 -27) 15% and for sixth 
year (2027-2028) 5% on incremental sale of KSMs/Drug Intermediates/APIs. For 
chemically synthesized eligible products incentive for six years (2021 -2022 to 
2026-2027) would be 10% on incremental sales of KSMs/Drug 

28 
 
Intermediates/APIs.  A total outlay of Rs. 6,940 C rore has been approved for the 
scheme. 
 
Regarding the Committee’s recommendation for the Department to 
seriously examinethe issue of creating tariff barriers  so that it becomes attractive 
to produce API in the country, it is to mention that this aspect has  also been 
examined while drafting the Production Linked Incentive scheme and once 
sufficient domestic manufacturing starts happening only then the imposition of 
trade barriers will be considered. With the successful implementation of these 
schemes, it is expected that India would be well -positioned as a global hub for 
manufacturing of critical KSMs/Drug Intermediates and APIs along with the final 
drug formulations. 
 
 COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO.3 
 
TECHNOLOGICAL UPGRADATION OF PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY. 
  
  The Committee note that  the World Health Organization - Good 
Manufacturing Practices (WHO -GMP) certificate is a mandatory requirement in 
most global markets for companies to be able to sell their medicines. It is difficult 
for the pharmaceutical Micro Smal l and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) to establish 
and operate world class quality manufacturing and testing facilities on their own 
due to huge financial and technical investment involved. It is roughly estimated 
that 80% of the pharmaceutical MSMEs in the cou ntry are not WHO -GMP 
compliant.  Upgrading to such standards require investment to the tune of Rs. 5-10 
crore per unit as per the feedback from the stakeholders. (Ref: P4 Para 2.1) The 
Committee observe that the Department has    launched a scheme 
viz. Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS) to 
facilitate pharmaceutical MSMEs to upgrade their plant and machinery to World 
Health Organization (WHO)-Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) standards so as 
to enable them to participate and com pete in global markets.   Under the scheme, 
assistance in the form of interest subvention against sanctioned loan by any 
scheduled commercial bank/financial institution, both in Public and Private sector 
will be provided to 250 pharmaceutical MSMEs of prove n track record.   The 
country requires Rs. 500 crore to Rs. 600 crore to convert the Pharma units in the 
country into WHO-GMP compliant.  However the Committee are dismayed to note 
that the Department has been getting only a token allocation of Rs. 2 lakh f or the 
scheme since 2018 -19 including   2020-21 at BE stage which is a miniscule 
amount to start this important scheme for improving the standards of vast number 
of pharmaceutical MSMEs in the country and scheme has been a non -starter as 
no Public Sector Fi nancial Institution(PSFI) has come on board to implement this 

29 
 
scheme.  After discussing with various stake holders, guidelines of this scheme 
have been revised by the Department including the selection of PSFI.  The 
Committee would like the Department to ap preciate the fact that technology 
upgradation to the level of WHO -GMP compliance will not happen unless the 
pharmaceutical SMEs are physically and financially assisted.   The Committee 
would simultaneously want the Department to appreciate that WHO -GMP 
compliance not only helps the exporting pharmaceutical units but also enhances 
the quality of drugs available for domestic consumption.  Therefore, the Committee 
would like the Ministry to formulate a concrete scheme involving real assistance to 
the SMEs for m aking them WHO -GMP compliant.   Even if the scheme provides 
assistance to a few units each year (in view of paucity of funds), it should extend 
substantial assistance to the units beyond encouragement and guidance.   The 
Committee in this regard recommend th at swift action should be taken by the 
Department to implement the scheme in a time bound manner. For this to take 
place, the Committee strongly recommend that the Finance Ministry should 
enhance the budgetary allocation for this scheme so that the Departm ent can 
implement this scheme for technology up -gradation of the pharmaceutical 
MSMEs. The Department shall also take up this matter at the highest level with the 
Ministry of Finance and this recommendation made by the Committee should be 
conveyed to Finan ce Ministry for necessary action at its level.   In case of funding 
difficulties, the Department may consider to create  a Special purpose Vehicle 
(SPV) in partnership with Private Pharmaceutical Industry who are dependent on 
the MSMEs sector to produce thei r pharmaceutical products so that a specific 
investment fund may be created   for the technological up -gradation of   Pharma 
MSMEs. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
  The department has prepared a revised Pharmaceuticals Technology 
Upgradation Assistance Scheme (P TUAS)  based on the feedback received from 
Industry Associations and other stakeholders.   In the revised scheme, the number 
of pharma MSMEs to be covered is   about 4,500 units.   The financial implication 
for supporting 4500 Pharma MSMEs will be of Rs. 5,00 0 crores for seven -year 
period from 2020 -2027.  Further, in the revised scheme, provision is made to 
engage Public Sector Financial Institution (PSFI) by nomination basis as well. The 
department will take up the matter of enhancement of budgetary allocation with the 
ministry of Finance after approval of the revised scheme. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION  NO 4 
 
PROMOTION OF ADVANCED RESEARCH IN DRUGS AND MEDICAL DEVICES 
FIELDS 
  
            The Committee note that Pharmaceutical industry is a knowledge intensive 
industry and needs continuous development of new Chemical/ biological entities, 

30 
 
updating/improvement in the processes, develop new drug delivery systems etc. to 
remain competitive. To sustain its edge in domestic and export markets, Pharma 
industry has to invest continuously in R& D.   Besides, academia-Industry linkage 
has been identified as a basic requirement for translating research into 
development (commercialization) a nd Innovation. The Committee note that the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has also constituted an Inter -Departmental 
Committee (IDC) on 9 th January, 2019 to institutionalize a robust mechanism to 
ensure economy, efficiency, effectiveness and transparency in  the arena of 
Pharmaceutical research . Since it is very much necessary to have a strong 
Research and Development base in the country to remain competitive at the 
global level and to meet the medicines needs of this huge country, the Committee 
would like to  recommend that the Department should take concrete steps for 
promoting advance research in drugs and medical devices fields in collaboration 
with National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), Public 
Sector Undertakings like BCPL and  KAPL and  private research laboratories.   In 
this regard the Committee strongly recommend that the Department shall request 
the Ministry of Finance to make separate budgetary allocation for Research and 
Development segment for pharmaceuticals sector. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 A new Sub -head of Research and Development in Pharma Sector under 
the Umbrella Scheme has been opened in Detailed Demand for Grants 2020 -21 
so that a proper account of funds allocated/utilized for R&D could be maintained. 
Department has proposed in EFC to establish a Center of Excellence in Anti -virus 
Discovery and Development at NIPER -Mohali at estimated cost of Rs. 160.73 
crore, Centre of Excellence in Medical Device with estimated cost of Rs. 149.85 
crore at NIPER -Ahmedabad and Establishment of a National Centre of R&D in 
Bulk Drugs (NCRDBD) with estimated cost of Rs. 99.31 crore at NIPER -
Hyderabad. These centres will augment R&D in Pharma Sector. A committee 
comprising experts from eminent Government as well as Private O rganizations 
has been duly constituted with the approval of Hon’ble Minister (Chemicals and 
Fertilizers, Government of India) to draft and finalize policy on R&D and Innovation 
including Academia-Industry linkage in Pharmaceuticals and medical Devices on 
29th May 2020 in pursuance of the decision taken in the presentation of the 
Sectoral Group of the Secretaries before the Council of Ministers, with a mandate 
to give its Report in three months. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
  
RECOMMENDATION NO 5 
 
ASSISTANCE TO MEDICAL DEVICES INDUSTRY 
  
            The Committee note that  the country imports almost 85% of all its medical 
device needs. The country largely imports high technology medical equipments 
and electronics which constitute 66 % of the country’s import basket . The 

31 
 
Committee note that for the year 2020 -21 the Department had proposed an 
amount of Rs 30.00 crore under the sub -scheme ‘Assistance to Medical Device 
Industry for Common Facility Centre’ b ut the Finance Ministry has allocated only 
Rs 7.50 crore. The Committee note that in principle approvals have been given for 
four proposals under this sub-scheme. The Department stated that under this sub -
scheme, the proposals received from State Governmen ts of Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana, Tamil Nadu and Kerala have been given ‘in -principle’ approval. Also, 
the proposal of Andhra Pradesh has been given final approval for financial 
assistance of Rs. 25 crore. The other three proposals will also be considered f or 
final approval after receipt of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for which the 
concerned State Governments have been reminded by the Department. The 
Committee feel that the setting up of common facility for Medical Device Industry 
would play major role i n promotion of medical device industry in the country. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the Department should take 
concrete steps in coordination with State/UT Government concerned to implement 
this sub scheme effectively.   The steps to be taken by the Department should 
involve a dedicated infrastructure with free or nearly free land, easy access to low 
cost finances and technological assistance as without these basic ingredients, it is 
not possible to motivate any entrepreneur to set up new  business in a sector 
where imports have a lower cost in general. The Department should also pursue 
with the Ministry of Finance to increase budgetary allocation for this scheme 
keeping in mind the priority of medical devices industry for the health sector . The 
Department shall also take up this matter at the highest level with the Ministry of 
Finance and this recommendation made by the Committee should be conveyed to 
Finance Ministry for necessary action at its level. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 The sub-scheme termed as “Assistance to Medical Device Industry for 
Common Facility Centre” is a Central Sector Scheme under the umbrella scheme 
for Development of Pharmaceutical Industry. The total size of the above sub -
scheme was Rs.100 Crores for 2018 -2020. The sub-scheme proposed to provide 
a one -time grant -in-aid to the tune of Rs. 25 Crore or 70% of the project cost, 
whichever is less, to be released for creation of identified infrastructure and 
common facilities to a State Implementing Agency (SIA) set u p for the 
purpose.  The purpose of the grant was to render the financial assistance for 
establishment of common facilities in any upcoming Medical Device Parks 
promoted by State Governments/State Corporations. 
However, it was realized that creation of comm on facilities requires much 
more investment and the Department proposed revision of the existing sub -
scheme. The revised sub -scheme is termed as “Promotion of Medical Device 
Parks” with an outlay of Rs. 400 Crore for financing 4 medical device parks from 
financial year 2020-21 to 2024-25. 
The revised sub-scheme will provide grant-in-aid to 4 Medical Device Parks 
with a maximum limit of Rs. 100 Crore or 70% of the project cost of Common 
Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is less.   In case of Hilly States a nd North East 
Region, the grant -in-aid would be Rs. 100 Crore per Park or 90%    of the project 
cost of Common Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is less.  The Scheme would be 
implemented through a State Implementing Agency (SIA) to be formed by the 

32 
 
concerned State Government.   The Scheme has been approved by the Union 
Cabinet on 20.03.2020.   The detailed guidelines of the scheme are under 
preparation. For allocation of sufficient funds, the Department will take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Finance at the appropriate time. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 6 
  
PRADHAN MANTRI BHARTIYA JANAUSHADI PARIYOJANA (PMBJP) 
  
           The Committee note that the  Department of Pharmaceuticals has launched 
a Scheme called “Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP)” with 
the objective of making quality generic medicines available at affordable prices to 
all. Presently 6141 PMBJP Kendras are functional across the count ry and out of 
this, 524 PMBJP Kendras are functional in 117 aspirational districts which are 
considered relatively backward 697 districts of the country have been already 
covered and the target has been fixed to cover all districts by 31 st March, 2020. 
The Government of India has requested the State Governments to provide space 
in government hospitals for the opening of Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi 
Kendras (PMBJKs). As on date the product basket of PMBJP comprises of 900 
drugs and 154 surgicals.  (Ref:P4-5/Para2.3). Further, the Committee   are pleased 
to note that the Bureau of Pharma PSUs of India (BPPI) which is the implementing 
agency of Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP), is 
increasing self -sufficiency and reducing dependence on  grants provided by 
Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) as envisaged in the guidelines of the 
scheme. Under the Vision Plan of BPPI the target is to open 1000 more Kendras 
by 31 st March 2024, to enhance basket of medicines up to 2000 drugs and 300 
surgicals, and establishment of an effective IT -enabled logistics and supply -chain 
system for ensuring real -time distribution of medicines at a ll outlets to avoid stock 
outs. Since PMBJP Kendras can play a vital role in providing quality medicines at 
affordable prices, the Committee recommend the following:- 
  
i. Concrete steps should be taken to open more number of PMBJP Kendras 
in all Tehsil (sub districts) of the country with particular emphasis on 
opening PMBJP Kendras in the rural, hilly and remote areas of the country. 
ii. Initiative should be made to open PMBJP Kendras in Primary Health 
Centres and Government hospitals across the country and for this purpose 
State/UT Governments should be impressed upon at the highest level to 
provide free space at PHCs and Governme nt hospitals to open PMBJP 
Kendras in their premises. 
iii. Presently there are four warehouses of BPPI at Gurgaon, Chennai, 
Bengaluru and Guwahati.   Two more are likely to be opened each in 
Western and Central India.   Since the absence of warehouse in each stat e 
may result in longer time for delivery of drugs to PMBJP Kendras, the 

33 
 
Committee recommend that warehouses may be opened in each state for 
timely distribution and delivery of medicines to PMBJP Kendras. 
iv. The feasibility of providing financial assistance to  PMBJP Kendras to 
provide basic infrastructure support to them viz. refrigerators etc. for storing 
the medicines safely in them may be examined for implementation. 
v. The Public Sector Enterprises under the Department viz. KAPL and BCPL 
may be given equal opportunity to sell their products for PMBJP scheme so 
as to enable their successful running with profit and at the same time 
ensuring procurement of quality medicines under the scheme. 
vi. The Department should also examine a better way to compensate the  Jan 
Aushadhi store owners where their compensation could be based on the 
number of medicines sold rather than percentage of the value which is 
already extremely low. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) The recommendation has been noted. The SFC for the period till 2024 -25 has 
approved additional incentives for PMBJP kendras opened in inspirational districts 
(backward districts), in Himalayan and Island territories and North-Eastern States.   
  
(ii)  The State/ UT governments have been requested at various levels up to the 
level of Hon’ble Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers for allotment of rent free 
space at prominent place of the PHC/CHC, Civil Hospitals for opening of 
Janaushadhi Kendras. Further, B PPI has entered MoUs with various State 
Governments like Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, Meghalaya, Maharashtra etc. for 
opening of Janaushadhi Kendra in Primary Health Centers and Government 
hospitals. As a result of these efforts, 919 PMBJP kendras have been o pened 
inside government hospitals/premises till 20.05.2020. 
  
(iii)   In addition to the warehouses of BPPI for supporting end-to-end supply chain 
system, 34 Distributors in various states/UTs are also serving the purpose of 
distribution of medicines to PMBJP Kendras across the country. These distributors 
maintain their individual warehouses and keep required inventory.   Any kendras 
has option to either directly place order to BPPI or procure from the distributors.  
  
(iv)The SFC for the financial year 2020 -2021 to 2024 -2025 has approved 
additional financial one time grantsof Rs 2 lakhs for basic infrastructure, viz., 
furniture, fixtures & IT infrastructure for PMBJK opened in aspirational districts 
(backward districts), in Himalayan, Island territories and North-Eastern States. The 
same additional incentive is available to stores opened by women entrepreneur, 
Divyang, SC and ST entrepreneurs.  
  
(v) BPPI is a society formed by Pharma PSUs and their MDs are members of the 
Governing Council. BPPI procures medi cines through open e -tendering on the 
Central Public Procurement (CPP) portal from WHO -GMP certified drug 
manufacturers. There is no restriction on Public Sector Enterprises under the 
Department as well as private companies for participation in tenders of BPPI. For 
effective supplies, BPPI enters in to Rate Contract with the Private companies and 

34 
 
Public Sector Enterprises under the Department viz. KAPL, BCPL, etc.at 
competitive rates, wherever feasible. 
 
(vi)  The SFC for the financial year 2020-2021 to 2024 -2025has enhanced 
incentive up to Rs. 5.00 lakh @ 15% of monthly purchase made subject to a 
ceiling of Rs 15,000/- per month. Further, additional one time grant of Rs 2 lakhs is 
also to be provided for stores opened in backward areas.  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 7 
SCHEME FOR DEVELOPMENT OF PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY 
             The Committee note that the Department has an umbrella scheme namely 
‘Scheme for Development of Pharmaceutical Industry’. Its objective is to increase 
the efficiency and competitiveness of domestic pharmaceutical industry so as to 
enable them to play a lead role in the global market and to ensure accessibility, 
availability and affordability of quality pharmaceuticals of mass consumption. This 
scheme is a Central Sector Sc heme (CSS) with a total financial outlay of Rs. 480 
crore for a three year period starting from 2017 -18 to 2019 -20 and comprises of 
the following five sub-schemes:- (a) Cluster Development  Programme for Pharma 
Sector (CDP-PS) (renamed as Assistance to Pharmaceutical Industry for Common 
Facilities); (b)Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common Facility Centre; 
(c)         Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility Centre;(d) 
Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS); and (e) 
Pharmaceutical Promotion and Development Scheme. The Department admitted 
that despite the best efforts made by the Government, the sub scheme ‘Assistance 
to Pharma Industry for Common Facilities’ under the umbrella scheme 
“Development of Pharmaceut ical Industry” did not receive a good response in 
2017-18, 2018 -2019 and 2019 -2020. For the sub -scheme “Assistance to Bulk 
Drug Industry for Common Facility Centre”, “Assistance to Medical Device Industry 
for Common Facility Centre” and “Pharmaceutical Tec hnology Upgradation 
Assistance Scheme (PTUAS) only token amount was sanctioned during the 
period. The Department has now received proposals from the State Governments 
for setting up Common Facility Centres under these two sub -schemes and in -
principle appro vals have also been given for setting up of these Centres.   Since 
the Department requires budgetary allocation for implementation of these sub -
schemes, the Department had sought   an amount of Rs. 144.01 crore from the 
Ministry of Finance for the implementa tion of Umbrella Scheme of “Development 
of Pharmaceuticals Industry” during 2020 -21 but only Rs. 42.05 crore has been 
provided to the Department.  
  
             The Committee note that during the last 3 year that is 2017 -18, 2018-19 
and 2019 -20 the Depart ment has been allocated 12.03 crore, 4.00 crore & 3.49 
crore respectively as Revised Estimate allocation.   Out of this the percentage 
utilisation was only 15.18%, 70.25% and 77.07% respectively.   Though the 
percentage utilisation has increased over a perio d of time but the Department is 
unable to utilise 100% allocation. The Committee also note that for the year 2020 -
21 the Department has been allocated Rs. 42.05 crore against their demand of 
Rs.144.01 crore.  Though the allocation has increased substantial ly by Rs. 38.56 
crore as compared to last year Revised Estimate figures, but the Department has 

35 
 
asked for more allocation that is Rs. 144.01 crore for implementation of the 
umbrella scheme of Development of Pharma Industries.  The Committee hope that 
the D epartment would be able utilise their initial allocation and ask for more 
allocation in the Supplementary Demand For Grants (2020 -21) by reflecting their 
good physical and financial progress. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the committee has been noted. The department would do 
its best to utilise the funds allocated initially to it and to seek more funds by 
showing good progress. 
RECOMMENDATION NO 10 
 
CONSUMER AWARENESS, PUBLICITY AND PRICE MONITORING SCHEME 
 
             The Committee note that the sub -scheme of Consumer Awareness, 
Publicity and Price Monitoring (CAPPM) has two components viz. Price Monitoring 
and Consumer Awareness and Publicity.   Under the first component, Price 
Monitoring and Resource Units (PMRUs) are set up in Stats/UTs.   The primary 
function of PMRUs is to assist NPPA in price monitoring, detection of violation of 
the provisions of DPCO, pricing compliance, ensuring availability of medicines and 
consumer awareness. They are also responsible for collection , compilation and 
analysis of market -based data of scheduled as well as non -scheduled 
formulations. Eleven Price Monitoring and Resource Units (PMRUs) have so far 
been set up in States of Kerala, Gujarat, Odisha, Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, 
Tripura, Nagala nd, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh and Mizoram. Six more 
PMRUs are targeted to be set up during 2020 -21 (Ref: Para 4.28 Chapter -
IV).  The Committee note that during the year 2019 -20 Rs 4.00 crore was 
allocated at both BE and RE stages under this scheme from  which Rs. 2.00 crore 
was for opening PMRUs and another Rs 2.00 crore was for publicity and 
consumer awareness campaigns. The allocation has been increased slightly to Rs 
4.50 crore for 2020 -21. However, the Committee observe that during 2019 -20, 
NPPA could utilise only Rs. 2.32 crore approx. till 18.2.2020.   Out of which only 
0.59 crore was spent on consumer awareness and publicity purpose.   This shows 
that NPPA is unable to utilise even the meagre sum of Rs. 2.00 crore for 
consumer awareness and publicity . The Committee while taking note that the 
allocation of Rs. 4.50 crore for the year 2020 -21 is quite nominal for both the 
components viz. PMRUs and consumer awareness and publicity purpose have 
their apprehension that the Department would be able to fully  utilize this meagre 
amount. The Committee is deeply concerned that on the one hand the 
Government is committed to provide low cost health services for all citizens, while 
on the other hand, the pharmaceutical companies continue to charge extremely 
high pr ices even for the routine medicines.   While the physical ‘offerings’ by the 
Government are extremely promising (Jan Aushadhi Yojana, Pradhan Mantri 
Swasthya Suraksh Yojana, etc.), the consumers have to be educated in an 
aggressive manner.  This requires large volume of funds as these funds will have 
a huge impact on the well -being of the citizens of the country. The Committee, 
therefore recommend that the Department should augment their scheme 
of Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring (CAPPM) by  optimum 
utilization of funds for both the components i.e.  PMRUs and consumer awareness 

36 
 
and publicity and thereafter seek for additional allocation in their Supplementary 
Demand for Grants 2020 -21.  Further the Committee recommend that 
Department   and NPP A should take active steps to open PMRUs in all 37 
States/UTs in a time bound manner so that the hands of NPPA are strengthened 
and is empowered to monitor the quality and standards of the drugs sold in the 
market across the country. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As per the revised target for the year 2019 -20, PMRUs have been set up in total 
12 States/ UTs, viz., Kerala, Gujarat, Odisha, Rajasthan, Haryana, Nagaland, 
Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Mizoram and Jammu & Kashmir. 
There are two components of CAPPM scheme viz. (i) ‘Grant in Aid General to 
PMRU’ and (ii) ‘Advertising and Publicity’ with Budget Estimate (B.E.) of Rs. 2/ - 
Crore each (Total B.E. of Rs. 4/ - Crore). During the F.Y. 2019 -20 the position of 
BE, RE and actual expenditure i ncurred under each component of CAPPM 
scheme is mentioned as below: 
  
(Rs. In crore) 
Sl. No. Particulars BE RE Amount Utilization 
Incurred % 
1 Grant in Aid General to 
PMRU 
2.00 2.00 2.00 (100%) 
2 Advertising and Publicity 2.00 2.00* *100% Approx. 
  
In view of the above the NPPA was able to utilise almost 100% amount 
under both the components of CAPPM Scheme for the F.Y. 2019-20. 
  
Keeping in view the utilisation of Budget of Rs. 4 crore during the F.Y. 
2020-21, the allocation of budget of Rs. 4.5 cro re for the F.Y. 2020 -21 is justified 
as with the current setup of 12 PMRUs and target to set -up additional six (6) 
PMRUs in the States/UTs during the F.Y. 2020-21 the activities will be increased. 
  
The suggestion of the Committee to take active steps for setting up of 
PMRUs in all the States/ UTs in a time bound manner is well noted.  
  

37 
 
 
 CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 11 
 
DISINVESTMENT OF PROFIT MAKING PHARMA PSUS 
  
            The Committee are concerned to note that out of five Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs) under the Department of Pharmaceuticals, Karnataka 
Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals (KAPL) and Bengal Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals 
Ltd. (BCPL) are profit making PSUs.   The Government has decided for strategic 
sale of BCPL and strategic disinvestment of 100% Government of India equity in 
KAPL.  As regards BCPL, Hon’ble High Court of Kolkata set aside the decision of 
its strategic sale.  Now an appeal has been made before the Division bench of the 
Court.  The Department of Pharma ceuticals opposed the strategic disinvestment 
of KAPL as the company is profit making and has been assigned the responsibility 
of being the sole manufacturer of Oxytocin for domestic consumption.   This matter 
of sole Oxytocin production rights to KAPL is p resently sub-judice in the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court.  The Committee are perturbed to note the decision of NITI Aayog 
to sell/ disinvest these two profit making PSUs of this priority sector which is 
concerning the health of huge population of this vast country.  Entirely leaving drug 
manufacturing at the hands of private sector may not be a prudent step as these 
PSUs may provide required quantity of essential medicines at affordable prices at 
times of needs particularly during epidemic and pandemic outbreak of 
diseases.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the decision for the 
strategic sale/ disinvestment of KAPL and BCPL should be revisited by the 
Government in the public interest.   The Committee should be informed of the 
action taken in this matter.  This recommendation of the Committee should also be 
sent to NITI Aayog for its specific reply within three months. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
  The recommendation of the Committee was forwarded earlier to MoF 
(DIPAM) and NITI Aayog on 14.02.2020 for reconsideration of the decision of 
strategic sale of KAPL and BCPL. Further, as directed by the Committee, the 
matter is again being taken up with NITI Aayog/ Ministry of Finance for 
reconsideration of strategic sale of profit making  PSUs. 
 
  
 COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 

39 
 
  

40 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATION NO 8 
 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHARMACEUTICAL EDUCATIONAL AND 
RESEARCH (NIPER) 
  
              The Committee note that there are seven NIPERs at Mohali, Guwahati, 
Ahmedabad, Hajipur, Raebareli, Kolkata and Hyderabad. Out of these only 
NIPER-Mohali, which was established in 1998, is fully operational and others 
which were operational since 2007 -08 are functioning only with the help of Ment or 
Institutes. These new NIPERs are lacking infrastructure and regular academic and 
other staff.  The Department had made additional demand of Rs 300.00 crore for 
NIPERs during 2019-20 but only Rs.10.00 crore was added at RE stage as  token 
supplementary fu nd after re -appropriation from matching savings from another 
scheme to make the total allocation to Rs 160 crore from Rs. 150.00 c rore at BE 
stage in 2019 -20. The Committee note that an amount of Rs. 450.00 crore was 
sought for the Scheme of NIPERs by the Department for the year 2020 -
21.  However, the Department submitted that only Rs. 202.45 crore has been 
allocated, which will affect the implementation of the various activities of the 
NIPERs particularly the construction of campuses for NIPERs. In this re gard, the 
Committee note that the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting held 
on 26.03.2018 recommended for continuation and strengthening of the existing six 
NIPERs, namely, Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Hajipur, Kolkata and 
Raebareli during  the period 2017 -18 to 2019 -20 at a total cost of Rs. 959.53 
crore.  However, the construction of 90% of campus of NIPER, Guwahati has only 
been achieved during the period.   EFC also allocated Rs. 465 crore for equipping 
the laboratories of the six existin g NIPERs. The EFC also recommended that 
setting up of the proposed four new NIPERs at Madurai and in the states of 
Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan be deferred. It suggested that the same 
may be reviewed in the year 2020 by the Department during the  Fifteenth Finance 
Commission period (2020 -25). The Department is in the process of preparing a 
fresh EFC proposal for the existing and newly proposed NIPERs seeking sufficient 
funds for construction of their campuses, equipping the laboratories as well as  
other administrative and academic expenses. It will seek funds as proposed/ 
approved under the fresh EFC. The Committee are dismayed to note that the 
proposal for the purchase of equipment for NIPERs has been deferred till the 
approval of the fresh EFC pr oposal beyond March, 2020.The Committee note that 
the NIPERs have been set up as Institutes of National Importance but the 
inordinate delay in allocation of requisite amount of fund since their inception is 
ruining the purpose for which these Institutes we re set up.   The Committee 
therefore strongly recommend that the Government look into this matter on priority 
basis and make adequate budget allocations for these institutes to construct 

41 
 
building infrastructure, upgrade their laboratories and appoint regula r staff and 
faculty. 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  Department has sent a EFC Note to the  Department of Expenditure 
seeking funds of Rs. 4300.00 crore to set up regular campuses of all NIPERs 
(Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Hajipur, Raebareli, Jhalawar, Nagpur, New 
Raipur and Bengaluru) Centres of Excellen ce at three NIPERs (Mohali, 
Ahmedabad & Hyderabad) to have well equipped laboratories and Product 
Development Centres at each NIPER etc. More than 50% of the posts sanctioned 
by Department of Expenditure have already been filled -up by NIPERs.   The 
remaining will be filled up shortly after restrictions imposed due to COVID 19 are 
lifted.  
RECOMMENDATION NO 9 
 
NATIONAL PHARMACEUTICAL PRICING AUTHORITY (NPPA) 
  
            The Committee note that the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA), was established through a Government of India resolution dated 29th 
August , 1997 as an independent body of experts for price control of essential and 
life saving medicines. NPPA  is an attached office of the Department of 
pharmaceuticals and implements the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy 
2012 and the Drugs (Prices Control) Orders as amended from time to time which 
were issued by the Department. The Committee note that Nati onal 
Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012 (NPPP, 2012) has the objective to put in 
place a regulatory framework for pricing of drugs so as to ensure availability of 
required medicines – “essential medicines” at reasonable prices even while 
providing suffic ient opportunity for innovation and competition to support the 
growth of pharma industry, thereby meeting the goals of employment and shared 
economic well -being for all. In pursuance to the NPPP -2012, the Drugs (Prices 
Control) Order, 2013 (DPCO -2013) was made to regulate the prices of 
medicines.  In this regard, the Committee note that the NPPA regulates 19 to 20 
percent of drugs prices based on market averages. But for the remaining non -
scheduled drugs which are almost 80 percent, companies are free to fix price as 
per market dynamics and their annual price cannot increase more than 10 percent. 
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that ambit of scheduled drugs 
should be increased so that NPPA can control the prices of more drugs. The 
Committee also recommend that NPPA should monitor effectiv ely to ensure that 
the annual price increase shall not increase more than 10% and strict action 
should be taken against those drug manufacturing companies which increase the 
price of medicines beyond 10%. National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority capped 
the Trade Margin of all the non -scheduled formulations of select 30 Anti -Cancer 
drugs (42 molecules) as recommended by Expert Committee of Ministry of Health 

42 
 
& Family Welfare, under the ‘Trade margin Rationalization Approach’ and as a 
result, a the total 526  brands of these medicines have shown reduction in MRP. 
The Committee while appreciating the policy of Trade Margin Rationalization 
(TMR) as a forward step in the direction of making branded medicines affordable 
to poor and deprived patients, recommend tha t the Department in coordination 
with NPPA should extend the benefits of TMR to more non -scheduled drugs and 
medical devices and the action taken in this regard should be conveyed to the 
Committee. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  (i) The National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM) is issued by the Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW). The Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) 
includes the formulations in schedule -I of the DPCO, 2013 which are called 
scheduled formulations by adopting the medicine listed i n the NLEM. The NPPA 
fixes the ceiling prices of scheduled formulations listed in Schedule -I of the DPCO. 
A Standing National Committee on Medicines (SNCM) has been constituted by the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in July, 2018 to review and revise t he National 
list of Essential Medicines (NLEM) by way of additions and deletions in the existing 
NLEM in the context of contemporary knowledge of use of therapeutic products in 
health & hygiene of general public. 
(ii) During stakeholder consultation with v arious pharma associations on the issue 
of trade margin capping, the associations representing pharma MSMEs have 
conveyed their opposition to bringing any ceilings on trade margins saying that it 
will be detrimental to the MSMEs. Covid Pandemic and lockdow n measures have 
already impacted these MSMEs adversely. In such a scenario, DoP is not 
proposing to bring TMR at present. 
  
 (iii) The ceiling price fixed by the NPPA is applicable across the board. The ceiling 
price are also to be followed in medicines supplied / sold by the hospitals. 
  
 (iv) The issue regarding 'hospitals charging patients for medicines which are 
never administered' at recommendation 9 (para 4.28 of Chapter IV) has been 
referred to MoHFW on 29.05.2020 by Department of Pharmaceuticals as desired 
by the Committee. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 
 
SETTLEMENT OF LIABILITIES OF CLOSED PHARMA PSUS 
 
            The Committee also note that the Government is in the process of settling 
the liabilities including payment of dues to employees of closed PSUs under the 
Department viz Indian Drugs& Pharmaceuticals Ltd. (IDPL), Hindustan Antibiotics 

43 
 
Ltd (HAL) and Rajasthan Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL) through sale 
of their movable and immovable properties.   Since this is a time consuming 
process, the Government has approved a budgetary support to the tune of Rs. 
330.35 crore as loan to these three PSUs for sett ling pending salaries/ VRS dues 
of their employees.  Out of total sanction of Rs. 230.15 crore to HAL, Department 
has released only Rs. 116.30 crore to HAL on 30.12.2019.   RDPL was provided 
the entire sanctioned loan of Rs. 43.70 crore.   It is understood t hat IDPL is yet to 
be given its sanctioned loan of Rs. 6.50 crore.   Since it is very much necessary to 
settle the salaries/VRS dues of these three closed PSUs, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should release entire amount of loan sanctioned 
to HAL and IDPL for the purpose within a definite period of time.   The Committee 
further note that during the year 2020 -21 an amount to the tune of Rs. 7.18 crore 
has been allocated.   The Committee have their doubt that this meagre amount of 
Rs. 7.18 crore wou ld be able to settle pending salaries/VRS dues of the 
employees of the above mentioned PSUs.   The Committee therefore recommend 
to revisit this allocation to ensure that all employees get their salary/VRS dues in 
time. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 All funds as sanctioned/ allocated by the Ministry of Finance in respect of PSUs 
during the year 2019 -20, were released (Rs.4.28 crores to IDPL, Rs.280.16 crore 
to HAL and Rs.48.71 crores to RDPL). The request for additional allocation apart 
from the BE of Rs. 7.18 crore provided in the current Financial year 2020 -21 shall 
be taken up with them on priority basis. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;       KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
       Chairperson 
8 February, 2021     Standing Committee on  
19 Magha, 1942 (Saka)     Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
*** 
 
 
 
  

44 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2019 -20) ON DEMAND FOR GRANTS 
(2020-21) OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS). 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 12 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 2,3,4,5,6,7,11,13  and 14 )   
8 
 
Percentage of Total 66.66% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil)   
Nil 
 
Percentage of Total 0.0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-   
 (Vide Recommendation No.  Nil )   
1 
Percentage of Total 8.33% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 8,9,10 and 12) 
3 
 
Percentage of Total 25.00% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

45 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE    FIRST SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 12th October, 2020 from 1100 hrs. to 1145hrs. 
in Committee Room  ‘B’,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
 
  Ms. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2. Shri Deepak Baij 
3. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
4. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
5. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
6. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
8. Shri Indra Hang Subba 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri  M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
10. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
11. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
12. Shri Arun Singh 
13. Shri A.D. Singh 
14. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
15. shri K. Vanlalvena 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora  - Officer on Special Duty (LSS) 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava - Director 
3. Shri Panna Lal   -  Under Secretary  
 
 
 
Session I  
 
XXXX    XXXX    XXXX     
Session-II  
 
  XXXX    XXXX   XXXX 

46 
 
 
2. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption of following draft 
Action Taken Reports: 
(i) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019 -20 (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals); 
(ii) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019 -20 (Department of 
Fertilizers); 
(iii) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019 -20 (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals); 
(iv) Action Taken Report on Study of System of Fertilizer Subsidy (Department 
of Fertilizers). 
(v) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals); 
(vi) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 (Department of 
Fertilizers); 
(vii) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals). 
 
3. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Action Taken Report(s) 
unanimously without any change/amendments.  The Committee also authorized the 
Chairperson for finalize and present the Action Taken Reports to the Parliament. 
4. The Committee also decided to hold its next sitting tentatively in the second week 
of November, 2020. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________
XXXX matters not related to this report. 
 

47 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 