1 
 
 
1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2019-20) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF  PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the  Fifty Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  on " Pricing of Drugs with Special Reference to Drugs (Prices 
Control) Order, 2013” (Department of  Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
 
 
 
  FIRST REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
   DECEMBER, 2019 /AGRAHAYANA, 1941 (SAKA) 
  


2 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2019-20) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT  PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Fifty Forth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha)  on "Pricing of Drugs with Special Reference to Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 2013” 
(Department of  Pharmaceuticals) 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 05 December 2019 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 05 December 2019 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2019 /AGRAHAYANA, 1941 (SAKA) 
 
  


3 
 
 
 
 
 CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20) (iv) 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
Chapter I Report  1 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
8 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government' s  
replies 
18 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee  
23 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
24 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of fifth Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2019-20) held on 13.11.2019. 
 26 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-fourth Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers on  "Pricing of Drugs with Special Reference 
to Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 2013" pertaining to the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) 
 28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2019-20) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
4 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
5 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
6 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
7 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
8 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
9 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
10 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
11 Shri M. Selvaraj 
12 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
13 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
14 Shri Nandigam Suresh 
15 Shri Er. Bishweswar Tudu 
16 Shri H. Vasanthakumar 
17 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
18 Dr. Vishnu Prasad M.K. 
19 Shri Deepak Baij  
20 Dr. Manoj Rajoria 
21 Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Ranjib Biswal 
23 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar  
24 Dr. Anil Jain 
25 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
 
26 Shri Amar Singh 
27 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
28 Vacant 
29 Vacant 
30 Vacant 
31 Vacant 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora    -  Officer on Special Duty 
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava    -  Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram   -  Additional Director 
4.          Ms  Sonia Sankhla                              -           Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
  
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 (2019-2020) having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their 
behalf, present this First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Fifty-Fourth  
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(2018-19) on the subject "Pricing of Drugs with Special Reference to Drugs (Prices 
Control) Order, 2013" pertaining to the Department of  Pharmaceuticals. 
 
2. The Fifty-Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to  Lok Sabha on 13.02.2019.  The Action 
Taken replies of Government to all observations / recommendations contained in the 
Report were received on 27.09.2019.  The Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2018- 2019) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
13.11.2019. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the First Report  
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Comments of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report - Chapter-I.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                          KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI  
 25 November,  2019                                                                                  Chairperson 
04 Agrahayana, 1941 (Saka)                                     Standing Committee on 
              Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
 

REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations containe d in the  
Fifty-Fourth Report  (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject 'Pricing of Drugs 
with Special Reference to Drugs (Prices Control) Order,2013' was presented to Lok Sabh a 
and Rajya Sabha on 13 February, 2019.  In all, the Committee made  9 (nine)  Observations 
/ Recommendations in the Report. 
2.  Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
were requested to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations cont ained in the 
Fifty-Fourth Report within three months from the date of presentation of th e Report, i.e. by 
13 May,2019.  The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect o f all the nine (09 ) 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report have been rece ived from the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) vide their OM No.  
31026/07/2019-Pricing dated 27 September, 2019. These Replies ha ve been categorized 
as follows:- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
 Sl. Nos. 4.1, 4.2, 4.4, 4.7 & 4.8                                         (Total =05)                  
 These are included in Chapter II of the Report. 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursu e 
in view of the Government’s reply :- 
 Sl. Nos. 4.3 and 4.6                                                      (Total = 02) 
 These are included in Chapter-III of the Report 
 (iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Governme nt   
have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
 Sl. Nos. 4.5 and 4.9                                                                              (Total = 02)  
         These are included in Chapter IV of the  Report. 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 
 
   Nil                                            (Total=Nil )  
 These are included in Chapter V of the Report. 

2 
 
3. The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report should be furnished e xpeditiously 
and not later than three months from the date of presentation of this Report. 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations which  still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4.2) 
 
5. The Committee in their 54th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had observed / recommended 
as under:- 
 "The Committee are not in agreement with the nomenclature of “National List of 
Essential Medicines”. Every medicine/drug is essential to treat a particular disease/ailment. 
When a person is affected by any disease/ailment, particular medicine becomes essential to 
treat that disease/ailment and as such every medicine is essential from the co ntext of 
treating the disease for which it is formulated. The Committee, therefore, feel that th e 
present nomenclature of NLEM is not appropriate and recommend that the  same may be 
reviewed and the present nomenclature may suitably be modified." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
6. In reply to the aforementioned observations / recommendation of the Committ ee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
"The concept of essential medicines, first introduced by WHO in 1977, has n ow 
been adopted by many countries, non-governmental organizations and  international non-
profit supply agencies. The list is considered to include the most cost-effective me dicines 
for a particular indication. It is developed in concordance with the standard treatme nt 
guidelines keeping in mind the healthcare needs of the majority of the po pulation. Careful 
selection of a limited range of essential medicines results in a higher quality of care, 
better management of medicines and more cost-effective use of health resources. The list 
of essential medicines guides the hospital drug policies, procurement and  supply of 
medicines in public sector, medicine cost reimbursement and medicine donations. It helps 
in monitoring the pricing of medicines. The list serves as a reference document for correct 
dosage form and strength for prescribing. Preference is given to single drug formulations 
as opposed to fixed dose combinations where appropriate. Hence use o f National List of 
Essential Medicines (NLEM) is expected to improve prescribing practices as well a s the 
health outcomes. The appropriate use of medicines selected in the NLEM p romotes 
rational use of medicines. Such rational use of medicines, especially antim icrobial drugs, 
reduces development of drug resistance. The list also serves as a reference for  
assessing the healthcare access of the populace. Lastly, NLEM serves as a tool for public 
education and training of healthcare providers. The Hon ’ble Committee is, therefore, 
requested that the present nomenclature, may continue to be u sed since it is 
internationally recognized. 
Further, the Standing National Committee on Medicines (SNCM) agrees with the 
spirit and sentiments expressed by the Hon ’ble Parliament Standing Committee that 
every medicine is essential to treat particular disease/ailment. The example include:- 

3 
 
 
*  Medicines used for conditions such as Gaucher disease (enzyme replacement  
therapy), myasthenia gravis (pyridostigmine) etc. However, these conditions are rare in 
nature and will be required in very few patients in the country. 
  
*  Several fixed dose combinations that are available in the country and a re very 
openly prescribed, such as combination of several vitamins, analgesics, anti-
hypertensives etc. More than one analgesic or antihypertensive medicine may be 
required for some patients but not for the majority. 
 
 The essential medicines list is the list of the drugs which caters to the majori ty of 
the population of a country. It is prepared in a country specific manner, depe nding on the 
disease prevalence in that region, and helps prepare policies of the country. 
 
 NLEM, 2015 was prepared considering the public health problems in India an d 
adhering to the basic problems of efficacy, safety, cost-effectiveness. This essential list 
included the medicines which should be useful in majority of the population  and depends 
on the prevalence data of various diseases in the country. It is expected th at such 
medicines will be available in good quality at all times at an afforda ble price. This list is 
not exhaustive but is limited to serve the above-said purpose. It could be called as a best-
fit list. 
 
 In India, the NLEM was prepared initially in 1996 and later revised in 2003, 2011 
and 2015. NLEM, 2015 was prepared after several nationwide consultations with experts 
in different subjects, NGOs and other stakeholders. The potential uses of NLE M include 
but are not limited to procurement by Government agencies, price fixing by Nat ional 
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority, prescribing by doctors, economizing and opti mizing the 
health care resources. 
 
 The NLEM in no way undermines the importance of any drug which may be 
useful/life saving for limited number of patients. There is a separate li st of life saving drugs 
by Ministry of  
 
Health & Family Welfare (M/o H&FW) and a separate policy for drugs for rare  diseases is 
being drafted." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. In regard to the Committees ’ recommendation to review the present 
nomenclature of National List of essential Medicines so as to include more and more 
medicines, the Committee note the reply given by the Ministry that the National List 
of Essential Medicines in no way undermines the importance of any drug which may  
be useful/ life saving for limited number of patients and that there is a separate lis t of 
life saving drugs by the Ministry of Health &Family Welfare.  Further, a separate 

4 
 
policy for drugs for rare diseases is being drafted. While accepting the reply of the 
government in this regard the Committee recommends that this policy for drugs for 
rare diseases may be drafted expeditiously and adopted in a time bound manner. 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4.5) 
 
8. The Committee in their 54 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had observed / recommended 
as under:- 
 "The Committee note that the Ministry of Health and Family welfare has con stituted a 
Standing National committee on Medicines to review and revise the National L ist of 
essential Medicines (NLEM). There are 23 Members in the Committee representing various 
Health and family welfare sectors. One representative is from the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals but there is no representation for NPPA in the committee . Even though a 
representative from NPPA will be a special invitee for the meetings of the Committe e, 
permanent representation has not been given to NPPA. NPPA is entrusted with the 
responsibility of fixation and revision of prices of scheduled formulations under drugs (Prices 
control) order and also responsible for monitoring and enforcing drug prices in the country. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that permanent representation should be  given to 
NPPA in the Core Committee." 
 
Reply of the Government 
9. In reply to the aforementioned observations / recommendation of the Committ ee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under :- 
 
" A Standing National Committee on Medicines and other Health Care Products 
(SNCM&HCP) has already been constituted by the Ministry of Health & Family W elfare to 
review and revise the NLEM. It is submitted that as per Order dated 03/07/2018 (Annexure -
I), a representative of NPPA has been made a special invitee. The Member S ecretary 
(NPPA) and Director, NPPA are attending the meetings of the aforesaid co mmittee as 
special invitees. " 
 
Comments of the Committee 
10.   Since the representative of the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) is only a special invitee in the Standing National Committee on Medicines 
which is empowered to review and revise the National List of Essential M edicines 
(NLEM), the Committee specifically recommended that permanent representation 
should be given to NPPA in the Committee.  In this regard, the reply given by the 
Ministry that the Standing National Committee on Medicines and other Health Care 

5 
 
Products has already been constituted and that a representative of the NPPA has 
been made a special invitee is not acceptable to the Committee.  Since NPPA is 
entrusted with the responsibility of fixing prices of drugs, monitoring and 
enforcement of prices for the entire country, the Committee reiterate the earlier 
recommendation that permanent representation should be given to NPPA in the 
Standing National Committee on Medicines. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4.7) 
11. The Committee in their 54 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had observed / recommended 
as under:- 
 "The Committee are satisfied to note that the total number of schedu led formulations 
have increased from 530 under NLEM 2011 to 851 under NLEM 201 5. It is also heartening 
to note that ceiling prices of 370 scheduled formulations under NLEM 2011 which witnessed 
0 to 30% decrease with respect to maximum price has increased to 670 formulations under 
NLEM 2015. However, the number of scheduled formulations which witnessed 3 5-40 
percentage and above 40 percentage reduction with respect to maximum p rice have 
reduced from 34 to 24 and 126 to 59 under NLEMs 2011 and 201 5, respectively. The 
clarification provided by the Department in this regard that the reduction in these ca ses are 
limited while refixing the ceiling price of the common formulations un der NLEMs 2011 and 
2015 is not satisfactory. The Committee recommend that the Government sho uld take all 
necessary steps to bring more number of formulations under these two cate gories so that 
overall prices of drugs in the country are affordable to people particularly to poor people." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
12. In reply to the aforementioned observations / recommendation of the Committ ee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under :- 
 
 " The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (M/o H&FW) notifies the National 
List of Essential Medicines. As per the NPPP, 2012, all the medicines s pecified in the 
National List of Essential Medicines are included in the First Schedule of DPCO, 201 3 and 
brought under price control.  Under the DPCO, 2013, prices of drugs are fix ed on ‘Market 
based pricing’ methodology which is in accordance with the NPPP, 2012. Since the prices 
of drugs are fixed on ‘Market based pricing ’, the number of formulations witnessing 
reduction by a particular percentage cannot be controlled or determined by  the 
Government."  
 
Comments of the Committee 
13. The Committee note the reply given by the Ministry that there is no provision in 
the Drug Prices Control Order, 2013 regarding cancellation of license of 

6 
 
manufacturers or retailers who indulges in overcharging.  There is also no provision 
under the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 & Rules, 1945 regarding cancellation of 
licenses of the manufacturers who do not deposit the demanded amount within the 
prescribed time limit given by NPPA.  While understanding the constraint being faced 
by the Government in this regard, the Committee recommend that relevant provisions 
of DPCO, 2013 and Drugs & Cosmetics Act 1940 and its Rules should be revisited by 
the Ministry and necessary action should be taken for the amendment of these 
Orders/Acts/Rules so as to make these provisions more stringent and effective. 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4.9) 
 
14. The Committee in their 54 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) had observed / recommended 
as under:- 
 "The Committee are constrained to note that presently National 
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) has only a part-time member apart  from the 
chairperson. NPPA is entrusted with the responsibility of enforcing the Drugs (Prices 
control) order and to monitor availability of drugs in the country, identify sh ortages 
and to take remedial steps thereon. In the absence of even a full ti me member and a 
strong management team, the Committee are skeptical that the authority wil l be able 
to carry out its functions effectively. The Committee are of the view that the current 
composition of the authority needs to be expanded to include more f ull time expert 
members so that the administrative efficiency of the organization is enha nced to fulfill 
the mandate of NPPA. Thus, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Composition of NPPA may be reviewed and more full time members may be 
appointed. " 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
15. In reply to the aforementioned observations / recommendation of the Committ ee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under :- 
 
 " The issue of restructuring of the NPPA was examined and it has been de cided to 
strengthen the NPPA at lower levels in order to enable it to fulfill its mandat e. Accordingly, 
NPPA has been asked to prepare a proposal for strengthening the NPPA at lower levels."  
 
Comments of the Committee 
16. The Committee are constrained to note that the reply furnished by the Ministry 
has not addressed the main recommendation of the Committee on review of 

7 
 
composition of NPPA and appointment of more full time members. This 
recommendation was made by the Committee based on the submission made by the 
Secretary that three or four full time members are necessary to strengthen NPPA.  
However, the  Ministry has decided to strengthen NPPA only at lower level.  
Presently, apart from Chairman, NPPA has only a Member Secretary and three other 
part time Members.  Since current composition of the authority needs to be expanded 
to include more full time expert members so that the administrative efficiency of the 
organization is enhanced to fulfill the mandate of NPPA, the Committee reiterate the 
earlier recommendation that the composition of NPPA should be reviewed and more 
full time Members may be appointed alongwith the strengthening of NPPA at lower 
levels. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4.1)  
 
 The observations / recommendations of the Committee are as under :-  
 
 " The Committee note that about 70% of medical expenditure in our coun try is 
incumbent on medicines and as such affordability of medicines is a crucial element in 
availing medical treatment by all sections of the people in the country particularly p oor 
people. The Committee, therefore, selected and examined the subject ‘Pricing of drugs with 
special reference to Drug (Price control) order, 2013 on priority basis. DPCO, 2013 w as 
notified on 15.05.2013 under the essential commodities Act and is base d on the broad 
guidelines of the National pharmaceuticals pricing policy, 2012 which aimed at bringing a 
regulatory framework for pricing of drugs so as to ensure availability of required  medicines 
at reasonable prices even while providing sufficient opportunity for in novation and 
competition to support the growth of industry, thereby meeting the goals and shared 
economic well being for all. The Government has dawn a National List of Essential 
Medicines (NLEM), 2015 as first schedule of DPCO, 2013 which was notified on  10 March, 
2016. As per NLEM, the essential medicines are those that satisfy the priority  health care 
needs of the population. The list is made with consideration to disease prevalen ce, efficacy, 
safety and comparative cost-effectiveness of the medicines. All efforts sho uld be made by 
the Union Government in coordination with State Governments to provide medicines to poor 
people at a price affordable to them." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.2  The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Pharmaceuticals is as und er :-  
 
" The National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) has notified ceiling p rices of 
857 formulations contained in schedule - I of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 2013 
(DPCO) to make these formulations affordable. In addition, prices of Cardiac stents, Knee 
Implants and 106 Anti-diabetic and Cardiovascular medicines were notified under paragraph 
19 of the DPCO. The fixation of ceiling prices/MRP has resulted in a total annu al saving of 
Rs. 11,463 crores to the public. Further, recently the NPPA has put a cap on T rade margin 
of select anti-cancer medicines under ‘Trade Margin Rationalization Approach ’ by invoking 
paragraph 19 of the DPCO. This would result in approximate yearly saving of Rs. 98 3 crore 
for the patients. 
 
Further, the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) is running a scheme namely 
“Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana ” (PMBJP) for providing affordable 
medicines to the public. Under this scheme, the target of opening 5000 P MBJP Kendras by 
the end of the financial year 2018- 19 has already been achieved on 05.02.2019. However, 
the target now is to cover all the districts of the country by the end of current financial year.  
 
India is among countries with the highest out of pocket expenses on h ealth care. As 
per analysis of NSSO 2014 data, it is estimated that nearly 70% of Out of Pocket (OP) 

9 
 
expenditure on health is on account of OP care of which expenditure on drugs constitutes 
more than 67% of out of pocket expenditure.  
 
Provision of free drugs in public health facilities can, therefore, bring enorm ous relief 
to people if essential drugs are provided free to all patients visiting p ublic health facilities 
since the cost to Government for procuring generic drugs in bulk is drastically lower than the 
price paid for a branded drug by an individual consumer. Thus, it does no t really cost the 
government very much if essential drugs are provided free to all patients visi ting public 
health facilities, but it brings huge savings to the patients. 
 
Pursuant to the Union budget announcement in 2014, Operational Gu idelines along 
with Model Request For Proposal (RFPs) for implementing the National Health Mission 
(NHM) Free Drug Service Initiative were developed and shared with the State s on 2nd July, 
2015. To nudge State towards adoption of policy to provide free essential ge neric drugs in 
public health facilities, upto 5% additional funding (over and above the normal allocation of 
the state) under the NHM was introduced as an incentive. Advocacy by the  Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare under the National Health Mission was done w ith all the States 
for provision of free essential drugs in all public health facilities under th is initiative. 
Accordingly, all the States/UTs have reported to have notified policy to provide free drugs in 
public health facilities. 
 
Support under the NHM is provided not only for drugs but also for various 
components necessary for effective implementation of Free Drug Service Initiative viz. 
strengthening/setting up robust systems of procurement, quality assurance, IT ba cked 
supply chain management systems like Drugs and Vaccines Distribution Manag ement 
Systems (DVDMS) developed by CDAC, warehousing, prescription audit, grievance 
redressal, Information, Education and Communication (IEC), training, dissemination of 
Standard Treatment Guidelines, etc. The DVDMS provides real-time status of drugs and 
vaccines in different health facilities to help in better planning, execution an d control on 
demand and supply at all the levels thereby avoiding stock outs and wasta ges. A few states 
are also implementing the same through their State enabled IT System.  
 
Based on the National List of Essential Medicines, the indicative number of drugs / 
formulations to be provided at facilities have been provided in the guideline s (District 
Hospitals - 544, Community Health Centres – 455, Primary Health Centres -285 and Sub-
centres – 57). However States have the flexibility to add more. Hence the Essential Drugs 
List (EDL) of States vary from State to State. 
 
The operational Guidelines issued in 2015 provide for procurement of generic drugs, 
prescription of drugs by generic names, training and orientation of Doctors on rational drug 
use and prescription by generic names and also for putting in place a sy stem of prescription 
audit to monitor prescription by generic names as well as rational prescription of drugs." 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department Of Pharmaceuticals)  
O.M. No. 31026/07/2019-Pricing dated 27/09/2019] 
 
 

10 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4.2) 
 
 The observations / recommendations of the Committee are as under :-  
 
 "The Committee are not in agreement with the nomenclature of “National List of 
Essential Medicines”. Every medicine/drug is essential to treat a particular disease/ailment. 
When a person is affected by any disease/ailment, particular medicine becomes essential to 
treat that disease/ailment and as such every medicine is essential from the co ntext of 
treating the disease for which it is formulated. The Committee, therefore, feel that th e 
present nomenclature of NLEM is not appropriate and recommend that the  same may be 
reviewed and the present nomenclature may suitably be modified." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 In reply to the aforementioned observations / recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under :- 
 
"The concept of essential medicines, first introduced by WHO in 1977, has n ow 
been adopted by many countries, non-governmental organizations and international non-
profit supply agencies. The list is considered to include the most cost-effective me dicines 
for a particular indication. It is developed in concordance with the standard treatmen t 
guidelines keeping in mind the healthcare needs of the majority of the po pulation. Careful 
selection of a limited range of essential medicines results in a higher quality of care, 
better management of medicines and more cost-effective use of health resources. The list 
of essential medicines guides the hospital drug policies, procurement and  supply of 
medicines in public sector, medicine cost reimbursement and medicine donations. It helps 
in monitoring the pricing of medicines. The list serves as a reference document for correct 
dosage form and strength for prescribing. Preference is given to single drug formulations 
as opposed to fixed dose combinations where appropriate. Hence use  of National List of 
Essential Medicines (NLEM) is expected to improve prescribing practices as well a s the 
health outcomes. The appropriate use of medicines selected in the NLE M promotes 
rational use of medicines. Such rational use of medicines, especially antim icrobial drugs, 
reduces development of drug resistance. The list also serves as a reference for  
assessing the healthcare access of the populace. Lastly, NLEM serves as a tool for public 
education and training of healthcare providers. The Hon ’ble Committee is, therefore, 
requested that the present nomenclature, may continue to be u sed since it is 
internationally recognized. 
Further, the Standing National Committee on Medicines (SNCM) agrees with the 
spirit and sentiments expressed by the Hon ’ble Parliament Standing Committee that 
every medicine is essential to treat particular disease/ailment. The example include:- 
 
* Medicines used for conditions such as Gaucher disease (enzyme replacement therapy), 
myasthenia gravis (pyridostigmine) etc. However, these conditions are rare in nature and 
will be required in very few patients in the country. 
  
* Several fixed dose combinations that are available in the country and  are very openly 
prescribed, such as combination of several vitamins, analgesics, anti-hype rtensives etc. 
More than one analgesic or antihypertensive medicine may be required for some patients 
but not for the majority. 

11 
 
 
 The essential medicines list is the list of the drugs which caters to the majori ty of 
the population of a country. It is prepared in a country specific manner, depe nding on the 
disease prevalence in that region, and helps prepare policies of the country. 
 
 NLEM, 2015 was prepared considering the public health problems in India an d 
adhering to the basic problems of efficacy, safety, cost-effectiveness. Th is essential list 
included the medicines which should be useful in majority of the population  and depends 
on the prevalence data of various diseases in the country. It is expected th at such 
medicines will be available in good quality at all times at an afford able price. This list is 
not exhaustive but is limited to serve the above-said purpose. It could be called as a best-
fit list. 
 
 In India, the NLEM was prepared initially in 1996 and later revised in 2003, 2011 
and 2015. NLEM, 2015 was prepared after several nationwide consultations with experts 
in different subjects, NGOs and other stakeholders. The potential uses of NLE M include 
but are not limited to procurement by Government agencies, price fixing by Nat ional 
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority, prescribing by doctors, economizing and opti mizing the 
health care resources. 
 
 The NLEM in no way undermines the importance of any drug which may be 
useful/life saving for limited number of patients. There is a separate li st of life saving drugs 
by Ministry of  
 
Health & Family Welfare (M/o H&FW) and a separate policy for drugs for rare  diseases is 
being drafted." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4.4) 
 
2.3  The observations / recommendations of the Committee are as under :-  
 
 "The Committee are concerned to note the lot of difference between th e prices of Jan 
Aushadhi and branded medicines. In this regard, the Committee note that the  cost of 
branded medicines are more due to inclusion of promotional cost in them. Nu mber of Jan 
Aushadhi stores is less in the country. Moreover, awareness among people abou t Jan 
Aushadhi medicines is also not quite high. Most of the doctors prescribe brand ed medicines 
and the people incur lot of expenditure on buying them and most of the  times such 
expenditure is beyond their buying capacity. In this regard, the Committee recom mend the 
following steps:- 
 
(a) The government should take necessary steps to ensure that branded m edicines are 
not heavily priced and their pricing should not be more than certain ce iling to be fixed 
by NPPA viz-a-viz Jan Aushadhi medicines. 
 
(b) More number of Jan Aaushadhi stores should be opened in all districts in cou ntry 
particularly near railway stations, bus terminals, Government hospitals, etc. 

12 
 
 
(c) Awareness among people about PMBJP scheme, cheaper prices of Jan Aushadhi 
medicines and their proven quality should be created. 
 
(d) Doctors should be advised to prescribe Jan aushadhi/generic medicines which are  
cheaper than branded medicines." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.4  The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Pharmaceuticals is as und er :-  
 
 (a) As per paragraph 14(1) of DPCO, 2013, no manufacturer shall sell the sched uled 
formulations at a price higher than the ceiling price (plus local taxes as a pplicable) so 
fixed and notified by the Government. The NPPA regularly monitors the p rices of 
medicines sold by retail pharmacists by way of purchase of formulation s amples and 
on the basis of references received from State Drug Controllers and gen eral public. 
Further, in respect of the Non-scheduled formulations, the companies are a llowed to 
increase the price of drugs not more than 10% in the past twelve months . The cases 
of violation of notified ceiling prices are taken up for recovery from the defau lting 
pharmaceutical companies. 
 
Recently, the NPPA has put a cap on Trade margin of select anti-cancer medici nes 
under ‘Trade Margin Rationalization Approach’ by invoking paragraph 19 of DPCO as 
a Pilot for ‘Proof of Concept ’ which may entail the possibilities of mid-course 
correction and further up-scaling by inclusion of more medicines, based on  
experience. The data submitted by manufacturers in this regard has shown  reduction 
in more than 90% of MRPs of brands. 
 
(b) As on 24/07/2019, 5463 Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Kendras a re opened 
in the country. PMBJP has covered 680 districts out of 723 districts of the cou ntry 
and remaining 43 are being covered on priority. The target is to cove r all 723 districts 
of the country by 31 st March, 2020. It has also been planned to open 1200 new 
PMBJP Kendras by 31 st March, 2020. As on 24.07.2019, 843 PMBJP Kendras are 
functional in Government premises in 29 States/UTs, out of which 801 PMBJP 
Kendras are functional in Government Hospitals in 27 States/UTs of the country. In 
the current financial year, as on 24/07/2019, 26 PMBJP Kendra s have been opened 
in government premises. 
 
The target of opening 5000 PMBJP Kendra by the end of the f inancial year 2018-19 
was achieved on 05.02.2019. However, the target in this year is to cover a ll the 
districts of the country. Letters have been written to the Collectors of the respective 
uncovered districts for expeditious opening of PMBJP Kendras in those districts. 
 
Moreover, applications are invited for opening the Kendras from Government bodies 
like Railways/ State Transport Departments/ Urban local bodies/ Panchayati Raj 
Institutions/ Post Offices/ Defence establishments/ PSUs, etc. In the State of 
Maharashtra, the Bureau of Pharma PSUs of India (BPPI) (the implementing age ncy 
of PMBJP) has signed a MoU with Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation 
(MSRTC) for opening 530 PMBJP Kendras, across the bus stands of Ma harashtra 
State. 

13 
 
 
(c) The Bureau of Pharma PSUs of India (BPPI) (implementing agency of PMBJP) ran 
various media and publicity campaigns to educate the general public about the 
affordability and quality of generic medicines highlighting the hug e difference in the 
prices of PMBJP medicines and branded medicines. The details of the p ublicity 
campaign are as under:- 
 
 Social Media: Educating the general public through Social Media platforms like 
facebook, twitter, linkedin, pinterest, Instagram, whatsapp, Youtube, etc. by m aking 
posts everyday on the difference of the prices in branded and gen eric, quality of 
generic medicines, advantages and salient features of Pradhan Mantri B hartiya 
Janaushadhi Pariyojana. 
 
 Digital Media: BPPI has initiated cinema advertisements by running video ads in 
cinema halls during the popular movies. We have also made audio ad vertisement at 
ST Bus Stands through public address system, in various States, across the country. 
 
 Out- of-home (OOH) Media: Mass awareness campaign have been made on the 
salient features of PMBJP through outdoor media publicity which includes Bus Queue 
Shelter branding, Bus branding, Hoardings and LCD Screens, across the country. 
We have also made advertisement in Delhi-NCR metro through display panels. 
 
 Print Media: Newspaper advertisements were made on salient features and 
advantages of PMBJP to educate the general public for taking bene fits of the 
pariyojana. 
 
 In addition to the above, BPPI have conducted various seminars, workshop s, public 
meetings, participated in exhibitions and also made exhibition stall on PMB JP in 
different Mela's, Yatra’s to make aware general public about PMBJP through our field 
officials. During these events, pamphlets, booklets, brochures, etc. on PMBJP  are 
distributed by BPPI to spread the awareness amongst the people. 
 
(d) Clause 1.5 (Use of Generic names of drugs) of Indian Medical Council (Profe ssional 
Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002 prescribes “Every physician should 
prescribe drugs with generic names legibly and preferably in capital letters and 
ensure that there is a rational prescription and use of drugs ”. The Medical Council of 
India vide its letter dated 21.04.2017 addressed to all Medical 
Colleges/Hospitals/Director, Medical Education/Health Secretary of all States/State 
Medical Councils/Director, Health Services directed the registered medical 
practitioners to comply with the provisions of above mentioned Regulations. Further, 
Clause 6.8 (Code of Conduct for doctors in their relationship with pharmaceutical and 
allied health sector industry) of the said regulations prohibits doctors from taking gifts, 
travel facilities, hospitality and cash or monetary grants from pharmaceutical an d 
allied health sector industry. Violation of these norms prescribes severe punishment  
as laid down in the said regulations." 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department Of Pharmaceuticals) 
 O.M. No. 31026/07/2019-Pricing dated 27/09/2019] 
 

14 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4.7) 
 
4.3  The observations / recommendations of the Committee are as under :- 
 
"The Committee note that on the issue of violation of Drug Price Control Orde r 
(DPCO),2013 with respect to overcharging, the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority 
issued Demand Notices but the actual amount recovered in 2013-14, 2014-15 , 2015-16, 
2017-18 and 2018-19 is Rs 40.08 crores, Rs.90.17 crores, Rs. 12.32 crores, Rs. 148.42 
crores and Rs. 17.43 crores respectively which is too meager in comparison to the amount 
due to be recovered which was Rs. 406.83 crores, Rs. 581.10 crores, Rs.931.63 crores, 
Rs.704.12 crores and Rs. 194.81 crores respectively during the period except in 2016- 17 
when out of Rs. 333.97 crores, Rs. 302.08 crores were recovered. The Committe e firmly 
feels that unless DPCO rules are made stringent and effectively implemented, the u nfair 
market practices by pharma companies may continue to hamper the availa bility of 
affordable medicines to the people. Since overcharging of drugs/medicines is a violation of 
consumers right to basic healthcare, the Committee strongly recommend that if the  
manufacturer do not deposit the demanded amount within the prescribed  time limit given by 
NPPA, cancellation of licenses of such companies to manufacture that medicin e/drug may 
be considered. Similar action may also be taken on retailers who indulge  in overcharging of 
drugs/medical devices." 
Reply of the Government 
4.4  The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Pharmaceuticals is as und er :-  
 
"As per the prevalent practice in the NPPA, the cases where the demande d amount 
is not deposited by the manufacturers are referred to concerned District Collec tors for 
recovery of the overcharged amount as arrears of land revenue under Section-3 of the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955. However, there is no such provision in the DPCO, 20 13 
regarding cancellation of license of such defaulting manufacturers or the retailers. 
 
There is no provision under the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 & Rules, 1945 
regarding cancellation of licenses of the manufacturers who do not deposit the demanded 
amount within the prescribed time limit given by NPPA. Thus, presently it is not permitted 
under the prevalent law." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.13 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4.8) 
 
2.5  The observations / recommendations of the Committee are as under :-  
 
 "The Committee are concerned to note the sale of spurious and no n-standard quality 
drugs/medicines in the country. Drug samples are annually tested by the Stat e Drugs 
Controller in States as well as Zonal and Sub-Zonal Offices of Central Drug Standard s 
Control Organization. However, the Committee are discomfit to note that the nu mber of 
samples tested is very less, such that 74586, 76721 and 82599 samp les were tested by 
State Drug Controller during 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 respective ly. During the same 
period 2897, 5207 and 7088 samples were tested by Central Drug Stan dards Control 

15 
 
Organization. Considering the size of the country and the huge quantum of medicines being 
distributed and sold in the country, this sample size is not adequate to me asure the actual 
problem of spurious and nonstandard quality drugs in the country. The Committee also note 
that the punishment for the spurious drugs under the amendments made  in Drugs and 
Cosmetics Act 1940 which came into force since 10th August, 2009 are stringent  and 22 
States have set up designated Special Courts for the purpose. However, th e Committee is 
dismayed to note that the decision is pending in most of cases such that in the year 2015-16 
out of 289 prosecutions launched against manufacture, sale and distribution  of 
spurious/adulterated drugs only 2 cases have been decided. Similarl y in 2016-17 out of 186 
cases of prosecutions against manufacture, sale and distribution of spurious/a dulterated 
drugs only 17 cases were decided and in 2017-18 out of 131 prosecutio n cases only 16 
cases were decided. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Governme nt 
should take adequate measures to considerably increase the number of samples of drugs to 
be tested so as to instill fear in those who indulges in sale/distribution of sp urious/non-
standard quality drugs. There is also urgent need for time bound decision on the 
prosecutions launched against manufacture, sale and distribution of spurious/n on-standard 
quality. The Committee in this regard recommend that more Special Designated Courts may 
be opened in all the States/UTs and those courts may also impressed up on the need for 
timely disposal of cases." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.6  The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Pharmaceuticals is as und er :-  
 
 “Measures taken to increase the number of samples tested: 
 
Ministry of Health &. Family Welfare and Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organization (CDSCO) have taken various regulatory measures from time to time to  
strengthen the Drug Regulatory System including the testing of samples to ensure the  
quality of drugs in the country. 
 
Details are as under: 
 
(i) State Drugs Controllers and CDSCO have been sensitized from time to time through 
Drugs Consultative Committee (DCC) meetings regarding issues related to the 
quality of drugs in the country. 
(ii) The number of sanctioned posts in CDSCO has been increased from 1 11 in 2008 to 
510 in 2018. 
(iii) Testing capacities of Central Drugs Testing Laboratories under CDSCO are being  
constantly strengthened to expedite testing- of drug samples in the country. 
(iv) To expedite the procedure of test and analysis by the laboratories, G.S.R. 103(E) 
dated 17.02.2017 was published providing that the results of test or an alysis shall be 
furnished by the Government Analysts within a period of sixty days from the receipt of 
sample. It has also been provided that where it is not possible to test or an alyse the 
sample within the specified period, the Government Analyst shall seek exten sion of 
time from the Government giving specific reasons for delay in such testing or 
analysis. 
(v) As a result, year-wise number of samples tested in the country has gradu ally 
increased and the same may be observed from the following:- 
 

16 
 
  
Data on the number-of samples tested during the last five years: 
 
(A) Testing by State/UT Drugs Control Authorities:- 
   
Year 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 
No. of drugs samples 
tested 
58537 72712 74586 76721 82599 
 
(B) Testing by CDSCO: 
 
Year 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 
No. of drugs samples 
tested 
4110 3605 2897 5207 7088 
 
(vi) Further, the Government has approved a proposal for strengthening the drug 
regulatory system in the country, both at the level of Central and the State 
Governments at a total expenditure of Rs. 1750 crores. Out of this, Rs. 900 cr ore is 
for strengthening the central drug regulatory structures and Rs.850 crore is for 
strengthening the drug regulatory system in the States. During the years 2016 -17 
and 2017-18, Rs. 128.39 crore was released under the Central component w hereas 
Rs. 87.90 crore was allocated during 2018-19 under this component. Unde r the State 
component, Rs. 81.36 crore was released during 2016-17 and 2017-18 whereas Rs. 
206 crore was allocated during 2018-19 under this component. 
 
(vii) The Government has approved setting up of 08 Mini Drug Testing Lab oratories at 
major ports and airports in the country to monitor the standards of imported  and 
exported drugs and reduce the time spent on quality assessment. The 8 Mini Drug 
Testing Laboratories are situated at the following locations:- 
 
1. Hyderabad (Airport) 2. Mumbai (Airport) 
3. Bangalore (Airport) 4. Nhava Sheva (Sea Port) 
5. Ahmedabad (Airport) 6. Kolkata (Sea Port) 
7. Delhi (Airport) 8. Chennai (Sea Port) 
 
Necessary accommodation for all Mini Labs except at Kolkata Sea Port has been arranged. 
 
 The aforesaid measures will increase the number of samples of drugs to  be, tested 
so as to instill fear in those who indulge in sale/distribution of spurious/'not o f standard 
quality (NSQ) drugs. 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
Measures for time bound decision on prosecutions and setting up of more  Special 
Designated Courts: 
 
 As already stated, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and Central Drugs Sta ndard 
Control organization (CDSCO) have taken various regulatory measures from time to time  
to strengthen the Drug Regulatory System including time bound decision on prosecutio n 
launched against the manufacture, sale and distribution of spurious/NSQ drugs to maintain 
the quality of drugs in the country. 
 
 As regards setting up of more Special Designated Courts, it may be mentioned that  
State/UT Governments have been requested to be proactive in this regard to  set up more 
Special Designated Courts to ensure time bound disposal of the cases of prosecution  
launched against the manufacture, sale and distribution of spurious/NSQ drug s so as to 
maintain the quality of drugs in the country." 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department Of Pharmaceuticals)  
O.M. No. 31026/07/2019-Pricing dated 27/09/2019] 
 
 
 
  

18 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4.3) 
 
3.3 The observations / recommendations of the Committee are as under :-  
 
 "The Committee note that the Department has adopted market based pri cing system 
for drugs in the country even though it has accepted that cost- based sy stem may be ideal 
and that may give a true reflection of drug prices. However, the Gove rnment has adopted 
market based system as it is very difficult to arrive at a cost-based pricing d ue to non-
divulgence of actual cost by every company. The government decided to go for market 
based pricing to bring in more transparency, less intrusive inspector raj and to encourag e 
innovation and research in the field. In this regard, the Committee are of the  firm view that it 
is the responsibility of the Government to protect the interests of common man throu gh 
actual and affordable prices for drugs in the country. The Committee, therefore,  recommend 
that an expert Committee should be constituted to study the impact of market  based and 
cost based pricing systems on drug prices in the country and to take ap propriate steps on 
the basis of the recommendations of that Committee." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.4 "Under National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy-2012 (NPPP-2012), the regu lation of 
prices of drugs is on the basis of regulating the prices of formulations through M arket Based 
Pricing. This was different from the earlier principle of regulating the prices th rough Cost 
Based Pricing under the Drug Policy, 1994; wherein ceiling prices of drugs are f ixed through 
a cost + margin method using cost data provided by individual drug manufacturers. Unde r 
Market Based Pricing, the ceiling price is first determined by working out simple average of 
Price to Retailer (PTR) in respect of all branded and generic versions of all formulations, 
which are having a market share of 1 % and above and then adding a n otional retailer 
margin of 16%. 
 
3.5 The reasons for the shift in the methodology for price fixation from  cost based to 
market based was clearly spelt out in NPPP-2012 as mentioned below:- 
 
(i) Under Cost Based Pricing, the prices of drugs had to be calculated afresh  every year 
which require a complex variety of data. For this, the manufacturers were required to 
provide their pricing data in an extremely detailed manner which was intrusive a nd 
hence highly resisted by the individual manufacturers resulting in possible 
manipulation and time delay of provision of the base costing data . This also made it 
difficult for Department of Pharmaceuticals to properly check the data provided by 
individual manufacturers in a timely and adequate manner. Secondly, the data w as 
also subject to variations in terms of production cost depending on technologies used  
for production. Also the government had no control on the cost of produ ction of 
medicines by different companies. 
 
(ii) Under Market Based Pricing, the ceiling price is fixed on the basis of ma rket data for 
Price to Retailers (PTR) which is easily available. The Price to Retailer data o f 

19 
 
pharmaceutical companies which have more than 1 % market-share in the sales of 
that formulation is picked up from the Pharmatrac database. It is this data which is 
taken for calculating the average PTR and finally the ceiling price. The calculation 
sheets are uploaded on the website of the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Au thority 
(NPPA). The process of ceiling price fixation under this methodology is thus cr ystal 
clear and transparent and is available in public domain. 
 
(iii) The Indian economy is largely market-driven and, particularly in the area of p ricing of 
manufactured products, prices are determined by market conditions and ma rket 
forces. Determination of prices, based on Cost Based Pricing, particularly where the 
input prices themselves were not subjected to any form of price control and  were 
determined in the open market by market forces, was found to be subjective  and 
anomalous. It was observed that, this would, in medium and the long te rm, lead to 
severe distortions, particularly in the product-mix and investment patterns in the 
industry and there was a serious possibility of production moving out of controlle d 
drugs into non-controlled drugs. This would have led to serious implications f or the 
availability of National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM) medicines in the future and 
for the growth and structure of the Pharmaceutical Industry as a whole. Further, the 
resultant implications on the growth and innovation would have impacted the 
industry’s ability to invest in Research and Development (R&D) for enhancing the 
capabilities to capture the overseas markets. 
 
(iv) Under Cost Based Pricing, as the controlled prices of formulations based o n a 
particular API were determined on a ‘lowest common denominator ’ basis, they 
tended to be clustered within a narrow band. This allows virtually no spa ce for a new 
entrant to come in at an uncovered price point. As a result, production activity and  
competition in the product segment tended to stagnate. In the Ma rket Based Pricing, 
since there is a wider price-band, in comparison to the cost based method, it was  
held that there would be ample space for manufacturers;  
 
 domestic, foreign or new entrant, to position themselves in an appropriate price band 
below the ceiling price and thereby also retain competition in the market. 
 
(v) The price determined on the basis of normative cost under the earl ier cost based 
pricing methodology was unable to account for the heterogeneity in the Indian 
pharmaceutical industry, as it did not distinguish between companies that invested in 
state-of-the art world class plants and those which were not so, even though, it did  
recognize costs associated with special features having therapeutic value. Further, 
Cost Based Pricing did not recognize costs incurred in innovation in drug deli very or 
in R&D in New Chemical Entities thereby it was discouraging innovation and 
efficiency in Pharmaceutical Industry. 
 
(vi) The market based formula, which arrives at a moderated price based o n simple 
average methodology, allows availability of medicine at different pri ce points, which, 
to some extent limits inter-brand price differences. Further, prices of imported  
medicines etc. are also considered in the same basket, such that there is n o 
differential treatment of foreign or domestically produced formulations. 
 
(vii) In case of scheduled formulations, the notified ceiling price is sub ject to annual 
revision which is notified by National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA), an d 

20 
 
which would be effective from the first day of April every year, base d on the annual 
Wholesale Price Index [WPI] notified by the Department of Industri al Policy and 
Promotion with respect to the previous calendar year. The revision may mean 
increase or decrease depending on whether the WPI is positive or nega tive. This 
keeps the prices under control and also ensures availability. In fact, the ce iling price 
of the scheduled formulations was revised with effect from 1st April 2014, a pplying 
the WPI of 6.32%; again with effect from 1st April 2015, applying the W PI of 3.849%, 
again from 1st April 2016 applying the WPI of (-) 2.711% and aga in from 1st April 
2017 applying 1.972%. Protection from cost escalation is already dealt in the price 
revision formula as revised prices are indexed to WPI. Accounting for ge neral 
inflation, can, to a large extent, provide adequate buffer for contingencies su ch as 
rise in input costs, increase in the cost of active pharmaceutical ingredients etc. 
Under Market based Policy, the DPCO 2013 provides for reduction in ceiling price of 
scheduled formulations on revision of NLEM (Schedule I) or five years whicheve r is 
earlier, which was not available under cost based system. Thus by adjust ing for 
inflation, Market Based Pricing accounts for variability in the economy as a gainst the 
argument that Market Based Pricing takes on components which are based on 
variable factors. 
 
(viii) Under Cost Based approach, the criteria of selecting medicines for price control were 
market share and monopoly. However, this criterion had shifted to essen tiality as 
stipulated by the NPPP-2012. The essential medicines are essentially the me dicines 
used by majority of the Indian population for majority of the diseases. By  shifting to 
the market based pricing policy, NPPP-2012 had tried striking a balance b etween 
affordability and availability of essential medicines. 
 
3.6 That under Para 19 of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 2013, Government can, in 
case of extraordinary circumstances, if it considers necessary so to do in public interest, fix 
the ceiling price or retail price of any drug for such period as it may deemed fit. The 
Government has used this provision for fixing the ceiling price of essential me dicines which 
are used for treatment of Diabetic and Cardio Vascular diseases. Recently, the gove rnment 
has also used this power for fixing the ceiling price of Coronary Stents, Kn ee Implants and 
Anti-Cancer Drugs. These are significant steps taken by the Government to bring down out 
of pocket expenditure for healthcare expenses in the country. 
 
3.7 That under the present Market based Policy, the ceiling price fixation  has resulted in 
the estimated saving to general public as follows:- 
 
Category Savings Estimated( Rs. in crore) 
NLEM 2011 2,422 
NLEM 2015 2,644 
NLEM 2015- Coronary Stents 4,450 
Para 19 - Knee Implants 1,500 
Para 19 - Cardio and Anti Diabetic drugs 350 
Para 19 – Anti-Cancer Drugs 980 
Grand TOTAL 12,443 
  

21 
 
Hence the contention that price control based on market driven factors would be 
unreasonable, irrational or disadvantageous to the consumer is not supp orted by above 
mentioned facts and figures. 
  
3.8.         That market-based pricing is definitely a superior formula for fixing the ceiling price 
of drugs. Unlike cost-based method, it is based on a reliable and authe ntic data set 
available on regular intervals, hence accuracy and validity is maintained in the process. Also 
the entire procedure of ceiling price fixation is available in the public d omain which accounts 
for transparency and accountability of the process. Further, under Market Based Pricing, the 
interests of both consumers and producers/suppliers are protected by keeping  a wider price 
band in comparison to cost based method. The ceiling price fixed is s ubjected to annual 
revision on the basis of Wholesale Price Index (WPI), thereby maintaining price stability and 
ensuring un-interrupted supply of essential medicines. The new ceiling price fixation has 
also resulted in enormous amount of savings to the general public in ter ms of reduction in 
out-of-pocket health expenditure. Further, the main argument against Market-Base d Pricing 
that the prices thus fixed are above the prices fixed under Cost-Based Pri cing, is denied as 
the prices fixed under the two methodologies are almost similar. Thus the ceiling price 
fixation based on Market- Based Pricing fits well with the objective of NPPP-2012 of 
ensuring sustained availability of essential medicines at reasonable prices while providing 
sufficient opportunity for innovation and competition to support the growth  of the 
pharmaceutical industry, thereby meeting the goals of employment and shared  economic 
well-being for all."  
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department Of Pharmaceuticals)  
O.M. No. 31026/07/2019-Pricing dated 27/09/2019] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4.6) 
 
3.9 The observations / recommendations of the Committee are as under :- 
  
 "The Committee are satisfied to note that the total number of schedu led formulations 
have increased from 530 under NLEM 2011 to 851 under NLEM 201 5. It is also heartening 
to note that ceiling prices of 370 scheduled formulations under NLEM 2011 which witnessed 
0 to 30% decrease with respect to maximum price has increased to 670 formulations under 
NLEM 2015. However, the number of scheduled formulations which witnessed 3 5-40 
percentage and above 40 percentage reduction with respect to maximum p rice have 
reduced from 34 to 24 and 126 to 59 under NLEMs 2011 and 201 5, respectively. The 
clarification provided by the Department in this regard that the reduction in these ca ses are 
limited while refixing the ceiling price of the common formulations un der NLEMs 2011 and 
2015 is not satisfactory. The Committee recommend that the Government sho uld take all 
necessary steps to bring more number of formulations under these two cate gories so that 
overall prices of drugs in the country are affordable to people particularly to poor people." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
"The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (M/o H&FW) notifies the National List of 
Essential Medicines. As per the NPPP, 2012, all the medicines specified in th e National List 
of Essential Medicines are included in the First Schedule of DPCO, 2013 and  brought under 

22 
 
price control.  Under the DPCO, 2013, prices of drugs are fixed on ‘Market based pricing ’ 
methodology which is in accordance with the NPPP, 2012. Since the prices of drugs are 
fixed on ‘Market based pricing ’, the number of formulations witnessing reduction by a 
particular percentage cannot be controlled or determined by the Government. " 
 
[Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department Of Pharmaceuticals) 
 O.M. No. 31026/07/2019-Pricing dated 27/09/2019] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.4.5) 
 
 The observations / recommendations of the Committee are as under :-  
 
 "The Committee note that the Ministry of Health and Family welfare has co nstituted a 
Standing National committee on Medicines to review and revise the National L ist of 
essential Medicines (NLEM). There are 23 Members in the Committee representing various 
Health and family welfare sectors. One representative is from the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals but there is no representation for NPPA in the committee. E ven though a 
representative from NPPA will be a special invitee for the meetings of the Committe e, 
permanent representation has not been given to NPPA. NPPA is entrusted with the 
responsibility of fixation and revision of prices of scheduled formulations under drugs (Prices 
control) order and also responsible for monitoring and enforcing drug prices in the country. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that permanent representation should be  given to 
NPPA in the Core Committee." 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.2  The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Pharmaceuticals is as under :-   
 
"A Standing National Committee on Medicines and other Health Care Products 
(SNCM&HCP) has already been constituted by the Ministry of Health & Family W elfare to 
review and revise the NLEM. It is submitted that as per Order dated 03/07/2018 (Annexure -
I), a representative of NPPA has been made a special invitee. The Member S ecretary 
(NPPA) and Director, NPPA are attending the meetings of the aforesaid co mmittee as 
special invitees." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.10 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4.9) 
 
4.5  The observations / recommendations of the Committee are as under :- 
 
 "The Committee are constrained to note that presently National Pharmaceutical 
Pricing Authority (NPPA) has only a part-time member apart from the chair person. NPPA is 
entrusted with the responsibility of enforcing the Drugs (Prices control) order and to m onitor 
availability of drugs in the country, identify shortages and to take remed ial steps thereon. In 
the absence of even a full time member and a strong management team, the Committee are 
skeptical that the authority will be able to carry out its functions effe ctively. The Committee 
are of the view that the current composition of the authority needs to be expanded to include 
more full time expert members so that the administrative efficiency of the o rganization is 

24 
 
enhanced to fulfill the mandate of NPPA. Thus, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Composition of NPPA may be reviewed and more full time members may be appointed." 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.6  The Action Taken Reply of the Department of Pharmaceuticals is as und er :- 
 
 "The issue of restructuring of the NPPA was examined and it has bee n decided to 
strengthen the NPPA at lower levels in order to enable it to fulfill its mandat e. Accordingly, 
NPPA has been asked to prepare a proposal for strengthening the NPPA at lower levels."  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.16 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                   Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
  25  November,  2019                                Chairperson 
 04 Agrahayana 1941 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on 
                                     Chemicals and Fertilizers 
  

26 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2019-20) 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 13th   November, 2019 from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. 
in Committee Room no. 2, Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe Building, New 
Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi-  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
3 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
4 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
5 Dr. Manoj Rajoria 
RAJYA SABHA 
6 Shri  G.C. Chandrashekhar 
7 Dr. Anil Jain 
8 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
9       Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
  
SECRETARIAT 
                1. Shri Manoj Kumar Arora   -               Officer on Special Duty(LSS) 
               2. Shri A. K. Srivastava -               Director 
  3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
 
 

27 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
1 Shri Chhabilendra Roul    Secretary (Fert.) 
2 Shri  Dharam Pal      Addl. Secretary  
3 Shri  Partha Sarthi Sen Sharma   Joint Secretary 
4 Shri Vinay Kumar Pandey Director (P&K) 
5 Shri Parbhas Kumar Director (UPP) 
6 Sh. B. Venkatesh Director (CE) 
 
2. At the outset, Hon ’ble Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) and other 
officials.  Chairperson also introduced Dr. Manoj Rajoria, the newly nominated Member to the 
Committee. 
 3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, Secretary, Department of Fertilizers made a 
power point presentation to the Committee regarding ‘System of Fertilizer Subsidy ’ of the 
Department of Fertilizers.  
4. XXXXX                XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  XXXX  
 5. XXXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  XXXX  
 6. XXXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  XXXX   
 7. XXXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   XXXX   
 8. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
9. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the draft Action Taken 
Report on subject ‘Pricing of Drugs with Special Reference to Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 
2013 (Department of Pharmaceuticals).  After deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft 
report unanimously without any changes/amendments. The Committee also authorised the 
Chairperson to finalize and present the report to the Parliament. 
    The Committee then adjourned.  
  

28 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para-3 of Introduction to Report) 
 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON TH E 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FORTY-SIXTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS ON THE SUBJECT ‘PROMOTION AND CO-ORDINATION OF BASIC-
APPLIED RESEARCH IN AREAS RELATED TO PHARMACEUTICAL SECTOR' OF 
THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF 
PHARMACUETICALS) 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 9 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 4.1, 4.2, 4.4, 4.7 & 4.8)   
5 
 
Percentage of Total 55.6% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
(Vide Recommendation No.  4.3 and 4.6 )   
 
 
2 
 
Percentage of Total    
22.2% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:-   
 (Vide Recommendation No. 4.5 and 4.9)                                                         
2 
Percentage of Total 22.2% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
(Nil) 
0 
Percentage of Total 100% 
 