 
 
 
 
             STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)  
 
        MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
         (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Thirty-First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Availability of 
Medicines & Medical devices for COVID Management’ of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) 
 
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 August, 2022/ Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
35 

 
 
CC&F No. 163 
THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Thirty  First 
Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Availability of Medicines & Medical 
devices for COVID Management' of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08 August, 2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08 August, 2022 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2022/ Sravana, 1944  (Saka) 
 
 


 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2021-22) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter I Report 1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
13 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government's 
replies 
 
35 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
37 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
46 
 APPENDICES  
 I.  Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2021-22) held on 4 th August
, 
2022.  
47 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the Thirty-
First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers on the subject 
'Availability of Medicines & Medical Devices for Covid 
Management' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
49 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri Deepak Baij 
5. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
6. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
7. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai 
Chudasama  
8. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
10. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
11. Shri Vasava Parbhubhai Nagarbhai  
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt Aparupa Poddar (Afrin Ali) 
14. Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
15. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
16. Shri M. Selvaraj 
17. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
18. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
19. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
21. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
24. Dr. Anil Jain 
25. Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
26. Shri Arun Singh 
27. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
28. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
29. Vacant* 
30. Vacant* 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Vinay Kumar Mohan : Joint Secretary  
2. Shri Nabin Kumar Jha  : Director  
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  : Deputy Secretary  
4. Ms Sonia Sankhla                     : Executive Officer 
 
* Vacant vice Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar (LJD), MP (RS) retired on 02.04.2022 from the Membership 
of Rajya Sabha. (RSS I.D. No. 1(2)/2019- Coord dated 18.01.2022). 
  
* Vacant vice Shri Jaiprakash Nishad (BJP), MP (RS) retired on 04.07.2022 from the Membership of 
Rajya Sabha. (RSS I.D. No. 1(2)/2019- Coord dated 18.01.2022).  
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(2021-2022) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their 
behalf this Thirty-Fifth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-First 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Availability of Medicines & Medical 
devices for COVID Management ’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
2.  The Thirty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 21 st March, 2022. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals) furnished their replies on 29 th June, 2022 
indicating Action Taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty-First Report. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft 
Report at their sitting held on 4th August, 2022. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-First Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    New Delhi; KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
   08 August, 2022 CHAIRPERSON, 
   13 Sravana, 1944 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
  CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS. 
 

1 
 
   REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contains in their Thirty-First  
Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 'Availability of Medicines & Medical devices for COVI D 
Management' of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals). 
1.2  The Thirty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 21 March 2022. It contained 19 Observations/Recommendations. Replies o f 
Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as follows:-  
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
          Sl.Nos.1,2,3,4,5,7,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18                             (Total=14)                          
 
   These are included in Chapter II of the Report.                                                   
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire   
 to pursue in view of the Government ’s reply:- 
 Sl.No. 6                                                                  (Total = 1) 
 These are included in Chapter III of the Report. 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government   have not been accepted by the Committee and requir e 
reiteration:- 
 Sl.Nos .  8,9,10,19                          (Total = 4)          
 These are included in Chapter IV of the Report. 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 
 Sl.No. NIL                                              (Total=0 )  
 These are included in Chapter V of the Report. 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
observations/recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be 
furnished expeditiously and not later than three months from the date of 
presentation of this Report. 
1.4   T he Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations which still require reiteration or merit further 
comments.  

2 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 8 
 
Nationwide Training Programme for Rational Use of COVID treating medicines 
 
1.5 While stressing on the need for nationwide training programme for rational 
use of COVID treating medicines, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee note that the clinical management protocol for COVID- 19 
clearly states that use of Remdesivir has been approved under Emergency  
Use Authorization, to be considered in patients with moderate to severe 
disease so as to ensure rational use of Remdesivir in only select sub-group of 
patients. Additionally, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has issued a 
separate ‘Advisory on 7th June 2021 on the rational use of Remdesivir for 
COVID-19 treatment’. According to this advisory, every hospital needs to set 
up a Special Drug Committee (SDC) which must review the use of Remdesivir 
in their hospital periodically and SDC should preferably have a Pharmacolog y 
Professor/ faculty as a member wherever available. SDC should share their 
findings with the physicians periodically to ensure rational and judicious use of 
Remdesivir. Standard treatment guidelines have also been disseminated 
through MoHFW ’s Center of Excellence initiative with AIIMS, Delhi as the 
apex institution. This exercise is carried out with State level/Regional centers 
of excellence as well as private doctors to promote rational use of drug. Since 
the prescription of Remdesivir was rampant during the second wave o f 
COVID-19 pandemic rather than its prescription only in select subgroup of 
patients with moderate to severe disease. This created a hue and cry situation 
in the entire country due to severe shortage in availability of this medicin e. 
Since it is very much necessary to educate the medical practitioners on the 
rational prescription/use of medicines/medical devices for the treatment of 
COVID 19, the Committee recommend that the Union Government in 
collaboration with the State Governments should organize nationwide online 
training programmes for all registered medical practitioners whether in 
Government or Private hospitals on the rational use of Remdesivir and othe r 
COVID drugs included in National Treatment Protocol." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
  "MoH&FW had issued a separate ‘Advisory on rational use of Remdesivir for 
COVID-19 treatment’ on 7th June 2021, which was hosted on its website for 
wider dissemination. Further noting relationship between use of steroids and 
other immunosuppressive drugs, “Advisory for rational use of Steroids and 
Tocilizumab in the treatment of Covid -19 patients ” was issued by Directorate 
General of Health Services (DGHS). Standard treatment guidelines were also 
disseminated through MoHFW ’s Center of Excellence initiative with AIIMS, 
Delhi as the apex institution. This exercise is carried out with State 

3 
 
level/Regional centres of excellence as well as private doctors to promote 
rational use of drug." 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.7 The Committee note that the MoH&FW has only issued advisories on 
rational use of Remdesivir, steroids and other immunosuppressive drugs to 
promote rational use of COVID related drugs among State level/Regional 
centres of excellence as well as private doctors . However, the reply furnished 
by the Department is silent on the recommendation of the Committee that the 
Union Government in collaboration with the State Governments should 
organize nationwide online training programmes for all registered medical 
practitioners whether in Government or Private hospitals on the rational use of 
Remdesivir and other COVID drugs included in National Treatment Protocol . In 
this regard, the Committee hope that the Union Government in coordination 
with State Government will explore the possibility of conducting such training 
programme so that the guidelines on rational use of drugs can be 
complimented with practical knowhow among the doctors and best practices 
can be shared among public and private hospitals through such training 
programme.  The Committee would like to be informed about the action taken 
on this recommendation in the Final Action Taken Reply.   
RECOMMENDATION No. 9 
 
Prompt Action Against Hoarding/Black Marketing/Over Pricing of Medicines 
and Medical Devices 
 
1.8 With regard to Prompt Action Against Hoarding/Black Marketing/Over Pricing 
of Medicines and Medical Devices, the Committee had recommended as under:- 
  
"(a) The Committee are concerned to note the large-scale black marketing 
of Remdesivir in particular and other medicines and medical devices in 
general at exorbitant prices during peak period of second wave of COV ID-19 
pandemic. This created a panic situation among public and led to huge crisis 
in availability of COVID-19 related medicines and medical devices. According 
to the Department of Pharmaceuticals, Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation (CDSCO) had requested all the States/UTs Licensing authorities 
through several advisories to instruct their enforcement staff to keep strict vigil 
on over pricing and black marketing. As per information available from various 
State Licensing Authorities, in cases of black-
marketing/hoarding/overcharging of COVID-19 management drugs, various 
enforcement actions like drug seizure, arrests of accused persons / 

4 
 
registration of FIR etc. have been taken out by the State Licensing Authorities. 
As on 12.07.2021, 146 cases out of 317 cases of hoarding/black 
marketing/over-pricing of Remdesivir have been reported and actions (Drug  
seizure/ arrests/ notices issued) have been taken by the respective State 
Licensing Authorities. Separately, NPPA vide its letter dated 08.04.2021 
addressed to all State Drug Controllers, had directed that the State 
Governments and UTs may closely monitor the production and availability o f 
COVID-19 drugs to prevent black marketing and hoarding. It further directed 
to ensure that there is no violation of provision of DPCO, 2013 with regard t o 
compliance of ceiling prices/permissible increase in prices of scheduled/non-
scheduled formulations. NPPA had also set up a Control Room to receive 
complaints on availability on medicines and is making all out efforts to 
address the issues promptly by coordinating with the State authorities, 
manufacturers, marketers and their associations. NPPA had received 6 
complaints on overcharging of Remdesivir and 32 complaints on other COVID 
drug and medical devices during the second wave of COVID-19. These 
complaints were referred to the concerned State Drug Controller for 
necessary action. In this regard, the Committee feel that very less number of 
complaints were registered with State Licensing Authorities and NPPA than 
the actual number of such indulgences of overpricing/hoarding/black 
marketing throughout the country. This clearly implies that there is very less 
awareness among people about the present complaint/grievance redressal 
mechanism. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Union 
Government particularly CDSCO and NPPA should take appropriate steps for 
the stepping up of awareness among the people about the availability o f 
complaint/grievance redressal mechanism so as to ensure that all such cases 
of overpricing/hoarding/black marketing come to the lime light. 
 
(b) The Committee also strongly recommend that prompt action should be 
taken against hoarding/black marketing/over pricing of medicines and medical 
devices related to COVID-19 in all States/UTs in a time bound manner. 
CDSCO and NPPA should obtain monthly/fortnightly reports from the State 
Governments/UTs on the action taken against violators." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.9 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
"(a) and (b): Action is initiated by NPPA, under aegis of DoP, on any case 
that is reported of overpricing in the case of medicines and medical dev ices 
as per the provisions of DPCO, 2013. So far as cases of hoarding and black-
marketing are concerned, the then Chairman, NPPA vide her D.O. letter dated 
23rd April 2021 had requested DCGI to take strict measures for prevention  of 
black-marketing and hoarding of essential drugs. State level team formation  
has also been urged for field level action monitoring. NPPA has also written  a 
DO letter on 8th April, 2021 to all the State Drug Controllers to closely monito r 

5 
 
the production and availability of COVID 19 drugs, prevent black-marketing 
and hoarding, and ensure availability of life saving essential drugs. 
  
In addition, various regulatory actions were taken by CDSCO against 
hoarding/black marketing/over pricing of medicines and medical devices 
related to COVID-19, which are detailed as under:  
  
i.          To ensure availability of Covid drugs in the country, CDSCO has 
requested all State/UT Drugs Controllers to take all proactive steps, i.e., 
monitoring stockpiling, maintaining checks on availability of drugs, random 
market survey of critical drugs for used in COVID- 19. 
  
ii.         All the States/UTs Drugs Controllers were requested to take necessary 
steps to expedite issuance of permissions/approvals for manufacturing and 
issuance of other approvals so that supply chain is not affected.  
  
iii.       Based on the complaint received from MoH&FW, regarding shortage of 
Remdesivir injection in certain areas in Madhya Pradesh (Bhopal, Indore, 
Gwalior), Gujarat (Ahmedabad, Surat, Rajkot) and Maharashtra (Mumbai, 
Thane, Ambernath).  CDSCO wrote to all State / UT Drugs Controllers 
requesting to initiate immediate remedial action to ensure supply of 
Remdesivir injection to public and private hospitals and also to instruct their 
enforcement officials to keep continuous monitoring on the situation and  keep 
strict vigil on the matter. 
  
iv.       CDSCO has requested to all State / UT Drugs Controllers to instruct 
their enforcement staff immediately to keep strict vigil especially at sensitive 
places and to take stringent action against hoarding/black 
marketing/overcharging for Remdesivir by conducting special drive of 
monitoring and investigation, so that such incidence could be prevented. 
 v.         CDSCO also requested all State / UT Drugs Controllers to forward 
information in the given format on a daily basis with regard to enforceme nt 
activities to prevent hoarding/black marketing /overcharging / overpricing in 
respect of Remdesivir, Tocilizumab, Favipiravir and Oxygen Cylinder. 
  
vi.       With reports on black marketing/hoarding of COVID related drugs, 
CDSCO has requested all State/UT Drugs Controllers to instruct their 
enforcement staff to keep strict vigil on the matter especially at sensitive 
places and to take stringent action against hoarding/black 
marketing/overcharging of drugs by conducting special drive of monitoring 
and investigation, so that any such incident of drugs is prevented. It wa s also 
stated that there shall be zero tolerance for any kind of hoarding/black-
marketing/overcharging of drugs. It was requested to establish a special task 
force for the purpose and also nominate a nodal officer in their respective 
States and UTs to attend to all complainants and intelligence inpu ts. CDSCO 
carried out a weekly availability survey of 17 drugs/ devices/ items near Cov id 
designated hospitals and general chemist shops. Its frequency was increased 
to twice a week when required." 
 
1.10 The Committee note that the Ministry has informed about a number of 
measures initiated by National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority (NPPA) on 

6 
 
cases of overpricing of medicines and medical devices as per the provision of 
Drugs (Price Control) Order (DPCO), 2013.  NPPA has also requested Drug 
Controller General of India (DCGI) to take strict measures for prevention of 
black-marketing and hoarding of essential drugs. Further all the State Drug 
Controllers have also been requested to closely monitor the production and 
availability of (i) COVID-19 drugs (ii) to prevent black-marketing & hoarding 
and (iii) ensure availability of life saving essential durgs.  However the 
Committee are surprised to note that the number of cases of overpricing of 
medicines/medical devices, black-marketing/hoarding of essential drugs has 
not been furnished.  In view of the Committee after an analysis of figures of 
cases of overpricing of medicines/medical devices, black/marketing etc.  
reported during the last two to three years  the efficacy of these measures can 
be  judged.  Apart from this the details of not even a single complaint of 
Remdesivir injection has been furnished to the committee, although according 
to the  Department the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had lodged a 
complaint to Department of Pharmaceuticals regarding shortage of Remdesivir 
injection in certain areas of Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Gujarat.  The 
Committee recommend that a detailed report about such complaints and their 
disposal be immediately furnished for their consideration.   The Committee 
also note with concern that the reply of the Ministry is silent on the steps taken 
to increase awareness among the people about the complaint/grievance 
redressal mechanism available to them so that they can report matters related 
to overpricing/hoarding/black marketing as recommended by the Committee. 
The Committee strongly reiterates its recommendation and recommend that 
NPPA and CDSCO should take urgent steps in this regard.  
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 10 
 
Effective price control of Non-schedule COVID-19 related Medicines and 
Medical Devices 
 
1.11 With regard to effective price control of Non-schedule COVID-19 related 
Medicines and Medical Devices, the Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"The Committee note that the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) fixes the ceiling price of scheduled medicines specified in the f irst 
schedule of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 2013 (DPCO) in accordance 
with the provisions of the DPCO and all manufacturers of scheduled 
medicines (branded or generic) have to sell their products within the ceiling 

7 
 
price (plus applicable Goods and Service Tax) fixed by the NPPA. On the 
other hand, a manufacturer of a non-scheduled formulation (branded or 
generic) is at liberty to fix the maximum retail price launched by it. Howeve r, 
as per the DPCO, 2013 the manufacturers of non-scheduled formulations are 
not allowed to increase the maximum retail price of such formulations by more 
than 10% during preceding 12 months. According to the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, Remdesivir being a non-scheduled formulation, the 
manufacturer has liberty to fix its price. However, due to proactive interven tion 
ofthe government, MRPs of various brands of Remdesivir that varied up to Rs 
5,400/per vial have been reduced voluntarily by the major 
manufacturers/marketers of the Remdesivir Injection (lyophilized) to less than 
Rs. 3,500/-. Since waves  after waves of the COVID 19 pandemic is hitting the 
world including our country, it is mandatory that the prices of all the COVID 1 9 
medicines and medical devices are controlled by the Government so as to  
make them affordable for the common man. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department of Pharmaceuticals and NPPA to frame a  
new price control regime specific for Medicines and Medical Devices for 
COVID Management where the distinction between the scheduled and non-
scheduled drugs may be done away with and all such medicines and medical 
devices are put under price control with no annual increase in prices allowe d 
till the pandemic is entirely over in the country. The Committee hope the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals and NPPA will understand the gravity of the 
situation and will take immediate necessary action on this recommendation 
within a stipulated time frame and will inform the Committee about the sa me 
in the action taken replies." 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.12 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department o f 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
 
"Based on the principles laid down in the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing 
Policy, 2012 (NPPP, 2012), the government has issued the Drugs Prices 
Control Order, 2013 (DPCO, 2013). The medicines included in the National 
list of Essential Medicines (NLEM) issued by the MoH&FW are included in the 
Schedule-I of DPCO, 2013. While the ceiling prices of Scheduled formulations 
are fixed by NPPA under DoP, in respect of other medicines (non-scheduled),  
NPPA ensures that their MRP is not increased by more than ten percent of 
what was prevalent during the preceding twelve months.  Price control of non-
scheduled medicines will entail revision of NPPP, 2012 and DPCO, 2013." 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 

8 
 
1.13 The Committee is disheartened to note that the Department has failed to 
convert this pandemic situation into an opportunity to make the current Drugs 
Price Control Regime flexible and insert clauses that address price control of 
non-schedule COVID-19 related medicines and medical devices. The 
Department has stated that  price control of non-scheduled medicines will 
entail revision of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy (NPPP), 2012 and 
Drug (prices control) Order (DPCO), 2013. The Committee believes that the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has full authority as well as responsibility to 
make changes in these policies/orders and some concrete action has to be 
taken in this respect to provide affordable medicines and medical devices in 
the country during pandemic like health crisis. The Committee therefore, 
reiterates its recommendation with respect to formulation of new price control 
regime or amend the current price control order, specific for COVID/future 
pandemic related medicines and medical devices. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 19 
 
Exemption of Basic Customs Duty and GST on medicines and medical devices 
for fighting COVID 19 
 
1.14  The Committee had given following recommendation with respect to 
exemption of Basic Customs Duty and GST on medicines and medical devices fo r 
fighting COVID 19:- 
 
 
"The Committee note that Basic Customs Duty was exempted for various 
medicines and medical devices used for fighting COVID 19 during 2021. 
Further GST Council in its 44th Meeting decided to reduce the GST rates 
which were notified on 14th June, 2021. GST was reduced to 5% on most of 
the medicines, Oxygen, Oxygen generation equipment and related medical 
devices including ventilators, Testing Kits and Machines and Other Covid-19 
related relief material such as pulse Oxymeters, hand sanitizers, temperat ure 
check equipments etc. Since the pandemic is creating wave after wave and  
the people of the country are under constant threat, the Committee feel th at 
though the GST council has reduced the GST on COVID related medicines  
and medical devices, the need of the hour is to make these products mor e 
affordable to the people. Hence, the Committee strongly recommend that the  
Department of Pharmaceuticals in coordination with Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare (MoHFW) should submit a proposal to GST Council to exp lore 
the possibility of exempting all the essential medicines and medical devices 
including, Liquid Medical Oxygen, Oxygen Concentrators, ventilators, pulse 
oximeters, hand sanitizers, temperature check equipments, etc used for the 

9 
 
treatment of COVID 19 from the purview of GST. Further Basic Customs Duty 
exemptions on various medicines and medical devices related to COVID 19 
may also be continued till the pandemic is over. This recommendation of th e 
Committee may be sent to the Ministry of Finance for taking appropriate 
action in this regard and furnish reply to the Committee at the earliest." 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.15 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department o f 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
"Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance has provided inputs regarding 
exemption of Basic Customs Duty and GST on medicines and medical 
devices for fighting COVID 19, as below. While Table A  shows the list of 
items that were provided exemption from Basic Customs Duty, the 
notifications under which the exemptions were provided and the validity o f the 
notifications, the Table B  shows the exemption from GST and reduction in 
GST rates provided for COVID-19 related relief goods, the notifications under 
which the exemptions were provided and the validity of the notifications. 
 
TABLE A Full Exemption from Basic Customs Duty on import of COVID 19 
relief goods 
 
S.No. Description of goods Valid till Reference 
1.        Face Mask and Surgical Mask 30th September, 
2020 Notification No. 20/2020-
Customs dated 9 th April, 
2020 
2.        Personal protective Equipment 
(PPE) 
3.        Covid-19 Testing Kits 
4.        Remdesivir Active 
Pharmaceutical Ingredients 
(API) 
31.10.2021 
Notification No. 27/2021-
Customs dated 20.04.21, 
as 
amended vide notification 
No. 29/2021-Customs 
dated 30.04.21 
5.        Beta Cyclodextrin (SBEBCD) 
used in manufacture of 
Remdesivir, subject to the 
condition that the importer 
follows the procedure set out 
in the Customs (Import of 
Goods at Concessional Rate 
of Duty) Rules, 2017. 
31.10.2021 
6.        Injection Remdesivir. 31.10.2021 
7.        Inflammatory Diagnostic 
(marker) kits, namely- IL6, D-
Dimer, CRP(C-Reactive 
Protein), LDH (Lactate De-
Hydrogenase), Ferritin, Pro 
Calcitonin (PCT) and blood 
gas reagents 
31.10.2021 

10 
 
8.        Medical Oxygen   31.08.2021 
Notification No.  28/2021-
Customs dated 24.04.21, 
as 
amended vide notification 
No. 31/2021-Customs 
dated 31.05.21# 
9.        Oxygen concentrator including 
flow meter, regulator, 
connectors and tubings. 
31.08.2021 
10.     Vacuum Pressure Swing 
Absorption (VPSA) and 
Pressure Swing Absorption 
(PSA) oxygen plants, 
Cryogenic oxygen Air 
Separation Units (ASUs) 
producing liquid/gaseous 
oxygen. 
31.08.2021 
11.     Oxygen canister. 31.08.2021 
12.     Oxygen filling systems. 31.08.2021 
13.     Oxygen storage tanks 31.08.2021 
14.     Oxygen generator 31.08.2021 
15.     ISO containers for Shipping 
Oxygen 
31.08.2021 
16.     Cryogenic road transport 
tanks for Oxygen 
31.08.2021 
17.     Oxygen cylinders including 
cryogenic cylinders and tanks 
31.08.2021 
18.     Parts of goods at S.No.6 to 14 
above, used in the 
manufacture of equipment 
related to the production, 
transportation, distribution or 
storage of Oxygen, subject to 
the condition that the importer 
follows the procedure set out 
in the Customs (Import of 
Goods at Concessional Rate 
of Duty) Rules, 2017. 
31.08.2021 
19.     Any other device from which 
oxygen can be generated 
31.08.2021 
20.     Ventilators, including ventilator 
with compressors; all 
accessories and tubings; 
humidifiers; viral filters (should 
be able to function as high 
flow device and come with 
nasal canula). 
31.08.2021 
21.     High flow nasal canula 
device with all attachments; 
nasal canula for use with the 
device. 
31.08.2021 
22.     Helmets for use with non-
invasive ventilation. 
31.08.2021 

11 
 
 
TABLE B  Exemption/ Reduction in GST/ IGST on import of COVID-19 relief 
goods 
 
S.No. Description of goods Reduced 
GST rate Valid till Reference 
1.        All goods covered under 
Customs notification 
27/2201 and 28/2021 (listed 
in Table 1 above), imported 
by State Government or 
agency authorised by it, free 
of cost for free distribution. 
Nil 31.08.2021 Ad hoc exemption 
Order (AEO) No. 
4/2021-Customs 
dated 03.05.2021, 
as amended by 
AEO No. 5/2021-
Customs dated 
31.05.2021 
2.        All goods covered under 
Customs notifications 
27/2201 and 28/2021 (listed 
in Table 1 above), imported 
and donated to Central/ 
State Government or relief 
agency recommended by 
State Government, for free 
distribution. 
Nil 31.08.2021 Notification 
No.  32/2021-
Customs dated 
31.05.2021 
3.        Medical Grade Oxygen 5% 30.09.2021 
Notification No. 
05/2021-Central 
Tax (Rate) dated 
14.06.2021 
4.        Tocilizumab Nil 30.09.2021 
5.        Amphotericin B Nil 30.09.2021 
6.        Remdesivir 5% 30.09.2021 
7.        Heparin (anti-coagulant) 5% 30.09.2021 
8.        Covid-19 testing kits 5% 30.09.2021 
9.        Inflammatory Diagnostic 
(marker) kits, namely- IL6, 
D-Dimer, CRP (C-Reactive 
Protein), LDH (Lactate De-
Hydrogenase), Ferritin, Pro 
Calcitonin (PCT) and blood 
gas reagents. 
5% 
30.09.2021 
10.     Hand Sanitizer 5% 30.09.2021 
23.     Non-invasive ventilation 
oronasal masks for ICU 
ventilators. 
31.08.2021 
24.     Non-invasive ventilation nasal 
masks for ICU ventilators. 
31.08.2021 
25.     COVID-19 vaccine. 31.08.2021 
26.     Amphotericin B 31.08.2021 
27.     Full exemption from Basic 
Customs Duty on 6 specified 
API/ excipients for 
manufacturing Amphotericin B 
31.08.2021 Notification No.  35/2021-
Customs dated 12 th July, 
2021 
28.     Full exemption from Basic 
Customs Duty on Raw 
materials for manufacturing 
COVID test kits 
30.09.2021 

12 
 
S.No. Description of goods Reduced 
GST rate Valid till Reference 
11.     Helmets for use with non-
invasive ventilation 5% 30.09.2021 
12.     Gas/Electric/other furnaces 
for crematorium 5% 30.09.2021 
13.     Pulse Oximeter 5% 30.09.2021 
14.     High flow nasal canula 
device 5% 30.09.2021 
15.     Oxygen Concentrator/ 
generator 5% 30.09.2021 
16.     Ventilators 5% 30.09.2021 
17.     BiPAP Machine 5% 30.09.2021 
18.     Non-invasive ventilation 
nasal or oronasal masks for 
ICU ventilators 
Canula for use with 
ventilators 
5% 
30.09.2021 
19.     Temperature check 
equipment 5% 30.09.2021 
20.     Ambulance 12% 30.09.2021 
  
  
FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.16 The Committee note that all the items listed in Table A like face mask 
and surgical mask, PPE, Covid-19 testing kit etc. mentioning full exemption 
from Basic Customs Duty and Table B   showing exemption/ reduction in GST/ 
IGST on import of COVID-19 relief goods have surpassed their validity in 2021 
itself. However the Committee had recommended the Department to explore 
the possibility of providing these exemptions till the pandemic is over. The 
Committee feel that these exemptions should have continued till the pandemic 
is over. The Committee, therefore strongly reiterates its recommendation on 
exemption of Basic Customs Duty and GST on medicines and medical devices 
for fighting COVID 19 till the pandemic is over. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT  
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 1 
 
Availability of required quantum of medicines 
 
 
2.1 With regard to the Availability of required quantum of medicines, the 
Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
 The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceutical ’s (DoP) mandate 
is the industry promotion for pharmaceutical industry and also providing support t o 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in achieving the objective of afforda ble, 
universal and quality health services in the country. DoP, therefore, undertakes th e 
task of making the essential COVID related drugs available across the country 
inactive partnership with the manufacturers of these drugs. The listing of drugs for  
the COVID management and including the same in the National Treatmen t Protocol 
is done by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW). However, there a re 
drugs which even though not in the National Treatment Protocol are also p rescribed 
by the physicians across the country and are in high demand. Accordingly, ba sed on 
the inputs received from MoHFW from time to time, Department of Pharmaceutica ls 
has been working to augment the production and supply of the e ssential drugs 
required for management of COVID. The Department of Pharmaceuticals also 
submitted that it has no role in framing of National Treatment Protocol as curren tly 
Central Drugs Control Organisation (CDSCO) is updating the MoHFW about the 
production capacity and availability of the drugs . The Committee are of the strong 
view that even a single COVID patient from any corner of the country sh ould not be 
deprived of timely medicines and medical devices for recovering from COV ID 19. 
Since COVID 19 creates waves after waves, it is very much necessary to accord top  
priority to make timely availability of required quantity of medicine s and medical 
devices to all the States and Union Territories. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that:- 
 
(a) daily review of requirements of all the States/UTs should be conducted  by 
DoP and MoHFW in coordination with the State/UT Governments and continuous 
necessary steps should be taken for making available all the medicines a nd medical 
devices required for COVID 19 treatment as per the day to day requireme nts of all 
the States/UTs; 
 
(b) the manufacturers of COVID medicines should be provided all kinds 
of support including logistics, regulatory facilitation by CDSCO, assistance inimports 
of raw materials through Ministry of External Affairs and Indian Missions ab road, 
relief in taxation etc. so as to enable them manufacture the 

14 
 
required quantum of medicines. 
 
(c) the Department of Pharmaceuticals should be made part of Nationa l 
Treatment Protocol so that coordination between DOP and MOHFW is initiated at  
the very planning stage itself. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.2 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
 1(a) Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has informed that the Nationa l 
Drug Buffer Management Guidelines/Strategy for all the essential drugs used in the 
COVID treatment were prepared from time to time to ensure availability of Covid-19 
related drugs in emergency situation. The guidelines were formulated and 
communicated to States/ UTs vide MoHFW ’s DO Letter No X.11035/178/2021-DRS 
dated 13th July, 2021. Further, an online monitoring portal www.dvdms.in  was 
developed to capture information with respect to Stocks, Purchase Orders and 
Closing stock of 8 critical drugs with states including, Enoxaparin 40mg, Methyl 
Prednisolone Injection 40mg/ml, Dexamethasone Injection 4mg/ml, Remdesivir 
Injection 100mg/vial, Tocilizumab Injection 400mg, Amphotericine B Deoxychola te 
Injection 50mg/Vial Posaconazole Injection 300mg, IVIG Injection 10. 
 
Daily training sessions were conducted for uploading information on portal. A 
WhatsApp group of all nodal officers of states has been created for immediate 
response. Further, training Program on MIS System started on 9th Sep 2021 an d is 
being held every day at 3 PM (Monday to Friday) till date. Moreover, d aily track is 
kept regarding the availability of buffer Stock of 8 essential medicine u sed in 
management of Covid-19. 
 
In pursuance of the M/o H&FW ’s guidelines dated 13th July 2021 emphasizing the 
States to build up the buffer stocks of prescribed drugs to strengthen the  
preparedness to meet any future surge of Covid cases, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals (DoP) assigned the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) to coordinate with States/ UTs and the manufacturers to monitor the 
supplies once the purchase orders were placed by the State/UT governments.  
Accordingly, NPPA has actively coordinated with manufacturers and States/UTs to 
ensure availability of adequate stock of Covid drugs, including IVIG. 
 
1(b) Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) has informed that the Indian manufactu rers 
of COVID-19 medicines have been provided all necessary support in terms of 
logistics and import of raw materials by MEA and its Missions abroad to enable  them 
to manufacture the required quantum of medicines.   
 
Pursuant to Government ’s call to ramp up domestic production of Remdesivir to 1 
crore doses a month, the Indian manufacturers had sought Ministry ’s help in 
sourcing critical raw materials from countries abroad, mainly from China, United 
States and Europe. Missions and Posts reached out to the suppliers and also so ught 
support from foreign governments. A sustained effort was made to speed up  delivery 
schedules. Specifically, the Indian missions in US, France, Germany, Italy, Hung ary, 
Portugal and China successfully took up the suppliers in these countrie s to expedite 
supply of raw material, expand their production capacity, etc. so as to ex pedite 
delivery.  

15 
 
 
MoH&FW has informed that the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation 
(CDSCO) streamlined the various regulatory procedures to ensure patient safety, 
early access to medicine as well as ease of doing business through issuance  of 
various circulars, notices, orders etc. The details of measures taken to streamline  
regulatory procedures are as under: - 
 
(i) On 30.01.2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) had declared the 
outbreak of coronavirus as a “Public Health Emergency and subsequently, on 
11.03.2020 declared it as a pandemic, and reiterating the call for countrie s to take 
immediate actions and scale up response to treat, detect and reduce th e 
transmission. 
 
(ii) To ensure adequate supply of the essential medicines, the issue wa s take n 
up with the State Governments as well as various drug manufacturing associations 
also, to ensure that they were having enough stock of APIs and formulatio ns and 
there were no shortages of essential medicines. 
  
(iii) Government has also issued advisory to all the State/UT Governments to 
ensure that merchant importers/ stockists as well as indigenous manufacturers of 
APIs do not hoard and create artificial scarcity of APIs / KSMs in the country. 
 
(iv) CDSCO has so far, approved total 515 diagnostic kits for COVID -19 on fast 
track basis which includes 262 RT PCR kits, 155 Rapid antibody kits, 85 Antigen test 
kit and 13 Antigen home test kit. 
  
(v) Govt. has issued notification on 18th May, 2020 so that manufacturers can  
manufacture and stock any vaccine for COVID-19, which is under clinical trial, for  
sale or distribution after completion of clinical trial and grant of approval by CDSCO 
for manufacturing. 
 
(vi) Considering the emergency and unmet medical need, CDSCO approved the  
following five drugs for Restricted Emergency Use in the country for treatment of 
COVID-19 infection: 
 
a. Remdesivir Injectable formulations for treatment of patients with severe 
COVID-19 infection, initially on 01.06.20 for import and marketing and subsequen tly, 
for manufacture and marketing the same drug to three indigenous manufacturers. 
 
b. Manufacturing and marketing permission on 19.06.2020 for Favipiravir  tablets 
for mild to moderate COVID-19 infection.  
 
c. Marketing permission 10.07.20 for Itolizumab injection for the treatment of 
CRS in moderate to severe ARDS patients due to COVID-19. 
 
d. Manufacturing and marketing permission on 28.12.2021 for Molnupir avir 
capsules for treatment of adult patients with COVID-19, with SpO2 >93% and who  
have high risk of progression of the disease including hospitalization or death. 
 
e. Manufacturing and marketing permission on 21.04.2022 for Nirma trelvir 
tablets and Ritonavir tablets for treatment of adult patients with COVID19, with Sp O2 
>93% and who have high risk of progression of the disease including h ospitalization 
or death. 

16 
 
 
(vii) The Government has assessed and ensured the availability of th e essential 
medicines, hand sanitizers as well as protective equipment including masks, PPE 
Kits as well as fast track processing of applications for clinical trials and new drug 
including vaccines for COVID and taken all possible measures to meet the public 
health emergency for COVID. 
 
(viii) CDSCO has granted approval to ten vaccines for manufacture for sale or 
distribution in the country with certain regulatory conditions. 
 
(ix) Provisions regarding the doorstep delivery of drugs to consumers under 
Section 26B of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, published vide G.S.R. 2 20(E) 
dated 26.03.2020 are applicable only for retail chemists having retail sale lice nse in 
Form-20 or Form-21 under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. It is not applicable 
for any digital health platforms/e-pharmacy/online pharmacy platforms. 
 
In order to handle the unexpected pandemic of Covid-19 in Jan 2020  onward and to 
ensure the continuous production and availability of the Covid drugs in the co untry, 
DoP in co-ordination with the NPPA & CDSCO have taken up various issues with the 
State/UT Governments, Drugs Controllers, industry associations including Chemist 
and Druggist Associations to take necessary measures to facilitate the drugs and  
pharmaceutical manufacturing companies for smooth movement of raw m aterials, 
packaging materials etc. as well as movement of the required personne l to maintain 
smooth supply chain of drugs in the country. 
 
DoP in collaboration with NIC and CDSCO has developed a CDMS (COVID Drugs 
Monitoring System) Portal to monitor the availability of indigenously man ufactured 
and imported APIs and formulations used in COVID management. Sto cks of API 
along with stocks of KSM/Intermediates are captured in the portal on weekly and 
monthly basis. 
 
1(c) Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has informed that currently the JWG is  
responsible for creation/ updation of National Treatment Protocol for Covid-19 
Management. If required, representative from DoP will be invited as special 
representative. ICMR has also informed about nomination of an officer from DoP. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 2 
 
Major constraints in ensuring availability of medicines 
 
2.3 With regard to the Major constraints in ensuring availability of medi cines, the 
Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
The Committee note that there were two major constraints noticed in ensuring  
the availability of drugs in the initial few days of the surge of COVID case s. One was 
the lag time between manufacturing of the drug and its actual availa bility in the 
market because when they start manufacturing a drug like Remdesivir takestwo  to 
four weeks before the drug can come out because it is a biological process or a bio-
chemical process. This time period is required with respect to the regulatory 
procedures which have a bearing on the safety and efficacy of the drug.In this regard 
the Committee note that MoHFW has brought out a buffer policy vide which the 

17 
 
States/UTs have been advised to maintain adequate buffer stocks of the drugs and 
that the Central Government is also maintaining a buffer stock of the drugs. Second 
constraint was the import of certain raw materials for drugs, including the finished 
formulations like Tocilizumab which is not manufactured in India. Even if APIs are 
domestically produced in the country, there are a few raw materials called excipients  
for which the country is depending on foreign manufacturers. In this regard, the  
Committee note that the Ministry of External Affairs provide assistance to all the 
manufacturers by coordinating with the overseas suppliers through Indian Missions  
abroad. Even though the steps have been taken by the Government to  address 
these two constraints, the Committee make the following recommendations to 
ensure the availability of COVID medicines to the people at the time of surge in 
COVID cases:- 
 
(a) Central Government should continuously maintain a buffer stock of allthe 
medicines required for the treatment of COVID 19 and that a transparent a nd fair 
process should be adopted for the equal distribution of medicines and me dical 
devices to meet the day-to-day requirements of each State and Union Territory. 
 
(b) Immediate attention should be paid to address the issue of depen dence on 
other countries for the raw materials particularly the excipients required for the  
production of COVID 19 related medicines. All necessary measures should be 
initiated on war footing for the manufacture of APIs and excipients in t he country to 
end the dependence on other countries. 
 
(c) Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) should continuously impress upon its 
missions abroad to provide the necessary assistance to the Indian manufacturers in 
getting the raw materials including excipients from the overseas suppliers for the 
manufacture of COVID 19 drugs. Secondly, Indianmissions should play a strong role 
for the import of required quantum of medicines like Tocilizumab wh ich are not 
manufactured in the country. Functioning of Indian missions in this regard sho uld be 
reviewed in the meetings of Drugs Coordination Committee (DCC) and corrective 
measures should be taken through MEA in case of any shortcomings in the 
functioning of Indian Missions. This recommendation of the Committee should b e 
sent to the Ministry of External Affairs for its information and necessary action.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.4   In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of  
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
(a) National Drug Buffer Management Guidelines/Strategy for all the essentia l 
drugs used in the COVID treatment were prepared from time to time to ensure t he 
availability of Covid-19 related drugs in emergency situation. Further, an onlin e 
monitoring portal www.dvdms.in was developed to capture information with respec t 
to Stocks, Purchase Orders and Closing stock of 8 critical drugs with States 
including, Enoxaparin 40mg, Methyl Prednisolone Injection 40mg/ml, 
Dexamethasone Injection 4mg/ml, Remdesivir Injection 100mg/vial, Tocilizumab 

18 
 
Injection 400mg, Amphotericine B Deoxycholate Injection 50mg/Vial Posaconazole 
Injection 300mg, IVIG Injection 10. Daily training sessions were conducted for 
uploading information on portal. Further, daily track was kept regarding the 
availability of buffer Stock of 8 essential medicine used in management of Covid-19. 
 
(b) CDSCO and MoH&FW took the following regulatory measures to curb the 
Import dependence:  
 
(i) CDSCO has issued the advisory to State Licensing Authorities to facilitate 
increasing the production of COVID drugs and other essential drugs including API 
from time to time. 
 
(ii) MoH&FW amended the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 vide Notification 
No. G.S.R. 1193 (E) dated 12/12/2018, wherein the application fees have been 
increased for grant of various Import Registration certificates/Licences/Permission 
drugs/New drugs as well as Overseas Inspection. This encourages domestic 
production. 
 
(iii) There is a provision under Rule 24(A)(5) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 
1945, for inspection or visit of the manufacturing premises or drugs, by the  licensing 
authority or by any persons to whom power has been delegated in this behalf by the 
licensing authority under Rule 22 of said rules. 
 
Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) has framed a Scheme “Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Promotion of domestic Manufacturing of critical K ey 
Starting Materials (KSMs)/Drug Intermediates and Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients 
(APIs) in the Country ” with objective to attain self-reliance and reduce import 
dependence in critical KSMs/DIs/APIs. Under the Scheme, financial incentives are 
given based on committed investment and sales made by selected ap plicant for the 
eligible products. The 41 eligible products under the Scheme covers the 53 A PIs 
approved by the Government. Out of 239 applications received under the scheme, 
49 applications have been approved for 33 products. Further, the DoP has also 
launched a Scheme for “Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks ” with objective to promote 
setting up of Bulk Drugs parks in the country for providing easy access to world class 
Common Infrastructure Facilities (CIF) to bulk drug units located in the park in order 
to significantly bring down the manufacturing cost of bulk drugs and thereby  make 
India self-reliant in bulk drugs by increasing the competitiveness of the domestic bulk 
drug industry. Thirteen applications received under the Scheme are under 
examination. 
 
(c)     MEA has informed that the Indian Missions abroad have been ex tending all 
necessary assistance to the Indian manufacturers in getting the raw materials, 
including excipients from the overseas suppliers for manufacturing COVID-19 drugs.   
 
The Indian Missions were able to get immediate positive response from as ma ny as 
23 suppliers in 13 countries for supply of Remdesivir, either as donation o r for 

19 
 
commercial purchase. It also helped in sourcing critical raw materials from countri es 
abroad, mainly from China, United States and Europe, which helped in ramping up 
production in India. With MEA ’s intervention, the Allocation of Tocilizumab was 
significantly expanded by M/s Roche, which immediately supplied 50,000 v ials to 
India, promised to ship another 50,000 vials in subsequent weeks, expanded 
production and doubled delivery. MEA also worked with external manufactu rers on 
transferring technologies to further increase global Actemra (Tocilizumab) supply as 
quickly as possible. MEA also helped in identifying suppliers for Molnupirapir within a 
very short span of time. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 3 
 
Covid Drugs Management Cell (CDMC) 
 
2.5 With regard to the Covid Drugs Management Cell (CDMC), the Committee 
had recommended as follows:- 
 
The Committee note that a COVID Drugs Management Cell (CDMC) has 
been set up in the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) to oversee the 
management of smooth supply of drugs used in COVID-19 management d uring the 
pandemic. As per the information provided by DoP, daily morning meetings of CDMC 
are conducted to review and prioritize the actions required with respect to th e issues 
surrounding drug production and availability. Looking at the importance a nd the 
quantum of work, the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT) atta ched one 
Additional Secretary and five Directors with DoP who were then assigned specif ic 
tasks in DoP. Since the new strains of SARS COV 2 virus are emerging from various 
parts of the world and continuously affecting the population of the world including the 
people of our country on a large scale, the Committee would like to make the  
following recommendations:- 
 
(a) In view of the continuous onslaught of the pandemic, CDMC should 
continuously function in DoP till the pandemic is entirely over. 
 
(b) In case of necessity of more senior officers for reviewing the requirements of 
individual States/UTs, DoPT should be impressed upon posting the requisite numb er 
of Officers and staff for the effective functioning of the Cell. This recommend ation 
may also be shared with DoPT for the purpose. 
 
(c) Daily review meetings of CDMC should continue till the pandemic is entirely 
over. 
 
(d) CDMC should work with the moral responsibility of ensuring that every COVID 
19 patient in the country gets his/her COVID medicines and medical devices for th e 
timely recovery from the disease. 
 

20 
 
(e) It should be the responsibility of CDMC to ensure fair allocation and 
distribution of medicines and medical devices to all the States and Union Te rritories 
by adopting transparent and fair criteria. 
 
(f) COVID Drugs Management Cell (CDMC) at the centre alone is not sufficient 
and similar COVID Drugs Management Cells need to be created at State/UT level so 
that holistic monitoring as well as availability and distribution of medici nes/medical 
devices is ensured in each State/UT. Necessary steps may be taken in this regard 
and the progress made may be conveyed to the Committee. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
(a) to (f) DoP, along with NPPA and CDSCO has set up CDMC. As 
recommended by the Committee, CDMC is still functioning and its meetings are 
being conducted at periodic intervals. While, during the peak of the pa ndemic 
situation, six officers including an Additional Secretary level officer were attache d 
with the department, but with reduction in number of active cases, DoP is able to 
manage things with the human resources available at its disposal. However, if 
required, it will again request DoP&T for posting officers, as needed. CDMC with  its 
continuous watch on monitoring activities by the government agencies like NPP A 
and CDSCO has ensured the sufficient availability of medicines and me dical devices 
to all States/ UTs as per their requirements. During the peak pandemic p eriod, 
CDMC undertook the exercises of allocation of Remdesivir, Tocilizumab a nd 
Amphotericin to different States / UTs / Central Agencies and PSEs. This facilitate d 
equitable distribution of these medicines to different parts of the country. Mo reover, 
continuous monitoring of 8 buffer drugs identified by MoH&FW plus other d rugs 
totalling to more than 30 in number along with the crucial medical devices are being 
done to keep close watch on their availability in hospitals and general chemist shops. 
The suggestion of opening similar cell as CDMC at state level has been no ted and 
the same will be undertaken, if such need arises. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 4 
 
Drugs Coordination Committee (DCC) 
 
 
2.7 With regard to the Drugs Coordination Committee (DCC) , the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
 
(a)The Committee note that in order to formalise the inter-Departmental 
consultations on the issues with regard to drug availability, a Drugs Coordination 
Committee (DCC) was constituted vide OM 20.05.2021 as an institutional 
mechanism with representation from DoP, MoHFW, Directorate General of Health 
Services (DGHS), Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), Directorate General 

21 
 
of Foreign Trade (DGFT), Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), CDSCO and NPPA for 
efficient decision making on all the issues with respect to COVID-19 related drug s. 
The Committee further note that Drugs Coordination Committee (DCC) in its 
meetings deliberated on issues such as the need to build up a buffer sto ck of drugs, 
regulating exports of COVID drugs and coordinating with manufacturers for ramping 
up production so as to be in a state of preparedness for drug supply in the eve nt of a 
future surge. In this regard, the Committee feel that the success of this administrative 
arrangement depends on the effective implementation of decisions ta ken by the 
Drugs Coordination Committee (DCC) as well as effective coordination among all the 
concerned Ministries/Departments and the State/UT Governments. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that an institutional mechanism should be created for 
the effective implementation of all the decisions of DCC by the concerned 
Ministries/Departments. 
 
(b) According to DoP, DCC is an administrative arrangement for coordination till the 
time it is required and this mechanism will be used as and when requir ed. Since 
various strains of COVID 19 are emerging in the world and the waves after the 
waves of the pandemic is affecting our country as well, the Committee, the refore, 
recommend that DCC should continuously function till the COVID 19 pandemic is 
completely over and its meeting should be held regularly for coordinating the  efforts 
of various Ministries/Departments to make available the medicines and me dical 
devices required for COVID 19. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.8   In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
(a) and (b): DoP had set up DCC with representatives taken from MoHFW, DGHS, 
ICMR, DGFT, MEA, CDSCO and NPPA for efficient decision making on all the 
issues with respect to COVID-19 related drugs. Till date, eleven meetings of DCC 
have been held. Presently, no surge in active cases has been noted. In ca se of any 
surge in active cases, the DCC will meet, as and when required, to mak e available 
the medicines and medical devices required for COVID-19. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 5 
 
Empowered Group-2 (EG-2) 
 
2.9 With regard to the Empowered Group-2 (EG- 2), the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
 
 
 (a) The Committee also note that the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) vide its 
Order dated 29th May, 2021 has re-constituted Empowered Group-2 (EG-2 ) for 
Emergency Response Capabilities with Secretary, MoHFW as the Convener and 12 
other Members of various Ministries/Departments of Government of India and th e 
Prime Minister Office including the Secretary, DoP as a member for decisively and 

22 
 
effectively addressing evolving changes from COVID-19 and for Emergency 
Response Capabilities. The subject “medicines” is tasked to the EG-2 besides 
Hospital beds with ICU and essential medical equipment for COVID. The Committee 
further note that EG-2 had prepared the buffer Stock Management Guid elines for 
COVID-19 drugs for the guidance of the States/ UTs to build up buffer stocks of 
essential COVID drugs and to ensure their availability for addressing any futu re 
surge in COVID cases. The guidelines were communicated to the States/ UTs by 
MoHFW on 13th July, 2021. In this regard, the Committee are of the strong  view that 
mere preparation and circulation of buffer stock guidelines is not adequate an d it is 
equally important that the guidelines are followed by states and Union Te rritories in 
letter and spirit. The Committee, therefore, recommend that concrete measures 
should be taken for the availability of buffer stock of various medicin es and medical 
devices with each and every State/UT so as not to deprive a single patient t he 
medicines and medical devices required by her/him for the treatment of COVID 19. 
 
(b) The Committee note that EG-2 is tasked with the decisions on import a nd 
export of essential COVID medicines such as Remdesivir, Liposomal Amphotericin 
B, Tocilizumab and IVIG. Since the country is again facing surge in number of cases, 
EG-2 reconsider its earlier decisions on permission granted for the export of thes e 
medicines and suitable decisions should be taken for the availability of the se 
medicines to the people of the country. EG-2 also ramp up its efforts to imp ort the 
medicines like Tocilizumab, Liposomal Amphotericin B etc. which are mostly 
imported for use in the country so that the requirements of the country are fulfilled.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.10 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
(a) and (b): DoP had assigned NPPA to coordinate with States/ UTs and the 
manufacturers to monitor the supplies once the purchase orders were place d by the 
State/UT governments. NPPA has actively coordinated with manufacturers and 
States/UTs to ensure availability of adequate stock of Covid drugs, including IVIG. In 
order to ensure domestic availability, on 8.2.2020, all personal protective  equipment 
(PPE) including clothing, masks, coveralls, N95 Mask were prohibited for export. 
Export of Ventilators/surgical Mask, Disposable banned on 19.3.2020 while 
Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) and formation export were banned on 25.3.2020. 
Subsequently, in view of improvement in Covid 19 situation and adequate a vailability 
of domestically produced essential medical equipment ban on export of Ve ntilators 
was removed on 4.8.2020; of PPE on 25.8.2020; of N95 Masks on 6 .10.2020; of 
Sanitizers on 15.10.2020 and that of Goggles/Nitrile Gloves on 22.12.20.  
 
MoHFW along with DoP took various initiatives to ensure the availability of 
medicines in the country. EG-2 took various actions to ramp up its efforts to import 
the medicines like Tocilizumab, Liposomal Amphotericin B etc. which are mo stly 
imported. 

23 
 
  
In order to maintain the availability of stock for domestic use during the COV ID-19 
pandemic, the export of Injection Remdesivir and Remdesivir Active Pharm aceutical 
Ingredients (API), Amphotericin-B injections, Enoxaparin (Formulation and API) a nd 
Intra-Venous Immunoglobulin (IVIG) (Formulation and API) was restricted vide 
DGFT’s Notifications No. 08/2015-2020 dated 14.06.2021, 07/2015-2020 dated 
01.06.2021 and 15/2015-2020 dated 10.01.2022 respectively. Further, loo king at 
the declining trend of new COVID cases as well as cumulative active cases, the 
restrictions on above four drugs were lifted. If there is any surge in active cases, 
appropriate decision will be taken up by the Empowered Group-2. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 7 
 
Shortage of Remdesivir during the second wave of pandemic 
 
 
2.11 With regard to the Shortage of Remdesivir during the second w ave of 
pandemic, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
(a) The Committee note that Remdesivir which is a patented drug, manufactured  
in India by 7 Indian pharmaceutical companies under voluntary license s granted by 
Gilead Life Sciences USA (patent holder). This drug has been included in the 
National Treatment Protocol of COVID 19 as an optional drug only. During se cond 
wave of the pandemic, shortage of this medicine caused severe hardsh ips to the 
people across the country. DoP has taken steps to address the shortages of 
Remdesivir in the market that was noticed in the months of April 2021 du e to the 
sudden surge in demand of the drugs for managing COVID-19 patients. The 
Department stated that in order to substantially augment the productio n of 
Remdesivir, Drugs Controller General (India) granted expeditious approval to 40 new 
manufacturing sites of the licensed manufacturers of Remdesivir. This has led to 
increase in number of Remdesivir manufacturing sites from 22 in mid-April 2021to 62 
at present. The domestic production capacity of Remdesivir increased from around 
38 lakh vials per month in April, 2021 to around 122 lakh vials per month in June, 
2021. Further, in order to augment domestic availability of Remdesivir man ufactured 
in the country, the export of Remdesivir Injection and Remdesivir API(Active 
Pharmaceutical Ingredient) was prohibited from 11th April, 2021. In addition,DoP and 
MoHFW jointly undertook an exercise for allocation of available stocks of Remdesivir 
to all the States/UTs of the country in order to mitigate shortage and toensu re fair 
and equitable distribution across the country. MoHFW has also suppliedarou nd 
30,10,798 Remdesivir vials, free of cost, to the States/UTs to address 
COVIDpandemic.In the aftermath of the second wave, the demand for Rem desivir 
has come down considerably and the demand supply gap has reversed w hereby 
supplyis much more than the demand. Accordingly, Remdesivir was moved 
fromProhibited to Restricted Category of Exports on 14th June, 2021. The states and 
UTshave been issued “Guidelines for Buffer Stock Management of Covid-19 
Drugs”and advised to procure and maintain buffer stocks of Remdesivir and other 

24 
 
Drugsfor preparedness to deal with any future requirements. Since Remd esivir has 
beenincluded in the National Treatment Protocol as only an optional drug, 
theCommittee recommend that scientific studies should be conducted on the 
effectiveness of medicines like Remdesivir which have been included in National 
Treatment Protocol as optional medicines in curing critical COVID patients. Basedon 
the studies, steps should be taken by MoHFW to remove those drugs which a renot 
necessary for inclusion in the National Treatment Protocol. 
 
(b) Affordable COVID-19 medicines and Medical devices is the need of the h our 
during these unprecedented Pandemic situation when the common man on thestreet 
is suffering either due to non availability of Remdesivir or if available,  anexorbitant 
price is charged making it difficult for the poor people to afford the medical treatment. 
However, the Committee fail to understand that none of thePharma Pu blic Sector 
Undertakings under the Department of Pharmaceuticals havebeen granted voluntary  
license to manufacture Remdesivir and other COVIDessential drugs for public health  
supply. In this regard, the Committee feel thatequal opportunity should also be 
extended to these Pharma PSUs who havedeveloped trust, quality an d cost 
effectiveness in their pharma products over a longperiod of time. Th e Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department ofPharmaceutical initiate steps to explore 
the possibilities of manufacturing of COVID essential drugs by PSUs under it. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.12  In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry o f 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
(a) and (b)  National Treatment Protocol is decided by DGHS, which updates 
the same from time to time. All the five pharma PSUs under the aeg is of the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals are under closure or strategic sale. However, private 
manufacturers have come forward and seven of them, viz., Mylan Pha rmaceuticals 
Pvt. Ltd., Jubilant Generics Ltd., Hetero Healthcare Ltd., Cadilla Health Care Ltd., 
Syngene International Ltd. (Biocon Biologics India), Dr. Reddy ’s Laboratories Ltd. 
and Cipla Limited got licences from M/s Gilead Life Sciences (USA), the pa tent 
holder of the Remdesivir injections to manufacture and market these medicin es in 
India. 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 11 
 
India Covid-19 Emergency Response and Health Systems Preparedness 
Package -Phase-II 
 
2.13 With regard to India Covid-19 Emergency Response and Health Systems  
Preparedness Package -Phase-II, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
  
The Committee note that a Scheme on “India Covid-19 Emergency Response 
and Health Systems Preparedness Package - Phase- II” (ECRP-Phase-II) during 

25 
 
2021-22 has been approved by the Union Cabinet on 8.07.2021 for an amount of Rs. 
23,123 crore, to be implemented in 9 months from 1st July, 2021 to 31st Ma rch, 
2022.The Scheme is aimed to prevent, detect and respond to the co ntinuing threat 
posed by COVID-19 and strengthen national health systems for preparedness in  
India. The scheme is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) with some Cen tral 
Sector (CS) components. One of the CSS components is support to the States for 
provision of required drugs and diagnostics for COVID management, including 
maintaining a buffer stock for essential medicines required for effective COVID-19 
management. In this regard, the Committee note that a guidance Note on  ECRP-
Phase-II was shared with the States/UTs on 14th July 2021, requesting th e States to 
send the proposals for appraisal and approval. Further, the ECRP-II has also a CS 
component of Central Procurement of essential medicines (including the emerging  
drugs, based on the needs) for effective management of COVID19. Presently th e 
country is going through another wave of the pandemic and the threat of  Omicron 
and the other strains of COVID virus is also looming large over the country. In t his 
regard, the Committee appreciate that the Union Government is implementing the 
scheme ECRP-Phase-II with an amount of Rs. 23,123.00 crore. It is very mu ch 
necessary that both CSS and CS components of the Scheme are imp lemented in 
letter and spirit. Since the Scheme is under implementation since 1st July, 2021, the 
Committee hope that considerable progress would have been made in the 
implementation of both the CSS and CS components of the Scheme. I n this regard, 
the Committee recommend that all the States/UTs should be given equ al 
opportunities in getting the financial support under the Scheme for the p rovision of 
required drugs and diagnostics for COVID management, including maintaining a 
buffer stock for essential medicines required for effective COVID-19 management.  
As the Scheme is to be implemented by 31 March, 2022, the Comm ittee should be 
informed of the assistance provided to each State/UT under the CSS component of 
the Scheme. The Committee should also be informed of the present status of 
implementation of the CS component of Central Procurement of essential medicin es 
(including the emerging drugs, based on the needs) for effective management of 
COVID19. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.14 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
MoH&FW has informed that the Scheme on “India Covid-19 Emergency 
Response and Health Systems Preparedness Package - Phase- II” (ECRP-Phase-II) 
during 2021-22 has been approved by the Cabinet on 08.07.2021 fo r an amount of 
Rs. 23,123 crores, to be implemented in 9 months from 1st July, 2021 to 31st March, 
2022. The Scheme is aimed to prevent, detect and respond to the continuing  threat 
posed by COVID-19 and strengthen national health systems for preparedness in  
India. The scheme is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) with some Cen tral 
Sector (CS) components. 
 

26 
 
One of the CSS components is support to the States for provision of required drugs 
and diagnostics for COVID management, including maintaining a buffer stock fo r 
essential medicines required for effective COVID-19 management. In this regard, 
Guidance Note on “India Covid-19 Emergency Response and Health Systems 
Preparedness Package - Phase- II” (ECRP-Phase-II) has been shared with the 
States/UTs on 14th July 2021, requesting the States to send the proposals fo r 
appraisal and approval. 
 
Further, the ECRP-II has also a component of Central Procurement of essential  
medicines (including the emerging drugs, based on the needs) for effective 
management of COVID19. An amount of Rs. 680 crore was provided under centrally 
sponsored portion of ECRP-II to all districts of States to ensure availa bility of 
essential drugs including a buffer stock of drugs for Covid-19 management. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 12 
Risk to children from COVID 19 
 
2.15 With regard to the Risk to children from COVID 19, the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
 
The Committee note with concern that Children are also at huge risk of getting 
COVID 19. So it is necessary that specific and fool proof preparedness is required 
with respect to the availability of medicines and medical devices specificall y used for 
the treatment of COVID-19 positive children. In this regard, Ministry of Health an d 
Family Welfare (MoHFW) has issued Guidelines for Management of COVID-19 in 
Children (below 18 years) on 18 June 2021. Just issuing guidelines is not enoug h 
and the Union Government should coordinate with all the State Governmen ts/Union 
Territories for the effective implementation of these guidelines. Particularly  the 
availability of adequate stock of IVIG should be reviewed with every  State 
Governments/UTs. In case of inadequate buffer stock of IVIG with any of  the 
states/UTs, the Union Government should take immediate necessary steps for the 
provision of required quantum of IVIG to those States/UTs. The action taken in this 
regard should be intimated to the Committee. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.16 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
MoH&FW developed an online monitoring portal, viz., www.dvdms.in to 
capture information with respect to stocks, purchase orders and closing stock of 8 
critical drugs with States/UTs.  As explained in reply to Recommendation No. 11 
above, funds for the same have also been provided to the states. Further, to 
strengthen the preparedness to meet any future surge, guidelines for Buff er Stock 
Management of drugs used for COVID- 19 were shared with the States/UTs, 
emphasizing the States to initiate procurement on priority for building up buffer 

27 
 
stocks. NPPA was assigned to actively coordinate with States/ UTs and the 
manufacturers, if any, facilitation is required to monitor supplies, once the p urchase 
orders are placed. NPPA actively coordinated with manufacturers and States/UTs to 
ensure availability of adequate stock of IVIG. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 13 
 
Effective Research for better understanding of causes of Mucormycosis/ Black 
Fungus disease 
 
2.17 With regard  to the Effective Research for better understanding of causes of 
Mucormycosis/ Black Fungus disease, the Committee had recommended as 
follows:- 
 
The Committee note that there was a significant increase in number of cases 
of Mucormycosis (Black Fungus) in Covid – 19 patients during the second wave of 
the pandemic. According to the Department of Health and Family Welfare, 
Mucormycosis and other fungal infections, although not new diseases, are most 
commonly seen as opportunistic infection in patients with underlying risk factors . 
Causal association has been observed between elevated blood sugar levels 
(whether in patients with pre-existing diabetes mellitus, or hyperglycaemia due t o 
steroid therapy), immune-suppressive therapy, irrational use of steroids as well as 
broad spectrum antibiotics. As per the submission made by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, till date there is no scientific evidence to suggest increased risk o f 
Mucormycosis for patients on oxygen therapy. The Committee further note tha t 
advisories on Mucormycosis have been issued by ICMR, AIIMS, Delhi as well as 
DGHS, which point to a multifactorial causation of Mucormycosis in COVID-
19patients. A number of technical advisories and guidance have also been issued by 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW) viz. Advisory for rational use of 
Steroids and Tocilizumab in the treatment of Covid -19 patients. Since it is v ery 
much necessary to ascertain the exact cause of Mucormycosis, the Committee 
recommend that the virology research institutes in the country should ramp up their 
research on the causes of fungal infections like Mucormycosis/Black Fungus that is  
prevalent in COVID-19 patients for better understanding and management of 
medicines and medical devices required for such patients. Indian Council of Medical 
Research (ICMR) may also be engaged in this regard for finding the appropri ate 
reasons for fungal infections like Mucormycosis in critical post COVID-19 patients.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.18 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
ICMR, in 2019, initiated a National Task Force (NTF) for capacity building and 
institutional strengthening for advanced and standardized fungal diagnostic facil ities 
across the country. Six Advanced Mycology Diagnostic and Research Centres 
(AMDRCs) have been established through this NTF to improve patient care & 

28 
 
management and fungal research in the centre in their geographical area. NTF wa s 
initiated in 12 centres across the country in July 2021 to identify the factors 
responsible for the development of Mucormycosis. Analysis of the data genera ted is 
currently under process in ICMR. Department of Biotechnology (DBT) initiated the 
efforts at National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), Pune, to understand the  fungal 
organisms involved in disease incidences of Mucormycosis in the city of Pune. The  
morphological and sequencing analyses of the collected samples revealed the 
prevalence of Rhizopusarrizus and R. oryzae among the diagnosed patients. 
However, few isolates were identified as Aspergillus hortai, A. persii, Peniophora sp ., 
Parathyridariasp., which were rarely reported in case of Mucormycosis. Further 
studies are proposed to be undertaken by DBT to gain insights into the 
pathogenesis. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 14 
 
Treatment for Mucormycosis/Black Fungus disease 
 
2.19 With regard to the Treatment for Mucormycosis/Black Fungus disease, th e 
Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
The Committee note that Amphotericin-B, which is used for the treatmen t of 
Mucormycosis, is of two types viz Liposomal and Conventional. The Liposo mal 
variant of the drug is the preferred choice of physicians for treating pa tients of 
Mucormycosis since the same is considered to be safe and is able to act on the body 
in a controlled manner with minimum side effects. During second wave of the 
pandemic, the country faced shortage of this medicine. The Government  of 
India'ssupply was not commensurate with the requirements of the States during  the 
second wave of the pandemic as every patient is to be given five d oses of medicine 
for about ten to twelve days or even more than that. The number of companies 
involved in production of Amphotericin-B is 16 and their total installed mo nthly 
production capacity is about 7,74,200 vials. Further CDSCO, after consultation with 
the association of Drugs manufacturers, has issued manufacturing / marketing 
permission for Amphotericin B Liposomal Injection to eleven firms. Union 
Government is also importing the drug to fill the gap between the requ irement and 
domestic production. Since this Amphotericin B Liposomal Injection is very mu ch 
essential for the treatment of Mucormycosis, the Committee recommend that th e 
Department of Pharmaceuticals should take necessary steps for augmen ting the 
production of the drug in the country as per the requirements of the country. 
Progress made in this regard should be intimated to the Committee. Services of 
Ministry of External Affairs should also be utilized for the import of required qu antum 
of the medicine to fill the gap between the domestic production and  the requirement. 
Moreover, fool proof arrangements should be made for equitable and f air distribution 
of the drug to the States/UTs according to their requirements in case of all ocation of 
the same by the Union Government.  
 
 
 
 

29 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.20 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
A sudden increase in demand was observed in mid-2021 in some states f or 
Amphotericin-B, which was being actively prescribed by the physicians to pa tients 
suffering from Mucormycosis also known as Black Fungus, a post COVID 
complication. As the complication which was initially confined to Maharashtra a nd 
Gujarat, spread among the other States, the availability of the drug  vis-à- vis the 
supply posed a challenge due to which lot of efforts were undertaken t o manage the 
supply and availability of the drug. The Department of Pharmaceuticals jointly with 
MoHFW took a decision to allocate Liposomal Amphoteric in-B, available in the 
country through five existing domestic manufacturers and one existing importer, to 
States/UTs till the supply and demand position stabilizes and also to ensure 
equitable distribution across the country. For ensuring quick supply, additional 
foreign sources were immediately tapped with the help of MEA and various Indian 
Missions in foreign countries were alerted to look for sourcing the said drug from 
anywhere in the world. 
  
All applications submitted by companies for permission to manufacture Am photericin 
-B have been considered expeditiously also keeping in mind the safety  and efficacy 
of the drug to be manufactured. CDSCO has given permission to 11 new  
manufacturers of Liposomal Amphotericin-B. Names of 11 new manufacturers are 
M/s Emcure, M/s Gufic, M/s Alembic, M/s Lyka and M/s Natco Ltd, M/s Intas, M/s 
Aspiro Pharma, M/s Dr. Reddy ’s Labs, M/s Stelis Biopharma, M/s Jodas  Expoim 
and M/s Samarth Life Sciences. 
  
MEA has informed that missions were mobilized to scout for suppliers o f the drug 
abroad as well as for alternative drugs. Based on MoH&FW ’s recommendations, 
MEA asked the concerned Missions and Posts to approach various identified 
sources and seek firm quotations. MEA presented firm quotations received fo r the 
desired drugs to EG-2 for its consideration. MEA reached out to M/s Gilead  at an 
appropriately high level to expedite allocation of Liposomal Amphoteri cin B.  It 
committed to expediting supply of up to 1 million doses to India thr ough M/s Mylan 
and withdrew stocks from third countries for supply to India. 
  
MEA also helped several Indian manufacturers of Liposomal Amphotericin-B for 
expeditious supply of key excipients DSPG and HSPC, required in the production o f 
the drug.  
  
As per monitoring data made available by NPPA till 2nd January 2 022, the total 
number of 16,99,452 vials of L-Amphotericin B injections were supplied to the  
different States, UTs and Central Agencies, against the total number of 16 ,08,291 
vials allotted to them. As the cases have dropped sharply, this supply shows 
comfortable position of availability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 15 
 
Provide Quality and Affordable Medical Oxygen in all States/UTs 
 
2.21 With regard to the Provide Quality and Affordable Medical Oxygen in all 
States/UTs, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
The Committee note that the Government of India, along with the State 
Governments took all possible steps to tackle the unprecedented surge in oxygen 
demand that arose in the second wave of Covid-19. Further the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare closely monitored the availability and supply of Me dical Oxygen 
and necessary infrastructure available with respective State/UTs for management of 
COVID-19 effectively. Liquid Medical Oxygen (LMO) supply, which was about 1,29 2 
MTs per day in February 2021 increased to 9,690 MTs in May, 2021. On 28th May 
2021, a total of 10,250 MTs of LMO was allocated to the states. This w as done by 
enhancement of LMO production in steel plants as well as in other LMO plants. 
Moreover, Pressure Swing Adsorption (PSA) oxygen generation plants are being 
established in each district hospital, especially in far flung areas enabling the  
hospitals to become self-sufficient in generation of oxygen for their need s and 
thereby, reduce the burden on the medical oxygen supply grid across the country. As 
on 3rd August 2021, out of a total 1,222 allocated PSA plants, 28 3 have been 
commissioned. As LMO is imperative for saving lives of critical COVID 19 patients, 
the Committee recommend that the Union Government should continuously monitor 
the availability of LMO in each State and UT and should take all n ecessary steps to 
ensure the availability of the required quantum of LMO in each State/UT on day to 
day basis. Concrete steps should also be taken for the commissioning of all the 1222 
PSA oxygen generation plants in all the States/UTs. State/UT-wise progress made in 
this regard should be intimated to the Committee. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.22 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
Department for Promotion of Industry & Internal Tarde (DPIIT), through 
Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organization (PESO), prepared a national 
database and portal providing real time availability of liquid oxygen, liquid Oxyg en 
manufactured, supplied to hospital, re-fillers and to industries, which remain 
functional 24 X 7. All the liquid oxygen manufacturers in the country submittin g data 
on daily basis, were mapped. As on 31.03.2022, the aggregate capacity o f cryogenic 
storage tanks installed in hospitals is 17,085 MT. Similarly, Cryogenic tank ers with 
aggregate carrying capacity of 20,453 MT are available in the country f or 
transportation of liquid oxygen. A daily report on liquid oxygen inventory in the 
country was submitted for perusal of sub-group of the Empowered Group (EG-4). 
  
MoH&FW monitored and worked in close co-ordination with States and other 
stakeholders concerned in order to augment the Medical Oxygen infrastructure 

31 
 
across the country in COVID-19 emergency. With regard to Pressure Swing 
Adsorption (PSA) Oxygen Generation Plants, a total of 1225 plants have bee n 
successfully commissioned across 736 districts of 36 States/UTs till date through 
PMCARES fund. In addition to this, 273 PSA plants out of 283 sanctioned by Centra l 
Government PSUs, 49 PSA plants out of 53 sanctioned by Foreign Aid and 2528 
PSA plants out of 2583 sanctioned by State /GSR have been commissioned. Thus, a 
total of 4075 out of 4144 PSA Plants through various sources have bee n 
commissioned in the country. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 16 
 
Price of Oxygen Concentrators 
 
2.23 With regard to the Price of Oxygen concentrators, the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
 
The Committee note that Oxygen Concentrator was under voluntarily 
registration regime w.e.f. 01.04.2020 and now under mandatory registration regime 
w.e.f. 01.10.2021. NPPA vide Gazette Notification dated 03.06.2021 has ca pped the 
Trade Margin for Oxygen Concentrators at 70% considering current PTD as base for 
a period of six months till November 2021. Subsequently, the downw ard revision in 
price up to of 54% has been reported in 70 products/brands, showing reductio n in 
MRP up to Rs. 54,337 per unit. Further, 58 brands have reported price reductio n up 
to 25% and 11 brands between 26-50%. Out of 252 products/brands rep orted, 18 
products/brands reported by the domestic manufacturers did not show any d ecline in 
prices. As reported by NPPA the average price range of oxygen concentrators after 
Trade Margin Rationalisation notification of NPPA is Rs 29,468.00 to 2,47,5 33.00 for 
Portable 5LPM (Litres Per Minute) Oxygen Concentrator and Rs.59,000.00 to Rs 
2,70,000.00 for Portable 10 LPM Oxygen Concentrator; for Stationary-5LPM  it is Rs. 
47,600.00 to Rs 1,73,240.00 and Rs 70,000.00 to Rs. 2,66,980.00 for Stationary 10 
LPM Oxygen Concentrator. In this regard, the Committee feel that that the price 
range of the oxygen Concentrators is still on higher side even after Trade Margin 
Rationalisation (TMR) and that thiscontinuously be an unaffordable medical device 
for the majority of the people inthe country. The Committee, therefore, recommen d 
that the Department of Pharmaceuticals and NPPA should consider capping of the 
prices of various types Oxygen Concentrators so as to make them affordable to 
common man. Department of Pharmaceuticals may also consider manufacture o f 
Oxygen Concentrators by Pharma PSUs under it so that quality Oxygen 
Concentrators may be made available at affordable prices to the people of  the 
country. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.24 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 

32 
 
With an aim to regulate the prices of medical devices, essential for diagno stic 
purposes, in general and specifically for COVID-19 management, NPPA, on  
recommendation of Standing Committee on Affordable Medicines and Health 
Products (SCAMHP), NITI Aayog, vide Gazette Notification dated 3rd June 2021 
capped the trade margin for Oxygen Concentrators at 70% on Price to Distributor  
(PTD) level. Price reduction in 70/252 products was observed and retail prices 
reduced up to 54% (up to Rs. 54,337). Similarly, vide notification dated 13 th July, 
2021, trade margin on Pulse Oximeter, Glucometer, Blood Pressure Monitor, 
Nebulizer and Digital Thermometer was capped at 70%. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 17 
 
Covering medical devices for COVID 19 treatment under National List of 
Essential Medicines 
 
2.25 With regard to the Covering medical devices for COVID 19 treatment unde r 
National List of Essential Medicines, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
 
The Committee is informed that at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandem ic 
in February 2020, India was dependent on high-end imported ventilato rs. To meet 
the need of States and Hospitals for ventilators, domestic production of ICU 
ventilators was encouraged. Based on the assessed requirement, orders for arou nd 
60,000 ventilators were placed for supply to State/ UTs. MoHFW has been supp lying 
ventilators to the States/UTs based on the demand projected by the S tates/ UTs. 
The allocation to hospitals/ institutions within the States/ UTs is being made by them 
based on their assessed requirement in the hospitals, availability of requ ired 
infrastructure in the hospitals, trained manpower to handle ventilators etc. As on 
03.08.2021, MoHFW has supplied 49,246 ventilators to the States/ UTs. F urther, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals has also stated that ventilators have been notified by 
MoHFW as Drugs under Drugs & Cosmetic Act, 1940 w.e.f. 1st April 2020 an d it is 
presently under voluntarily licensing regime of CDSCO for 42 months i.e. till 
September 2023. Ventilator is a non-scheduled Medical Device and under the 
DPCO- 2013, manufacturer/importer of non-scheduled medical devices is at liberty 
to fix the maximum retail price launched by it, but cannot increase it by m ore than 
10% during preceding 12 months. Further, an extensive online training programm e 
has been launched by MoHFW on 21.05.2021 where the manufacturers of 
ventilators are providing online training to all the States/UTs. Till 05.08.2021, t otal 
17,292 Doctors, Para-medical Personnel/ ICU Technicians/ Bio-Medical Engineers of 
States and UTs have got trained. Since the Ventilators are also covered under 
voluntary licensing regime under Drugs and Cosmetic Act, 1940 the Committee fee l 
that all Medical Devices like Ventilators, Oxygen Concentrators etc should be kept 
under scheduled drugs category by the Department of Pharmaceuticals and NPPA 
so that these medical devices can be made available to the people/hosp itals at 
affordable prices till the pandemic is completely over. The Committee, the refore, 
recommend that all medical devices critical to COVID-19 treatment like Ventilators, 
Oxygen Concentrators etc. should be covered under National List of Essential 

33 
 
Medicines for effective price control. Department of Pharmaceuticals can also 
consider manufacturing of ventilators by Pharma PSUs under it to make ava ilable 
quality Ventilators at competitive prices to the hospitals. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.26 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
MoH&FW has constituted the Standing National Committee on Medicines 
(SNCM) for revision of National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM) including medical 
devices on 3rd July 2018. SNCM is deliberating on the issue and has co nstituted a 
sub-committee for Medical Devices. NPPA has capped the trade margin for 
Ventilators, Oxygen Concentrators, Pulse Oximeter, Glucometer, Blood Pressure 
Monitor, Nebulizer and Digital Thermometer. As all pharma PSUs are either u nder 
closure/ strategic disinvestment, none of them is in manufacture of medical devices 
for COVID. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 18 
 
Real time web platform on availability of COVID Medicines and Medical 
Devices 
 
2.27 With regard to the Real time web platform on availability of COVID Medicines 
and Medical Devices, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
The Committee note that once the drugs are allocated and procured b y the 
States/UTs Governments, actual utilisation of the drug is monitored at different  
administrative levels in respective State/UTs. Further, the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare is operating a COVID-19 portal in which all States can fill in and 
access real time information. COVID 19 INDIA PORTAL is a Real time web plat form 
to analyze, understand and keep track on COVID pandemic situation across country. 
This portal is getting used by more than 20,000 users from various leve l such as 
National / State/ District. From the data fed in by the states a wide varie ty of reports 
are available to them to keep track of day to day utilization and ava ilability of critical 
COVID medicines and medical devices at village, block, district, state and central 
level. These datasets help MoHFW in data based decision support. This portal is 
integrated with CV analytics portal, National Disaster Management Authority 
(NDMA), NIC data-hub, Arogyasetu, NCD, various State COVID19 portals. The 
Committee feel that it is important to further strengthen this real time web platform so 
that real time information regarding availability of critical COVID medicines and  
medical devices at village, block and district levels is available with the Depart ment 
of Pharmaceuticals and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to enable them take 
immediate necessary action in case of shortage of medicines and medical devices at 
any level. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Health an d 
Family Welfare and the Department of Pharmaceuticals should take concrete steps 
in coordination with the State Governments to ensure that the real time information is 
fed by the every district authority regarding block and village level availability of 

34 
 
medicines and medical devices for the treatment of COVID 19 treatment. Necessa ry 
training for the operation of this real time web platform should be give n to all the 
stakeholders involved in its operation. Progress made in this regard should be 
intimated to the Committee. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.28      In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
MoH&FW developed an online monitoring portal, viz., www.dvdms.in to 
capture information with respect to stocks, purchase orders and closing stock of 8 
critical drugs with States/ UTs. Training were provided to state functionaries to 
upload the data on the portal. NPPA is also working along with CDSCO for g etting 
the up-dated information. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

35 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 6 
 
Joint exercise undertaken by the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP), 
National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority (NPPA) under Department of 
Pharmaceuticals and the Central Drugs Standards Control Organisation 
(CDSCO) 
 
3.1 With regard to the Joint exercise undertaken by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals (DoP), National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority (NPPA) under 
Department of Pharmaceuticals and the Central Drugs Standards Control 
Organisation (CDSCO), the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
The Committee note that for monitoring of production and availab ility of 
medicines for Covid related drugs there is a joint exercise undertaken by the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP), National Pharmaceuticals Pricing 
Authority(NPPA) under Department of Pharmaceuticals and the Central Drugs 
Standards Control Organisation (CDSCO) under the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare (MoH&FW). The CDSCO plays an important role in giving approvals for 
manufacturing, marketing and distribution of the drugs and enforcement of drug 
licenses under the Drug and Cosmetics Act, 1940. Hence, CDSCO identifies the 
manufacturers of COVID drugs. Further, the major existing manufacturers of COVID 
drugs are also identified by NPPA through a database of retail sales where the  
manufacturers having largest market share of COVID drugs are identified. Once the 
manufacturers are identified, their production and supply are monitored wee kly by 
NPPA and CDSCO apart from some detailed monitoring on three specific drugs viz. 
Remdesivir, Tocilizumab and Amphotericin-B. NPPA interacted regularly with 
NodalOfficers of States/ UTs and manufacturers to coordinate supplies. CDSCO, 
throughits Zonal and Sub-zonal offices conducts survey on availability 
ofHydroxychloroquine, Enoxaparin, Methyl Prednisolone (MP), 
Paracetamol,Dexamethasone, Budesonide, Ivermectin, Naproxen, Doxyxycline, 
Azithromycin,Prednisolone, Favipiravir, Amphotericin B and Apixaban at chemist  
shops in variouslocations on every Monday. This is being shared with Departm ent 
ofPharmaceuticals/ NPPA for their required intervention, which is being carried out 
onregular basis. In addition, NPPA in co-ordination with 18 PMRUs has been 
conducting the weekly availability survey since May, 2021 for nine sched uled 
formulations and six non-scheduled formulations used for COVID managem ent, on a 
sample basis. With effect from 5th July 2021 onwards in the weekly surv ey, PMRUs 
are also collecting information on availability of five essential devices for diagn ostic 
purposes, in general and specially for COVID management viz., (i) Pulse 
Oximeter,(ii) Blood Pressure Monitoring Machine, (iii) Nebulizer, (iv) Digital 

36 
 
Thermometer, and(v) Glucometer. Both CDSCO and NPPA are engaged in 
collection of information on availability of medicines and medical devices in the 
market. However, the country witnessed chaos during the initial phase of the se cond 
wave due to non availability of medicines/medical devices and their black marketing 
and this caused severe hardships to COVID 19 patients and their relatives. In th is 
regard, the Committee feel that the Government should not allow re-occuurence of 
that kind of situation again. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Joint 
Monitoring exercise by DoP, NPPA and CDSCO should be further strengthened so 
that the requirements ofevery state and union territory for the medici nes and medical 
devices is properly assessed and necessary steps be taken to make available  the 
required quantum of medicines and medical devices to effectively fight the COVID 19 
pandemic. For the purpose, the representatives of CDSCO and NPPA should be 
included in the COVID Drugs Management Cell (CDMC) under the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals for the monitoring of the production and availability of 
medicines/medical devices in a holistic manner so as to initiate concrete measu res 
to ensure the availability ofrequired quantum of medicines/medical devices for the 
management of COVID 19. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.2 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
NPPA and CDSCO both are part of Covid Drug Management Committee 
(CDMC) set up by DoP and they work closely together to ensure availabil ity of 
adequate medicines and medical devices. NPPA is regularly conducting market 
surveys through its Price Monitoring and Resource Units (PMRUs) in 21 States/ UTs 
for COVID Management drugs as well as six medical devices. Similarly, CDSCO is 
also conducting frequent surveys of 14 drugs and 3 medical devices to assess their  
availability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

37 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 8 
 
Nationwide Training Programme for Rational Use of COVID treating medicines 
 
4.1 With regard to the Nationwide Training Programme for Rational Use of COVID 
treating medicines, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
The Committee note that the clinical management protocol for COVID-19 
clearly states that use of Remdesivir has been approved under Emergency Use 
Authorization, to be considered in patients with moderate to severe disease so a s to 
ensure rational use of Remdesivir in only select sub-group of patients. Additionally , 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has issued a separate ‘Advisoryon 7th June 
2021 on the rational use of Remdesivir for COVID-19 treatment ’.According to this 
advisory, every hospital needs to set up a Special DrugCommittee (SDC) which must 
review the use of Remdesivir in their hospital periodically and SDC should preferably  
have a Pharmacology Professor/ faculty as a member wherever available. SDC 
should share their findings with the physiciansperiodically to ensure rational and 
judicious use of Remdesivir. Standard treatment guidelines have also been 
disseminated through MoHFW ’s Center of Excellenceinitiative with AIIMS, Delhi as 
the apex institution. This exercise is carried out with State level/Regional centers of 
excellence as well as private doctors to promote rational use of drug. S ince the 
prescription of Remdesivir was rampant during the second wave of COVID- 19 
pandemic rather than its prescription only in select subgroup of patients with 
moderate to severe disease. This created a hue and cry situation in the entire 
country due to severe shortage in availability of this medicine. Since it is ver y much 
necessary to educate the medical practitioners on the rational prescription/use of 
medicines/medical devices for the treatment of COVID 19, the Committee 
recommend that the Union Government in collaboration with the State Gove rnments 
should organize nationwide online training programmes for all registered medical 
practitioners whether in Government or Private hospitals on the rational use of 
Remdesivir and other COVID drugs included in National Treatment Protocol.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.2     In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
 
MoH&FW had issued a separate ‘Advisory on rational use of Remdesivir for 
COVID-19 treatment ’ on 7th June 2021, which was hosted on its website for wider 
dissemination. Further noting relationship between use of steroids and other 
immunosuppressive drugs, “Advisory for rational use of Steroids and Tocilizumab in 
the treatment of Covid -19 patients ” was issued by Directorate General of Health 

38 
 
Services (DGHS). Standard treatment guidelines were also disseminated through 
MoHFW’s Center of Excellence initiative with AIIMS, Delhi as the apex institution. 
This exercise is carried out with State level/Regional centres of excellence as well as 
private doctors to promote rational use of drug. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 9 
 
Prompt Action Against Hoarding/Black Marketing/Over Pricing of Medicines 
and Medical Devices 
 
4.3 With regard to the Prompt Action Against Hoarding/Black Marketing/Over 
Pricing of Medicines and Medical Devices, the Committee had recommended as 
follows:- 
 
(a) The Committee are concerned to note the large-scale black marketing of 
Remdesivir in particular and other medicines and medical devices in general at 
exorbitant prices during peak period of second wave of COVID-19 pa ndemic. This 
created a panic situation among public and led to huge crisis in availability of 
COVID-19 related medicines and medical devices. According to the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) had 
requested all the States/UTs Licensing authorities through several advisories to 
instruct their enforcement staff to keep strict vigil on over pricing and black 
marketing. As per information available from various State Licensing A uthorities, in 
cases of black-marketing/hoarding/overcharging of COVID-19 management drugs, 
various enforcement actions like drug seizure, arrests of accused persons / 
registration of FIR etc. have been taken out by the State Licensing Authorities. A s on 
12.07.2021, 146 cases out of 317 cases of hoarding/black marketing/ove r-pricing of 
Remdesivir have been reported and actions (Drug seizure/ arrests/ notices issued) 
have been taken by the respective State Licensing Authorities. Separately , NPPA 
vide its letter dated 08.04.2021 addressed to all State Drug Controllers, had directed 
that the State Governments and UTs may closely monitor the production  and 
availability of COVID-19 drugs to prevent black marketing and hoarding. It further 
directed to ensure that there is no violation of provision of DPCO, 2013 with reg ard 
to compliance of ceiling prices/permissible increase in prices of scheduled/non-
scheduled formulations. NPPA had also set up a Control Room to receive complaints 
on availability on medicines and is making all out efforts to address th e issues 
promptly by coordinating with the State authorities, manufacturers, marketers and 
their associations. NPPA had received 6 complaints on overcharging of Remdesivir 
and 32 complaints on other COVID drug and medical devices during the secon d 
wave of COVID-19. These complaints were referred to the concerned Stat e Drug 
Controller for necessary action. In this regard, the Committee feel that very less 
number of complaints were registered with State Licensing Authorities and NPPA 
than the actual number of such indulgences of overpricing/hoarding/black ma rketing 
throughout the country. This clearly implies that there is very less awareness among  
people about the present complaint/grievance redressal mechanism. The 

39 
 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Union Government particularly CDSCO 
and NPPA should take appropriate steps for the stepping up of awareness among 
the people about the availability of 
complaint/grievance redressal mechanism so as to ensure that all such cases o f 
overpricing/hoarding/black marketing come to the lime light. 
 
(b) The Committee also strongly recommend that prompt action should be take n 
against hoarding/black marketing/over pricing of medicines and medical de vices 
related to COVID-19 in all States/UTs in a time bound manner. CDSCO and NPP A 
should obtain monthly/fortnightly reports from the State Governments/UTs on the 
action taken against violators.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.4 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows: -
  
(a) and (b):Action is initiated by NPPA, under aegis of DoP, on any case th at 
is reported of overpricing in the case of medicines and medical devices as per the  
provisions of DPCO, 2013. So far as cases of hoarding and black-marketing a re 
concerned, the then Chairman, NPPA vide her D.O. letter dated 23rd April 2 021 had 
requested DCGI to take strict measures for prevention of black-marketing and 
hoarding of essential drugs. State level team formation has also been urged fo r field 
level action monitoring. NPPA has also written a DO letter on 8th April, 2021 to  all 
the State Drug Controllers to closely monitor the production and availability of 
COVID 19 drugs, prevent black-marketing and hoarding, and ensure availability of 
life saving essential drugs. 
  
In addition, various regulatory actions were taken by CDSCO against hoarding/black 
marketing/over pricing of medicines and medical devices related to COVID-19, which 
are detailed as under:  
  
i.          To ensure availability of Covid drugs in the country, CDSCO has requeste d 
all State/UT Drugs Controllers to take all proactive steps, i.e., monitoring stockpiling, 
maintaining checks on availability of drugs, random market survey of critical d rugs 
for used in COVID- 19. 
  
ii.         All the States/UTs Drugs Controllers were requested to take necessary steps 
to expedite issuance of permissions/approvals for manufacturing and issuan ce of 
other approvals so that supply chain is not affected.  
  
iii.       Based on the complaint received from MoH&FW, regarding shortage of 
Remdesivir injection in certain areas in Madhya Pradesh (Bhopal, Indore, Gwalior), 
Gujarat (Ahmedabad, Surat, Rajkot) and Maharashtra (Mumbai, Thane, Ambernath). 
 CDSCO wrote to all State / UT Drugs Controllers requesting to initiate immediate 
remedial action to ensure supply of Remdesivir injection to public and private 
hospitals and also to instruct their enforcement officials to keep continuous 
monitoring on the situation and keep strict vigil on the matter. 
  
iv.       CDSCO has requested to all State / UT Drugs Controllers to instruct their 
enforcement staff immediately to keep strict vigil especially at sensitive places and to 

40 
 
take stringent action against hoarding/black marketing/overcharging for Remdesivir 
by conducting special drive of monitoring and investigation, so that such incidence 
could be prevented. 
 v.         CDSCO also requested all State / UT Drugs Controllers to forward 
information in the given format on a daily basis with regard to enforcement a ctivities 
to prevent hoarding/black marketing /overcharging / overpricing in respect of 
Remdesivir, Tocilizumab, Favipiravir and Oxygen Cylinder. 
  
vi.       With reports on black marketing/hoarding of COVID related drugs, CDSCO 
has requested all State/UT Drugs Controllers to instruct their enforcement staff to 
keep strict vigil on the matter especially at sensitive places and to take stringen t 
action against hoarding/black marketing/overcharging of drugs by conducting special 
drive of monitoring and investigation, so that any such incident of drugs is prevented. 
It was also stated that there shall be zero tolerance for any kind of hoardin g/black-
marketing/overcharging of drugs. It was requested to establish a special task force  
for the purpose and also nominate a nodal officer in their respective States and UTs 
to attend to all complainants and intelligence inputs. CDSCO carried out a we ekly 
availability survey of 17 drugs/ devices/ items near Covid designated hospitals a nd 
general chemist shops. Its frequency was increased to twice a week when required. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 10 
 
Effective price control of Non-schedule COVID-19 related Medicines and 
Medical Devices 
 
4.5 With regard to the Effective price control of Non-schedule COVID-19 related 
Medicines and Medical Devices, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
The Committee note that the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) fixes the ceiling price of scheduled medicines specified in the first schedule 
of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 2013 (DPCO) in accordance with the provisions 
of the DPCO and all manufacturers of scheduled medicines (branded or gene ric) 
have to sell their products within the ceiling price (plus applicable Goods and Service 
Tax)fixed by the NPPA. On the other hand, a manufacturer of a non-sche duled 
formulation (branded or generic) is at liberty to fix the maximum retail pri ce launched 
by it. However, as per the DPCO, 2013 the manufacturers of non-scheduled 
formulations are not allowed to increase the maximum retail price of su ch 
formulations by more than 10% during preceding 12 months. According to  the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals, Remdesivir being a non-scheduled formulati on, the 
manufacturer has liberty to fix its price. However, due to proactive intervention ofthe 
government, MRPs of various brands of Remdesivir that varied up to Rs 5,40 0/per 
vial have been reduced voluntarily by the major manufacturers/marketers of th e 
Remdesivir Injection (lyophilized) to less than Rs. 3,500/- . Since waves after waves 
of the COVID 19 pandemic is hitting the world including our country, it is mandatory 
that the prices of all the COVID 19 medicines and medical devices are controlled  by 
the Government so as to make them affordable for the common man. The 

41 
 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Pharmaceuticals and 
NPPA to frame a new price control regime specific for Medicines and Medical 
Devices for COVID Management where the distinction between the scheduled and 
non-scheduled drugs may be done away with and all such medicines a nd medical 
devices are put under price control with no annual increase in prices allowed till  the 
pandemic is entirely over in the country. The Committee hope the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals and NPPA will understand the gravity of the situation and  will take 
immediate necessary action on this recommendation within a stipulated time fram e 
and will inform the Committee about the same in the action taken replies. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
Based on the principles laid down in the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy,  
2012 (NPPP, 2012), the government has issued the Drugs Prices Control Ord er, 
2013 (DPCO, 2013). The medicines included in the National list of Essential  
Medicines (NLEM) issued by the MoH&FW are included in the Schedule-I of DPCO, 
2013. While the ceiling prices of Scheduled formulations are fixed by NPPA under 
DoP, in respect of other medicines (non-scheduled), NPPA ensures that their MRP is 
not increased by more than ten percent of what was prevalent during the preceding 
twelve months.  Price control of non-scheduled medicines will entail rev ision of 
NPPP, 2012 and DPCO, 2013. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 19 
 
Exemption of Basic Customs Duty and GST on medicines and medical devices 
for fighting COVID 19 
 
4.7 With regard to the exemption of Basic Customs Duty and GST on m edicines 
and medical devices for fighting COVID 19,  the Committee had recommended  as 
follows:- 
 
The Committee note that Basic Customs Duty was exempted for various 
medicines and medical devices used for fighting COVID 19 during 2021 . Further 
GST Council in its 44th Meeting decided to reduce the GST rates which were notified 
on 14th June, 2021. GST was reduced to 5% on most of the medicine s, Oxygen, 
Oxygen generation equipment and related medical devices including ventilators, 
Testing Kits and Machines and Other Covid-19 related relief material such as pulse 
Oxymeters, hand sanitizers, temperature check equipments etc. Since the pandemic  
is creating wave after wave and the people of the country are unde r constant threat, 
the Committee feel that though the GST council has reduced the GST on COVID 

42 
 
related medicines and medical devices, the need of the hour is to make  these 
products more affordable to the people. Hence, the Committee strongly recommen d 
that the Department of Pharmaceuticals in coordination with Ministry of Health an d 
Family Welfare (MoHFW) should submit a proposal to GST Council to explore th e 
possibility of exempting all the essential medicines and medical devices including, 
Liquid Medical Oxygen, Oxygen Concentrators, ventilators, pulse oximeters, hand 
sanitizers, temperature check equipments, etc used for the treatment of COVID 1 9 
from the purview of GST. Further Basic Customs Duty exemptions on various 
medicines and medical devices related to COVID 19 may also be continued till  the 
pandemic is over. This recommendation of the Committee may be sent to t he 
Ministry of Finance for taking appropriate action in this regard and furnish reply to the 
Committee at the earliest. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.8 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
 
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance has provided inputs regarding 
exemption of Basic Customs Duty and GST on medicines and medical devices fo r 
fighting COVID 19, as below. While Table A  shows the list of items that were 
provided exemption from Basic Customs Duty, the notifications under which the  
exemptions were provided and the validity of the notifications, the Table B shows the 
exemption from GST and reduction in GST rates provided for COVID-19 related 
relief goods, the notifications under which the exemptions were provided an d the 
validity of the notifications. 
 
TABLE A Full Exemption from Basic Customs Duty on import of COVID 19 
relief goods 
 
S.No. Description of goods Valid till Reference 
1.        Face Mask and Surgical Mask 30th September, 
2020 Notification No. 20/2020-
Customs dated 9 th April, 
2020 
2.        Personal protective Equipment 
(PPE) 
3.        Covid-19 Testing Kits 
4.        Remdesivir Active 
Pharmaceutical Ingredients 
(API) 
31.10.2021 
Notification No. 27/2021-
Customs dated 20.04.21, 
as 
amended vide notification 
No. 29/2021-Customs 
dated 30.04.21 
5.        Beta Cyclodextrin (SBEBCD) 
used in manufacture of 
Remdesivir, subject to the 
condition that the importer 
follows the procedure set out 
in the Customs (Import of 
Goods at Concessional Rate 
of Duty) Rules, 2017. 
31.10.2021 

43 
 
6.        Injection Remdesivir. 31.10.2021 
7.        Inflammatory Diagnostic 
(marker) kits, namely- IL6, D-
Dimer, CRP(C-Reactive 
Protein), LDH (Lactate De-
Hydrogenase), Ferritin, Pro 
Calcitonin (PCT) and blood 
gas reagents 
31.10.2021 
8.        Medical Oxygen   31.08.2021 
Notification No.  28/2021-
Customs dated 24.04.21, 
as 
amended vide notification 
No. 31/2021-Customs 
dated 31.05.21# 
9.        Oxygen concentrator including 
flow meter, regulator, 
connectors and tubings. 
31.08.2021 
10.     Vacuum Pressure Swing 
Absorption (VPSA) and 
Pressure Swing Absorption 
(PSA) oxygen plants, 
Cryogenic oxygen Air 
Separation Units (ASUs) 
producing liquid/gaseous 
oxygen. 
31.08.2021 
11.     Oxygen canister. 31.08.2021 
12.     Oxygen filling systems. 31.08.2021 
13.     Oxygen storage tanks 31.08.2021 
14.     Oxygen generator 31.08.2021 
15.     ISO containers for Shipping 
Oxygen 
31.08.2021 
16.     Cryogenic road transport 
tanks for Oxygen 
31.08.2021 
17.     Oxygen cylinders including 
cryogenic cylinders and tanks 
31.08.2021 
18.     Parts of goods at S.No.6 to 14 
above, used in the 
manufacture of equipment 
related to the production, 
transportation, distribution or 
storage of Oxygen, subject to 
the condition that the importer 
follows the procedure set out 
in the Customs (Import of 
Goods at Concessional Rate 
of Duty) Rules, 2017. 
31.08.2021 
19.     Any other device from which 
oxygen can be generated 
31.08.2021 
20.     Ventilators, including ventilator 
with compressors; all 
accessories and tubings; 
humidifiers; viral filters (should 
be able to function as high 
flow device and come with 
31.08.2021 

44 
 
 
TABLE B  Exemption/ Reduction in GST/ IGST on import of COVID-19 relief 
goods 
 
S.No. Description of goods Reduced 
GST rate Valid till Reference 
1.        All goods covered under 
Customs notification 
27/2201 and 28/2021 (listed 
in Table 1 above), imported 
by State Government or 
agency authorised by it, free 
of cost for free distribution. 
Nil 31.08.2021 Ad hoc exemption 
Order (AEO) No. 
4/2021-Customs 
dated 03.05.2021, 
as amended by 
AEO No. 5/2021-
Customs dated 
31.05.2021 
2.        All goods covered under 
Customs notifications 
27/2201 and 28/2021 (listed 
in Table 1 above), imported 
and donated to Central/ 
State Government or relief 
agency recommended by 
State Government, for free 
distribution. 
Nil 31.08.2021 Notification 
No.  32/2021-
Customs dated 
31.05.2021 
3.        Medical Grade Oxygen 5% 30.09.2021 Notification No. 
05/2021-Central 
Tax (Rate) dated 
14.06.2021 
4.        Tocilizumab Nil 30.09.2021 
5.        Amphotericin B Nil 30.09.2021 
6.        Remdesivir 5% 30.09.2021 
7.        Heparin (anti-coagulant) 5% 30.09.2021 
nasal canula). 
21.     High flow nasal canula 
device with all attachments; 
nasal canula for use with the 
device. 
31.08.2021 
22.     Helmets for use with non-
invasive ventilation. 
31.08.2021 
23.     Non-invasive ventilation 
oronasal masks for ICU 
ventilators. 
31.08.2021 
24.     Non-invasive ventilation nasal 
masks for ICU ventilators. 
31.08.2021 
25.     COVID-19 vaccine. 31.08.2021 
26.     Amphotericin B 31.08.2021 
27.     Full exemption from Basic 
Customs Duty on 6 specified 
API/ excipients for 
manufacturing Amphotericin B 
31.08.2021 Notification No.  35/2021-
Customs dated 12 th July, 
2021 
28.     Full exemption from Basic 
Customs Duty on Raw 
materials for manufacturing 
COVID test kits 
30.09.202 

45 
 
S.No. Description of goods Reduced 
GST rate Valid till Reference 
8.        Covid-19 testing kits 5% 30.09.2021 
9.        Inflammatory Diagnostic 
(marker) kits, namely- IL6, 
D-Dimer, CRP (C-Reactive 
Protein), LDH (Lactate De-
Hydrogenase), Ferritin, Pro 
Calcitonin (PCT) and blood 
gas reagents. 
5% 
30.09.2021 
10.     Hand Sanitizer 5% 30.09.2021 
11.     Helmets for use with non-
invasive ventilation 5% 30.09.2021 
12.     Gas/Electric/other furnaces 
for crematorium 5% 30.09.2021 
13.     Pulse Oximeter 5% 30.09.2021 
14.     High flow nasal canula 
device 5% 30.09.2021 
15.     Oxygen Concentrator/ 
generator 5% 30.09.2021 
16.     Ventilators 5% 30.09.2021 
17.     BiPAP Machine 5% 30.09.2021 
18.     Non-invasive ventilation 
nasal or oronasal masks for 
ICU ventilators 
Canula for use with 
ventilators 
5% 
30.09.2021 
19.     Temperature check 
equipment 5% 30.09.2021 
20.     Ambulance 12% 30.09.2021 
  
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

46 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
NIL 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                    KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
08 August,  2022                                                     Chairperson, 
 13 Sravana 1944 (Saka)                                     Standing Committee on 
                                Chemicals & Fertilizers. 
  

47 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
  
            The Committee sat on Thursday, the 04th August, 2022 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
                
PRESENT 
  
   Smt. Kanimozhi  Karunanidhi, Chairperson 
               Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ramakant Bhargarva   
3. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama   
4. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi   
5. Shri Kripanath Mallah   
6. Shri Satyadev Pachauri   
7. Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad   
8. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar   
9. Shri Indra Hang Subba   
  
  
10. 
  
Rajya Sabha 
Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
  
  11. Dr. Anil Jain 
  12. Shri Arun Singh 
  13. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
  14. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
        
 SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Vinay Kumar Mohan       -           Joint Secretary  

48 
 
2.  Shri  Nabin Kumar Jha           -           Director 
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh              -           Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Panna Lal                         -           Under Secretary  
  
   XXX                   XXX                    XXX 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of  
the Committee, convened for consideration and adoption of the following  Draft 
Action Taken Reports: 
i. Thirty-Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-First Report (17 th Lok 
Sabha) on 'Availability of Medicines & Medical devices for COVID 
Management’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals). 
ii. XXX                            XXX       XXX  
iii. XXX                            XXX       XXX  
iv. XXX                            XXX       XXX  
3. Giving an overview of the important Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/ 
suggestions of the Members. 
 
4. The Committee, then, took up the Draft Action Taken Reports one by one for 
consideration and after some discussions adopted them. 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Action Ta ken 
Reports and present the same to the Parliament. 
 
XXX Not related  

49 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS ON THE SUBJECT 'AVAILABILITY OF 
MEDICINES & MEDICAL DEVICES FOR COVID MANAGEMENT' OF THE 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  (DEPARTMENT OF 
PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 19 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 
1,2,3,4,5,9,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18)   
14 
Percentage of Total 74% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
(Vide Recommendation Nos.6)   
1 
 
 
Percentage of Total    5% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-   
 (Vide Recommendation No. 7,8,10,19)   
4 
Percentage of Total 21% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Nil 
0 
Percentage of Total 100.0% 
 