1 
 
13 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & 
FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
   
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2020-2021) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
  
 
 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 


2 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2020-2021) of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  11.02.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.02.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
FEBRUARY, 2021 /MAGHA, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
 CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Chapter I Report    
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
  
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
  
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee  
  
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
  
 
APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee  on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2020-21) held on 12.10.2020 
  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the  Sixth Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
on  Demand for Grants (2020 -2021) pertaining to the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers  (Department of  
Chemicals & Petrochemicals) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
4 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
5 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
6 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
7 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
8 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
9 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
10 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
11 Shri M. Selvaraj 
12 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
13 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
14 Shri Nandigam Suresh 
15 Er. Bishweswar Tudu 
16 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
17 Dr. M.K Vishnu Prasad. 
18 Shri Deepak Baij  
19 Dr. Manoj Rajoria 
20 Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil 
21 Vacant$ 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
26 Shri Arun Singh 
27 Shri P. Selvarasu^ 
28 Shri A.D. Singh^ 
29 Shri K. Vanlalvena^ 
30 Vacant* 
31 Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora    -  Officer on Special Duty 
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava    -  Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram   -  Additional Director 
4.         Shri Gagan Kumar   -  Committee Officer 
 
^Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 22.07.2020. 
*Shri Amar Singh expired on 01.08.2020. 
$ Shri Vasantha Kumar expired on 28.08.2020 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2020-2021) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on 
their behalf, present this Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action 
Taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in 
the Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers ( 2020-21) on Demands for Grants (2020 -21) pertaining 
to the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. 
 
2. The Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 20.03.2020 and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on  20.03.2020.  The Action Taken  replies of Government to all 
observations / recommendations contained in the Report were received on  
30.06.2020. The Standing Committee on Che micals and Fertilizers (2020 -21) 
considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 12.10.2020. 
3. An an alysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the further Comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                               KANIMOZHI  KARUNANIDHI 
 8  February, 2021                                                                                      Chairperson 
 19 Magha, 1942 (Saka)                                                       Standing Committee on 
         Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
  

6 
 
 
  
Report 
 
Chapter I 
 
1.1 This report of the standing committee on chemicals and fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the 6th report (17th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the Demand 
for Grants 2020-21 of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) which was presented to  Lok Sabha on 
20.03.2020. The Committee made a total of 15 
Observations/Recommendations in the report. 
 
1.2  Ministry of chemicals and fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) were requested to furnish replies to the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the 6th report within three months from the 
date of presentation of the report is 20.03.2020. The action taken replies of the 
Government in respect of the 15 Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the report have been received from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) vide their O.M. NO -
23011/2/2020-IFD-CPC dated 30.06.2020. These replies have been 
categorised as follows:- 
 
(i) Observations/ Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government:- Sl no. 1,2,3,5, 8,10,11, 13 & 14            (Total: 9) 
 
 (ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government reply:- Sl no. 4                   (Total 1) 
 
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration: - 
Sl no 12                                                                                  (Total 1) 
 
 (iv) O bservations Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- Sl no. 6,7,9 & 15                      (Total 4) 
 
1.3 The committee expect that the action taken notes on the observations / 
recommendations contained in chapte r I and V of this report should be 
furnished expeditiously and within three months from the presentation of 
this Report. 
 

7 
 
1.4 The committee will now deal with action taken by the government on  the 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration o r merit 
comments. 
 
Recommendation Sl no. 1 
Production of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
 
1.5 While, pointing out the growing domestic requirement of chemicals and 
petrochemicals and increasing foreign exchange outgo on imports of 
chemicals and petrochemicals the committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 “The Committee note that the Chemical industry is knowledge intensive as well 
as capital intensive industry and it is an integral constituent of the growing 
Indian industry.  It includes chemicals and its products, Petrochemicals, Paints, 
Varnishes, gases, soaps, perfumes, toiletry, etc.  The diversification within the 
chemical industry is large and covers more than eighty thousand commercial 
products. Projection of production and consumption of chemicals and 
petrochemicals in the country during 2019 -20 is 51,241 Metric tons and 59,202 
Metric tons respectively.  Gap between the production and consumption is met 
through imports.  During 2018 -19, the country imported Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals worth Rs. 3.95 lakh crore.  Since it is very much necessary to 
augment domestic production of chemicals and petrochemicals according to 
the requirements of the country and to contain the huge expenditure on 
imports, the Committee recommend the following: 
 
(i)  The Government should initiate suitable measures to augment  
production of Chemicals and Petrochemicals which are required to be imported 
for use in the country.  
(ii)  Since it is a capital intensive industry, sufficient incentives should be 
given to attract mega investments in this sector and delays in according 
approvals should be minimized. 
(iii)  All initiatives should be made to set up world scale capacity plants in the 
country with world class infrastructure.  
 (iv) There is a need to Increase capacity utilization of domestic units along with 
the addition of new capacity in the country. All necessary steps should be 
taken to increase the capacity utilization of existing plants.” 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.6 In reply of the aforementioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals had stated as under:- 
 

8 
 
(i) “The Government has taken many measures to facilitate production of 
chemicals and petrochemicals in the country. The industry is free from 
industrial licensing regime; only IEM from DPIIT is required to be obtained for  
setting up new undertaking or to carry out substantial expansion. The latest 
and state-of-art technology of chemicals and petrochemicals is freely allowed 
under automatic foreign technology agreement initiative of the RBI and also 
100% FDI is permissible under automatic route except from contiguous 
Nations. Government has reduced corporate tax rate and abolished Dividend 
Distribution Tax. Due to these measures, the industry is expected to make 
further progress in achieving more production in the sector. 
 
(ii) Numbers of initiatives have been already taken in the recent past to attract 
mega investments for setting up world scale capacity plants, enhance ease of 
doing business. Advisory Forum has been set up under the chairmanship of 
Minister(C&F) for resolving t he problems faced by the industry. The 
Department has been engaging with leading global players to facilitate them to 
set up world class plants in India. The PCPIR Policy has been announced to 
provide integrated top -class infrastructure in the investment r egions. All 
initiatives are being further strengthened which shall contribute towards 
achieving higher competitiveness & more growth in the sector. 
 
(iii) Currently, all integrated/standalone petrochemical complexes are being 
planned/ setup of world scale capaci ty/infrastructure, as there is no viability of 
the complexes below of world scale capacity. 
 
(iv) Wherever there is low capacity utilization of the plant and the products 
manufactured in the plant are imported in the country; the same is being 
considered for restriction on import.” 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.7   The Committee note from the reply given by the Department that the Government 
has taken many measures to facilitate production of chemicals and petrochemicals in 
the country viz.   chemical and petrochemical industry is mostly free from industrial 
licensing regime, the latest and state -of-art technology  of chemicals and 
petrochemicals is freely allowed under automatic foreign technology agreement 
initiative of the RBI and also 100% FDI is permissible under automatic route except 

9 
 
from contiguous nations.  Further the Government has reduced corporate tax rate and 
abolished Dividend Distribution Tax.  The Department has also stated that it is 
engaging with leading global players to facilitate them to set up world class plants in 
India.   In this regard, the Committee urge the Department to pursue these  
engagements very  aggressively     particularly in the changed global  scenario  due to 
COVID 19 pandemic as there are opportunities to attract global players who would 
like to shift their production bases by impressing upon them the ease of doing 
business opportunities in India.  The Committee further note that an Advisory Forum 
has been set up under the chairmanship of Minister(C&F) for resolving the problems 
faced by the industry. In this regard, the Committee would like to be apprised of the 
achievements ma de by this Forum in resolving the problems being faced by the 
industry so far.   The Department in its reply has further stated that wherever there is 
low capacity utilization of the plant and the products manufactured in the plant are 
imported in the country; the same is being considered for restriction on import.  While 
appreciating this  stand taken by  the Department to protect the domestic 
manufacturers through imposition of restriction on import of the products for which 
the production  capacity is av ailable in the country, the Committee recommend  that 
the Department should  look into the reasons for low  capacity utilization of the plants 
in the country and necessary corrective steps be taken to enable  the domestic 
manufacturing industry  fully  uti lize their  installed capacity  so as  to make them 
globally competitive.  
 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
Setting up of Plastic WMCs 
1.8 Noting  the need for plastic waste management in the cities, the Committee had desired for 
swift action to be taken to expedite the setting up of the four approved PWMCs and had 
recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that four plastic Waste Management Centres (WMCs) are 
proposed to be set up at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Patna and Varanasi Centres 
of CIPET.  The Department  sought an additional amount of Rs. 30 crore during 
2019-20 from the Ministry of Finance for setting up of these WMCs but the same 
was not received.  Presently identification of land for WMCs is under progress.  
In this regard, the Committee are of the vie w that WMCs are very much 
necessary in cities to manage huge amount of wastes being accumulated daily 

10 
 
particularly the plastic wastes.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
swift action should be taken by the Department and CIPET in setting of these 
four WMCs in a time bound manner.  Budgetary support for the purpose should 
be provided in RE/supplementary demand this year by impressing upon the 
Ministry of Finance about the importance of these centers.  Moreover, steps 
should also be taken to set up WMCs in other cities in the country”.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.9    The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals in its reply to the aforementioned 
recommendation had furnished the following information:- 
 
“In order to address the environmental issues related to plastics, 
Government of India has approved four Plastics Waste Management Centres 
(PWMCs) in the country at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Patna and Varanasi with the 
main objective to create awareness on pla stics waste management, promote 
cost effective recycled plastics material grades for end -use applications, 
entrepreneur development in plastic recycling, networking of rag pickers with 
processors, manpower development through training in the field of recyc ling 
technology, to create business and employment opportunities using waste to 
wealth concepts and also technically help in tackling the issue of plastics waste 
disposal in the country.  
CIPET, in consultation with the local authorities, is in the process  of 
identifying suitable land for Setting up of Plastic Waste Management Centres 
(PMWCs) at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Patna and Varanasi”.   
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
 
 
 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.10   The Committee are concerned to note that the  action taken reply furnished by 
the Department has not fully addressed  the recommendations made by the 
Committee  regarding  setting up of four plastic waste management centres 
(PWMCS) in Ahemdabad, Ben galuru, Patna and Varanasi.  Thrust of the 
recommendations were swift action for setting up of these Centres, necessary 
budgetary allocation for the setting up of these Centres and setting up of more such 

11 
 
Centres in other cities.  However, no progress or very little  progress has been made 
in setting up of four PWMCs as the Department has furnished the same reply that  
the CIPET, in consultation with local authorities is in the process of identifying 
suitable land for setting up of PWMCs in all the four cit ies.  Moreover, the reply 
given by the Department is silent on other aspects of the recommendation regarding 
budgetary allocation and opening of more such Centres in other cities in the 
country.   The problem of plastic waste is increasing day by day in the country and it 
is a huge challenge before the civic bodies to effectively manage the plastic waste 
in view of the environmental hazards posed by it.  Such delays in setting up of these 
PWMCS would make it very difficult to reach the lofty goals envisaged  for these 
Centres viz. creation of   awareness on plastics waste management, promotion of 
cost effective recycled plastics material grades for end -use applications, 
entrepreneur development in plastic recycling, networking of rag pickers with 
processors, manpower development through training in the field of recycling 
technology, creation of business and employment opportunities using waste to 
wealth concepts in the country.  Since it is very much necessary to create a strong 
network  these Centres in all c ities in a time bound manner, the Committee reiterate 
the earlier recommendations that swift action should be taken by the Department to 
set up  all the four PWMCs within a definite time frame by taking up the matter of 
land identification at the highest l evel with the concerned State Governments,  
requisite amount of budgetary allocation which is necessary for implementation of 
the project  should be obtained through Supplementary Demands for Grants during 
this financial year and the measures to set up the se Centres in   more cities in the 
country should be started at the right earnest.  Action taken on the above 
recommendations should be intimated to the Committee. 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
1.11    Noting t he importance and potential of Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology 
(IPFT), the Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that Institute of pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
is the only institute of its kind in the country devoted to the development of 
state of the art and environment friendly new generation Pesticide formulation 
technologies for saf er environment and also to develop methods for the 

12 
 
detection and analysis of pesticides and their residues.  An enhanced amount 
of Rs. 11 crore has been provided in BE, 2020 -21 to enable the institute to 
acquire laboratory equipment to cater to the present  need and future of 
analysis of samples of soil for detecting pesticide residues. In Committee’s 
view role of this institute should be strengthened and the Committee would like 
to make the following recommendations:   
i.  Institute should develop environme nt friendly, cost effective 
pesticides for use by farmers.  Bio -pesticides should be developed and 
should replace the synthetic pesticides throughout the country.  
 
ii.   Quantum of pesticides residues in soil and water bodies 
should be analyzed /tested in  all the states and UTs of the country and 
suitable measures should be taken in coordination with the State 
Governments concerned to educate and train the farmers to enable them 
to follow good agricultural practices particularly to use right amount of 
pesticides for crop cultivation. 
 
iii. Department should examine the feasibility of opening more branches of 
this Institute so as to have at least one institute in each of the four regions 
of the country to enable it conduct analysis of soil and water in time bound 
manner.” 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.12 The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals in its reply of the aforementioned 
recommendation had stated as under:- 
(i)  “To minimize the risks and disadvantages of conventional and solvent 
based formulation s, IPFT has developed various user & environment 
friendly new generation formulations like Suspension Concentrates, Water 
Dispersible Granules, Controlled Release Formulations, Concentrated & 
Micro-emulsions, Spreading Formulations, Suspo -emulsions, Micro  and 
Nano encapsulation, Gel and Tablet Formulations, Bio -botanical Pesticide 
Formulations. 
The new generation formulations provide desired bio -efficacy and minimize 
the disadvantages and problems associated with the use of conventional 
and solvent based f ormulations. These formulations contain no or minimum 
solvent, therefore, safer to the user and do not create the hazards. Fine 
sizes of dispersed droplets provide very good bio -efficacy on the target 
pests at the same or lower doses of pesticides. These f ormulations 
minimize the risk of skin toxicity, flammability and phytotoxicity and pesticide 
residue in food products. IPFT has successfully developed 65 technologies 

13 
 
of new generation formulations. Many technologies have been transferred to 
different industries for scaling up to commercial production. 
These formulations, developed by IPFT, safeguard the human health and 
environmental concerns expressed due to use of conventional pesticide 
formulations. These formulations will help farmers in sustainable agriculture. 
 
(ii)  Use of excessive amount of pesticides beyond the prescribed limit for 
agricultural and  non-agricultural purposes may result in the presence of 
their residues in surface and ground water resources. Also, the extra 
quantity of pesticides released into the environment are regarded as toxic 
substances. Contamination occurs not only due to current use of 
agrochemicals but also due to leaching of persistent ingredients from 
soil. Pesticide contamination of surface water in a particular region 
depends on several  factors, such as closeness of crop fields to surface 
water, characteristics of surrounding fields and climate conditions. 
IPFT is already doing pesticide residue analysis in water and soil for 
Haryana Horticulture for last few years. The Institute has the  facilities where 
farmers can be educated and trained for the purposeful use of the 
agrochemicals according to Agricultural Good Practices. 
Considering the capabilities, objectives of IPFT & facilities available at this 
Institute Government of Rajasthan ha s sanctioned a mega project entitled 
“Monitoring of Pesticide Residue in the farm produce of Rajasthan” for the 
better of framing community and living beings in the State of Rajasthan with 
a view to doubling the farmers income. 
(iii) The ministry will explore the possibility of opening of IPFT in different 
parts of India to enable it conduct analysis of soil and water in time bound 
manner.” 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.13 The Committee are satisfied to note that the Institute of Pesticides Formulation 
Technology (IPFT) has developed various user and environment friendly new generation 
formulations which minimize the risk of skin toxicity, flammability and phytotoxicity  and 
pesticide residue in food products. IPFT has successfully developed 65 technologies of 
new generation formulations. Many of these technologies have been transferred to 
different industries for scaling up to commercial production. The Committee would l ike 
to be apprised of the status of these transferred technologies and whether these 
pesticides formulations are being used for production and use on the field alongwith the 
benefits accrued to the farmers thereon.   The Committee  note that IPFT is doing 

14 
 
pesticide residue analysis in water and soil for Haryana Horticulture for the last few 
years and Government of Rajasthan has sanctioned a mega project entitled “Monitoring 
of Pesticide Residue in the farm produce of Rajasthan” for the better of farming 
community and living beings in the State of Rajasthan. The Committee are of the view 
that there is a need for regular monitoring of pesticides residues in farm produce, water 
and soil in all parts of the country keeping in view the human health and sustainabl e 
agriculture. Thus, there is a need for opening of more IPFT branches in other parts of 
the country. This will not only enhance the monitoring of pesticides residues capacity, it 
will be cater to different needs of farmers in different parts of the countr y including 
education and training  of farmers in purposeful use of agrochemicals according to 
Good Agricultural Practices.  In this regard, the Committee note  the reply given by the 
Department that it will explore the possibility of opening of IPFT in di fferent parts of the 
country.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the Department 
in the matter.  
 
Recommendation No.14 
Removal of toxic waste in UCIL, Bhopal 
 
1.14   The Committee while expressing dissatisfaction over the lackad aisical response to the 
important issue of disposal of toxic waste lying at the UCIL complex had recommended as 
under:- 
 
“The Committee are highly perturbed to note that even after 35 years of the 
Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster there is a huge pile of toxic waste still lying at the 
UCIL site. It could not be disposed of due to one reason or another. The toxic 
waste may contaminate the ground water and is a potential health hazard for 
the people living in the area.   In this regard, the Committee note that a t rial run 
was taken under the direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court to incinerate 10 metric 
tons of about 350 metric tons of waste lying in the site and that was 
successfully done.  In this context, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Government of India  should take up the matter of disposal of remaining toxic 
waste lying at the UCIL site and the remediation of the site with the state 
government more vigorously and complete the task within 2020. The 
Committee feel that the non -disposal of toxic waste even  after 35 years of 
tragedy indicate the lackadaisical attitude of Union Government as it is high 
time that the toxic waste is disposed of in view of successful trial incineration”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.15 The Department in its reply to the aforementi oned recommendation had stated as 
under:- 
“As per Union Cabinet decision taken in the year 2010, the Government of 
Madhya Pradesh would be responsible for undertaking disposal of hazardous 

15 
 
wastes and remediation of the erstwhile UCIL plant at Bhopal. Minis try of 
Environment, Forest and Climate  Change had constituted the Oversight 
Committee to provide oversight and support to the Government of Madhya 
Pradesh in taking necessary remedial actions. Oversight Committee could 
provide oversight and technical suppo rt only when there is a proposal from 
Government of Madhya Pradesh before it’s consideration. Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has taken up the issue with the State 
Government time and again. In the Review Meeting held on 9 th December, 2019 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals, it was decided that Government of Madhya Pradesh will write to 
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change at the highest level for 
resolving the issue of disposal of waste. D espite repeated reminders, no 
response has been received from Government of Madhya Pradesh, so far”.   
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.16 The Committee are dismayed to note that no response has been received 
from the Government of Madhya Pradesh despite repeated reminders sent by the 
Government of India on resolving the issue of disposal of toxic waste which is   
lying at the UCIL complex in Bhopal  even after 36 years of the tragedy.  
According to the decision of the Union Cabinet in 2010, the Government of 
Madhya Pradesh would be responsible for undertaking disposal of hazardous 
wastes and remediation of the erstwhile UCIL plant.  However, it is a matter of 
grave  concern that even after 10 years of that Union Cabinet decision,  no 
progress has been made in the matter notwithstanding the fact that the toxic 
waste lying in UCIL Complex  is a potential health hazard to th e people living in 
the vicinity.   In view of the successful incineration of 10 metric tons of the toxic 
waste on the direction of Hon'ble Supreme Court,  it is clear that the  remaining 
quantum of 340 metric tons of toxic waste can be  disposed off with s ame vigour 
but no concrete steps have been taken either by the Union Government or the 
State Government for the disposal of the waste  so far despite knowing the havoc 
caused by the  historic tragedy which killed thousands of people and critically 
affected the health of tens of  thousands of more people.    If the State 
Government is either not showing interest or unable to initiate steps  to dispose 
the toxic waste and remediation of the area, it is the responsibility of the Union 
Government to  do the nee dful for the  early disposal of the toxic waste lying at 
the UCIL complex.  If needed, the matter may be placed before the Union   Cabinet 
for a fresh decision in the matter.  The progress made in this regard may be 
intimated to the Committee. 

16 
 
 
Chapter ll 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation Sl no. 1 
Production of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
 
2.1  While, pointing out the growing domestic requirement of chemicals and 
petrochemicals and increasing foreign exchange outgo on imports of 
chemicals and petrochemicals the committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 The Committee note that the Chemical industry is knowledge intensive as well 
as capital intensive industry and it is an integral constituent of the growing 
Indian industry.  It includes chemicals and its products, Petrochemicals, Paints, 
Varnishes, gases, soaps, perfumes, toiletry, etc.  The diversifi cation within the 
chemical industry is large and covers more than eighty thousand commercial 
products. Projection of production and consumption of chemicals and 
petrochemicals in the country during 2019 -20 is 51,241 Metric tons and 59,202 
Metric tons respectively.  Gap between the production and consumption is met 
through imports.  During 2018 -19, the country imported Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals worth Rs. 3.95 lakh crore.  Since it is very much necessary to 
augment domestic production of chemicals and petr ochemicals according to 
the requirements of the country and to contain the huge expenditure on 
imports, the Committee recommend the following: 
 
(i)  The Government should initiate suitable measures to augment 
production of Chemicals and Petrochemicals which are required to be imported 
for use in the country.  
(ii)  Since it is a capital intensive industry, sufficient incentives should be 
given to attract mega investments in this sector and delays in according 
approvals should be minimized. 
(iii)  All initiatives should be made to set up world scale capacity plants in the 
country with world class infrastructure.  
 (iv) There is a need to Increase capacity utilization of domestic units along with 
the addition of new capacity in the country. All necessary steps  should be 
taken to increase the capacity utilization of existing plants. 
  

17 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2  In reply of the aforementioned recommendation of the Committee, the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals had stated as under:- 
 
(iv) The Government has taken many measures to facilitate production of 
chemicals and petrochemicals in the country. The industry is free from 
industrial licensing regime; only IEM from DPIIT is required to be obtained for 
setting up new undertaking or to carry out  substantial expansion. The latest 
and state-of-art technology of chemicals and petrochemicals is freely allowed 
under automatic foreign technology agreement initiative of the RBI and also 
100% FDI is permissible under automatic route except from contiguou s 
Nations. Government has reduced corporate tax rate and abolished Dividend 
Distribution Tax. Due to these measures, the industry is expected to make 
further progress in achieving more production in the sector. 
 
(v) Number of initiatives have been already taken in the recent past to attract 
mega investments for setting up world scale capacity plants, enhance ease of 
doing business. Advisory Forum has been set up under the chairmanship of 
Minister(C&F) for resolving the problems faced by the industry . The 
Department has been engaging with leading global players to facilitate them 
to set up world class plants in India. The PCPIR Policy has been announced 
to provide integrated top -class infrastructure in the investment regions. All 
initiatives are being  further strengthened which shall contribute towards 
achieving higher competitiveness & more growth in the sector. 
 
(vi) Currently, all integrated/standalone petrochemical complexes are being 
planned/ setup of world scale capacity/infrastructure, as there is no  viability of 
the complexes below of world scale capacity. 
 
(vii) Wherever there is low capacity utilization of the plant and the products 
manufactured in the plant are imported in the country; the same is being 
considered for restriction on import. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
 
 
 
 
  

18 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Review of structure of taxes on Chemicals and  Petrochemicals 
 
2.3  During the deliberations it was repeatedly noted that in many product categories, 
the Indian manufacturers are not able to compete with cheaper imports from different 
countries.  Since the chemicals and petro -chemical sector is critical for the Indian 
economy, it is important that the issue of tariff protection to the domestic manufacturers 
is re-visited again.  The Committee strongly recommend that the Department should set 
up a high level group to review the structure of taxes -both customs as well as GST 
applicable to the chemicals and petrochemicals sector with a view to provide impetus 
for increased domestic production.  The Committee should also have representatives 
from the Ministry of Finance, private sector and the industry chambers.  This group 
must be constituted immediately with  directions to furnish their recommendations 
within 8 weeks.  The Committee would like a separate Action Taken Report on this from 
the Department. 
Reply of the Government 
 2.4 Every year, DCPC consults industry associations for recommending suitable duty structure 
for boosting the growth of the sector. Pre-budget proposal for the year 2020-21 was formulated 
after consultation with the industry associations and submitted to Department of Revenue 
based on the following criteria: 
(i)   In general, where the ga p between domestic capacity and demand is very small, 
capacity utilization is low, it may propose enhancement in BCD (Basic Custom Duty). In cases, 
where the gap between capacity and demand is very high, progressive increase in BCD has 
been proposed for incentivizing new investments for capacity creation. 
(ii)  BCD on basic feedstock/building blocks is proposed to be kept at the minimum. BCD 
on intermediates is kept moderately high. BCD on finished products is kept higher than the 
BCD applicable to intermed iates. Future growth and development of both upstream and 
downstream products is kept in mind while formulating the Budget proposals. Due attention is 
also given to the fact that no inverted duty structure should exist due to our proposals. It is 
there evi dent that due diligence has been done in formulating our budget proposals. It is 
proposed that the ‘High -Level Group’ as suggested by Standing Committee may be 
constituted, while formulating Budget Proposal for the year 2021 -22 after consulting 
Department of Commerce, Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, and 
Department of Revenue. 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Budget allocation of the Department of Chemical and   Petrochemicals 
 
2.5  The Committee note that the BE for the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals is Rs. 218.34 crore against the requirement of Rs. 227.56 crore proposed 

19 
 
by the Department for the year.  Budget Estimate (2020 -21) proposed by the Department 
for Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Rs. 31.80 crore), Central Institute of Plastic Engineering 
(Rs. 98.25 crore) and Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology (Rs. 11 crore) have 
been allocated entirely without any curtailment. However, allocation for “New Schemes 
of Petr ochemicals”, under which the requirement of fund for two sub -schemes viz. 
“setting up of Plastic Parks” and  “Setting up of Centres of Excellence in Polymer 
Technology”, has been curtailed from the proposed amount of Rs. 60.86 crore to Rs. 
53.79 crore.  But the average of actual expenditure for the scheme from the year 2015 -16 
to 2019 -20 was only 73.9% of the total amount allocated for the scheme.  Hence, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should make proper analysis of the 
requirement of funds for  specific schemes and all efforts should be made by the 
Department to utilize fully the allocated funds so as to enable the Ministry of Finance to 
allocate full funds proposed by the Department for its schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6  The Department h as noted the recommendation of the Committee for proper 
analysis of the requirement of funds for specific schemes and all efforts are being made 
by the Department to utilize fully the allocated funds so as to enable the Ministry of 
Finance to allocate full funds proposed by the Department for its schemes.   
It is further to inform that in BE 2019 -20  an amount of Rs.31.65 crore was 
allocated and was fully utilized and released to the Plastic Parks/Centres of Excellence 
in phases depending upon their progres s reports, utilization of funds and eligibility for 
getting additional funds. Based on analysis and projected requirements for all the 
Plastic Parks, Programme Division had sent a proposal for Budget requirement of 
Rs.60.86 crore during BE 2020 -21, however  it got reduced to Rs.53.79 crore.   
Department shall make all out efforts to utilise the full fund. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
  

20 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Response of entrepreneurs to Plastic Parks 
 
 2.7 The committee are concerned to note that there is lack of enthusiastic response 
from entrepreneurs to set up their units in plastic parks particularly due to high cost of 
land, high cost of raw material etc.  The Committee in this regard note the steps taken 
by the Department to convince the State Governments to reduce the cost of land, give 
land to entrepreneurs on lease/rent basis, to provide special discounts on raw materials 
etc.  Since creation of just infrastructure without proper responses from entrepreneurs 
will defeat the very purpose of the scheme, the committee recommend that the 
Department should impress upon the concerned states about the long term benefits of 
these parks to the country’s economy and convince them either to reduce the cost of 
land or to provide land on lease/rent basis to the entrepreneurs to enable them to set up 
their units without financial difficulties.  Department should also take steps to supply 
raw material on discounted rates to the units in the plastic parks. Publicity to the plastic 
parks should also be made in the events organized by the Industry Associations so as 
to attract entrepreneur to set up their units in the plastic parks. 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The Department is making continuous efforts in this direction. The State 
Government/ implementing agency of Plastic Park are being advised to reduce the cost 
of land or to provide land on lease / rent basis to the entrepreneurs to enable them to 
set up their units without financial difficulties which is in the long term interest of the 
state. As a result many Plastic Parks have reduced land price substantially.  
The Department has also convinced its erstwhile PSU, BCPL to extend 
support to MSME setting up units in Plastic Park. As a result BCPL now helping Plastic 
Industry by giving special discount to the extent of Rs 750/MT + Rs 500/MT on 
purchase raw material (Polymers) from BCPL to units coming up in the Tinsukia Plastic 
Park.    
Other State Governments have also been advised by the Department during 
meetings to provide incentives to the Plastic Industry to attract and encourage them to 
invest in the Plastic Parks. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
  

21 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
Closure of HFL 
 2.9 The Committee note that in view of the non -viability of the HFL’s existing 
operations, the Department moved a proposal for closure and the Govt/ CCEA on 
22.01.2020 has approved the shutting down of the plant/unit of HFL and closure of the 
Company. All employees (except skeletal staff) are to be separated through VRS/VSS as 
per DPE guidelines; non -VRS opting employees are to be retrenched as per Industrial 
Disputes Act. Government of India proposes to provide an interest free loan of Rs.77.20 
crore to HFL for settling immediate closure related liabilities, including VRS/VSS 
expenditure, and to meet administrative expenses of skeletal staff. The committee not e 
that the interest free loan of Rs 77.20 crore has not been released and no allocation has 
also been made in the BE of 2020 -21.   In View of this, the Committee are concerned 
about the fate of the employees of HFL and recommend that the interest free loan to HFL 
should be released without further delay so that the employees who are to be given 
VRS/VSS do not face any hardships. 
Reply of the Government 
   With regard to providing interest free loan of Rs.77.20 crore to HFL for settling the 
closure related liabilities of HFL, the Ministry of Finance vide OM dated 02.03.2020 had 
suggested that the proposed payment to HFL may be considered in the next Financial 
Year when the Budget 2020-21 would become available. Accordingly, requisite proposal 
for providing the loan amount of Rs.77.20 crore in the Department’s budget for 2020 -21, 
including through advance from the Contingency Fund of India (CFI), was sent to the 
M/o Finance on 22.04.2020.   
Vide OM dated 11.05.2020, M/o Finance has conveyed grant of an advance of 
Rs.73.70 crore from the CFI to the Department’s budget in light of implementation of the 
CCEA decision for closure of HFL, with the advice that DCPC may accordingly issue 
formal sanction order for expenditure. Based on this, formal sanction order for re leasing 
the interest free loan of Rs.73.70 crore to HFL for settling closure related liabilities of the 
company, including for giving VRS/VSS compensation to the employees and payment 
of their other outstanding dues, has been issued by the Department on 19.05.2020. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
CIPET 
2.10  The Committee are note that CIPETs are doing commendable job in skilling the 
youth in polymer technology and helping them to gain employment not only in India but 
also in foreign countries and thus helping in bringing remittances to the country. The 
Committee are happy to note that almost 5 lakhs student have been trained/skilled at 

22 
 
various CIPET centres so far and are of the view that more CIPET centres would cater to 
the need of youth in getting gainful employment. The Committee are satisfied to note 
that students from rural areas and left wing extremism hit areas are also joining CIPETs 
particularly young women of these areas are getting remunerative jobs after training in 
CIPET centres. In view of the above, the Committee recommend to open more CIPET 
centres in other parts of the country so that youth can be imparted skill training as per 
the demand of  the industries and help them in gaining useful employment. The 
Committee also recommend that proper reservation rules of the Union government 
should be fo llowed while giving admission in CIPET centres for various courses.  The 
Committee may be furnished the information on the number of students admitted and 
passed belonging to various categories viz. SC, ST, OBCs, women and economically 
backward persons during the last 3 years. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.11  The Government of India through EFC held on 13.04.2016 has approved 11 new 
CIPET centres with a total project cost of Rs. 562.32 crore to be shared by the 
Government of India and the respective State Government on 50:50 basis. Process of 
establishment of these centres are ongoing. However, some new centres / sub -centres at 
Andaman & Nicobar, Nellore, Gurugram, Goa and Nagpur are also in pipeline, for which 
correspondences are being made.   
It is further informed that CIPET adopts the reservation rules of th e union 
government while giving admission in CIPET Centres for various courses. The category -
wise number of persons trained in the last 3 years is furnished below –  
 
Category 2017-18 2018-19 2019-2020 
General  24771  26551  22631 
SC 10529 9963 9428 
ST 4082 3441 3303 
OBC 21764 21838 19334 
PWD 57 48 63 
Minority 525 479 430 
EWS - - 188 
Women** 8328 8695 7785 
Total 70056 71015 63162*  
*Ongoing training programmes were suspended from 2nd week of March 2020 due 
to COVID       ** reservation rules were also followed while selecting women 
candidates. 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 

23 
 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Change of nomenclature of CIPET 
 
 
2.12 The Committee note that CIPET conducts 13 different long term training 
programmes viz. Diploma, Post Diploma, Post Graduate Diploma, Undergraduate, Post 
Graduate and Ph.D. programme. Apart from training programmes CIPET offers 
Technology Support Services (TSS) in the entire spectrum of Plastic Engineering & 
Technology. The Committee observe that changing the nomenclature of CIPET from 
Central Institute of Plastic Engineering & Technology to Central Institute of 
Petrochemical Engineering & Technology would be more appropriate in terms of wide 
scope of course curriculum of the institute.  The Committee are of the view that the new 
name proposed by CIPET is more representative of the course curriculum and training 
imparted in the in stitute. Hence the Committee recommend that the name of CIPET may 
be changed to Central Institute of Petrochemical Engineering & Technology from 
Central Institute of Plastic Engineering & Technology.  
Reply of the Government 
2.13   The Governing Council of  CIPET in its 130 th meeting accorded approval to rename 
CIPET as Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering and Technology (CIPET) and 
accordingly the approval of the competent authority has also been taken. Further action has 
been initiated to comple te the formalities for renaming of Central Institute of Plastics 
Engineering & Technology as “Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering and Technology 
(CIPET) 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
  

24 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
 
  2.14 The Committee note that Institute of pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) is 
the only institute of its kind in the country devoted to the development of state of the art 
and environment friendly new generation Pesticide formulation technologies for safe r 
environment and also to develop methods for the detection and analysis of pesticides 
and their residues.  An enhanced amount of Rs. 11 crore has been provided in BE, 2020 -
21 to enable the institute to acquire laboratory equipment to cater to the present need 
and future of analysis of samples of soil for detecting pesticide residues. In Committee’s 
view role of this institute should be strengthened and the Committee would like to make 
the following recommendations:   
i.   Institute should develop environme nt friendly, cost effective pesticides for use 
by farmers.  Bio -pesticides should be developed and should replace the synthetic 
pesticides throughout the country.  
ii.   Quantum of pesticides residues in soil and water bodies should be 
analyses/tested in a ll the states and UTs of the country and suitable measures should 
be taken in coordination with the State Governments concerned to educate and train the 
farmers to enable them to follow good agricultural practices particularly to use right 
amount of pesticides for crop cultivation. 
iii. Department should examine the feasibility of opening more branches of this Institute 
so as to have at least one institute in each of the four regions of the country to enable it 
conduct analysis of soil and water in time bound manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
i) To minimize the risks and disadvantages of conventional and solvent based 
formulations, IPFT has developed various user & environment friendly new 
generation formulations like Suspension Concentrates, Water Dispersible 
Granules, Controlled Release Formulations, Concentrated & Micro -
emulsions, Spreading Formulations, Suspo -emulsions, Micro and Nano 
encapsulation, Gel and Tablet Formulations, Bio -botanical Pesticide 
Formulations. 
The new generation formulation s provide desired bio -efficacy and minimize the 
disadvantages and problems associated with the use of conventional and solvent 
based formulations. These formulations contain no or minimum solvent, therefore, 
safer to the user and do not create the hazards.  Fine sizes of dispersed droplets 
provide very good bio -efficacy on the target pests at the same or lower doses of 
pesticides. These formulations minimize the risk of skin toxicity, flammability and 
phytotoxicity and pesticide residue in food products. IPF T has successfully 
developed 65 technologies of new generation formulations. Many technologies 
have been transferred to different industries for scaling up to commercial 
production. 

25 
 
These formulations, developed by IPFT, safeguard the human health and 
environmental concerns expressed due to use of conventional pesticide 
formulations. These formulations will help farmers in sustainable agriculture. 
 
ii) Use of excessive amount of pesticides beyond the prescribed limit for 
agricultural and  non-agricultural purposes may result in the presence of their 
residues in surface and ground water resources. Also, the extra quantity of 
pesticides released into the environment are regarded as toxic substances. 
Contamination occurs not only due to current use of agrochemicals  but also 
due to leaching of persistent ingredients from soil. Pesticide contamination of 
surface water in a particular region depends on several factors, such as 
closeness of crop fields to surface water, characteristics of surrounding fields 
and climate conditions. 
IPFT is already doing pesticide residue analysis in water and soil for Haryana 
Horticulture for last few years. The Institute has the facilities where farmers can 
be educated and trained for the purposeful use of the agrochemicals according to 
Agricultural Good Practices. 
Considering the capabilities, objectives of IPFT & facilities available at this 
Institute Government of Rajasthan has sanctioned a mega project entitled 
“Monitoring of Pesticide Residue in the farm produce of Rajasthan” for the  better 
of framing community and living beings in the State of Rajasthan with a view to 
doubling the farmers income. 
iii) The ministry will explore the possibility of opening of IPFT in different parts of 
India to enable it conduct analysis of soil and water in time bound manner. 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.14 
Removal of toxic waste in UCIL, Bhopal 
   
2.15 The Committee are highly perturbed to note that even after 35 years of the 
Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster there is a huge pile of toxic waste still lying at the UCIL site. It 
could not be disposed of due to one reason or another. The toxic waste may 
contaminate the ground water and is a potential health hazard for the people living in 
the area.   In this regard, the Committee note that a trial run was taken under the 
direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court to incinerate 10 metric tons of about 350 metric tons 
of waste lying in the site and that was successfully done.  In this context, the Committee 

26 
 
strongly recommend that the Government of India should take up the matter of disposal 
of remaining toxic waste lying at the UCIL site and the remediation of the site with th e 
state government more vigorously and complete the task within 2020. The Committee 
feel that the non -disposal of toxic waste even after 35 years of tragedy indicate the 
lackadaisical attitude of Union Government as it is high time that the toxic waste is 
disposed of in view of successful trial incineration. 
Reply of the Government 
  2.16  As per Union Cabinet decision taken in the year 2010, the Government of Madhya 
Pradesh would be responsible for undertaking disposal of hazardous wastes and 
remediation o f the erstwhile UCIL plant at Bhopal. Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change had constituted the Oversight Committee to provide oversight and support 
to the Government of Madhya Pradesh in taking necessary remedial actions. Oversight 
Committee could provide oversight and technical support only when there is a proposal 
from Government of Madhya Pradesh before it’s consideration. Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals has taken up the issue with the State Government time and again. In 
the Revi ew Meeting held on 9 th December, 2019 under the Chairmanship of Secretary, 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, it was decided that Government of Madhya 
Pradesh will write to Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change at the highest level 
for resolving the issue of disposal of waste. Despite repeated reminders, no response has 
been received from Government of Madhya Pradesh, so far.  
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
 
 
 
 
  

27 
 
Chapter III 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT WANT TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
Recommendation No. 4 
Setting up of Plastic Parks 
 
3.1  The Committee note that the Department is implementing a plastic Park 
scheme.  The Scheme aims at setting up of need based plastic parks which are the 
ecosystems with State of the art infrastructure enabling common facilities through 
cluster development approach, to consolidate and s ynergize the capacities of the 
domestic downstream plastic processing Industry.  The other objective of the scheme is 
to contribute to the economy by increasing investment, production, export and 
generation of employment.  Under the scheme, the Government of India provides grant 
funding up to 50% of the project cost, subject to a ceiling Rs. 40 crore per project. In the 
first phase of the project, the Government approved six Plastic Parks viz. two in the 
State of Madhya Pradesh and one each in the states of  Odisha, Assam, Jharkahand and 
Tamil Nadu.  In this regard, the committee are concerned to note none of these Parks 
have started actual production activities in their parks.  Physical progress of work has 
now only been completed in Tamot, Madh ya Pradesh an d Paradeep, Odisha even 
though these parks were given approval in 2013.  In other four parks, the progress of the 
work Is not very significant.  In the second phase, four more parks have been approved 
for the states of Uttarakhand, Chhattisgarh, Haryana an d West Bengal which are in DPR 
stage.  In view of the significance of these parks to increase the production and export 
of plastics and in generation of employment, the Committee recommend that the 
Department should take concrete steps for creation of comp lete infrastructure of all the 
six parks of the first phase within a definite time frame and to sanction and start the 
works in four parks approved in the second phase by  taking up the matter with the 
State Governments concerned at the highest level. 
Reply of the Government 
3.2  The Department monitors progress of Plastic Parks constantly and pursue with the 
State Governments by reviewing progress reports, holding review meetings and site 
visits etc. The Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) also reviews the  progress of Plastic 
Parks. State Governments are making all out efforts through marketing of Plastic Parks 
in various events organized by the Industry Associations and they are also offering 
attractive incentive schemes.  
It is the result of monitoring the progress that physical infrastructure of Tamot 
(MP) Plastic Park is almost completed and Paradeep (Odisha) is near to completion. 
Bilaua (MP) and Jharkhand Plastic Park are showing good progress, however progress 
of Tinsukia (Assam) Plastic park is slow due to specific issues of NER. Tamilnadu 
Plastic Park has also awarded the work the implementing agency TNIDCO is confident 
to get the work completed in time.          

28 
 
 The ‘in-principle" approval accorded to States of Uttarakhand, Chhattisgar h, 
Haryana and West Bengal reviewed regularly and now Uttarakhand has submitted its 
revised DPR which is under evaluation by a committee. State Government of Haryana, 
Chhattisgarh and West Bengal still have not complied and they are being given final 
opportunity to comply with the guidelines failing which ‘in -principle" approval accorded 
to them would be withdrawn.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
Recommendation No. 12 
Setting up of Plastic WMCs 
4.1  The Committee note that four plastic Waste Management Centres (WMCs) 
are proposed to be set up at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Patna and Varanasi Centres of 
CIPET.  The Department sought an additional amount of Rs. 30 crore during 2019 -20 
from the Ministry of Finance for setting up of these WMCs but the same was not 
received.  Presently identification of land for WMCs is under progress.  In this regard, 
the Committee are of the view that WMCs are very much necessary in cities to manage 
huge amount of wastes being accumulated daily particularly the plastic wastes.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that swift action should be taken by the Department 
and CIPET in setti ng of these four WMCs in a time bound manner.  Budgetary support 
for the purpose should be provided in RE/supplementary demand this year by 
impressing upon the Ministry of Finance about the importance of these centers.  
Moreover, steps should also be taken to set up WMCs in other cities in the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
4.2  In order to address the environmental issues related to plastics, Government 
of India has approved four Plastics Waste Management Centres (PWMCs) in the country 
at Ahmedabad, Be ngaluru, Patna and Varanasi with the main objective to create 
awareness on plastics waste management, promote cost effective recycled plastics 
material grades for end -use applications, entrepreneur development in plastic recycling, 
networking of rag picker s with processors, manpower development through training in the 
field of recycling technology, to create business and employment opportunities using 
waste to wealth concepts and also technically help in tackling the issue of plastics waste 
disposal in the country.  
 
CIPET, in consultation with the local authorities, is in the process of identifying 
suitable land for Setting up of Plastic Waste Management Centres (PMWCs) at 
Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Patna and Varanasi.   
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 

30 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
Sale of Land of HOCL 
 
5.1  The Committee note that the Government of India approved a restructuring 
plan for HOCL on 17.05.2017. So far out of total of approx. 684 acres of land approved by 
the Government for sale to BPCL, sale & registration of only about 375 acres have been 
completed. Sale of balance approx. 309 acres land has been affected by law & order 
situation due to protests by the local villagers to fencing of the purchased land by BPCL 
and the delay in submission of the report by the Committee under Divisional 
Commissioner, Konkan, constituted by the Maharashtra Govt. to address the concerns 
and demands of villagers in respect of HOCL land sale to BPCL . In this regard, the 
committee note that the matter is being followed up with the State Government at the 
highest level  for expe diting resolution of the issues . The committee recommend to 
resolve the issue at the earliest by convincing the local people about the ownership of 
the land and by providing them alternative land or suitable compensation by the State 
Government.  
Reply of the Government 
5.2  The land for HOCL’s Rasayani unit in Maharashtra, that has been shut down 
under the restructuring plan of the company, was acquired by the State Govt. in the 1960s. 
HOCL has stated that the land owners were fully compensated and the company had also 
given employment to the project affected people. As per the land revenue records, HOCL is 
the absolute owner and possessor of the land. Further, the process of sale and registration 
of the 684 acres of land at Rasayani,  that have so far been approved by the Govt. of India 
for sale to BPCL, was initiated only after the requisite NOC for the land sale was given to 
HOCL by the Maharashtra Govt. 
  
For resolution of the issues delaying the disposal of HOCL land  at Rasayani (a nd 
approx. 7 acres at Panvel) , a meeting with all the stakeholders concerned was taken by 
Secretary (C&PC) and Chief Secretary, Maharashtra, in Mumbai on 12.02.2020. After follow 
up by this Department/HOCL (including DO reminder from Secretary (C&PC) to CS , 
Maharashtra, on 28.05.2019) minutes of the meeting has been issued by the State Govt. on 
02.06.2020. As per the minutes, following discussions were held and decisions taken in the 
meeting: 
  
(i)     For the land already registered in favour of BPCL, all necessary support will be 
provided by the State Govt. to enable BPCL to take full possession and fence the area. 
  
(ii)    NOC for sale of HOCL land at Panvel and sale of land to IOCL at Rasayani will be 
processed and expedited by the State authorities concerned. 
  

31 
 
(iii)   Report of the Committee constituted by the State Govt. on the grievances of the project 
affected villagers is under consideration and further necessary action will be taken as per 
the decisions to be taken by the State Govt. on the said report. 
  
(iv)  Regarding concerns of villagers having scattered houses on HOCL land, a proposal for 
payment of some compensation will be prepared by the Divisional Commissioner, Konkan, 
to resolve the issue. 
  
  
  
 The above issues are being followed up by HOCL with BPCL and State Govt.  
authorities concerned. Further necessary action for disposal of HOCL’s land at 
Rasayani and Panvel will accordingly be taken based on the progress made by the 
State Govt. on the above issues. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
  
 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Kochi Unit of HOCL 
5.3  The Committee are dismayed to know that imports of phenol at low prices 
is adversely affecting the finances of HOCL Kochi unit. Kochi unit achieved turnover of 
Rs 472 crore and net profit of Rs 22.47cr in FY 2018 -19 however, imports of phenol at 
low prices has once again pushed the unit towards a net loss of 58.49 crore in  FY 2019 -
2020 (upto 3.2.2019). In this regard, HOCL has also applied to DGTR, M/o Commerce for 
imposition of safe guard duty on phenol imports and anti -dumping duty on Phenol 
imports from  USA and Thailand. The Committee strongly recommend that the 
Department should take up the matter more vigorously with the M/o Commerce for 
imposition of safe guard and anti -dumping duties on phenol for resolving the HOCL’s 
grievance so that closure of one more PSU can be averted.  
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.4  Application of M/s HOCL and other Phenol Producer was sent to 
Directorate General of Trade Remedies (DGTR), D/o Commerce for levy of safeguard 
duty on import of Phenol with the approval of Hon’ble Minister (C&F) vide OM dated 
30.10.2019. In spite of remind ers dated 15.11.2019 & 28.02.2020 the status report on 
imposition of safeguard duty on import of Phenol has not been received from DGTR.  
The joint petition of M/s Hindustan Organic Chemicals Ltd. (HOCL), M/s 
Deepak Phenolics Ltd. & M/s SI Group India Pvt. Ltd. Manufacturing Phenol was sent to 
DGTR for initiation & Imposition of Anti -Dumping Duty on imports of Phenol from 

32 
 
Thailand and USA vide OM dated 27.02.2020 with retrospective effect as per the 
provisions of Customs Tariff Act.  
A D.O. letter dated 13. 05.2020 from Secretary (C&PC) also has been sent to 
Secretary, D/o Commerce to examine the request of HOCL for imposition of provisional/ 
interim anti-dumping duty on import of phenol from Thailand and USA. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
HIL (India) Ltd. 
 
5.5  The Committee observe that the authorized and paid up share capital of 
HIL(India) Ltd is Rs.100 crore and Rs.91. 33 crore respectively. 100% of its shares are 
held by the Govt. of India. The Committee are satisfied to know that after implementation 
of revival package sanctioned in 2006 -07, HIL (India) has been continuously posting 
profits. HIL (India) Ltd has now ven tured into a wide range of products and businesses 
such as seeds for crops and vegetables, trading of fertilizers, bio -pesticides and bio -
fertilizers. The Committee were apprised that HIL (India) Ltd has made a five year plan 
for self -sustainability, with the target to increase the company’s turnover significantly 
by the year 2024. The Committee were informed about the detailed plan of HIL (India) Ltd 
and the Committee are of the view that if the plan is executed it would be profitable not 
only for HIL (Ind ia) Ltd but also to the economy and would boost employment 
generation. However Committee also note that the plan is subject to HIL being able to 
generate funds for working capital of Rs.200 Cr and CAPEX of Rs.200 Cr. The Committee 
therefore recommend that the Department shall take necessary steps to help HIL India 
to raise the required capital to achieve the above mentioned plan. Department should 
also financially help HIL in its Research and Development efforts.  Further the 
Committee take a serious view o f continuous delays in payments for DDT supplies from 
NVBDCP of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare which affects the working capital of 
HIL.  In this regard the Committee recommend that the matter should be taken up at the 
highest level with that Minist ry for early DDT payments.  This recommendation of the 
Committee should be sent to the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for specific 
action taken reply by it.  
 
Reply of the Government 
5.6  In view of Finance Ministry's OM dated 3.2.2016 which instructs that the 
window of investment and working capital loan to CPSUs from Govt. of India is closed, it 
would not be possible for the Department to extend any direct financial assistance/ 
budgetary support for working capital funds to HIL. However, to facilitate the company 
to tide over its liquidity constraints and run its business operations smoothly and 
profitably in the near future, the Department has processed HIL’s proposal for extending 

33 
 
Govt. of India guarantee for enabling the company to raise additional working capital 
loan of Rs.100 crore from any public sector bank, and referred the said proposal to the 
M/o Finance for its approval.  
 
  
For helping HIL in its R&D efforts, the outcome of R&D activities of IPFT and 
CIPET (autonomous bodies under the Department) that are engaged in R&D activities 
in the field of pesticide formulations, polymeric materials, etc., wherever applicable, are 
also shared with HIL. F or example, CIPET has supported HIL in the development of 
LLIN technology and IPFT is supporting HIL in the commercialization of Neem based 
botanical pesticides. 
  
 
As regards the delays in DDT related payments by the NVBDCP/ Ministry of 
Health & Family We lfare (MoH&FW), Secretary (C&PC) vide DO letter dated 
11.05.2020 has conveyed the Committee’s concern and recommendation to the 
Secretary, MoH&FW, along with the request to expedite the DDT related 
payments/vetting of interest claim of HIL. NVBDCP vide let ter dated 15.06.2020 has 
informed that meetings to resolve the issues related to payment of DDT and vetting of 
the company’s interest claim are being held under the Chairmanship of AS&FA, 
MoH&FW, and that decisions, if any, of MoH&FW will be communicated in due course. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
 
 
Recommendation No. 15 
Compensation to the victims of BGLD 
 
5.7  The Committee note that the process of paying compensation of ex -gratia 
to the victims of Bhopal Gas tragedy is still going on.  Office of Welfare Commissioner 
which is a judicial body, awards/disburses compensation/ex -gratia to the victims.  An 
amount of Rs. 1549.32 crore was settled as compensation to 5,74,393 claimants out of 
the compensation amount deposited by Union Carbide corporation.  Apart from it, a sum 
of Rs. 835.06 crore has been awarded to 49,972 victims as ex -gratia to them as decided 
by the g overnment of India.  The disbursement of ex -gratia is still continuing.  The 
Committee note that only Rs. 2  Lakh is awarded in case of cancer and total renal failure.  
Since this amount may not be adequate, the committee recommend that the ex -gratia 
amount in these two cases may be increased suitably so as to enable the victims get the 
proper treatment in case of cancer and total renal failure.  Further, the Committee 
recommend that all the steps should be taken to award compensation/ex -gratia to all 

34 
 
victims without much appealing processes so as to enable them to get the 
compensation/ex-gratia quickly.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.8 Based on the decision of the Union Cabinet in 2010, an amount of Rs.874.28 crore 
was allocated for providing additional comp ensation to the victims of the Bhopal gas tragedy 
under different categories. Cancer and Total Renal Failure are two categories under ex -gratia 
in which compensation of Rs.2 lakh per victim is awarded. The recommendation of the 
Committee for increasing the  amount in these two categories is noted and the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemical will examine the matter in consultation with Government of 
Madhya Pradesh and Ministry of Finance. The recommendation of the Committee regarding 
steps should be take n to award compensation/ex -gratia to all victims without much appealing 
processes is also noted and will be taken up with the Office of the Welfare Commissioner, 
Bhopal Gas Victims, Bhopal and State Government of Madhya Pradesh. 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
[Ref: DCPC OM No.23011/2/2020-Fin Dated: 30.06.2020] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                     KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
08 February, 2021                                                                                    Chairperson 
19 Magha, 1942 (Saka)                                              Standing Committee on 
              Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
***** 

1 
Appendix II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT (17TH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2020-21) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2019-2020)’ OF 
THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND 
PETROCHEMICALS). 
 
I Total Number of Recommendations 15 
II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Vide Recommendation No. 1,2,3,5, 8,10,11, 13 & 14 
 
 Percentage 60% 
III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government reply:- 
Vide Recommendation No. 4 
 
 Percentage 6.67% 
IV Observation/Recommendation in respect of which reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:- 
Vide Recommendation No. 12 
 
 Percentage 6.67% 
V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government is still awaited:- 
Vide Recommendation No.  6,7,9 & 15 
 
 Percentage 26.66
% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
MINUTES OF THE    FIRST SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 12th October, 2020 from 1100 hrs. to 1145hrs. in 
Committee Room  ‘B’,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
 
  Ms. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2. Shri Deepak Baij 
3. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
4. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
5. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
6. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
8. Shri Indra Hang Subba 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri  M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
10. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
11. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
12. Shri Arun Singh 
13. Shri A.D. Singh 
14. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
15. shri K. Vanlalvena 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora  - Officer on Special Duty (LSS) 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava - Director 
3. Shri Panna Lal   -  Under Secretary  
 
 
 
Session I  
 
XXXX    XXXX    XXXX     
Session-II  
 
  XXXX    XXXX   XXXX 

3 
 
2. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption of following draft 
Action Taken Reports: 
 
(i) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019 -20 (Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals); 
(ii) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019-20 (Department of Fertilizers); 
(iii) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019 -20 (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals); 
(iv) Action Taken Report on Study of System of Fertilizer Subsidy (Department of 
Fertilizers). 
(v) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 (Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals); 
(vi) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2020-21 (Department of Fertilizers); 
(vii) Action Taken Report on Deman ds for Grants 2020 -21 (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals). 
 
3. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Action Taken Report(s) 
unanimously without any change/amendments.  The Committee also authorized the 
Chairperson for finalize and present the Action Taken Reports to the Parliament. 
4. The Committee also decided to hold its next sitting tentatively in the second week of 
November, 2020. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
XXXX matters not related to this report. 
 
  
 
 
 
 