 
 
 
39 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
                        CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2022-23) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
     
     MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
        (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
NANO-FERTILIZERS FOR SUSTAINABLE CROP PRODUCTION AND 
MAINTAINING SOIL HEALTH 
 
THIRTY- NINTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 March, 2023/  Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
 


C&F.No. 167 
 
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2022-23) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
NANO-FERTILIZERS FOR SUSTAINABLE CROP PRODUCTION AND MAINTAINING 
SOIL HEALTH 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.03.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.03.2023 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
   March, 2023/ Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
CONTENTS 


 PAGE No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22) (iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) (v) 
INTRODUCTION (vi) 
Acronyms/Abbreviations  (vii) 
REPORT  
PART- I          NARRATIVES 1 
I  Introductory   
II Research and Field Trials on Nano Fertilizers 
(i) Research and Field trials 
(ii) Variance in crop yield on application of Nano Urea 
(iii) Efficacy Trials for Nano Urea 
(iv) Development of other nano fertilizers 
(v) Efficacy of Nano Urea  
(vi)         Nano fertilizers and Conventional Fertilizers - a Comparative  Analysis 
(vii) Research Trials on Nano DAP 
3 
III Progressive journey of Nano Fertilizers 
(i) Progressive journey Nano Urea 
(ii) Measures to increase the production of Nano Urea  
(iii) Benefits of Nano Urea in Reduction of Imports and Subsidy  Savings  of  
Bulk Urea 
13 
IV Application of Nano Urea 
(i) Best application of Nano Fertilizers 
(ii) Methodology for spraying Nano Urea 
(iii) Availability of drones for Nano Fertilizers spray 
(iv) Need for Drone Pilot Training  
(v) Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) fund to facilitate drone spray of 
 Nano Fertilizers  
17 
V Promotion of Nano Urea 
(i) Methods adopted for promotion of Nano Urea 
(ii) Testing Laboratories for Nano fertilizers. 
(iii) Equitable Distribution of Nano Fertilizers 
(iv) Need for Relief in Basic Customs duty on fertilizer raw materials 
27 
 PART - II  
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 33-46 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Summary of all India Experimental Results of Nano Urea (liquid) in Kharif 2021. 47 
II. Seasons-wise/crop-wise experimental trails undertaken on Nano urea (liquid) 
(Nano nitrogen). 
 
III. Safety assessment of IFFCO Nano urea (liquid) as per DBT Nano guidelines.  
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2021-22) held on 18th April, 2022. 
 
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2021-22) held on 04th May, 2022. 
 
III. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2021-22) held on 04th August, 2022. 
 
IV. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(2022-23) held on 14th February, 2023. 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri Deepak Baij 
5. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
6. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
7. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
8. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
10. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
11. Shri Vasava Parbhubhai Nagarbhai  
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt Aparupa Poddar  
14. Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
15. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
16. Shri M. Selvaraj 
17. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
18. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
19. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
21. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
24. Dr. Anil Jain 
25. Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27. Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Arun Singh 
29. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
30. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
      1.    Shri Vinod Kumar Tripahti  -  Joint Secretary  
2.    Shri N.K. Jha    -   Director 
3.    Shri C. Kalyanasundaram              -           Additional Director 
4.    Shri Panna Lal    -  Under Secretary 
 
  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2022-23) 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor-  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
5. Shri Deepak Baij 
6. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
7. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhalikar 
8. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
10. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
11. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt. Aparupa Poddar  
14. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15. Shri Muniyan Selvaraj 
16. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
17. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
18. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
19. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
21 Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar  
23. Dr. Anil Jain  
24. Shri Arun Singh  
25. Shri Ram Nath Thakur* 
26. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
27. Vacant 
28. Vacant 
29. Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
      1.    Shri Vinay Kumar Mohan             -   Joint Secretary  
2.    Shri N.K. Jha    -   Director 
3.    Smt. Geeta Parmar              -           Additional Director 
4.    Shri Panna Lal    -  Under Secretary 
 
* Nominated w.e.f. 13.03.2023 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin Part –II 6251 dated 14.02.2023 

INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
 (2022-23) having been authorized by the Committee  do present on their  behalf, this 
Thirty Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘ Nano-Fertilizers for sustainable crop 
production and maintaining soil health’ pertaining to the Department of Fertilizers, 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers.  
2. The Committee  (2021-22) took oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Department of Fertilizers on the subject on 18 th April, 2022. The Committee took further 
oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare ( Department of Agricultural Research and Education 
(DARE)) and the Ministry of Civil Aviation at their sittings held on 04th May, 2022 and 04th 
August, 2022. 
3.  The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on   
14th February, 2023.  
 4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives  of the 
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India for tendering evidence and placing 
before the Committee all the requisite information sought for in connection with the 
examination of the subject.  
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.  
6. For ease of reference and convenience, the Observations/ R ecommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                    DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
20, March, 2023                                                                        Chairperson, 
29, Phalguna,1944 (Saka)                                             Standing Committee on 
       `                                                    Chemicals & Fertilizers. 
 

ACRONYMS/ABBREVIATIONS OF THE TERMS USED IN THE REPORT 
 
AIF Agriculture Infrastructure Fund 
APVMA Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority  
ATP-ADP Adenosine tri-phosphate - Adenosine di-phosphate [Energy transfer 
compounds] 
BVFCL Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited 
CIARI, Port Blair Central Island Agricultural Research Institute, Port Blair 
CPSU Central Public Sector Undertaking 
CSCs  Common Service Centres 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
CSSRI, Karnal Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal 
DAP Di-ammonium Phosphate  
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
DBT- DST The Department of Biotechnology and The Department of  Science and 
Technology 
DDG, NRM Director General ((Natural Resource Management) 
DGCA  The Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DNA-RNA Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) - Ribonucleic acid (RNA) [Genetic 
Materials] 
DoF Department of Fertilizers 
EFSA The European Food Safety Authority 
FACT The Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited 
FAO/WHO Food and Agricultural Organization/ World Health Organization 
FCO Fertilizer Control Order 
FPOs  Farmer Producer Organizations 
FSANZ Food Standards Australia New Zealand  
GLP Good Laboratory Practice  
GST Goods and Service Tax  
ICAR 
ICAR- CIARI 
 
ICAR-CSSRI 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research  
Indian Council of Agricultural Research – Central Island Agricultural 
Research Institute 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research- Central Soil Salinity Research 
Institute 
ICH The International Council for Harmonization of Requirements  for 
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use  
IFCCO Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative Limited (IFFCO) 
IRRI SARC, Varanasi International Rice Research Institute South Asia Regional Centre, 
Varanasi 
ISO International Organization for Standardization 
KVKs Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MoA&FW, GOI Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Government of India 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MOP Muriate of Potash 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MRP Maximum retail price  
MSP Minimum Support Price 
NARS National Agriculture Research System 
NBRC  Nano Biotechnology Research Centre 

NCU Neem coated Urea  
NDA Non-Disclosure Agreement 
NFL National Fertilizers Limited 
NMR Nuclear magnetic resonance   
NOAEL No-Observed-Adverse-Effect-Level 
NPK Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potassium 
NUE Nutrient Use Efficiency 
OECD Organization for Economic Cooperation & Development 
OECD  Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. 
PLI Production Linked Incentive  
ppm Parts per million 
PSUs Public Sector Undertakings 
R&D Research and development 
RCFL Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited 
Rdn Recommended Dose of Nitrogen 
REACH Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of Chemicals 
SAU State Agricultural Universities 
SMAM Sub Mission on Agricultural Mechanization 
SMS Short Message Service 
SOP Standard operating procedure 
TFP Total factor productivity 
TGs Testing guidelines 
TNAU Tamil Nadu Agricultural University 
TSCA Toxic Substances Control Act 
UN SDGs UN Sustainable Development Goals 
USEPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
USFDA United State Food and Drug Administration  
 
 

REPORT 
PART- I 
NARRATION 
 
I INTRODUCTORY 
 
 
1.1 World over , agriculture is facing a wide spectrum of challenges, such as 
stagnation in crop yields, low nutrient use efficiency (NUE), declining soil organic 
matter, multi -nutrient deficiencies, shrinking arable land and water availability. 
Depletion and degradation o f land and water resources present a serious  
challenge for food, livelihood and nutritional security for the ever -growing 
population. 
1.2 Fertilizers provide nutrients needed by the plants for their optimal productivity. 
Farmers typically apply fertilizers thr ough the soil by surface broadcasting, 
subsurface placement or mixing with irrigation water. However, a large portion of 
bulk conventional fertilizers like urea is lost to the atmosphere or surface water 
bodies, thereby polluting the ecosystem. 
1.3 In India, there is a little scope of bringing in more area under cultivation; therefore, 
growth in food grain production has to come largely through productivity 
enhancement. However, fertilizer consumption in India is imbalanced, and Urea 
accounts for more than 82% of the nitrogenous fertilizers applied to majority of the 
crops. Resultantly, the Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potassium (NPK) consumption 
ratio has widened from 4:3.2:1 in 2009-10 to 7:2.8:1 in 2019-20. 
1.4 Hon’ble Prime Minister has appealed to farmer s to reduce the use of urea on farm 
field in the interest of soil health, environment and futuristic prosperity for gradually 
reducing use of chemical fertilizers and eventually stop th eir use to protect soil 
health. Hon’ble Prime Minister has called for “ Reduction in chemical fertilizer 
consumption especially Urea by 50 percent. 
1.5  Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative Limited  (IFFCO) has developed 
nanotechnology-based Nano Urea fertilizer to address the imbalanced and excessive 
use of conventional Urea. Nano fertilizer has been developed indigenously for the first 
time in the world at IFFCO - Nano Biotechnology Research Centre (NBRC) Kalol, Gujarat 
through a proprietary patented technology. Nano Urea is a source of nitrogen which is a 
major essential nutrient required for proper growth and development of a plant. Nitrogen 
is a key constituent of amino aci ds, enzymes, genetic materials (DNA-RNA), 
photosynthetic pigments (i.e.  chlorophyll) and energy transfer compounds (ATP -ADP) in 

a plant. Typically, nitrogen content in a healthy plan t is in the range of 1.5 to 4%.  Foliar 
application of Nano Urea at critical crop growth stages of a plant effectively fulfils its 
nitrogen requirement and leads to higher crop productivity in comparison to conventional 
urea.  
 
1.6 Nano Urea has been tested for bio -safety and toxicity as per the guidelines of 
Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Government of India and international guidelines 
developed by Organization for Economic Cooperation & Development (OECD) which are 
adopted and accepted globally. Nano Urea  is completely safe for human, animals, birds, 
rhizosphere organisms and the environment  at the recommended levels of application. 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Government of India, has notified Nano Urea 
as a nano fertilizer under the Fertilizer Control Order  (FCO) vide notification dated  24th 
February, 20 21 and commercial production started at Kalol, Gandhinagar w.e.f. 
1st August 2021.  
1.7 IFFCO had been engaged in research and development of nano fertilizers since 
2017.  They have developed nano fertilizer macronutrient grades - Nano Nitrogen, Nano 
DAP and secondary /micronutrient grades - Nano Zinc, Nano Copper, Nano Boron, Nano 
Sulphur, etc. at Nano Biotechnology Research Centre (NBRC), Kalol, Gujarat. Other  
nano fertilizers of IFFCO are in pipeline at different stages of development, 
demonstration and for inclusion under Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), GOI. It is expected 
that they would be priced considerably cheaper than the prevailing price of their 
conventional bulk counterparts. 
1.8 The various benefits of Nano fertiliz ers over conventional fertilizers are 
enumerated as under: 
1. Price Advantage  - They cost less than the subsidized conventional 
fertilizers resulting into lower input cost for the farmers. 
2. Advantage in terms of Logistics and Warehousing  - They are easy to 
carry and store thus, they are economical in terms of reduced 
transportation and warehousing cost. 
3. Saving of Bulk Fertilizer - With the application of nano fertilizers per 
hectare, less number of subsidized fertilizer bags are required which leads 
to saving in fertilizer cost and additional income to the farmers. 
4. Economic Benefit due to additional crop yield  - Application of nano 
fertilizers results into better crop productivity and higher income for the 
farmers. Based on 11,000 all India far mer field trials conducted on  94 
crops by IFFCO in collaboration with  the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) – Krishi Vigyan Kendras(KVKs), average 8 % higher crop 
yield was achieved with the application of Nano Urea; which translates into 
Rs. 2000 – Rs. 5000 per hectare higher income to the farmers. Economic 

benefit is even more in case of high value / high MSP crops. It will act as 
one of the tool to double the income of farmers as co mmitted by our 
Hon’ble Prime Minister. Average 45 – 90 Kg less subsidized urea would be 
applied per acre of field which translates into Rs. 266 – Rs. 532 per acre 
cost saving for the farmers in terms of lower purchase cost for the farmers.  
 
5. Enhancement in total factor productivity (TFP) of our crop production 
systems – Application of nano fertilizers has commensurate benefits in 
term of better soil health, air and water which will ultimately benefit the 
farmers through improvement in total factor productiv ity (TFP) of our crop 
production systems. 
II. RESEARCH AND FIELD TRIALS ON NANO FERTILIZERS 
(i) Research and Field trials 
2.1 As regards the re search and field trials on nano fertilizers, the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare , Department of Agricultural Research  & Education  
(DARE) has informed that IFFCO had started trials in some of the ICAR I nstitutes / State 
Agricultural Universities (SAUs) from Rabi crops season 2019-20.  However, th ese trials 
were taken only in few locations, not covering all the agro climatic zones of India.  Based 
on the agronomic efficiency of the product, it was  provisionally enlisted in FCO.  
Subsequently, in Kharif crop season 2021, it was felt that the trials should be conducted 
in all the agro climatic zones of India.  Accordingly 20 experimental trials with Nano Urea 
were conducted in Five  (5) Kharif crops viz. Rice  
(12 locations), Maize (4 locations), Finger Millet (2 locations), Pearl Millet (1 location) and 
Ginger (1 location) in selected  ICAR Inst itutes.  The experimental trials in most of the 
locations included the following treatments: 
 
1. Application of 100% Recommended Dose of Nitrogen (RDN). 
2. 75% of RDN + 1 Nano Urea  spray. 
3. 75% of RDN + 2 Nano Urea  spray. 
4. 50% of RDN + 1 Nano Urea  spray. 
5. 50% of RDN + 2 Nano Urea  spray. 
 
2.2 Further, i n three locations viz. Indian Council of Agricultural Research  – Central 
Island Agricultur al Research Institute, Port Blair ; (ICAR-CIARI), Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research - Central Soil Salinity Research Institute,  Karnal; (ICAR-CSSRI), 
and International Rice Research Institute  -South Asia Regional Centre,  Varanasi; 
(IRRI SARC), the experimental trials had the following treatments: 
1. Application of 100% Recommended Dose of Nitrogen (RDN). 
2. 66% of RDN + 1 Nano Urea  spray. 
3. 66% of RDN + 2 Nano Urea  spray. 
4. 33% of RDN + 1 Nano Urea  spray. 
5. 33% of RDN + 2 Nano Urea  spray. 
 
(ii) Variance in crop yield on application of Nano Urea 

2.3 Also, e xperiments were conducted in a randomizing block design with four 
replications. After harvesting of the kharif crops, grain yields were recorded and statistical 
analysis was performed.  In 100% RDN treatments, conventional urea was applied 
through broadcasting. However, in Nano Urea  plots, Nano Urea liquid was sprayed @ 
2ml/L of water.  The Nano Urea was sprayed in the tillering / branching stages of the 
crops.  Crops, their varieties, duration and average yields are described in Table below: 
S. 
No. 
Location Crop Variety Duration Average 
Yield 
(q/ha) 
1. GRF, 
CRIDA, 
Hyderabad 
Maize Hybrid  - DHM-
117 
107 days 30-35 
 AICRPDA 
centre, 
Bengaluru 
Finger Millet GPU-28 112 days 25  
 AICRPDA 
centre, 
Jagdalpur 
Upland rice  Danteswari 100 days 33  
2. IISR-
Kozhikode 
Ginger Varada 240 days 22-24 
tonnes/ha 
3. IRRI-SARC-
Uttar 
Pradesh 
Rice (Rainfed) Binadhan11 125 days 37 
 -do- Rice (Irrigated) MTU7029 145 40 
 IRRI-SARC-
Assam 
Rice (Rainfed) CR Dhan 311 125 43 
4. NRRI-
Cuttack 
Rice Pooja 158 days 40 
5. SKNAU-
Jobner 
Bajra RHB-173 70-80 days 25-28 
6. UAS GKVK - 
Bangalore 
Maize BRMH-8 120-125 days 75 
 -do- Rice KMP 220 125-130 days 55 
7. VPKAS-
Almora 
Finger Millet VL Mandua352 100 – 105 
days 
25-28 
8. RVSKVV-
Indore 
Maize Komal 
(Hydbrid) 
80-85 days 38-40 
9. AAU-Anand Maize GAYMH 1 85 - 90 Days 45 
 
2.4 The results of the trials indicated that in the case of rice, Nano Urea saved top-
dressed nitrogen in the range of 25 -50% with additional yield of 1.32 to 14.5%, which 
gave an overall benefit of Rs. 75 to Rs. 9832/ha.  In the case of maize, Nano Urea 
application saved 25 -50% top-dressed nitrogen and produced 2 to 5% additional  yield, 
which resulted in overall benefit ranging between Rs. 531 to  Rs. 1722/ha.  In the case of 
finger millet,  Nano Urea application saved 25 -50% top -dressed nitrogen with 11% 
additional yield in Karnataka and no yield advantage in Uttarakhand.  In the case of pearl 
millet, Nano Urea application saved 25% top -dressed nitrogen and produced 7% higher 
yield with overall benefit of Rs. 3070/ha.  Trial conducted at Kozhikode (Kerala) saved 
50% recommended nitrogen and produced 57% higher yield of ginger with overall benefit 

of Rs. 50870/ha. In most of the locations there was no significant difference amongst 
recommended dose of  nitrogen (RDN), 75% RDN + Nano Urea, and 50% RDN + Nano 
Urea Application. However, the best treatments in terms of fertilizer saving a nd the 
results are summarized in Annexure- I. 
2.5 During evidence, a representative of I CAR with regard to variance in the increase 
of yield of different crops on application of nano fertilizers submitted as under: 
“Although rice was tried in 13 locations, for the sake of brevity, I am taking one 
example from North, East, South, West and Central regions. For example, in 
Ayodhya, total grain yield obtained was 6.5 tonnes per hectare. The additional 
cost incurred for u sing the Nano Urea was Rs. 1200 but the overall benefit after 
calculating the economics in standard manner was Rs. 7530 and the biggest 
benefit was in terms of saving in top dress nitrogen and that was up to 50 per cent. 
Similar type of trend was obtained in different places  where saving varied from 33 
to 50 per cent. In one location, it was 25 per cent. But in most of the locations, 
besides additional cost, the Nano Urea application was able to give the benefit to 
farmers. The same trend was observed in some other crops also. The second crop 
was maize which was tried in four locations, Anand in Gujarat, Hyderbad in 
Telangana, Indore in Madhya Pradesh  and Bengaluru in Karnataka. Here also, 
additional cost involved in Nano Urea was Rs. 800 to Rs. 1400 in different 
locations but overall benefit also varied from Rs. 300 to Rs. 1700. Besides, it had 
huge saving of nitrogen. So, top dress nitrogen saving ranged between 25 to 50 
per cent in maize crop.”         
2.6 In this context, he further added as under: 
 “If I put all these tria ls and give a summary, in rice, Nano Urea saved top dress 
nitrogen in the range of 25 to 50 per cent with additional yield of 1.3 to 14.5 per 
cent which gave overall benefit from Rs. 750 to Rs. 9832. In the case of maize 
crop, the Nano Urea application saved 25 to 50 per cent nitrogen and 2 to 5 per 
cent additional yield was obtained with the benefit range being between Rs. 531 to 
Rs. 1700 per hectare. In finger millet also, similar results were obtained. It saved 
25 to 50 per cent top dress nitrogen with 1 1 per cent additional yield in Karnataka. 
There was yield benefit in Almora. In pearl millet, the Nano Urea saved 25 per cent 
top dress nitrogen and produced seven per cent higher yield with overall benefit of 
Rs. 3000 per hectare. The trials conducted at Kozhikode, Kerala saved 50 per 
cent recommended nitrogen and 57 per cent higher yield was obtained and overall 
benefit was more than Rs. 50,000 per hectare. If you see scientifically, there was 
no significant difference amongst recommended dose of nitrogen  and 75 per cent 
of RDN with Nano Urea and 50 per cent RDN with Nano Urea  application, but the 
real saving was in terms of top dress nitrogen which ranged between 25 to 50 per 
cent in various locations. However, the yield advantage of three to eight per c ent 
has compensated whatever small additional cost was involved in Nano Urea  
application and 25 to 50 per cent saving in top dress nitrogen was observed due to 
Nano Urea application. So, these are the results in brief. As the Secretary has 
said, the result s of rabi crops are expected shortly. The wheat crop is being 
harvested now.” 

2.7 The Committee desired to know whether any study has been conducted to assess 
the reasons for such vide variance in yield of crops  on application of Nano Urea. In reply, 
a representative of DARE stated as under: 
 
“….हहहहह हहहहहह हह हहहहहहहह हहह हह हह, हहहहहहह हहह 
हह हह हह हहहहह हहहहहहहहहह हहह हहह हह हह हहहहहह हह 
हहह हहहह हहहहहहहह हह हह हहहहहह हहहह हहह हहह हहह 
हहहह हहहह हहह हहहहहह हहहहहहहह हहहहहहहह हहह हह 
हहहह हहहह हहहहह हहह हह हहह हहह हहहहहहह हहहहहह हहह 
हहह हह हहह-हहह हहहहह हहहहहहहहहह हहहहह हहह हहह 
हहहहहहह हह हहह हह, हहहहहहह हह हहहहहहह हहह हहह हहहह 
हहहह हह हह हहहहह हहह हहहह हहहह हह, हह हहहहहह हहह 
हहहह हहहह हहहह हहह हह हहहह हहहहह हह हह हह हहह हह हहह-
हहह हहहहहहह हहह हह हहह-हहह हहहहह हहह-हहह हहहहहहहहह 
हहहहहह हहह हह हहह हहह हहह हहहह हह, हहहहह हह हहहहह हह 
हह हहह-हहह हहहहह हहहहहहहहहह हहह हहह हह हह हहह हह 
हहह-हहह हहहहहहह हहहह हहह हहहहहहहहह हहहहहह हहहह 
हहह हहह हह हहहहह हहहहहहहह हह हह हहहह हहह-हहह 
हहहहहहहहह हहह हह हहहहहह हहह“  
 
2.8  To a similar query, the Secretary, DARE & DG, ICAR submitted as under:  
 
“यय यययययय यय ययय ययय यय ययय-ययय यययययय ययय यययय यय 
यययय यय यय यय ययय ययययययय ययययय, यययय यय यययय यय ययय 
यय यय यय ययय यययय ययय यय-ययययययय यय ययययययययय 
ययययययययय ययय यय, यय यययय ययय यय यययय ययय ययययय 
यययय यययय यय यययययय ययय यययय यय यययययय ययय यय, 
ययययययय यययय ययय यय यय यय ययययययययय ययययययययय ययय 
यय ययय 50 ययययययय यय यययय यययय ययययय ययययययय यययय 
ययययय यय ययय ययय, ययययय ययययय यययय यय यययययय यययय 
यय, ययययययय यय ययय यययय यय यय यययय ययययययययय यय ययय 
ययय यय यय ययय ययययय यययय यययय ययय यय ययययय यय 
ययययययययय यययय यययय ययय” 
 
2.9 As regards the efforts being made to conduct field trials on other varieties of crops 
/ vegetables / fruits, etc., the Secretary DARE stated as under: 
“Actually, these trials were planned with the involvement of NITI Aayog …... So, 
for initial trials, we planned that we should cover all the agro -climatic zones with 
at least one site and in both the seasons. That is how, it has been late. 
Obviously, when we take the data of both the seasons, the crop which we have 
tried would increase. It will include both the season crops and main crops. As you 
rightly said, there are a number of crops like vegetables which you have pointed 
out.” 
2.10 During evidence, when asked about any further plans to test the impact of nano 
fertilizers on more crops, a representative of IFFCO replied as under: 
“Sugarcane results are very fine.  We have already test ed 94 crops.  In throughout 
the country, we are organizing trials. We are very thankful to our ICAR Director, 
DDG.  Both the DDGs are present.  They have given us full support in that.  Even 
all the KVKs have been supervising our trials.  They have given a very 
encouraging report.  From every place, we got a very good result.  I have  not seen 

any negative impact.  We hope that our DAP will also reduce the burden of DAP.  
This is my ambition.” 
2.11 The Committee further desired to know if intensified field trials with Nano Urea are 
being conducted on crops in various parts of the country where they are widely sown an d 
have bountiful yield. And also how the 11 crore soil health cards issued to the farmers 
are being utilized while conducting the field trials on Nano Urea .  In this  regard, the 
Secretary, DARE submitted as under: 
“ययययय, यययय ययययय ययययय यय ययययय यय ययययय यय ययय 
यययय ययययययययय ययययययययय ययय यययययययय यय ययय ययय 
यय ययययय यय ययय यययययय यय ययय यययययययय यययययय यय 
यययययययय यययय ययय यय यय यययय ययययय ययययय यय ययययय 
यय यय यययययययययय ययय यय ययय ययय  
ययययय, यय यययय यय यययययय यययय ययय यय यययय यय यययय यय 
यय यययययय यययय यय, यययय यय यययय ययययय यययय ययय, यययय 
यययय ययय यययययययययययय यययय यययय ययय यय यययय यय 
यययययय ययय यययय यय यययय यय यययय यययय ययय, यययय 
ययययययययय ययययययययय ययय यय-ययययययय यययय ययय यय 
ययय 50 ययययययय यय यययय यययय यययययय यययय ययययययय 
यययय यययय यययय यय ययय यय ययययय यययय ययय यययय ययययय 
ययय यय यययययय ययय यय यययय यययय ययय यय यययययय यययय 
ययय ययय यययय ययय ययय यय यययय ययययययय ययययययययय यय 
ययय यय ययय ययय यय यय ययययययय यय यय यययययययय 
ययययययययययय ययय यय यययययययययय ययय, यययय ययययययय 
ययययय यययय ययययययय ययययययययय ययय यययय यययययय यय 
यययययययययययययय यययय ययय यय यय यय ययययययय यय हहहह 
यय ययययय यययय ययय यययय यययय ययययययय ययययययय ययययय 
यययययययय ययय ययययययय यय ययययय ययय यययययययययययययय 
यययय ययय ययय यययय यययय यययय ययययय यय यययययय ययय 1000 
यययययययय यय यय यययययययययययययय ययय यय यययय यय यय 
ययय यय ययय ययय यय ययय यय यययय ययययययय ययययययय ययय 
यययय ययय यययययययय ययययययययय यय ययय यय ययय यय ययय यय 
ययय ययययययय” 
 (iii) Efficacy Trials for Nano Urea 
2.12 The Committee wanted to know whether the field trials conducted so far to 
ascertain efficacy of the nano fertilizer s are sufficient before its authorization for 
commercial production and use by the farmers. In reply, it has been stated that  IFFCO 
had co nducted sufficient number of multi -location and multi -crop  
“On Station” and “On Farm” efficacy trials under National Agriculture Research System 
(NARS) with ICAR Institutes and State Agriculture Universities under different agro -
climatic regions since Rab i Season 2019 -20 (Annexure- II) for Nano Urea. Based on 
these successful trials and scientific reports Nano Urea has already been included under 
Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), GOI on 24.2.2021. 
(iv) Development of other nano fertilizers 
2.13 When asked about the ongoing research and development efforts being made for 
development of other nano fertiliz ers like Nano-DAP, Nano Zinc, Nano Boron, etc. and  

timelines by  which these nano fertilizers are likely to be introduced in th e market for use 
by the farme rs, the Department in its  reply has stated that continuous research and 
development efforts have been un dertaken for manufacturing of  nano fertili zers like 
Nano DAP, Nano Zinc, Nano Copper as well as establishing their efficacy vide 
experiments conducted under the National Agriculture research System (NARS).  In view 
of encouraging Bioefficacy – Biosafety – Biotoxicity tests of these nano fertilizers, reports 
have been submitted to JS (INM), M/oA&FW, GOI for earlier inclusion in Fertilizer Control 
Order (FCO), GOI. 
 
(v) Efficacy of Nano Urea  
2.14     With regard to the effectiveness of nano fertilizers on different crops in different 
climatic conditions, soil, etc., the Department has clarified that nano fertilizers have been 
found effective on different crops in different agro-climatic regions as per trials conducted 
under National Agriculture Research System (NARS).  
2.15 As regards  the efforts being made by the various Agricultural Research 
Institutions/ State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) to expand the scope of field trials so as 
to cover all the food crops of the country in different agro -climatic zones in order to 
analyse its efficacy in a time bound manner, the D ARE has stated that experiments have 
been laid out on major crops in different agro -climatic zones of the country. Scope of 
application of nano fertilizers can be increased both by undertaking farmers field trials as 
“Seeing is Believing” and also by increasing availability of nano fertilizers to the farmers.  
2.16 It has further been stated that d uring 2021-22, 290 lakh bottles (500 ml) of Nano 
Urea  have been marketed across the country and as a result farmers across different 
crop geo graphies and different seasons (Kharif, Rabi & Zaid) were benefitted by its 
application in terms of better productivity and profitability.  Presently, efforts were made to 
undertake nano fertilizer  trials in major fertilizer consuming crops of the country under 
different agro -climatic regions in c ollaboration with ICAR  Institutes, SAUs and ICAR - 
KVKs.  IFFCO had conducted 13,000 Nano Urea “On Farm” and “On Station” multi 
season trials with more than 22 research institutes, SAUs and ICAR -KVKs on 94 crops 
under major agro-climatic regions of the country.  
(vi) Nano fertilizers and Conventional Fertilizers - a Comparative Analysis 
2.17 The Committee desired to know how the use of Nano-fertilizers would address the 
issue of imbalanced and excessive use of conventi onal Urea and other fertilizers. In 
reply,  it has been informed that on the basis of the field trials/research conducted, it was 
found that conventional urea is excessively applied in most of the agricu lturally important 
States such as Punjab, Haryana, Telengana, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Uttarakhand 

respectively. NPK ratio is highly skewed and distorted from the ideal NPK ratio of 4:2:1 
due to imbalanced application of nutrien ts. A higher value of N itrogen in NPK ratio 
denotes imbalanced application of nitrogen i.e. conventional urea over and above the 
recommended dose at the cost of other essential nutrients. These variations are more 
pronounced at regional, block and district  level. As conventional urea is available at 
pocket friendly price to the farmers and they use urea more than the recommended dose. 
The price of Nano Urea  is even less than the price of urea and farmer will use it happily 
without compromising ideal N:P:K ratio. Higher Nitrogen Use Efficiency (NUE) along with 
precision and targeted application of Nano Urea can correct imbalanced and excessive 
use of conventional Urea and other fertilizers leading to an improved NPK rati o and 
better crop productivity.   
 
2.18 To a specific query as to what extent the use of Nano fertilizers would improve the 
crop productivity, soil health and nutritional quality of various crops, it has been replied 
that on the basis of On station and On Farm trials, it is projected that an a verage of 8 % 
yield increase is possible through application of Nano Urea in different crops. However, 
outcome varies with type of crop, soil and agro -climatic conditions as well as 
management practices. As per research trials, foliar application of Nano Urea  at critical 
growth stages leads to increase in crop yield in the range of 3 -23 % in wheat, 3 -24 % in 
rice, 2-15 % in maize, 5 -11 % in tomato, upto 5 % in cucumber and 18 % in capsicum.  
Also according to research institutes / state agriculture reports , the application of nano 
fertilizers does not have any negative effect on the soil health in terms of EC, pH, 
Organic Carbon and available nutrients. Root biomass is increased due to foliar 
application of nano fertilizers. Further, h arvested grains of nan o fertilizer treated plots 
have recorded an incremental increase in nutritional content and mineral content. 
 
2.19 As regards the efficacy of nano fertilizer, it has further been added that foliar application 
of Nano Urea has use efficiency greater than 80 %. Nano Urea through foliar spray at critical 
crop growth stages can effectively reduce the urea requirement by 50 %. Thus, 1 bag (45 Kg) 
of urea per acre can be reduced through application of one 500 ml bottle of Nano Urea. With 
average consumption of urea to the tune of 330 lakh MT every year and targeted replacement 
of upto 25-50% of urea, at least 83 lakh MT to 165 lakh MT of Urea is expected to be reduc ed 
by Nano Urea over the years. 
2.20 During evidence, the Committee desired to know the impact of nano fertilizers on the 
produce, soil and health and its effect of food crops . In response,  a representative of IFFCO 
responded as under: 

“Actually, the quality has been increased.  We have tested it in several crops 
like apples, cereals, pulses, vegetables, etc.  The quality parameters are 
increasing.  Just to take an example of apple of Kashmir, we have tested in 
Sher-E-Kashmir University, the firmness and sweetness has increased 
whereas the acidity has decreased.  All nutrient parameters are increasing by 
using nano.  So, there is no harm for the health.” 
2.21 In this context, Department of Fertilizers has added that grain / harvested produce 
of nano fertilizers treated crops have been tested for nutritional quality and bio -safety as 
per DBT guid elines based on  Food Safety & Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)  by 
approved NABL accredited, GLP certified laboratories and have been found safe for 
consumption. Complete report had been submit ted to CFC - DBT-ICAR committee  
(Annexure-III).  
2.22 As regards the long-term effects of use of Nano fertilizers on the nutritional quality 
of various crops, D ARE has stated that the research trials being conducted have 
completed one year and, in most cases, only one season. So, long term effects of use of 
Nano fertilizers on the nutritional quality of various crops cannot be drawn based on this.  
Food toxicity, nutritional value and human safety tests as per nutritional analyses 
guidelines of FSSAI were conducted for harvested produce of crops treated with nano 
fertilizers and were found safe for human and animal consumption. 
2.23 Elaborating on the benefits of Nano Urea for environment, a representative of 
Department of Fertilizers stated as under: 
 
“Benefits in terms of environment -friendly, if you see the plant capacity and 
the way the plant is working and the specific energy consumption, the CO2 
emission, it has an enormous benefit for the environment per se. As 
regards effect of Nano Urea on green house gases emission, I believe that 
IRRI is there and the y will be very happy to share whatever their interim 
report has been saying that if India’s 50 per cent of rice cultivation area is 
brought under Nano Urea, then it would lead to reduction in green house 
gas emission by 4.6 million tonnes. This is an interim report, but this is 
certainly a game changer in terms of opportunity that is given to the nation if 
we can replace even 20 -30 per cent of  the urea that is going waste and it 
can be utilized, then green house gas emission can be appropriately 
addressed.” 
 
2.24 Reacting to the concern expressed by the Committee of ill-effects of use of nano-
fertilizers, if any, on human health, soil, environment, water bodies and marine life, etc.; a 
representative of IFFCO replied as under: 
“We have done extensive toxicity bio -safety studies in collaboration with 
NABL accredited and GLP certified laboratories. There were 15 basic 
testing guidelines that were given by the DBT. But we have gone 
extensively and tested it under 21 guidelines.  

Starting from human health safety, it was environmental safety and 
packaging compatibility test was also there. We have done additional safety 
assessments. To begin with human health safety, we have gone for dermal 
toxicity. So, these guidelines were followed. 
So, these guidelines or OECD protocols were followed and as per the DBT, 
we have undertaken the studies.  These are the studies which we have 
done: The Skin Absorption Study for human safety, Eye Irritation 
Investigation, Inhalation Toxicity Study of nanoparticles because if you are 
spraying, Genotoxicity Study, Cytotoxicity Study.  We have done these 
studies extensively.  
Apart from this, there is environmental safety test. It is exposed to the 
environment.  As you are also saying, it is going to the water and all these 
things.  So, following are the environmental safety studies which we have 
done.  They are: Inhibition Test in fresh water alga, Immobilization Test in 
Daphnia, Toxicity in tropical fish, Fish Embryo Toxicity Study, Earthworm 
Reproduction Study, Stability Test of the nano  materials for aqua, human 
and environment safety, Soil – water leaching – Spray Studies on soil, Soil 
– water leaching -- Spray on Plant.   
Apart from that, we have done packaging compatibility test.  They are: 
Packaging Compatibility Test, which is very important.  It has been done as 
per OECD Environmental, and all ISO certifications were followed. 
We have done additional safety assessment. This is apart from the 15 
testing guidelines by DBT. 
We have gone for Toxicity o n Microbes, Toxicity on Mice and Chicken, 
Microbial Contamination Study, NMR Analysis of Nitrogen.  We have done 
how it is behaving.  Then, we have done Plant Uptake Studies, and 
Nutritional Analysis from FSSAI.  
We have done all these testing studies. It was found that it is safe.  Just to 
add to this, these DBT nano guidelines are harmonized as per international 
guidelines of REACH, OECD, USEPA, TSCA, APVMA, FAO/WHO, USFDA, 
EFSA, FSANZ and Codex, and the principles of ICH.   
 Sir, all these have been done . Extensive reports have been 
submitted to the Ministry.” 
2.25 The Committee further desired to know whether any analysis was done to gauge 
the impact of spray of Nano fertilizers inhaled by the farmers in the form of droplets on 
the respiratory system. To this, a representative of IFFCO submitted as under:  
“Sir, as a precaution, w e have recommended mask, but practically 
speaking, you are inhaling oxygen because you are inhaling air which has 
got nitrogen.  It is not having any long -term effect.  So, how w ould these 
nano particles have any long -term effect?  Besides this, you can bring this 
Nano Urea.  It is only protein which will go inside.  Practically speaking, we 
should be proud of our efforts of our scientists and engineers. They have 
designed something. Urea was designed 120 years back, and in these 120 
years, so much development has taken place.  We have opened a window 
on nano. With it, tomorrow, India can become a big door where the world 
can start following and having the Nano Urea or nano fertilizer. That is why 
we are coming into nano. DAP is our effort.  When we will have support 
from the Hon. Members of Parliament, when we will have support from our 
Government, when we will have support of the farmers, this could become a 

game changer in techno logy.  Today, the biggest problem is environment, 
global warming. If we have to save humanity, we have to reduce urea 
consumption.  Urea is the bigger polluter as NO2 which comes out of it. That 
has why the International Rice Research Institute gave their 
recommendations.  There is nobody is bigger than them in science.  So, Sir, 
I would say that we should feel proud of something which has happened in 
our country.” 
2.26 The witness further added as under: 
“Sir, it has four per cent nitrogen only.  It is as effective as one bag of urea 
is effective.  The urea becomes toxic after 5000 ppm.  After 5000 ppm and 
three months exposure, one disease can be seen which is the baby 
syndrome.  So, here we are using only 80 ppm to 10 ppm.  There is no 
issue of any toxicity at all. So, we have tested everything..…….. 
2.27 Observing that Nano fertilizers are a new technology and only short -term studies 
have been done so far, the  Committee expressed a need for long-term studies so as to 
analyze its long-term effects, a representative of IFFCO replied as under: 
“You are absolutely right. ....We have not stopped here only. So many 
agriculture research institutes are doing their studies continuously. O ne of 
them is TNAU.  Some more universities are also doing their studies. DDG, 
NRM is also looking it and  he has given me the task to make trials. We 
have done trials in several  institutes and in future also, we will do it. We will 
not stop.” 
 (vii) Research Trials on Nano DAP 
2.28 As regards the development of Nano DAP and its ongoing research trials , the 
Department has informed that IFFCO have indigenously developed Nano DAP using its 
own Proprietary Technology on a Pilot Scale. During Kharif 2021, they ha ve conducted 
Nano DAP Rese arch trials on 10 crops across 34 locations in 20 states under the 
National Agriculture Research System (NARS). However, the results of these trials have 
not been submitted to Government of India for evaluation. 
 
2.29 When enquired whether a  separate fund  allocation has been envisaged in 
department' s Budgetary Head for r esearch and development in the field of Nano 
fertilizers in order to develop more cost effective/ efficient and varied nano fertilizers (to 
include other macro and micro crop nutrients), the Department replied in negative. 
 
2.30 In this regard, when further asked regarding R&D efforts made by the Department 
of Fertilizers or its PSUs or other entities like IFFCO to indigenously develop nano DAP 
and other nano complex ferti lizers and progress made so far, the Department has stated 
that IFFCO through its R&D facility at NBRC, Kalol has indigenously  developed 
Nano DAP using its own proprietary technology. The invention is at initial  pilot scale and 

efforts are being made to scale up th e process and manufacture N ano DAP at a 
commercial scale. 
III PROGRESSIVE JOURNEY OF NANO FERTILIZERS 
(i) Progressive journey Nano Urea 
3.1 The Department of Fertilizers has furnished the details with regard to t he 
progressive journey of IFFCO Nano Urea, in a tabular form as under:  
SN Year Details 
1 2017    Research & Commercial Exploration of Nano fertiliser s started 
by IFFCO. 
2 2018 Initiation of Lab scale trials 
3 2019 Inauguration of NBRC, Kalol& Research & Field trials 
undertaken. 
4 2020 Steps taken for inclusion of Nano fertiliser s in FCO,1985 & its 
commercial production. 
5 2021 24th February- Nano Urea (liquid) - Liquid Notified under FCO & 
permission for commercial production granted. 
6 May, 
2021 
Nano Urea (liquid) introduced by IFFCO RGB in its 50th AGM at 
New Delhi. 
7 June, 
2021 
Commercial Dispatches of Nano Urea (liquid) initiated from 
Kalol, Gandhinagar Plant. 
8 July & 
August 
2021 
Online sales of Nano Urea (liquid) began in July. 
Formally commercial production started at Kalol (Gujarat) on  
1st August, 2021. 
 
 
3.2 IFFCO has set up the World’s first manufacturing facility with a production 
capacity of 1,50,000 bottles per day (500 ml size) of Nano Urea fertilizers at its Kalol unit 
in Gujarat and the commercial production has commenced w.e.f 1st August, 2021. As on 
27th November, 2021, 1,15,21,789 bottles (500 ml size) of Nano Urea fertilizer have 
been produced at IFFCO Nano Fertilizer Plant at Kalol. It is for the first time in the world 
that Nano Urea has been introduced to the farmers. It will be a step in the direction of 
self-reliance in terms of ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’ and ‘Atmanirbhar Krishi’ because of Nano -
fertilizers. India has also delivered 100 tonnes of Nano-fertilizers to Sri Lanka. 
 (ii) Measures to increase the production of Nano Urea  
 3.3 When the Committee enquired about the measures being taken for scaling up the 
production of Nano Urea, the Secretary, Department of Fertilizers submitted as under: 

 
“….. The first plant, that is, IFFCO Kalol, Gujarat has already been set up. 
The scientists of IFFCO Kalol, Gujarat, have manufactured Nano Urea. The 
total capacity of first plant  is five crore bottles per year…  The IFFCO is 
setting up five other plants also at Phulpur, Aonla, Bengaluru, and Deoghar. 
With the technology transfer, NFL and RCF are also setting up their plants. 
The NFL is setting up its plant in Nangal in Punjab. The RCF is setting up its 
plant in T rombay in Maharashtra. All these eight plants will be operational 
by November, 2025 and 44 crore bottles will be produced every 
year.……….There are doubts in the minds of the farmers and the officers 
that whether the use of Nano Urea will be in addition to the use of 
conventional urea or it is going to replace the conventional urea. …..by 
2023, two plants will be operational and the total production would be 
eleven crore bottles every year. The expected replacement will be 50 lakh 
metric tonnes of convention al urea and the value will be around Rs. 20,000 
crore.  
 
By 2023 -24, five plants will be operational with twenty -eight crore bottles 
production, and the expected replacement will be 127 lakh metric tonnes of 
conventional urea.  
 
By 2025-26, all the eight p lants will be operational and the total production 
would be 44 crore bottles every year and they are going to replace 200 lakh 
metric tonnes.  
 
Now, I come to Nano DAP, Nano Zinc, and Nano Copper. Based on the 
technology developed by the scientists of IFFC O in their Kalol Research 
Centre, the DAP version and other fertilizer versions are also being 
developed in nano forms. IFFCO has developed Nano DAP, which is under 
field trial. They have conducted research trials on more than ten crops 
across thirty -four locations in twenty States and they have submitted the 
result to the Department of Agriculture for further validation and approval. A 
meeting is going to be held today to discuss the issues and to take 
necessary action in this regard.  
 
Nano Zinc and Nano Copper have also been developed and field trials are 
going on. The production of Nano Urea is scaled up through transfer of 
technology to other Government companies. The NFL and RCF have 
already started the construction of the plants and  within one and a half 
years, they will start producing it.” 
 
3.4 The Committee drew the attention of the Department of Fertilizers  to India’s 
fertilizer imports which had been on the rise due to pandemic-related disruptions. During 
2016-17, the import of urea was 54.81 Lakh MT and it has reached to 98.28 L akh MT 
during 2020-21. Therefore, keeping in view the dependency of our country on the import 
of fertilizers, the Committee enquired about the steps taken  by the Department to 
increase the production capacity of nano fertilizers in the country as it is stated to be less 
energy intensive and can be operated with non-renewable resources like solar energy, 
so as to build a sustainable model for achieving self -sufficiency in prod uction of various 
fertilizers by involving both the Public and Private Sector C ompanies. The Department of 
Fertilizers in its reply has stated that to boost the indigenous production of Nano Urea, 

two Central Public Sector Undertaking s (CPSUs) viz. National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) 
and Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF), under its administrative control 
has signed Non -Disclosure Agreement (NDA) & Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
with Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative (IFFCO) to transfer the technology of Nano 
Urea from IFFCO.  The details of Nano Urea plants with regard to thei r production 
capacity and anticipated timings of commercial production are given as under:- 
         Location  Production Capacity 
Bottles (500 ml) per 
Year (in Crore) 
Commercial 
Production/Anticipat
ed tmimgs for 
Commercial 
production 
IFFCO Kalol Gujarat  5.0 August  2021  
IFFCO Phulpur UP  6.0  Sept 2022  
IFFCO Aonla UP  6.0  April 2023  
IFFCO Bengaluru, 
Karnataka  
6.0 March 2024  
RCF Trombay 
Maharashtra 
5.0  March 2024 
NFL Nangal Punjab  5.0  July 2024 
IFFCO Deoghar 
Jharkhand 
6.0 Nov 2024 
IFFCO Assam 5.0  Nov 2025 
 Capacity by 2025                            44.0 Crore Bottles Per Year  
 
3.5 Considering the expected high usage of Nano Urea in the coming days , the 
Committee emphasized that more and more Public and Privat e Sector Companies 
desirous of manufacture Nano fertilizers should be promoted. To this, a representative of 
IFFCO responded as under: 
  
 “Certainly, we have that provision also. Our Board has passed it. There are 
certain guidelines and procedures which the private people should follow. 
Then only we can give the technology to establish a manufacturing unit. But 
this technology is a proprietary technology. Anyone who is not following our 
set procedures we cannot give him the technology. Anyone who is following 
all our procedures and rules, we will give the technology. It is now open. Our 
Board has passed this decision.” 
 
3.6 On being further asked by the Committee, if IFFCO will share the nano fertilizers 
technology with the private companies and industries on profit -sharing basis, a 
representative of IFFCO replied as under: 
 “RCF and NFL are also doing. We are open to give the technology. But 
 certainly, we will charge some royalty.” 
 

3.7 In this context, t he D epartment of Fertili zers has added that with the increased 
acceptance of Nano Urea in the farming community, more players will venture into 
production, distribution and marketing of Nano Urea which will further lead to 
enhancement in the nano fertilizer production capacities. This will also generate 
employment opportunities for the local  communities and support the ‘Atmnirbhar Bharat’ 
campaign of the Government.  The Department has also requested IFFCO to transfer the 
Nano Urea technology to other CPSU’s viz. BVFCL and FACT without any cost. 
However, the matter is under consideration before the management of IFFCO.  
 
3.8 To a specific query whether the brown field urea manufacturing units which will be 
completed by 2023 and the e xisting units producing fertilizers on old technology would 
continue to run with the same technology or will they be replaced with the new 
technology, a representative of DARE stated that new Nano fertilizer technology will not 
completely replace the use of urea.  Actually 50 percent basal dose application is done. 
In the rest of 50 %, up to 25 to 50 % or 75 % urea would be replaced. Hence, the Plants 
which are manufacturing urea would also manufacture Nano Urea. 100 percent urea, will 
therefore not be replaced. 
 
 (iii) Benefits of Nano Urea in Reduction of Imports and Subsidy   Savings of  
 Bulk Urea  
 
3.9 The Committee have been informed that it has been justified through experimental 
trials that 25 -50 % reduction in urea usage is possible with application of Nano Urea . 
Conservatively, 10 % reduction in urea demand may be targeted in short term followed 
by 25 % in medium term and 50 % in long term as per current average figure of 330 lakh 
MT of Urea consumed per year in the country as shown below:  
 
Phase Proposed Reduction in Demand of Urea 
through Nano Urea(liquid) 
1st phase ( 2022-24) 33 lakh MT 
2nd phase (2024-26) 83 lakh MT 
3rd phase ( 2026-27) 165 lakh MT 
 
3.10 When enquired about the expected budgetary savings under the fertilizers subsidy 
Head over the years due to sale and use of nano fertilizers in the next 5 years , it was 
informed that IFFCO has commissioned 01 production facility of Nano Urea and is 
establishing 03 ( Three) more plants of Nano Urea with a total production capacity of 25 
crore bottles of Nano Urea per year which will replace 112.5 lakh MT Urea.  As a result of 
production of Nano Urea, GOI Exchequer can save approx. USD 3 Billion equivalent to 
Rs.22,500 crore in subsidy bill per year considering subsidy of approx. Rs. 20,000 per 
MT of Urea. IFFCO wil l be also establishing 02 plants of Nano DAP equivalent to about 

66 Lakh Tonne of DAP, that would resul t in savings of approx. 21,800 crore  in subsidy 
per year at current subsidy on DAP of Rs. 33,000 per MT. 
 
3.11 With regard to pr ospective benefit of Nano Urea in reduction of imports of 
fertilizers and resultant subsidy saving of Bulk Urea, the information has been compiled 
and furnished to the Committee as under: 
 
 
IV  APPLICATION OF NANO UREA  
(i) Best application of Nano Fertilizers 
4.1 The Committee have been informed that the b est application of Nano Urea, Nano 
Zinc and Nano copper to achieve their maximum efficacy is foliar application over crop 
foliage at ma ximum tillering / branching before flowering stages preferably during 
morning (9-11 AM) and e vening (3-6 PM) hours. Nano DAP can be applied as seed 
treatment, seedling dipping and foliar application. 
 
4.2 As regards the correct timings for use of spray of Nano Urea, the Department of 
Fertilizers has informed that 2 spray application of Nano Urea are recommended when 
sufficient crop canopy is there in field and crop is at critical growth stage of application of 
nitrogen viz.1 stspray at active tillering / branching stage (30 -35 days after germination / 
20- 25 days af ter transplanting) and 2 nd spray 20 -25 days after 1 st spray or before 
flowering stage of the crop. 
(ii) Methodology for spraying Nano Urea 
4.3 On being enquired about the methodology adopted for using Nano Urea , it has 
been informed that spraying of liquid Nano Urea is done by the  farmers with g eneral 
hand operated or battery -operated knapsack sprayer of 15 or 16 litres water tank 
capacity. Now-a-days, f armers have also star ted using power or mist sprayers /boom 
sprayers of 200 litres or mo re capacity. Besides, drone can be used to spray nano 
fertilizers.  


4.4 Asked about the cost  of nano fertilizers sprayers and how it is cost effective ,  the 
Department has informed that cost of the manual sprayers vary from Rs. 1200 to1500 
per sprayer; b attery operated sprayers  from Rs. 3000 to 4500 per sprayer and p ower 
sprayers from Rs. 6000 to 10,000 per sprayer. Further, the cost of spray of nano fertilizer 
per acre would be in the range of Rs. 200-250 only. 
4.5 Regarding avai lability of nano fertili zers sprayers in the market, the Department 
has stated that these sprayers are easily available in the market. Different agro chemical 
suppliers and manufactures supply them to the farmers so as to expand their customer 
base. Dealers / retailers as well as cooperative societies / Farmer Producer 
Organizations ( FPOs) provide spraying services at nominal cost to its customers for 
spray of agrochemicals / fertilizers which can be utilized for spray of Nano Urea  also. 
IFFCO is also coming up with agriculture drone spraying model at block level and is also 
training village youth for providing these services to farmers on custom hire basis thereby 
generating youth employment in rural area.   Co-operative societies / FPOs/ Dealers also 
provide spraying services on custom hire  basis. Besides, IFFCO is facilitating 1.0 lakh 
sprayers spraying services to the farmers through its retail points on mutually acceptable 
basis. It is expected that drone machine would be availabl e on mutual basis to farmers 
who wish to spray nano fertilizers.  Forming SOPs for use  of drone to spray nano 
fertilizers in agriculture is also under consideration. 
4.6 On the point of availability of th e dispensing system for use of nano fertiliz ers, a 
representative of Department submitted as under:  
 “I want to make one more submission that drone is  one way of using nano 
 urea. The other knapsacks sprayers and other spray  cans can also be used 
 since we use it at the early stages. Our scientists will support whatever I am 
saying. So, I think sprayers can also be used, but drones will  facilitate it. So, 
it is a major factor, but not the only one for spraying.” 
  
4.7 During a power point presentation , a representative of Department submitted 
about the importance of targeted application of nano fertilizers as under:  
“Infact, the precision and targeted application of nano fertilizers is a boon for 
the soil, air and water continuity, environmental continuity and benefits 
farmers. The  use efficiency is more and there is easy transportation and 
replacement of top  dressing is possible with the use of Nano Urea. So, in 
fact, the underlined  statement is that precision and targeted application of 
nutrients can save our environment and lead to productivity enhancement in 
perpetuity.” 
  
4.8 The Committee during their study visit to Gujarat in  June, 2022 interacted with the 
farmers, who  informed that the use of irrigation sprinklers for spray of Nano -fertilizers 
was very effective. When enquired about the feasibility of using irrigation sprinklers/ drip-

irrigation for spraying nano fertilizers in the fields and the steps, if any, taken to combine 
the delivery system of nano fertiliz ers(developed by IFFCO) with the fertigation 
technology and promote its use amongst the farmers in a big way so that the use of nano 
fertilizers may be  made economical and convenient , t he Department in its reply has 
stated that s praying nano fertilizers through drip irrigation is not possible as fertilizers 
through drip irrigation (Fertigation) are applied on soil. In this con text, a representative of 
IFFCO clarified that nano fertilizers could be sprayed by use of sprinklers but not through 
drip irrigation.  
(iii) Availability of drones for Nano Fertilizers spray 
4.9 With regard to the development of drone industry in India  for use in spray of nano 
fertilizers, a representative of the Ministry of Civil Aviation during evidence submitted that 
as the manual spray of Nano fertiliz ers is harmful to the hands, skin and eyes of the 
farmers, use of drone would eradicate practice of manual spray of Nano -fertilizers as 
drone works like a robot who needs the direction of the farmer. 
4.10 When further asked about the number of drone manufacturers  in the country , a 
representative of MoCA submitted as under: 
 “…as on date, the re are about 120 manufacturers  and about 180 -200 and 
odd service provid ers but the service providers’ number will go into 
hundreds and thousands some day. Right now, we have 120 manufacturers 
of which - under our PLI Scheme we have done the selection  process - 23 
manufacturers have b een found eligible for the PLI because the  PLI 
required a turnover of Rs.2 crore. Of the 23, around 11 are drone 
manufacturers and the remaining are component manufacturers.” 
4.11 While pointing out that the efficacy of n ano fertilizers depends a lot on its proper 
utilization which would also depend on the availability of drones which are at present very 
less in the country , t he Committee wanted to know the steps being taken by the 
Government to increase the production of drones especially in view of the fact that its 
import has  been banned by the Government . To this , a representative of MoCA 
submitted as under: 
“….. What do they want? They wanted good policies; we have done it. They 
wanted incentives, we have done it. They wanted protection from cheap 
Chinese drones, we have done it. So, now the industry has to do step up 
and do it. Even on type certification, based on industry feedback, we  have 
outsourced that to three world famous certification bodies – Tata Quality, 
TQC of US and Bureau Veritas. Earlier people were cribbing that 
Government takes a lot of time like eight months or six months. Now, it is 
two months in the rules. We cannot d elay it for more than two months and 
DGCA cannot delay it for more than 15 days without giving reasons. These 
three entities are also private. So, now from Government side, we have 
stepped ourselves and made ourselves as unemployed as possible which is 
good for the farmers and the producers. Now, the producers have to step 

up. As I said, out of these 21 drones which are being currently tested by 
these private labs, seven are from agricultural field. Against every month, 
two or three type certificates will c ome up. Once a type certificate  is given 
out, then that is as good as money printing machine, as we call in  colloquial 
terms. They can make as many drones as they can. Even for the 
registration, they do not need to come to us. They come to our digital 
platform on their own. They can register hundreds of registration numbers. 
There is a standard form, D -2. They fill up the D -2 form and the system 
generates the registration number. They just put that stamp and they sell it 
to the farmers the next day. I think  we have gone way beyond, and we do 
not know how much anger we have from MHA and some of our brother 
Ministries. They are not very happy with this liberalization, but we have tried 
to do as much as we could do.  Now, it is up to the industry because we 
have created demands, we have created incentive, we have removed policy 
bottlenecks, procedural bottlenecks, harassment. Everything is gone. 
Imports have gone.” 
 
  
4.12 When asked about assessment, if any, done with regard to the number of drones 
required to meet the demands of the entire country , a representative of MoCA submitted 
as under: 
“The requirement of drones is in lakhs. As I said, we are just babies. We are 
at the crawling stage because we were too late. Sir, we held back 20 years 
against China thinking that this is a negative step. Now, we have just started 
and done away with  all the things. The target is 6.6 lakh villages. If in each 
village there are 10 tractors, at least, we should have 10 drones for each 
village. Till last night, we had only 3,100 drones registered. The target is 
massive 60 lakhs but the ramp up will happen very fast.” 
  
4.13 When further asked about the specific Departm ent/ Ministry / any other inter -
Departmental composite scheme having requi site budgetary allocation through which 
subsidy is being granted to the Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras (KVKs) for purchase of drones and if there is provision for single window 
clearance system; a representative of MoCA replied as under: 
“यय, यय यययय ययययय यययय ययय यय ययययय यययययययययय 
यययययययययय यय ययययययययययय ययययय ययय यययय यय 
यययययय यय यययययययययय यययययय ययययय यययय ययय यय यय 
यय यययय ययययय ययय यय ययययय यय यययय यययययय यययय यययय 
ययययय ययययय ययय ययय यय यय ययययययययययय ययययय यय, ययय 
यय ययययय यय यययययययय य यययययययययय यय यययययययय यय 
ययय-ययय ययययय यय यय ययययययय यय यययययय ययययय ययय 
ययययययययय ययय ययय ययय, यय यययययययय यय ययययय ययय यय 
यय ययययययययययययय ययययय ययय  
यय, ययय ययय ययय ययय यय ययययय यययय यय ययय यययययययय 
ययययय यययय ययय यय ययय यययय ययययय यययययययययय यय ययय 
यय यययय ययययय यययययय ययययय, ययय ययय यययय यय यय 
यययययययय ययय यययय ययययययय ययय यययय ययय यय 
यययययययय यययय ययय यय ययय ययय यय यययययययययय 
यययययययययय यय ययय ययय यययययययय ययय-यय यययय यययय 
ययययय यय ययययय यय ययय यय, यय यययय यययययय यय यययय 
यययययययययययय यय ययय यययय यययययययय यय यययययययययय 

ययययय यययययययय यय यय यययय ययय यय ययय यययययय यययय 
यय, यय यय ययययय यय यययययय यय यय यययय ययय Each State has to 
form its own methods so that the money can reach to the last person . 
ययययययय यय ययय यय यययययय यय यय, यययययययय ययययययय य 
ययययय यय ययय यययय यय, ययययय यययय ययययययय यययय यय यय 
ययय ययय“ 
   
4.14 During interaction with the Committee, one of the farmers stated that apart from 
reduction in manual labour and labour cost in spray of Nano fertilizers, use of drones will 
also enable disposal of th e work in much lesser  time. Nowadays labour is not easily 
available. He also told that since farmers cannot individually buy drones, they need to 
form Cooperatives in the form of FPOs which may purchase the dron es for use of the 
farmers of the region which will be more economical. Another farmer stated that spray of 
nano fertilizers improves the quantity of produce and increases the income of the farmers 
by 15 to 20 percent.  He emphasized on the need to make available more sprayers to the 
farmers to facilitate spray of nano fertiliz ers and provide subsidized loan facility to the 
small and marginal farmers to enable them to purchase the drones and sprayers. 
4.15 During evidence, a representative of the Ministry of Civil Aviation elaborated on 
the cost of farm drone as under: 
 
“यय, यययययययय ययययय यययय 8 यय 10 ययय ययययय यय ययय ययय 
ययय ययय यय 25 यययय यय ययययय यय यय यययय यययय यययय ययय 
यययययय ययययय 50 यययय ययययय यय यययय यययय ययययय यययय 
यययय ययययय यययय ययययय ययय यय यययय ययय ययययय यय यययय 
यययय यययययययययय ययययय 25 यययय यय यययय यय यय 10 यययय 
यय यययय यययय ययय ययययय ययययय यय ययययय यय यययय यय, 
यययय ययय ययय-यययय यय यय ययय ययय ययय य ययय यय ययय ययय 
ययय ययय यययय ययय यय यय ययय य ययययय यय यययय 10 ययय 
ययययय यय ययय ययय“ 
4.16 The Committee held i nformal discussions with the farmers during the ir study visit 
to Kalol, Gujarat in June, 2022  in which the farmers inter -alia mentioned about the 
benefits of foliar application of Nano fertilizers . They however  stated that spray of nano 
fertilizers by manual means is  a time consuming and too costly in terms of labour cost.  
The farmers expressed their h elplessness to use Nano -fertilizers due to its high cost of 
application/ spray by the drones and desired that some relief should be given by the  
Government to facilitate them in using the innovative product.  In this regard, Department 
have stated that collective and c ommunity spraying with the help of cooperatives, 
retailers as well as custom hiring of sprayers by village level youth/ FPOs are being 
explored for effective spray of Nano Urea. 
4.17 To a  concern expressed by the Committee over the inabilit y of over 86 perc ent 
small and marginal farmers in  the country to afford agricultural drone costing about 10 
lakh, a representative of MoCA commented as under:  
 

“यय, ययययय ययययय यय यय यययययययययययय यय ययय यय ययय 
यययययय ययययय यय यययय यययय यययय यय ययय ययययय यय यययय 
यययययय ययय ययययययययययययययय ययययय 60 यययय ययययय यय 
यय, यय यय ययययय 120 यययय ययययय यय ययय ययय If we talk about 
the entire drone industry which is manufacturing in India for Rs. 60 crore, 
the Government of India is giving  Rs. 120 crore to them over three years. 
ययययययययय यय यय यय यययय यय यय ययययय ययययय” 
4.18 When asked about the specific schemes of the Government , if any,  to make the 
drones available to the farmers at cheap er rates throughout the country, for formation of 
farmer’s co-operatives to buy drones at subsidized rates and impart drone pilot training to 
the local entrepreneurs and farme rs for its appropriate use, the  Department of Fertilizers 
has informed that they have issued guidelines for development of entrepreneurs for  
drone spraying of liquid fertilizers. Th e Department is in regular touch with the 
stakeholders for promotion of the said guidelines, which will ensure availability of drone s 
to fertilizers at cheap cost. 
4.19 To a specific query with regard to making provision of adequate number of 
battery-operated sprayers, Department has informed that it has provided one lakh 
battery-operated sprayers to the farmers.  
 
4.20 When asked about incentives proposed to the farmers to enable them purchase 
the equipments/sprayers  for spray of nano fertilizer, the Department has stated that 
SOPs for use of drone to spray the nano  fertilizer in agriculture is under their 
consideration, wherein 90 % of drone price would be provided throug h Agriculture 
Infrastructure Fund (AIF) for those entrepreneurs who wish to avail the facility of drones. 
  
4.21 When asked about the efforts being made to make drones available at economical 
rates, a representative of MoCA submitted as under: 
“यय, ययय यय यय य ययय यययय ययययय यययय यय यययय यययययय 
ययय, ययययय यययययययययय ययययययययययययययय ययय यय, ययययय 
ययय 90 ययययययय यययय 10 ययय ययययय ययय यय 9 ययय ययययय 
यययय यययययययययय यययययय ययय यय यययययययय ययय यय ययययय 
यययय यययय यय यययययय यय यययय यययय यययययय यययय ययय 
ययययय, यययय यययययययय यय ययय यय यय ययययययय ययययय यय, यय 
यययययय यय ययययय यय, यय 100 ययययययय, 75 ययययययय यय 50 
ययययययय यय ययय यययय ययययय ययययय ययययययय ययय यय ययय 
ययययययययययय ययययययय यय यययय 100 यययययय यययय यययय 
ययययय यययययय यययय ययय ययययय यय 75 ययययययय ययययययय यय 
यय यययय ययय यययययय यययय ययययययय यय 50 ययययययय ययय 
यययय, यययय यययययययय यय ययययय यययययययय यय 50 यययययय 
ययययययय ययय यय यययय यययययय यययययययययय ययय यय ययय 
यययययययययय यययययययययय यय यय यययय ययययय यययययय यय 
यययययययय यययय ययययय यययय यययययययययय यययययय ययय 
ययययय यय यययययययय यय यययय ययय ययययय यययय यययय ययययय 
यययय यययय यययययय ययययययययययय ययययय यय ययय यययय यययय 
यय ययय यययय” 

 
4.22 During evidence, it was observed by the Committee that as per the guidelines 
issued by the Department of Fertilizers  for development of entrepreneurs for drone 
spraying of liquid fertilizers, the rate of spraying of liquid fertilizers/pesticides through 
drones by the farmers would be decided by the market forces.  In this regard, when  the 
Committee suggested that instead of leaving the rate of spraying of liquid fertilizers to the 
market forces, the same should be fixed statutorily so that farmers may be given some 
relief to use the product comfortably , Department has stated that they have issued 
guidelines for development of entrepreneurs for drone spraying of liquid fertilizers. The  
Department is in regular touch with the stakeholders for promotion of the said guidelines, 
which will ensure availability of drones to fertilizers at cheap cost. 
 
4.23 The Committee pointed out that the cost of Rs. 500/- for hiring of drones by the 
farmers for spray of nano fertilizers is on a highe r side and needs to be subsidized. In 
reply, a representative from Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU) replied as under: 
 
 “For a drone, it takes only five minutes to complete spraying on one acre of the 
field. It is very effective. One drone can spray on about 80 acres of the area a day. 
As the hon. Member has ment ioned, most of the Indian farmers are small and 
marginal farmers. It is like a toy. We can set the location where it needs to fly and 
at what height. All the safety  measures can be taken.” 
 .....   
 
 “We can subsidize it, Sir.” 
.... 
 “We made a comparison  with the manual sp ray. It takes about one day 
to complete spraying on one acre of the field.” 
   
4.24 The Committee further pointed out that according to the guidelines on the 
development of entrepreneurs for drone spraying of liquid fertilizers, a drone costs 
Rs.6,28,000 with 5 percent GST, however, as per Ministry of Civil Aviation the drone 
costs about 10 lakh. Further, the guidelines says that the drone spray charge is about 
Rs.200/- per acre, however TNAU is charging Rs.500/ - per acre.  In reply, a 
representative of TNAU clarified as under: 
 
 “It is because we need to travel to the location. All this is  
 included in the cost. The price that has been indicated here is the farm  gate 
price. We have to carry drone from the institute to the farm. But it can be 
subsidized.” 
 
4.25 On the issue of making use of drones more economical, a representative of 
IFFCO submitted as under: 
यय, यय यय यय यय ययययययय यय ययय ययय यय यययय यययययय ययय 
यय यययय यययय ययय ययययययय यययय यय ययय यययय यय यययय 
ययय यययय यययय यय, यय ययय यययय यययययययय यययय ययय, 
ययययय यययय-यययय ययय ययय यययय यययय यय 
यययययययययययययय यययय ययययय ययय ययययय यय यय यय यय यय 
ययययय ययययय, ययययय यय ययय यय यययययययययय यययययय 

ययययय, ययययय ययययय यययय यय ययय यययय ययययय ययययय ययय 
ययय ययययय यय यययययय यय ययय ययययय यय ययययय ययययय 
यययय यय ययययय ययय यययययय यययय यययययय यय यययययययय 
यययय यय यय यय यय, यययय यययय यययययय यय ययययय यय यययय 
यययय यययय यय यय ययय यय ययययय यय यय यययययययययययययय 
25 ययय ययय ययय ययययय, यय यय यययय यययय यययय ययय 
ययययययय ययय यय यययय यययय यययय ययययय यय, यय यययय 
यययय ययययय यय यययय यययय ययय ययय यय यययययय ययय ययय 
यययय यययय यय ययय ययय ययययययय यययय यय ययययय ययययय यय 
यय यययय यय ययय ययय यय ययययययय यययय ययय, यय यय यय ययय 
यय यययययययय ययय यययययय यययय ययययय ययययय ययययय यय 
यय ययययय यययययय यययय यय-ययय ययययय यययय यययय यय, ययय 
यययययय यययययय यययय यय-ययय ययययय यययय यययययय 
यययययय यय यययययय ययययययय, यय यययय यययययय ययययय यय 
यय ययय यययययय यय ययय 200 ययय ययययययय यययय यययय यय 
ययय य: ययय यययय यय ययययय यय यययययय यययय ययय 
ययययययययययय यय यययययययययय यय यययय यययययय यय यययय 
यययययय ययययय यययययययय यययययययययय ययय यय यययय 
यययययययय यय यय ययय यय यययययययययययययय यय ययय यययय 
यय, ययययय यय ययययययययययय यय यययययय यय यय ययय यय, 
यययय ययय ययय यय ययययय यययययय ययययय, यय यय यययय यय 
यययययययययययययय ययययय, यय ययय यययय-यय यययय यय ययययय 
यययय ययययय, यययययय यययययययय यय ययययय यययय ययययय यय 
यययय यययय ययय यय ययययय यय ययय यय ययय ययय ययय ययययय 
यय ययययय यय यययययय ययययय यययय, यययय यययय ययय 
ययययययय यय यय यययययययय यययय ययय यय यययययय ययय 
ययययय, यययय 20 यययय ययययय ययय ययय यय ययययययय यय 20 
यययय ययययय ययय ययय यययययय यययय ययय यययय ययय यययय 
यययय ययययय ययययययय यय यय ययय यययय यय, यय ययययय 
ययययय यययययययय यययय ययय यय यययययय यययययय यय यय 
यययय यय ययय ययय यययय यययय ययय यययय 
 
यय, यययय यय यययय ययययय ययय ययय ययय यय यययय यय 
ययय यययययय, यय ययययय ययययययय ययययय ययययययय यययय 
ययय 25 ययय यय यययय यय, ययययय ययय यय ययय ययय यय यय यय 80 
ययय यय यय यययय ययय ययययय यययय 80 ययय यययय ययययय यययय 
ययय यय ययय यययय 30 ययय यय ययययय-यय यय यययय, यययय 
यययययय 25 ययय यय, ययययय ययय 30 ययय ययय यय यययययय यय 
यययय, यय यय ययययय यययय यय ययययय ययययय यय यय ययय यययय 
ययययययय  
 
ययययय यय ययययय ययययययय यययय ययय यय, यय यय यय यय 
यययय ययय यय यय यय ययययय यय यययययय ययययय, यययय यययय 
यययययय यय ययय यययययय यययय यययय यय यययय यययययय यययय 
ययय यय यययययय यययययय, यय यय यययय यययय यय यय यययय यय 
यययय यययय, यय ययययय ययय ययय यययययययय ययययय यय यय 
ययययय, यययय यय यययय यययययय, ययययययय यय ययय यय 
यययययययय यययययययय यययययय, यय यययय यययययय यययय यययय 
यय यययय ययय यय, ययययय यय यययययय यय यययय ययय यय ययययय 
यय ययय यय, ययययय यययययय ययययययय यययय यय-यय ययय यययय 
ययय यययय ययय  
 
यययययय यययययययययय यययययययय यययय यय यय ययय ययय 
यय यय यययय यययय ययययय यययय यय यययय ययय ययय यययय यय 
यययय यययय यययय यय ययययय यय, यय ययययय यययय यय यय यययय 
यय ययययय ययय ययययय ययय ययय यय ययय यय ययय ययययययय यय 

ययय ययययययय यययय यय यययय ययय यययय यय ययययय यय-ययय 
यययययययय ययययय य यययययय, यय यय यययय ययययययय“ 
 
(iv) Need for Drone Pilot Training  
4.26 When asked about the custom hiring of drones and training imparted for spray by 
drones and its operation, an agricultural scientist of TNAU submitted as under: 
“We have 40 research stations, 18 colleges and 14 KVKs. In all the units, 
we will have a drone. Farmers need not get drone from elsewhere. We will 
give a custom hiring. Per acre, it costs about Rs.500 and it is very effective. 
Particularly, we also used dr one for Nano Urea spray. 
We conducted experiments in 10 acres for maize as well as rice. We have  
optimized several parameters to effectively deliver Nano Urea in maize as 
well as in rice. We have the complete SOP for that. It is very effective. 
There is no environmental hazard. We have studied the efficacy. 
…..Farmers really would be benefited. In order to improve the manpower  
for drone operation, we have a dip loma course in agricultural engineering in 
which the  Tamil Nadu Government has taken a special initiative in which 
drone training is to be given.  It is a 10 hours course. Within two weeks they 
will become trained and will get license to operate drones.” 
 
4.27 When asked about the  training programmes of drones being organised for the 
farmers, a representative of IFFCO replied: 
“…… यययय ययययय यय ययययययय यययययययय ययययययययययय 
यययय यययय We have organised six training programmes of drones.  
There are some issues, which are to be settled, and it will be settled very 
soon.  So, we will be starting spray by drones.  Even in all our plants, we 
have supplied drones, especially in UP at two places.  Nearby our Phulpur 
unit and Aonla unit, we are spraying at farme rs’ fields by drones.  Even in 
Madhya Pradesh, we have started some activities.  In Gujarat also we have 
started it.  Even Chennai, Dr. Subramanian is also doing some drones.  MIT 
Chennai is also imparting training of drones with our help.  So, we are also  
very vigilant for the drone training and drone application.  Certainly, he has 
developed a guideline of this drone as to how to optimize the doses for the 
drone.  So, this work has already been completed.  We have submitted a 
Report to the Department of F ertilizer and they have very kindly issued 
guidelines of drones in which the rural entrepreneurs can earn Rs. 7 lakhs 
to Rs. 10 lakhs per year.   
It is under the pilot phase.  Within a year, you will see that the drones are 
used by the farmers for the application of all types of pesticides, Nano Urea, 
water soluble fertilizers, etc.  Very soon, it will be coming up.” 
4.28 In this context, a research scientist from TNAU submitted as under: 
“….. the drone can be used for herbicide spray, pesticide spray.  The Tamil 
Nadu State Assembly has sanctioned a project for us of Rs. 11 crore to buy 
60 drones.  We have a Drone Laboratory in TNAU where s everal 
parameters of flight height, swath, speed of the drones are there.  Now, the 
regulation is in place.  Certainly, drone is picking up.  The State 
Government of Tamil Nadu has also requested the TNAU to train 
unemployed youth to drone usage for which we are taking efforts.  There 
are several companies, which have come forward  to sign MoUs to promote 
drone technology.” 

 
4.29 During evidence, a representative of the Department furnished the details with 
regard to its Agri Entrepreneur Model Guidelines, as under: 
“Madam, in addition to what IFFCO and TNAU have said, looking at the 
importance of the drones in Nano Urea and other liquid fertilizers, the 
Department of Fertilizer has come up with Agri Entrepreneur Model 
Guidelines.  As per those guidelines, on  a pilot basis, what we have studied 
is that at each block level, one entrepreneur will be chosen by the lead 
fertilizer agency.  We have so many companies.  For each State, we have 
one lead fertilizer agency.  That agency will take care of the blocks in t hat 
State and in each block, one entrepreneur will be chosen.  With the help of 
the Fertilizer Company as well as agricultural universities, and drone 
federation, they will try to procure the drones for the entrepreneur.  For that 
it would cost around Rs. 8 lakhs to Rs. 10 lakhs. 
There is a fund in the agriculture department that is Agri -Infrastructure 
Fund.  The drone is also included under farm machinery and it is getting 
subsidy.  So, in both the cases they can get the subsidy for getting the 
drones and those entrepreneurs can be trained by the fertilizer agencies 
with the technical persons from agriculture universities or from the drone 
agencies and that can be used for the spraying in the particular area, 
Madam.  We have finalized the model and we are m onitoring the progress 
of it.  We have recently issued the guidelines for that.” 
4.30 The Committee apprehended that the farmers will not be able to go to far off 
centres for drone training, and therefore desired that the Ministry should make 
arrangements for setting up more number of centres. In reply, a representative of MoCA 
submitted as under: 
 
“यय, यय ययय ययययय यय यय ययय ययय यय ययययय (SMAM) यय 
ययययय ययय ययययय ययय यय यय यय यययय यययययय यययय ययय 
यय यययय यययययय ययययय ययय यययय य ययय यय, यय ययय य ययय, 
ययययय ययययय यययय यय ययययययय ययय यययय यययय यययय ययय 
यय यययययययययय यय ययय यययय ययय यय यय यययय ययय यय यय 
ययययय यययययययय ययय ययययय यय यय ययययय ययय यय यय यययय 
यय ययययय यय यय ययययय यय ययययय यय ययययय यययय यय यय 
ययययययययययय यययय यय यययय यययययय यययय यययय ययययययय 
यय ययययय यय यययययययय यययययययय यय यययय यय यययय, 
ययययय ययय ययय ययय ययय यय यय यययय यययय यय ययय ययय यय 
यययययय यय यययययययय यययययययययय यययययययययययय यय 75 
ययययययय ययययययय ययय ययय यय यययय यययय 10 ययय ययययय 
ययय यय 2.5 ययय ययययय यययय ययय यय यय ययय यययय 
ययययययययययययय यय यययय ययय यय यययययययय यय, यय यययय 
ययय यय यययययय यययय यय 27 ययययययय ययय ययय यय ययययय 
यययय ययय यययय ययययययय ययय यययय ययय“ 
4.31 When the Committee expressed their view that the use of drones will become 
successful only when the training facility reaches upto the Block level, a representative of 
MoCA replied as under: 
 
“हह, हहहहह हहहहह हह 8,000 हह हह हहहहहहह हहह 800 हहहह 
हहह हह हह हह हह हह हहहह हहह 10 हह हहह, हहह-हहहह हह 
हहहहहह हह हहहहहहह हह 8,000 हह हहहहह हह, हहह हह हहहह हह 

हहहहहह हह हह हहहहहह हहह, हहहहहहह हह, हहहह हह 
हहहहहहह हहहह हह हहहहहहह हहहह हहह"  
4.32 Asked about the awareness programs or outreach programs  organised  to 
educate the farmers so as to get rid of their fear that having the drone or using it would 
require a lot of clearances and licenses, a representative of MoCA reacted as under: 
“यययय यययय यययय ययययययययययययय यय ययय यययय यययय यययययय, 
यययययय-यय, यययययय, ययय यय यय यय यय ययय ययय यय यय यययय यययय 
ययय यय ययय ययययThere is no point doing twitter in English. So, we have 
covered 12 States so far. We will try to cover more States. So, every State is doing 
it, and at the district level, there are a lot of young officers who are very convinced 
about the humanitarian part  of drones, and they are spreading the message. But, 
as I said, we have just opened up in August last year, it has just been one year. 
The rules are still being opened up. Based on feedback, in February this year 
itself, we came up with the first amendment . Within seven months, we did away 
with the pilot licence also. Earlier, for pilot licence, you had to go to DGCA. Now, 
you can go to any of the drone training schools across the country which is 
authorized. DGCA authorises the schools. When the IIT Madras  gives certificates, 
the Government of India does not go and check that. So, you authorize the IIT 
Madras, then IIT Madras gives the certificate. Same concept has been used here. 
We only oversee 27 schools, what do they do, we leave it to them. The schools  
also, as per the rules, have to give a certificate within seven days after completing 
the training. It is online. " 
4.33 During the course of evidence, a representative of TNAU informed about the 
present and future aspects of use of drones for spray in agriculture activities as under:   
“With regard to drones, we are really late. Most of the farmers are using combine 
harvester as a service; one person would come and harvest for the entire village. I 
do see drone becoming that kind of a thing very soon. It is not only for Nano Urea 
but also, for the entire application of pesticides and herbicides. We have started 
research work on seed spraying and sowing. Very soon, we will see direct seeding 
of rice. In many countries, like Vietnam and Sri Lanka, ninety per cent seeding of 
rice is by direct seeding. If we just work hard and use drones even for seeding 
purposes that can be poss ible. So, the scope is huge and drone, probably, would 
be the vehicle for taking Indian farmers to next level of technology transformation 
that we really think  through. That would be one of the things that, probably, we 
should be working very fast.” 
   
(v) Corporate Social Respons ibility (CSR) fund to facilitate drone spray of 
 Nano Fertilizers  
4.34 The Committee have observed that nano fertilizers have been considered as  a 
Next Generation Smart Fertilizers which may address the imbalanced and excessive use 
of conventional Urea and other chemical fertilizers . When asked to state  the measures 
taken so far  to encourage the companies/ corporate houses to utilize their Corporate 
Social Responsibility (CSR) fund to provide the facility of drones to the farmer s of a 
particular ear-marked area (adopted by them) for spray of Nano Urea at subsidized rates 
/ free of cost and to impart drone pilot training to the local village entrepreneurs and 
farmers about its use, the Department replied as under: 
 “Noted by Department of Fertilizers for consideration.” 

V PROMOTION OF NANO UREA 
 
(i) Methods adopted for promotion of Nano Urea 
5.1 As regards initiatives being taken to promote use of Nano fertili zers among the 
farmers, the Secretary, Department of Fertilizers informed during evidence as under: 
“For promotion of the use of the Nano Urea, we have taken up a lot of activities 
including, village level demonstration on Nano Urea application through 
progressive farmers. We are making the farmers aware about the use of Nano 
Urea in kisan sammelans. Films have also been made in different regional 
languages. We are extensively using the social media for dissemination of 
information an d for the promotion of the use of Nano Urea among farmers. Call 
centres are also there. Regular talks and panel discussions on radio, and DD 
Kisan channel and other television channels, are being held. One training module 
is being developed for farmers for crop specific right dose of Nano Urea. Since it is 
a nano version, it becomes very essential that the farmers should use the right 
quantity or right dose of Nano Urea on the crops. 
5.2 In a similar context, he submitted as follows: 
“हहह हहहह हहहह हह हहहहह हहहहहहह हह हहहह हहहहहह हहहहहह 
हहह हहहह हहह हहहहह हहहहहहहहहहह हह हहहहह हहहह हह हह हहहह 
हहहहहहह हहहहह हहहह हहह हह हहहहहहहहहहह हह हहहह हहह They 
have also filed the patent. They are also working on different versions of nano, 
DAP, Zinc, Boron and other fertil izers. I am sure it is going to reduce the import of 
fertilizer and the farmers will be really satisfied with the use of the nano in future 
because we are leaving no stone unturned to popularize this product amongst the 
farmers and the State Governments ar e repeatedly requested, in our monthly 
meetings, to take up the initiative to popularize this product amongst the farmers.” 
  
5.3 In a written submission, the Department has added that use of Nano Fertilizer is 
being promoted through awareness camps, webinars, nukkadnataks, field 
demonstrations, kisan sammelans and films in regional languages etc. Department has 
prepared a movie on Nano Urea in English, Hindi and four othe r regional languages to 
promote the use of Nano Urea. Besides, Department has extended its all kind of support 
to nano fertilizer manufacturers as and when required. Nano fertilizer manufacturers are 
educating farmers to use nano fertilizers as per the crop, soil, etc. 
 
5.4 In this regard, IFFCO has stated that they have taken extensive promotion and 
popularization efforts for use of Nano Urea  across the country.  In this process print and 
electronic media, social and digital platforms, promotional and extension programmes 
have been organized for communicating the benefits of Nano Urea , its method  of 
application, mode of action and  its availability.  IFFCO has popularized the Nano Urea 
and is selling it through its market channel for realizing immediate sales and feedback. 

Farmers are encouraged to purchase it by undertaking sales campaigns and providing 
incentives to ‘Buy now’. Sales promotion , complements advertising, which is being taken 
up at local, national and international levels. IFFCO has deployed effective sales, 
publicity and promotional efforts for popularizing Nano Urea through a series of 
programmes given below . Simultaneously, promo tion and market development 
programmes are also being undertaken.  
  
(a) Crop Demonstrations: India is bestowed with more than 200 crops which have 
distinct agronomies.  In tune with the concept of ‘Seeing is Believing’ IFFCO had 
conducted on -farm and on -station trials in major agro -climatic regions and on major 
crops of the country. Research trials at farmers’ fields have been conducted in more than 
94 crops in 15 agro-climatic regions of the country. Progressive and nearby farmers have 
also visited these trials which helped in generating interest and awareness about the 
product. 
(b) Short video films of Nano Urea: Technical and educational videos of short 
duration (4 -6 minutes) displaying the unique benefits and complete package of 
application of IFFCO Nano Urea have been made available through online platforms. 
These videos are being screened to farmers or are shared in farmer’s friend WhatsApp 
groups. Farmers testimonial videos (120 seconds; 60 seconds)) showcasing their 
experience and the benefits of this new fertilizer are also circulated to channel partners, 
cooperative officials and policy makers. To take advantage of the limited attention span 
of viewers, short clips or ‘Feeler’ Videos of Nano Urea (20-30 seconds) have been 
created. These videos ar e being screened or showcased at social, mass media and 
digital platforms at national and international cooperative platforms at seminars, 
symposiums and workshops. Product details are communicated to the farmers visiting 
farmers’ haat, agriculture fairs and village community centres. 
(c) Print & Electronic Media  : The product promotion through print and electronic 
media has been extensively undertaken. Press releases in the print and digital media 
have been a regular occurrence. Advertisements have been printed in leading 
newspaper and also displayed on social medi a and digital network. F armers success 
stories about use of Nano Urea have found mention in leading newspapers as well as in 
agriculture centric regional and local newspapers. Webinar on Nano Urea have been 
conducted in collaboration with State Agricultura l Universities in presence of Vice 
Chancellor and leading agricultural scientists and cooperators. Benefits, application 
methodology and other details of the fert ilizer are discussed and viewer s’ queries are 
suitably answered during the webinars. Research work done by the scientists is 

documented in form of research as well as popular articles in local/regional magazines, 
newspapers, periodicals, etc. They act as a reference point for gaining knowledge and 
understanding about Nano Urea. To catch the imagina tion of young and impressionable 
minds, Nano Urea awareness programmes/quizzes are being conducted in village 
schools. Advertisements on All India Radio/Community Radio/Regional Channels are 
integral part towards sales promotion and marketing efforts of Nano Urea . Information 
about Nano Urea has been covered by international media also. 
(d) Mass Media Campaigns: Mass media campaigns, Audio visual and publicity 
vans are in operation for promotion and last mile delivery of Nano Urea Progressive and 
entrepreneur farmers work as brand ambassador. Different aspects of application of 
Nano Urea , its content and benefits for the farmers and the environment are 
emphasized. Nano Urea  news is also played as breaking/ troll news at the bottom of 
national/regional news. Selective SMS messages are being sent to IFFCO progressive 
farmers informing them about availability of this product. Radio Jingles /Audio Clips / 
Songs in local language are played at premium time at regional / All India Radio w hile 
audio messages are also circulated in various farmers WhatsApp groups. Publicity 
matter for creating awareness campaigns in form of catchy poems, couplets and slogans 
are being circulated or displayed at appropriate platforms related to salient featur es of 
the product associated with farmers. Banners and posters are displayed at prominent 
places in addition to wall/tractor trolley/bus panel/ rickshaw/three -wheeler paintings, 
hoardings, etc.  Digital displays are placed at vantage and strategic points a nd also at 
places registering maximum farmers fo otfalls viz. at all sale points,  farmer friend clubs; 
Krishi Vigyan  Kendras; farmers ’ stores; Common Service Centres (CSC); farmer 
producer organizations, kisan mandis and haats, etc. 
IFFCO is also sponsoring  Nano Urea specific shows, skit, street plays and local vocal 
groups. Spray campaigns are being carried out where spraying cost is subsidized in line 
with size of landholding and group spraying or mass crop spraying operations are 
undertaken at farmer’s pl ots. The awareness programmes are being conducted in the 
sidelines of important national / international programmes su ch as Amrut Mahotsav, 
Earth Day, World Environment Day, World Food Day, etc. Dispatches of Nano Urea from 
Kalol plant were started on 5th June 2021 (World Environment Day). 
(e) Publicity Material, Gifts & Awards  : Cooperatives and other sale points have 
been provided with publicity material such as stickers, display charts, brochure, 
pamphlets, literature of Nano Urea, replica and souvenir of Nano bottles, T-shirts, Caps, 
key chains, umbrella, toran, etc. Samples of Nano Urea and brochures / folders are 

provided to dignitaries and scientists.  Progressive farmers engaged in its promotion are 
honoured at various forums. 
(f) Dedicated Internet Site : Dedicated internet site has been created for Nano Urea. 
Site is operable on all kind of internet platforms and is android / iOS -based. It works as a 
knowledge resource and repository on Nano Urea , its benefits, journey of IFFCO in 
nanotech space, n ano-fertilizers, farmers’ testimonials, endorsements by public figures 
and opinion of leaders. Apart from resources and documents specific to the product 
which are required by a user and buyer; a photo gallery depicts programmes being 
organized for Nano Ur ea. Queries of the visitors are also addressed. Videos of Nano 
Urea, usage and benefits are also available at the site. 
(g) Training & Awareness programmes  : Nano Urea is an innovative and novel 
product. Therefore, for its proper knowledge and awareness, training programmes are 
regularly being organized at district/ block / village level / cooperative / retailer level 
exercising COVID protocol. The trainings and workshop s, symposium, webinar, panel 
discussion, ‘Live in’ and ‘Stream in’ programmes are being organized. These training 
programmes address the problems faced by agriculture in general and environment in 
particular and how Nano Urea can help mitigate some of the ill effect of intensive 
agriculture practices. Participants are also made aware of the safety aspects and 
precautions which need to be exercised. Feedback of the training is collected from 
trainees for possible corrections and advancement. Trainers of thes e training 
programmes are IFFCO officials and technical and extension  experts are from research 
institutes, state agriculture universities and ICAR - Krishi Vigyan Kendras. Emphasis is 
also being given on training of the trainers. Participants of these prog rammes besides 
farmers are technical & extension experts; nanotechnologist; public figures; opinion 
leaders & influencers; celebrities; entrepreneurs; government officials; environment 
experts; vice-chancellors; directors of SAUs / Research Institutes etc.  Nano Urea is also 
being noticed and mentioned by premium research institutes engaged in nanotechnology 
such as Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi.  
(h) State-wise Flag off Programmes  & Endorsement by Opinion Leaders, 
Government Officials and Scientists : Unique state-wise flag off programmes involving 
Chief Minister, Agriculture Minister, Agriculture Commissioner, Director, Agriculture, 
cooperative leaders, important dignitaries of concerned states have been undertaken for 
17 states/UTs. This has resulted into sensitisation of the state machinery, agricultural 
department, channel partners, production and distribution network in regard to Nano 
Urea supply and availability as well as its promotion amongst farmers and channel 
partners. Agriculture  department of the states are also conducting trials at state farms 

and at farmers’ fields. Some states are also helping increase the acceptability of Nano 
Urea by sharing information about the product, conducting demonstrations and by 
promoting it amongst the farmers. 
 
(ii) Testing Laboratories for Nano fertilizers. 
  
5.5 The Committee had desired that quality testing laboratories should be set up 
throughout the country to ensure production and sale of quality nano fertilizers. In reply, 
the Department has stated that they may request the Department of Agriculture and 
Farmer’s Welfare for setting up of the quality testing laboratories throughout the country 
to ensure production and sale of quality of Nano Fertilizers. 
 (iii) Equitable Distribution of Nano Fertilizers 
5.6 Considering that Nano fertilizers shall be in great demand by the farmers 
throughout the country, the Committee desired to know how the Department has planned 
to meet the demand of farmers and for equitable distribution of Nano Urea throughout the 
country. In reply, it has been stated that Nano Urea is being sold by IFFCO at MRP of 
Rs. 240 per 500 ml bottle, which doesn’t include any subsidy component. 
 (iv) Need for Relief in Basic Customs duty on fertilizer raw materials  
5.7 During evidence, the Committee enquired whether the raw materials used for 
production of nano fertilizers are indigenous. To this , a representative of IFFCO replied 
as under: 
“…In our country, we do not have sufficient raw materials to produce 
fertilizers.  We do not have sufficient gas; we do not have sufficient oil; we 
do not have rock phosphate; we do not have potash.  So, we need to think 
differently.” 
5.8 On being further asked if everything required for regular production  of nano 
fertilizers is available in India, a representative of IFFCO conveyed as under: 
 “Nothing is imported.” 
……. Everything is indigenous. Indigenously, we have done  research; 
indigenously we have manufactured; and it is available to the world. 
 
….. In our country, if we have  to become self-sufficient, we have to become 
self-sufficient right from the beginning. Otherwise, we are dependent on raw 
materials, and then we will  be exploited. Fertilizer raw material is available 
only in few countries and today  after Russia -Ukraine w ar, practically it is 
available only in one country, which is Canada, otherwise, Israel and Jordan 
are practically 20 per cent of Canada. So, roughly, 30 to 40 per cent 
capacity has gone. So, we need to bring all this  science into play; we need 
to bring en gineers, technologists to design the plant. There is no foreign 
technology design. The design is all indigenous.” 

5.9 When asked about the plan of the Government to promote use of nano technology 
based P&K fertilizers including through joint ventures abroad in countries rich in P&K raw 
materials and to rationalize/ exempt the basic customs duty on P&K fertilizer raw 
materials in coordination with the Ministry of Finance so as to incentivize setting up of 
nano based production plants in the country which may  result in huge foreign exchange 
savings, the Department stated that it may consider above mentioned suggestion and will 
act accordingly, if required. 

PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The Committee are gravely concerned to note that agriculture world wide is 
facing wide spectrum of challenges, such as stagnation in crop yields, low nutrient 
use efficiency (NUE), declining soil organic matter, multi -nutrient deficiencies, 
shrinking arable land and water availability. Fertilizers do provide nutrients needed 
by the plants for their optimal productivity. However, presently  the f armers 
typically apply fertilizers through the soil by surface broadcasting, subsurface 
placement or mixing with irrigation water . It is worrisome that in this process, a 
large portion of bulk conventional fertilizers like urea is lost to the atmosphere or 
surface water bodies, thereby polluting the ecosystem.  It is disheartening that  
fertilizer consumption in India is imbalanced, and Urea accounts for more than 
82% of the nitrogenous fertilizers applied to majority of the crops . Furthermore, 
the Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potassium (NPK) consumption ratio has widene d 
from 4:3.2:1 in 2009 -10 to 7:2.8:1 in 2019-20. Hon’ble Prime Minister has called for 
“Reduction in chemical fe rtilizer c onsumption especially Urea by 50 %.  Against 
this background, it is satisfying to note that  Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative 
Limited (IFFCO) has indigenously developed nano  technology-based Nano Urea 
fertilizer and attempted to address the issue of imbalanced and excessive use of 
conventional Urea. Nano Urea is a source of nitrogen which is a major essential 
nutrient required for proper growth and development of a plant. Typically, nitrogen 
content in a healthy plant is in the range of 1.5 to 4%. Foliar application of Nano 
Urea at critical crop growth stages of a plant effectively fulfils its nitrogen 
requirement and leads to higher crop productivity. Ministry of Agriculture & Family 
Welfare (M/oA&FW) has notified Nano Urea  as nano fertilizer under Fertilizer 
Control Order (FCO), GoI in February, 2021.   

Keeping in view the significance of nano fertilizers for agricultural needs of 
our country, the Committee applaud the effo rts of IFFCO in developing Nano Urea. 
It is for the first time in the world that Nano Urea  has been introduced to the 
farmers.  
The steps taken by the Department of Fertili zers (DoF)/IFFCO and other 
concerned Ministries for availability, usage, promotion and adaptability of nano 
fertilizers in the country as deliberated o ver by the Committee, have been detail ed 
in the succeeding paragraphs. At the s ame time, the Committee would like the 
Department of Fertiliz ers to ensure that the steps so taken do not suffer  from the 
procedural delays and such  delays, if any, are avoided with efficient, proper 
management and timely action.  
2.   The Committee note that IFFCO has developed technology for bringing other 
nano fertilizer s macronutrient grades - Nano DAP and secondary /micronutrient 
grades - Nano Zinc, Nano Copper, Nano Boron, Nano Sulphur, etc. in order to 
ensure eco -friendly sustainable agriculture. Nano DAP is under field trial . 
Research trials have been conducted on more than ten crops across thirty-four 
locations in twenty States and the result s have been submitted to the Department 
of Agriculture for further validation and approval and its inclusion under FCO . In 
view of t he significance of nano fertiliz ers in agriculture, the Committee urge the 
Department of Fertili zers and IFFCO to expedite the process  of inclusion of other 
nano fertilizers, which have been developed by IFFCO and undergone sufficient 
field trials, under FCO to enable their commercial utilization. The Committee desire 
that other nano fertilizers  should be  priced considerably cheaper than the 
prevailing price of their conventional bulk counterparts. 
3. The Committee observe that there are several benefits of nano fertilizers like 
they cost less than the subsidized conventional fertilizers. Also, IFFCO field trials 
have shown that a 500 ml bottle of Nano Urea can replace one 45 Kg. bag of 
conventional urea and thus can curtail the requirement of the same by at  least 50 

per cent.  The current MRP of IFFCO’s Nano Urea is Rs . 240 per 500 ml bottle 
which is approx. 10% less than the conventional 45 Kg . urea bag having 
subsidized price of Rs . 266.50 per bag . Further, nano fertilizers are easy to carry 
and store . T hey are economical in terms of reduced tran sportation and 
warehousing cost. Besides, application of nano fertilizers results into better crop 
productivity and higher income for the farmers. IFFCO in collaboration with ICAR – 
KVKs has conducted 11,000 all India farme r field trials on 94 crops and found an 
average 8 % higher crop yield with the application of Nano Urea. This translates 
into Rs. 2000 to Rs. 5000 per hectare higher income for the farmers. Application of 
nano fertilizers has commensurate benefits in term s of better soil health, air and 
water quality, which ultimately will benefit the farmers through improvement in 
total factor productivity (TFP) of crop production systems.  As per interim report of 
the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), if India’s 50 percent of rice 
cultivation area is brought under Nano Urea , it would lead to reduction in Green  
House Gas emission by 4.6 million tonnes.  Even if 20-30 per cent of the urea that 
is going waste can be replaced and utilised , then the issue of green house gas 
emission can be appropriately addressed.  
Despite many benefits of nano fertilizers , which are critical for our 
agriculture food production systems (FPS) to sustain the burgeoning population, 
the Committee regret to note that no separate funds have been allocated by the 
Department of Fertilizers for Nanotechnology.  As Nano technology is a promising 
field of research for developing nano fertilizers that has emerged as an innovative 
solution for addressing the issue of low or declining nutrient use efficiency (NUE) 
with minimal environment footprint , it is  imperative that  the Ministry/Department 
of Fert ilizers allocate a sizeable amount for nanotechnology based research 
activities through its fertilizer PSUs so that it gets focused attention for developing 
innovative fertilizer products which are cost effective and efficient. Fertiliz er PSUs 
should be fully supported for work on common research projects along  with 

IFFCO so that they contribute in  development of varied nano fertilizers (both 
macro and micro nutrient based) and help to achieve self-reliance in the In dian 
Fertilizer Sector thereby saving  a substantial amount of foreign exchange lost on 
import of fertilizers which has shown an increasing trend over the years. 
4. The Committee note with concern a continuous increas e in the import of 
urea over the years  to meet the demand of fertilizers in our country . During 2016 -
17, the import of urea was 54.81 lakh MT and it has reached to 9 8.28 lakh MT 
during 2020-21. Subsidy burden on account of urea import constitutes 26 % of the 
overall urea subsidy paid in a year by the Government. Amid the prevailing 
circumstances, t he Committee believe that judicious application of u rea is the 
need of the day and nano fertilizers can definitely play an important role to reduce 
the dependency of our country on the import of urea . As submitted, with t he 
precise application of nano fertilizers at critical cro p growth stages, about 25 to 
50% replacement of convention fertilizers is possible. Resultantly, w ith the use of 
Nano Urea , GOI Exchequer can save approx. 3 billion USD equivalent to around 
Rs. 25,000 crore in subsidy bill per year considering subsidy  of approx. Rs. 20,000 
per MT of Urea. The Committee are glad to learn that by the year 2023, IFFCO’s two 
plants will be operational with total production of 11 crore bottles every year. The 
expected replacement is 50 lakh MT of conventional urea. By 2023-24, 5 plants will 
be operational with production of 28 crore bottles per year  and the expected 
replacement is 127 lakh MT of conventional urea. By 2025 -26, all the proposed 
eight plants will be operational and the total production would be 44 crore bottles 
every year and they are expected to replace 200 lakh MT of urea . The Committee 
find the figures for expected replacement of urea encouraging and trust that 
DoF/IFFCO would take further steps to enhance the production of Nano Urea 
towards making our country self-reliant for meeting the requirement of fertilizers.  
5. The Committee draw some satisfaction from the fact that IFFCO has 
transferred the technology of Nano Urea to NFL and RCF and they are setting up 

their plants with th e technology transfer at Nangal in  Punjab and Trombay  in 
Maharashtra, respectively. Department has now requested IFFCO to transfer the 
Nano Urea technology to other CPSUs viz. BVFCL and FACT also without any cost. 
The matter is stated to be under consideration before the management of IFFCO. 
The Committee are aware that IFFCO has transferred the technology to NFL and 
RCF without any royalty. The Committee trust that a favorable decision would be 
taken by IFFCO this time too on an urgent basis with a view to enhance the 
production of nano urea to meet its increasing demand because of the multiple 
benefits of Nano Urea. 
6 . The Committee are aware that the Department of Fertilizers  has a larger role 
to play in making available the required quantum of nano fertiliz ers to fulfill the 
need of farmers of the entire country. The Committee are of the strong conviction 
that Public and Private Sector C ompanies desirous of manufacturing n ano 
fertilizers can do much better and should be given every possible support by the 
Government. In this regard, the Committee wo uld like to impress upon the 
Department to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance at the appropriate 
level to bring production of nano fertilizers under the Production Linked Incentive 
(PLI) scheme in order to give a boost to the fertilizer industry with a view to 
increasing the production of nano fertilizers. 
7. The Committee are informed that as our country do not have sufficient raw 
materials, gas, oil, rock phosphate, potash needed to produce fertilizers, there is 
an urgent need to think differently to be self-reliant. The Committee s hare the 
apprehension of the Department  that in case of dependency for raw materials on 
other countries , our country would be prone to e xploitation as fertilizer raw 
material is available only in  a few countries . In view of the foregoing, t he 
Committee recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should play a proactive 
role to establish long term agreements for import of fertilizer s’ raw materials and 
set-up joint venture plants in countries rich in fertilizers ’ raw materials with buy 

back arrangements thereby a ssuring access to acquisition of the fertilizer s’ raw 
materials abroad, through the Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of  Finance and 
other concerned Departments/ agencies . All necessary steps are needed to be 
taken by the Government to avoid any hinderances in  production of nano  
fertilizers. This may help achieve self-reliance in the fertilizer sector while ensuring 
regular supply of fertilizers and raw materials at reasonable rates and saving 
precious foreign exchange by decreasing the import burden of the country.  
Besides, t he Department may approach the Ministry of Finance to rationalize/ 
exempt the Basic Custom D uty on fertilizer s’ raw materials (i.e. P&K and other 
macro and micro nutrients) so that they are available at reasonable price thus 
incentivizing setting up of nano technology based plants in the country for 
enhancing  the  production of nano fertilizers.  
8.  The Committee are made to understand that use of Nano Urea  will act as 
one of the tools to double the income of farmers. It has higher nutrient use 
efficiency which will boost crop production and would increase farmers’ income.  
Based on 11,000 all India farmer field trials conducted on 94 crops by IFFCO in 
collaboration with ICAR – KVKs, an average 8 % higher crop yield was achieved 
with the application of Nano Urea , which translates into Rs . 2000-Rs. 5000 per 
hectare higher inco me for the farmers. Economic benefit is even more in case of 
high value/high MSP crops. With the use of Nano Urea, there is input cost saving 
for farmers in terms of purchase of less fertilizer. Average 45 – 90 Kg less 
subsidized urea would be applied per acre of field which translates into Rs .266-
Rs.532 per acre cost saving for the farmers in terms of lower purchase cost for the 
farmers. Despite advantages, the practical implementation of nano -fertilizers still 
has a long way to go.  The Committee realize t hat t he biggest challenge for any 
game changer technology is its adoption on a larger scale by common masses . In 
the instant case, the biggest challenge being faced , is the adoption of Nano Urea 
by the small and marginal  farmers. Department of Fertilizers  is taking a lot of 

activities for promotion  of  Nano Urea viz. village level demonstration on Nano 
Urea application through progressive farmers, creating awareness for use of Nano 
Urea in kisan sammelans. Films have also been made in different regional 
languages and the social media is extensively being used for  dissemination of 
information on Nano Urea and its use among farmers . Besides, regular  talks and 
panel discussions on radio , DD Kisan channel and other television channels are 
being held. One trainin g module is being developed for farmers for crop specific 
right dose of Nano Urea. Further, the State Governments are repeatedly requested, 
in their monthly meetings, to take up the initiative to popularize Nano Urea 
amongst the farmers. IFFCO has also tak en organised promotional and extension 
programmes for use of Nano Urea  across the country through Crop 
Demonstrations, Short video films of Nano Urea , Print & Electronic , Media and 
Mass Media Campaigns, Publicity Material, Gifts & Awards, Dedicated Internet Site, 
Training & Awareness programmes  and State-wise Flag off Programmes  & 
Endorsement by Opinion Leaders, Government Officials and Scientists, etc.  
 While appreciating the efforts being made by DoF/IFFCO to pro mote use of 
Nano Urea, the Committee feel that a lot of work can still be done in this direction. 
The Committee are of the opinion that enhancement of the crop produce and 
income benefits to the farmers should be given adequate focus in the promotional 
programmes of nano fertil izers. Once farmers are convinced of these benefits, 
they would be open to use the related information through various promotion al 
activities organized by Department of Fertilizers and IFFCO. The faster the farmers 
of our country adopt th e Nano Urea, the sooner the country will be able to move 
towards complete Atma Nirbharta in the fertilizer sector. 
9. The Committee  note that an agriculture sprayer is a special type of farm 
equipment that a farmer uses to apply liquid or powder agricultural chemicals and 
fertilizers on farm fields. For spraying of liquid Nano Urea, the farmers use a hand 
operated or battery -operated knapsack sprayer of  15 or  16 litres water tank 

capacity. T hey also use power or mist sprayers / boom sprayers of 200 litres or 
more capacity. Cost of manual sprayers ,  battery operated sprayers and power 
sprayers is in the range of Rs . 1200-1500, Rs. 3000-4500 and Rs 6000 -10,000 per 
sprayer, respectively. In this regard, Department of Fertilizers has submitted that a 
collective and community spraying with the help of cooperatives, retailers as well 
as custom hiring of sprayers by village level youth/ FPOs are being explored for 
effective spray of Nano Urea . The Committee would desire the Department to 
speed up their efforts for provisioning of effective and cheaper means of spraying 
of nano fertilizers to the farmers.  
10. The Committee note that drone are also used to spray nano fertilizers.  
Spreading fertilizer or seed spreading with a drone allows a user to reach places 
that traditionally would be hard to access and at a faster pace. As informed by the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation , import of drones has been banned to support the 
indigenous production of drones in the country. The Committee strongly support 
the decision of the Government in this regard and desire that such facilities should 
be encouraged and established within the cou ntry itself. As submitted, the 
Government has come up with good policies and have introduced incentives and 
engaged three world -famous type certification bodies for drones viz. Tata Quality, 
TQC of US and Bureau Veritas.  Therefore, t hings have been liberal ized to create 
demands and  policy & procedural bottlenecks removed. The Committee would 
like to be assured that the Government has taken policy initiatives with a view to 
encourage drone adoption by States and Union Territories and procurement 
process of drones have been simplified.  Keeping in view that the production of 
drones have just started and also in view of the initiatives taken by the 
Government, the Committee trust that target set by the Ministry of Civil Aviation to 
provide 10 drones for each vi llage and fulfill the requirement of more than 6 lakh 
villages in the country would be accomplished within a reasonable time  frame by 

taking care of the avoidable delays.  The Committee would like the Department of 
Fertilizers to provide an update in the matter from time to time. 
11. The Committee do appreciate that the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare have included drones as part of agricultural machinery . However, in view 
of the fact that a 25 kg agricultural drone c osts between Rs. 8 to 10 lakh, the 
Committee fi nd it extremely difficult for the small and marginal farmers , which 
constitute about 86% farmers, to afford the same. The Committee are aware that 
the Government on 15.09.2021 has approved the  Production Linked 
Incentives(PLI) Scheme  for drones and drone components. The PLI scheme 
allocates Rs. 120 crore for drones and drone components spread  over three 
financial years which is  almost twice the comb ined turnover of Rs. 60 crore of all 
domestic drone manufacturers during 2020 -21. As submitted, out of 120 
manufacturers of drones and about 180 -200 service providers, 23 drone/ 
component manufacturers having a turnover of Rs. 2 crore have been found 
eligible for the PLI Scheme. As the PLI scheme for drones and drone components  
is in place, the Committee are hopeful that the drone manufacturing industry 
would play a significant role and supplement the Government s’ efforts. In other 
words, while the industry expects the Government to display a trust based 
facilitator attitude by way of creating a conducive manufacturing environment, the 
Committee expect the industry to  display exemplary focus on drone 
manufacturing for domestic agricultural use by way of investing significantly thus 
ensuring the growth of the drone manufacturing industry up to the expected level.  
12. The Committee note that SOP for use of drone to spray the nano  fertilizers 
in agriculture is under consideration  of the Department of Fertili zers, wherein 90% 
of drone price would be provided through Agriculture Infrastructure Fund (AIF) for 
those entrepreneurs who wish to avail the facility of drones. The Committee desire 
that the Department in coordination with all the concerned Ministries/Departments 

and other stakeholders seek for sufficient budgetary support to the AIF  for 
provisioning of drones at subsidized rates to the Kisan Vikas Kendras,  Custo m 
Hire Centres and Agricultural Universities, etc. The Committee would desire that 
SOP for use of drone for spray of nano fertilizers  should be finalized at the 
earliest.  The Committee further desire that Department of Fertilizers  should take 
similar measures to ensure th e availability of fertilizer sprayers for enhanced and 
better productivity of crops.  
 
13.  The Committee are further informed that Department  of Fertilizers has also 
issued the g uidelines for development of entrepreneurs for spraying of liquid 
fertilizers by drones  and they are in regular touch with the stakeholders for 
promotion of the said guidelines, which will ensure availability of drones to spray 
fertilizers at cheap er cost. The Committee would desire t hat it should be closely 
monitored that the guidelines for development of entrepreneurs for spraying of 
liquid fertilizers by drones are strictly followed so that their very purpose to ensure 
availability of drones at cheaper price is achieved.    
14. It is satisfying to note  that a  drone takes only 5 minutes to complete 
spraying on one acre of the field and a single day to spray 80 acres of the field  
whereas a manual sprayer takes one full day to spray one acre of the field . The 
Committee are, however, not happy to note that though the rates fixed for spray by 
drones as per the g uidelines on the d evelopment of entrepreneurs for drone 
spraying of liquid fertilizers is Rs.200/ - per acre per day, the farmers are being 
charged more  i.e. @ Rs.500/ - per acre per  day inclusive of its transportation 
charges upto the farm gate.  Hence, though the nano fertili zers have several 
benefits, the concern of the farmers with regard to the high er cost of drone spray 
application remains  unattended. A representat ive of Tamil Nadu Agricultural 
University (TNAU) reacted to the concern of the Committee and submitted that the 

transportation charges for drones upto the farm gates can be subsidized. The 
Committee would like to be assured that the Department would take all necessary 
steps to resolve the anomalies with regard to the rates of drone spray and address 
the concern of the farmers in this regard  so that more farmers avail the facility of 
drones for spraying of fertilizers. 
15. The Committee hope that as assured, the Department of Fertilizers would 
take up the matter with the companies/ corporate houses for utilizing their 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) fund to provide the facility of drones to the 
farmers of a particular ear -marked area (adopted by them) for spray of Nano Urea 
at subsidized rates / free of cost and to impart drone pilot training to the local 
village entrepreneurs and farmers. 
 
16. The representative of Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (TNAU) have 
informed that they have 40 research stations, 18 colleges and 14 KVKs  and in all 
their units, they have a drone. They also propose to give a custom  hiring and for 
that they have the complete SOP . Also, t o improve the man power for drone 
operation, the Tamil Nadu Government has taken a special initiative to include 
drone training in diploma course in agricultural engineering . It is a 10 hours 
course and within two weeks one gets trained and get license to operate drones.  
Tamil Nadu State Assembly has sanctioned a project worth Rs. 11 crore to buy 60 
drones.  There is a d rone laboratory in TNAU where several parameters of flight 
height, swath, speed of the drones are asessed.  Tamil Nadu Government has also 
requested the TNAU to train unemployed youth for drone usage and for that efforts 
are being made. Also, several companies are ready to sign MoUs to promote drone 
technology. The Committee welcome the initiatives taken by the State Government 
of Tamil Nadu/TNAU in drone usage for agricultural needs and promotion of drone 
technology. The Committee recommend to the D epartment of Fertilizers to pursue 

with the other State Governments to follow suit to cater to the need of the farmers 
for use of drone in spraying of fertilizers/nano fertilizers. 
17. The Committee find that there is limited number of drone training centres  
which makes it difficult for the farmers to avail the training facility.  As per the  
submission of Ministry of Civil Aviation, they have plan ned for 8000 drone training 
schools for 800 districts in the country with an average of 10 s chools per district. 
However, it involves certain process of approval.  The Committee desire that the 
Department of Fertilizers  should devise a definite plan in coordination with the   
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras, Kishan Vikas Kendras, Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs), Customer 
Hire Centres, Farmers Cooperatives, Agricultural Universities, fertilizer 
manufacturing companies, etc. for conducting regular training programmes to  
train  the entrepreneurs and farmers throughout the country  about appropriate 
usage of various types of fertilizer sprayers including drones for precision and 
targeted application of right dosage of nano fertilizers, etc. on the crops.   
18. The Committee note that the Sub -Mission on agricultural mechanization 
(SMAM) has been introduced by the Government  of India . Eligible farmers can 
apply for the  scheme and can buy modern agricultural equipment with 50 to 80% 
subsidy. This scheme, therefore,  will facilitate the availability of drones in the 
villages with the a ctive cooperation of the State Governments . A representative of 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation during evidence admitted that implementation of the 
SMAM scheme is little slow.   The Committee recommend that the Department of 
Fertilizers should work in unison with the Ministry of Civil Aviation  and State 
Governments and others concerned agencies for effective implementation of 
SMAM so as to achieve its objective of facilitating the availability of drones to the 
farmers at the Block/ village level throughout the country.  

19. The Committee gather from the submission of Department of Agricultural 
Research & Education (DARE) that long-term effects of nano fertilizers on the  
 
nutritional quality of various crops cannot be drawn as till date the research trials 
being conducted have completed only one year and in most cases, only one 
season. The Committee would recommend that  concerted long -term dedicated 
research may be got con ducted by the Department of Fertilizers in active 
coordination with DARE/ ICAR, all the Agricultural universities/ fertilizer 
manufacturing companies, etc. by covering all the major crops i n all the agro -
climatic regions and  soil types of the country so as to thoroughly assess the 
merits and demerits of the use of nano fertilizers and  establish nutritional quality, 
bio-safety, efficacy and reliability of the harvested produce of nano fertilizers 
treated crops.  
20. The Committee learn that during the field trials on varities of crops with the 
application of Nano Urea, it was found that there was 25 to 50 percent saving in top 
dress nitrogen.  The Committee desire that a thorough audit of the field trials on 
application of nano fertili zers may be got conducted by the Department in 
coordination with other Ministries/ organizations , to assess the reasons for huge 
variation (25 to 50 percent) in top dress nitrogen saving  on different crops and in 
different regions, by the premier agricu ltural research institutes, etc.;  the reasons 
for variance and effects may be scientifically analysed and  a crop specific 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)  for appropriate application of Nano Urea be 
devised so that the variance range in this regard may be minimized/ removed.   
21. The Committee further desire that as assured, the Department of Fertili zers 
would take up the matter for setting up of quality testing laboratories throughout 
the country to ensure production and sale of quality nano fertilizers with the 

Department of Agriculture and Farmer’s Welfare. The Committee would like to be 
kept informed of the progress in the matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                    DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
20, March, 2023                                                                        Chairperson, 
29, Phalguna,1944 (Saka)                                             Standing Committee on 
       `                                                    Chemicals & Fertilizers. 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE -I 
Summary of All India Experimental Results of Nano Urea (liquid) in Kharif 2021 
 
SN Crops Location Season Treatments Nitroge
n Dose 
Applied 
per Plot 
kg  
Equivalent 
urea  Top 
dressed 
Urea Qty 
per Plot  
Urea 
Top 
dressi
ng 
Cost 
Nano 
Appn. 
Cost 
Approx  
(Bottle + 
Foliar  
labour). 
Subsidize
d Urea 
Cost (@ 
Rs 266.50 
/ Bag) 
Total 
Cost 
(Urea 
cost + 
Nano 
Urea 
(liquid) ) 
Addn 
cost  
in 
Nano 
Plot 
Grai
n 
Yield 
* 
Mandi 
Price 
of the 
produ
ce 
Addn. 
Yield 
over 
RDF  
% 
Inc 
over  
RDF 
Addn. 
Retur
n  
Overall 
Economic 
Benefit 
Nitrogen Saving in 
Top Dressed  
Nitrogen Only 
            kg / ha Rs / 
ha 
Rs / ha Rs / ha Rs Rs / 
ha 
kg / 
ha 
Rs / 
kg 
kg % Rs / 
ha 
Rs / ha kg % 
A B C D E F G H I J (G x 
266.5)/45 
K 
(H+I+J) 
L M N O (M-
Mrdf) 
P 
(O/M
rdf*1
00) 
Q  
(OxN) 
R (Q-L) S(Frdf - 
Fnano) 
T  
1 Rice BCKV, 
Mohanpur(West 
Bengal) 
Kharif, 
2021 
100% RDF (60: 
30: 30 kg/ha 
NPK) 
60 130 800 0 772 1572   3786 19         _ _ 
        50% basal N, P, 
K+ 50% of total 
top dressing 
urea at 20 DAT+ 
1st Nano Urea 
(liquid) spray at 
27 DAT + 2nd 
Nano Urea 
(liquid) spray at 
40-45 DAT 
30 65 800 3168 386 4354 2776 4208 19 422 11.1
5 
8018 5242 30 50 

2 Rice 
(CIARI 
Dhan-3)  
ICAR- CIARI, 
Port Blair 
Kharif 
2021 
RDN ((90 Kg N 
/ha) 
90 196 1521 0 1159 2680 - 3593 19.5             
        RDF with 66 % 
N & 2 Sprays of 
Nano N @ 4ml / 
litre at AT& PI  
66.5 145 507 1614 856 2977 249 4110 19.5 517 14.3
9 
10081.
5 
9832.5 24 33 
3 Maize 
(Hybrid 
DHM 
117) 
ICAR- CRIDA, 
Hyderabad ( 
Telangana) 
Kharif 
2021 
RDN (90 Kg 
N/ha) 
90 196 800 0 1159 1959 - 2694 18.7             
        RDF with 25% N 
reduction & 2 
Sprays of Nano 
N @ 2ml / litre at 
25 and 45 DAS 
67.5 147 800 1760 869 3429 1470 2801 18.7 107 3.97 2000.9 530.9 23 25 
  Fingermi
llet 
(GPU 
28) 
AICRPDA 
Centre, 
Bengaluru 
(Karnataka) 
Kharif 
2021 
RDN (50 Kg 
N/ha) 
50 109 400 0 644 1044 - 2742 32             
        RDF with 25% N 
reduction & 2 
Sprays of Nano 
N @ 2ml / litre at 
25 and 45 DAS 
37.5 82 400 1760 483 2643 1589 3038 32 296 10.8
0 
9472 7883 13 25 
  Upland 
rice 
(Dantes
wari) 
AICRPDA 
Centre, 
Jagdalpur(Chhat
tisgarh) 
Kharif 
2021 
RDN (80 Kg N 
/ha) 
80 174 800 0 1030 1830 - 2897 19.6             

        RDF with 25% N 
reduction & 2 
Sprays of Nano 
N @ 2ml / litre at 
35 and 55 DAS 
60 130 800 1760 772 3332 1500 2971 19.6 74 2.55 1450.4 -49.6 20 25 
4 Paddy 
Basmati 
PB-1121 
CSSRI 
Karnal(Haryana) 
Kharif 
2021 
RDF (90 Kg N 
Kg /ha) 
90 196 1200 0 1159 2359 - 4466 33             
        RDF with 33% N 
reduction & 1 
Spray of Nano N 
60 130 800 1000 772 2572 215 4525 33 59 1.32 1947 1732 30 33 
5 Ginger 
(Varada) 
ICAR-  IISR, 
Kozhikode 
(Kerala) 
2021-22 RDN (180 kg N 
/ha) 
120 261 2000 0 1545 3545 - 1400
0 
12             
        RDF with 50 % 
N reduction & 2 
Sprays of Nano 
N @ 2ml / litre at 
90 and 120 DAP 
(800 ml/ha) @ 
Rs. 250 per 
bottle 
60 130 500 2400 772 3672 1130 2200
0 
12 8000 57.1
4 
96000 94870 60 50 
        RDF with 50 % 
N reduction & 2 
Sprays of Nano 
N @ 4ml / litre at 
90 and 120 DAP 
(1.6 L/ha) @ Rs. 
250 per bottle 
60 130 500 2800 772 4072 1530 2744
0 
12 13440 96.0
0 
16128
0 
159750 60 50 
6 Rice 
(Irrigated
) 
IRRI-SARC, 
Varanasi (U.P.) 
Kharif 
2021 
RDN (120 Kg/ 
ha) 
120 261 800 0 1545 2345 - 7600 19.4             

   (MTU 
7029) 
    RDN with 34% N 
reduction & 1 
Spray of Nano 
Urea (liquid) @ 4 
ml/l at PI 
79 172 400 1120 1017 2537 195 7900 19.4 300 3.95 5820 5625 41 34 
7 Rice 
(Rainfed
) 
IRRI-SARC, 
Varanasi (U.P.) 
Kharif 
2021 
RDN (80 Kg/ ha) 80 174 800 0 1030 1830 - 4400 19.4             
   (Binadh
an 11) 
    RDN with 34% N 
reduction & 2 
Spray of Nano 
Urea (liquid) @ 2 
ml/l at MT and PI 
52.8 115 400 1520 680 2600 770 4900 19.4 500 11.3
6 
9700 8930 27 34 
8 Rice 
(Rainfed
) 
IRRI-SARC, 
Jorhat (Assam) 
Kharif 
2021 
RDN (60 Kg/ ha) 60 130 800 0 772 1572 - 4000 19.4             
   (CR 
Dhan 
311) 
    RDN with 34% N 
reduction & 2 
Spray of Nano 
Urea (liquid) @ 
2ml / litre at MT 
and at PI stage  
39.6 86 400 1520 510 2430 858 4400 19.4 400 10.0
0 
7760 6902 20 34 
9 Paddy ANDUAT, 
Kumarganj,Ayod
hya(U.P.) 
Kharif 
2021 
RDF 150/kg 
N/ha 
150 326 400 0 1931 2331 0 60.5 1940 - - - - - - 
  ,, ,, ,, RDF 50% N+2 
Nano Zinc spray 
75 163 400 1200 966 2566 1200 65 1940 4.5 7.44 8730 7530 75 50 
10 Rice 
(Pooja) 
ICAR-NRRI, 
Cuttack 
(Odisha) 
Kharif 
2021 
RDN (80kg 
N/ha) 
80 174 800 0 1030 1830   4600 19.4             

        75% of RDN & 
one spray of 
Nano N @ 2 
ml/litre at 78 
days after 
transplanting 
(DAT) 
60 130 400 1100 772 2272 443 4200 19.4 -400 -
8.70 
-7760 -8203 20 25 
        50 % of RDN & 
two  spray of 
Nano N @ 2 
ml/litre at 48 and 
78 days after 
transplanting 
(DAT) 
40 87 0 2200 515 2715 885 3800 19.4 -800 -
17.3
9 
-15520 -16405 40 50 
11 Pearlmill
et 
(RHB 
173) 
SKNAU, 
Jobner(Rajastha
n) 
Kharif 
2021 
RDN (120 Kg N 
/ha) 
90 196 375 0 1159 1534 - 2849 22.5             
        RDF with 25% N 
reduction & 2 
Sprays of Nano 
N @ 2ml / litre at 
30 and 45 DAS 
67.5 147 281 1768 869 2918 1385 3047 22.5 198 6.95 4455 3070.42 23 25 
        RDF with 50% N 
reduction & 2 
Sprays of Nano 
N @ 2ml / litre at 
30 and 45 DAS 
45 98 188 1768 579 2535 1001 2980 22.5 131 4.30 2947.5 1946.35 45 50 
12 Maize 
(BRMH 
8) 
UAS GKVK, 
Bangalore 
(Karnataka) 
Kharif 
2021  
RDN ((150 Kg N 
/ha) 
0.3 1 800 0 4 804 - 8260 14.2             

        RDF with 50 % 
N reduction & 2 
Sprays of Nano 
N @ 4ml / litre at 
30 and 60 DAS 
0.15 0 600 1944 2 2546 778 8440 14.2 180 2.18 2556 1778 0 50 
  Rice 
(KMP 
220) 
UAS GKVK, 
Bangalore 
(Karnataka) 
Kharif 
2021  
RDN ((100 Kg N 
/ha) 
0.12 0 800 0 2 802 - 5240 17             
        RDF with 50 % 
N reduction & 2 
Sprays of Nano 
N @ 4ml / litre at 
30 and 60 DAS 
0.06 0 600 1944 1 2545 1103 5340 17 100 1.91 1700 597 0 50 
13 Finger 
millet 
(VL 
Mandua 
352) 
ICAR-VPKAS, 
Almora 
(Uttarakhand) 
Kharif 
2021 
100% RDN 50 109 1200 0 644 1844 - 1407 33.77             
        50% RDN +2 
spray of  Nano 
Urea (liquid) @ 
0.2% 
25 54 800 1400 322 2522 675 1235 33.77 -172 -
12.2
2 
-
5808.4 
-6483.4 25 50 
14 Rice IGKV, Raipur 
(Chhatisgarh) 
Kharif 
2021 
RDN (120 Kg 
N/ha) 
120 261 900 0 1545 2445   6017 19.4             
        RDN with 50% N 
reduction & 2 
spray of Nano 
N@ 4ml/L at 
Tillering and 
Before Flowering 
stage 
60 130 600 2040 772 3412 968.9 5513 19.4 -504 -
8.38 
-
9777.6 
-10747 60 50 
15 Maize 
(Komal 
Hybrid) 
RVSKVV, Indore 
(M.P.) 
Kharif 
2021 
RDF (120-60-40) 120 261 600 0 1545 600 - 2614 18.7 - - - - - - 

        60 kg N + 2- 
sprays of NU 
60 130 300 1800 772 2872 727.5 2745 18.7 131 5.01 2449.7 1722.2 60 50 
16 Maize 
(GAYMH
1) 
AAU, 
Anand(Gujarat) 
Kharif 
2021 
RDF (120:60:0 
NPK Kg / ha) 
120 261 800 0 1545 2345 - 4910 18.7             
    RDF with 50% N 
reduction & 2 
Sprays of Nano 
N  
60 130 400 2000 772 3172 828 4970 19.25 60 1.2 1122 294 60 50 
17 Paddy  TNAU, 
Bhavanisa gar 
(Tamil Nadu)  
Kharif 
2021 
RDF (120:60:0 
NPK Kg / ha) 
120 261 800 0 1545 2345 - 6030 19.4       
    RDF with 50% N 
reduction & 2 
Sprays of Nano 
N  
60 130 400 3200 772 4372 2028 6970 19.4 940 15.6 18236 16208 60 50 
 
  
 
 

Annexure- II 
 
Season-wise/Crop-wise experimental trials undertaken  on Nano Urea 
(liquid) (Nano Nitrogen) 
 
Experiments Season Crops & Trials (Nos.) 
“On Station” 
Trials 
Rabi 2019-20 
(24 Nos.) 
Cereals:  Wheat (11); 
Oilseeds:  Mustard (1); 
Vegetables: Onion  (2); Capsicum  (1), Cabbage (1), 
Tomato (3); Parthenocarpic Cucumber under 
polyhouse (1) 
Sugar Crops: Suru Sugarcane (1) 
Summer 2019-20 
(3 Nos.) Cereals: Paddy (1); Maize (2) 
Kharif 2020 
(16 Nos.) 
Cereals: Paddy (6); Maize (5); Pear millet (3) 
Fibres: Cotton (1) 
Vegetables: Okra (1) 
Rabi 2020-21 
(8 Nos.) 
Cereals:  Wheat (6); 
Oilseeds:  Mustard (1); 
Vegetables: Onion (1) 
Summer 2020-21 
(2 Nos.) Cereals: Paddy (1); Maize (1) 
Kharif 2021 
(21 Nos.) See Table 2. 
“On Farm” 
Trials 
Rabi 2019-20 93 crops; 11224 trials (9037 recorded) 
Kharif 2020 44 crops; 1511trials (1435 recorded) 
Rabi 2020-21 1126 
Total 11,598 
  
 
  

Annexure-III 
 
SAFETY ASSESSMENT OF IFFCO NANO UREA (LIQUID) AS PER DBT NANO 
GUIDELINES 
SN Test Name Guideline Purpose 
1 Dermal Toxicity – IATA for skin 
corrosion & irritation OECD TG 404 & DBT  Human Safety 
2 Skin Absorption study OECD TG 428 & DBT Human Safety 
3 Eye Irritation Investigation OECD TG 437 & DBT Human Safety 
4 Inhalation Toxicity Study of 
nanoparticles OECD TG 433 & DBT Human Safety 
5 Genotoxicity study OECD TG 473 & DBT Human and Plant Safety 
6 Cytotoxicity study MTT & Neutral Red 
Assay & DBT Human Safety 
7 Inhibition test in fresh water 
alga OECD TG 201 & DBT Aquatic /Env Toxicity 
8 Immobilization test in Daphnia OECD TG 202 & DBT Aquatic /Env Toxicity 
9 Toxicity in tropical fish OECD TG 203 & DBT Aquatic / 
Environmental Toxicity 
10 Fish Embryo toxicity study OECD TG 236 & DBT Ecological/ 
Environmental Toxicity 
11 Earthworm reproduction study OECD TG 222 & DBT Ecological/ 
Environmental Toxicity 
12 Stability test of the 
nanomaterials OECD TG 318 & DBT Aqua/Human/ 
Environmental safety 
13 Soil – water leaching – spray 
on soil OECD 312 & DBT Environmental Safety 
14 Soil – water leaching – spray 
on plant OECD 312 & DBT Environmental Safety 
15 Packaging compatibility test OECD, ENV/JM/MONO 
(2019)12 & DBT 
Environmental & human 
Safety 
16 Toxicity on Microbes FCO 1985 & DBT Rhizosphere Study 
17 Toxicity on mice and chicken OECD 407 & DBT Food Toxicity 
18 Microbial Contamination study FCO 1985 & DBT Contamination safety 
19 NMR analyses of Nitrogen DBT Stability 
20 Plant uptake studies DBT Stability and trophic transfer 
21 Nutritional analyses FSSAI Nutritional value and human 
safety 
 
  

STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(2021-22) 
 
 Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on  Monday, the 18th April, 2022 from 1100  hrs. to 1400 
hrs. in Committee Room. ’B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi-  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
4. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
5. Smt Aparupa Poddar (Afrin Ali) 
6. Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
7. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
9. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
10. Dr. Anil Jain 
11. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
12. Shri Arun Singh 
 
            SECRETARIAT  
    1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi - Joint Secretary 
            2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram -          Additional Director 
            3. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary 
  4. Shri Panna Lal  - Under Secretary 
 
  
WITNESSES 

Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 Department of Fertilizers 
 
1.    Shri  Rajesh Kumar Chaturvedi, Secretary (F) 
2.     Shri Satendra Singh, Addl. Secy. & FA  
3.       Smt. Aparna  Sharma, JS 
4.       Smt. Neeraja Adidam, JS 
5.  Dr. Prathibha A., Economic Adviser 
6.  Shri Harvinder Singh, Director 
 PSUs/Autonomous Institutions 
7. Shri U.S. Awasthi, MD, IFFCO 
8. Shri Yogendra Kumar, Director (Mktg.), IFFCO 
9. Shri   S.C. Mudgerikar. CMD, RCF                
10.      Shri Nirlep Singh Rai, CMD, NFL                   
11.      Shri P.S. Gahlot, MD, IPL 
 Other Department/Ministries 
12. Shri Priya Ranjan, JS (INM), DA&FW 
 13. Shri A. K. Singh, Agriculture Commissioner, DA&FW 
          14. Shri S. K. Chaudhari, Dy. Director General, ICAR 
 
Part - I 
2. At the outset the Hon’ble Chairperson  welcomed the Members of the 
Committee to the sitting  and then  the Committee discussed the proposal regarding 
study tour of the Committee to Ahmedabad, Pune and Kashmir.  It was proposed 
that the details the said study tour may be worked out for approval by the Committee 
at its next sitting. 
  

Part – II 
 
Briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers) on ‘Nano fertilizers for sustainable crop production 
and maintaining soil health’. 
3. Thereafter, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed  the representatives of the 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) to the sitting. Their 
attention was invited to the provisions contained in the Direction  55(1) of the 
‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding confidentiality of the Committee’s proceedings. 
 4. After the witnesses introduced themselves,  a short film showcasing the  
features of   “Nano fertilizers” was  screened for th e information of the Members of 
the Committee.  Then the Secretary of the Department briefed the Committee 
through a power point presentation  on ‘Nano fertilizers’.  
5.    The power point presentation was followed by discussion on several aspects of 
the subject, ‘Nano -fertilizers for sustainable crop production and maintaining soil 
health’.   During the discussion, the  Hon’ble Chairperson and Members of the 
Committee raised questions on several issues such as:- 
(i)  Research on the long term effects of use of  Nano fertilizers on   
nutritional quality of various crops, soil, human health, etc. 
(ii)  Awareness programmes for farmers and imparting training to them 
about the use of Nano fertilizers. 
(iii) Promotion of drone technology for efficient spray of Nano fertilizers and 
training of farmers for its use. 
(iv) Display of expiry date, if any, on the bottles of Nano fertilizers and 
precautionary warnings, thereon.   
(v) Use of recyclable plastic bottles for Nano fertilizer packing. 
(vi) Selective need based introduction and use of Nano fertilizers in various 
Regions of the country in a phased manner as per its present 
production capacity.  
(vii) Need for efforts to increase the production capacity of Nano fertilizers. 
(viii) Revival of Haldia plant in West Bengal  of Hindustan Fertilizers 
Corporation. 
(ix)  Allocation of separate Budgetary allocation for promotion and use of 
Nano fertilizers.  Consideration of subsidy for the use of nano 
fertilizers. 

(x) Need for research and development of different versions of Na no 
fertilizers viz. Nano-DAP, Zinc, Boron, Copper, etc. 
(xi) Need for sustainable models by involving Private sector companies 
also for achieving self -sufficiency in fertilizers so as to reduce its 
import. 
(xii) Need for further Research in Nano fertilizer s so as to enhance the 
quality parameters in all aspects to meet the export standards. 
(xiii) Need for steps to reduce the usage of Urea and to promote Nano 
fertilizers. 
(xiv) Effects of droplets of nano urea spray on the environment and the  
human beings.  
Part – III 
Discussion with the representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) on the topical issue of ‘Availability and 
Price volatility of fertilizers in the context of present international situation’. 
6.    Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers) made a power point presentation on ‘Availability and Price 
volatility of fertilizers in the context of present international situation’  which was 
followed by discussion on several aspects of the topical issue. The following 
important points were discussed by the Committee:- 
(i) Requirement, availability and DBT sales of various fertilizers during 
Rabi and Kharif seasons (2021-22). 
(ii) Budget for fertilizers subsidy. 
(iii) Increase in international prices of MOP due to war between Russia and 
Ukraine and sanctions against Belarus and Russia. 
(iv) Revision in NBS rates for nutrients – N, P, K and S. 
(v) Need for increase in subsidy on DAP fertilizer. 
(vi) Trends of International Prices of fertilizers during 2020 -21 and  
2021-22. 
(vii) Short-term and long -term arrangements to meet the fertilizers 
requirements due to current geo-political situations.  
(viii) Issue of Potash supply and efforts to meet the requirements. 
(ix)  Need for timely measures to meet the requirements and shortage of 
fertilizers. 
(x) Need to increase the production capacity  of Potash derived from 
Molasses.  

(ix) Urgent need for short -term and long -term strategic plans to  achieve 
self-sufficiency in fertilizers and sort out the crisis. 
(xii) Need for constant monitoring the situation for availability of fertilizers.  
  
7.  The Secretary, Department of Fertilizers  and other representatives 
accompanied him  responded to the aforesaid issues  raised by the members of the  
Committee. 
8. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee 
as well as for furnishing valuable information to the Committee. They were also 
asked to provide required information whi ch was not readily available in writing , at 
the earliest.    
 
9. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
  
         The Committee then adjourned.                      
  

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 04 th May, 2022 from 1100 hrs. to 
1230 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Smt.  Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Shri Deepak Baij 
4. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
5. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
6. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
7. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
8. Dr. Anil Jain 
9. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
10. Shri Arun Singh 
11. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
12. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
SECRETARIAT 
         1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi  - Joint Secretary (VT) 
2. Shri N.K. Jha         -  Director (CF&GP) 
            3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director (CF & JC) 

            4.       Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary 
            5. Shri Panna Lal  - Under Secretary  
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
1.  Shri Satendra Singh, Addl. Secy. & FA 
2.  Smt. Neeraja Adidam, JS 
3.  Smt. Aparna  Sharma, JS 
4.  Dr. Prathibha A., Economic Adviser 
5.  Shri Johan Topno, DS 
 
 II. MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
[DEPARTMENTN OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH & EDUCATION 
(DARE)] 
 
1.          Dr. T. Mohapatra, Secretary, DARE & DG, ICAR  
2. Dr. Suresh K. Chaudhari, Deputy Director General, ICAR 
3. Dr. K.S. Subramanian, Director of Research, TNAU Coimbatore 
4. Dr. V.K. Singh, Director, ICAR-CRIDA, Hyderabad 
5. Dr. Ashwani Kumar, Scientist (PP), ICAR-CSSRI, Karnal, Haryana 
7. Dr. Parveen K. Upadhayay, Scientist (Agronomy), ICAR – IARI, New Delhi 
8. Dr. J.K. Parmar, Associate Professor (Agri Chemistry & Soil Science) 
AAU, Anand, Gujarat 
9. Dr. N.B. Prakash, Professor & Dean (Agriculture), UAS, GKVK, Karnataka 
10. Dr. Sanjay K. Sharma, Director of Research, RVSKVV, Gwalior 
11. Dr. A.K. Singh, Agri Comm, DA&FW 
  
 
 
 
III REPRESENTATIVES OF PSUs/AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS 
(FERTILIZER SECTOR) 

 
1. Dr. Yogendra Kumar, Director (Mktg), IFFCO  
2. Dr. Tarunendu  Singh, Head, Agriculture Services, IFFCO  
   
Part - I 
2. At the outset ,  the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the 
Committee to the sitting. Thereafter, the Committee discussed the proposal 
regarding the proposed study tour of the Committee.  After deliberations, the 
Committee decided to undertake a study visit to Sr inagar, Pune, Mumbai and 
Ahmedabad from 10th to 15th June, 2022. 
Part – II 
 
Briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare (Department of Agr icultural Research & Education);  Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Departm ent of Fertilizers) and the prominent 
Agricultural Research Institutes/ State Agricultural Universities on ‘Nano 
fertilizers for sustainable crop production and maintaining soil health’. 
3. Thereafter, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the representatives of th e Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Department of Agricultural Research & 
Education); Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) and the 
prominent Agricultural Research Institutes/ State Agricultural Universities to the 
sitting. Their attention was invited to the provisions contained in Direction 55(1) of 
the Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of the Committee's 
proceedings.  
4. After the witnesses introduced themselves, the Secretary, Department of 
Agricultural Research & Education made a power point presentation to the 
Committee on the subject  ‘Nano fertilizers for sustainable crop production and 
maintaining soil health’.  
5.    The power point presentation was followed by discussion on several aspects of 
the subject.   During the discussion, the Hon’ble Chairperson and Members of the 
Committee raised questions on several issues such as:- 

(i) Need for detailed audit of field trials conducted in various agro -climatic 
regions of the country based on soil test, etc. due to variation shown in 
the results for Nitrogen savings, crop yield, etc.  
(ii) Need for research on the long term effects of Nano fertilizers on human 
health, environment, soil, water bodies, marine life, etc. 
(iii) Efforts made to enhance the standards and quality parameters of Nano 
fertilizers so that it may over the time completely replace the use of 
conventional Urea. 
(iv) Need to expand the scope of field trials to cover the other f ood crops, 
regions of the country, etc. 
(v) Results of R&D and field trials on Nano DAP, Nano Zinc, and other 
P&K fertilizers, etc. 
(vi) Regarding MoUs signed by IFFCO with the fertilizer PSUs and status 
of setting-up of plants by them.  
(vii) Need to boost the production of Nano fertilizers by sharing of Nano 
fertilizers technology by IFFCO with the PSUs and private fertilizers 
companies to make it abundantly available at cheaper rates. 
(viii) Need for enhanced field trials of Nano fertilizers in the areas having 
high crop productivity. 
 
(ix) Steps to be taken to increase awareness of   farmers  about the 
benefits of Nano fertilizers and to organize training programmes for 
them so that they may shift to its use. 
(x) Need for publicity to  the study results of the use of Nano fertilizers t o 
gain the trust of the farmers and allowing conduct of tr ials by the 
private farmers as well. 
(xi) Framing of plans for future of fertilizers industry in the country.  
(xii) Initiatives for easy availability of drones to the farmers and imparting 
training to rural entrepreneurs for its efficient use and application. 
(xiii) Need for grant of subsidy for  the purchase of drones by the farmers as 
part of farm machinery. 
 
6.  The Secretary, Department of Agricultural Research & Education and other 
representatives from the Departments and the Agricultural Research Institutes/ State 
Agricultural Universities responded to the aforesaid issues raised by the Members of 
the Committee. 
 
7. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee 
as well as for furnishing valuable information to the Committee. They were also 
asked to provide required information which was not readily available in writing, at 
the earliest.    
 
8. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 

 
  
         The Committee then adjourned.                      
 
  

 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
  
            The Committee sat on Thursday, the 04th August, 2022 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
                
PRESENT 
  
   Smt. Kanimozhi  Karunanidhi, Chairperson 
               Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ramakant Bhargarva   
3. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama   
4. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi   
5. Shri Kripanath Mallah   
6. Shri Satyadev Pachauri   
7. Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad   
8. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar   
9. Shri Indra Hang Subba   
  
  
10. 
  
Rajya Sabha 
Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
  
  11. Dr. Anil Jain 
  12. Shri Arun Singh 
  13. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
  14. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
        
 SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Vinay Kumar Mohan       -           Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri  Nabin Kumar Jha                        -          Director 
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh              -           Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Panna Lal                         -           Under Secretary 
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES 

Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers: 
(Department of Fertilizers) 
1. Ms. Arti Ahuja, Secretary (Fert.) 
2. Shri Satendra Singh, AS & FA 
3. Ms. Neeraja Adidam, JS 
4. Shri K. Gurumurthy, JS 
Ministry of Civil Aviation: 
1. Shri Amber Dubey, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Sufiyan Ahmed, Assistant Secretary 
Scientists: 
1. Dr. K.S. Subramanian, Director of Research & Head Nano Science 
Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu. 
2. Dr. Sudhanshu Singh, Dirctor, IRRI-ISARC, Varanasi, UP 
Farmers: 
1.  Shri Ram Narayan, Rewari, Haryana 
2. Shri Ketanbhai Jashbhai  Patel, Anand, Gujarat 
3. Shri Ram Sharan Verma, Barabanki, Uttar Pradesh 
REPRESENTATIVES OF DARE/ICAR 
1. Dr. Suresh K. Chaudhary, DDG, ICAR 
REPRESENTATIVES OF IFFCO 
1. Shri Yogendra Kumar, Director Marketing, IFFCO 
2. Shri Rajneesh Pandey, Chief Manager, IFFCO 
3. Dr. Tarunendu Singh, Sr. Manager (AS), IFFCO 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members t o the sitting of  
the Committee, convened for consideration and adoption of the following Draft  
Action Taken Reports: 
i. Thirty-Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -First Report (17 th Lok 
Sabha) on 'Availability of Medicines & Medical devices for COVID 
Management’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals). 
ii. Thirty-Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty -Second Report (17 th 
Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants 2022 -23' of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
iii. Thirty-Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in th e Thirty-Third Report (17 th Lok 

Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants 2022 -23' of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
iv. Thirty-Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations con tained in the Thirty -Fourth Report (17 th 
Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants 2022 -23' of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).  
  
3. Giving an overview of the importan t Observations/ Recommendationscontained in 
the Draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of the Members. 
 
4. The Committee, then, took up the Draft Acti on Taken Reports one by one 
forconsideration and after some discussions adopted them. 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to fi nalise the Action Taken 
Reports and present the same to the Parliament. 
Part II 
6.         Thereafter the representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
and Ministry of Civil Aviation were called in and the Chairperson welcomed them to 
the sitting of the Committee, convened to hear their views on the Subject ‘ Nano 
Fertilizers for sustainable crop production and maintaining soil health’ .  Impressing 
upon the witnesses to keep the proceedings of the Committee 'Confidential', the 
Chairperson asked them to present their views/suggestions on the subject. 
7.         The representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers and Ministry 
of Civil Aviation accordingly submitted their views covering various aspects. The 
representatives of Min istry of Civil Aviation gave a Power  Point Presentation. They 
also responded to the queries of the Members. 
8.         The Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, accordingly gave an overview 
and made a power point presentation of various issues pertaining to benefits of Nano 
Urea to Farmers; Commercial production of nano Urea (liquid); promotion, publicity 
and Marketing efforts for Nano urea (Liquid); Promotional & Awareness Programmes 
of  Nano Urea; efforts in terms of Promotion of Nano Urea spraying ; farmers’ field 
trials; Brief results of nano fertilizer trials; benefit of Nano Ur ea for environment; 
benefit in terms of less environment footprints; effect of Nano urea on GHGs 
emission and safety assessment of IFFCO Nano fertilizers. 
9.         The Members then raised certain specific queries on various issues, which 
inter-alia included use of drones in spraying of Nano urea, steps initiated to reduce 

the spraying cost of Nano urea, price of drones their maintenance and use by 
farmers, increase in production of various crops by the use of Nano urea, benefits of 
Nano Urea to the farmers etc.   The representative of both the Ministries responded 
to the queries raised by the Members.  
10. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Commit tee and 
furnishing their comments/suggestions on the subject. The Chairperson also asked 
the representatives to furnish their written replies/additional information within a 
week. 
A copy of the audio recorded- verbatim proceedings was kept in record.  
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 