i 
 
38   
 
 
 
 
 
              
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2023-24) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Fertilizer Subsidy Policy and Pricing Matters including need to continue Urea 
Subsidy Scheme’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Department of Fertilizers) 
 
FORTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
49
. 

ii 
 
CC&F NO. 177 
FORTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Fertilizer Subsidy Policy and Pricing Matters including need to continue Urea 
Subsidy Scheme’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(Department of Fertilizers) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 December, 2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 December, 2023 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2023-24) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
8 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
28 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
29 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
32 
 APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2023-24) held on 14th December, 2023. 
33 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Forty -Fourth Report  
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘ Fertilizer Subsidy Policy and Pricing Matters 
including the need to continue Urea Subsidy Scheme ’ of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
34 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(2023-24) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
5. Shri Deepak Baij 
6. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
7. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhalikar 
8. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
10. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
11. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt. Aparupa Poddar  
14. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15. Shri Muniyan Selvaraj 
16. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
17. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
18. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
19. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
20. Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
21. Vacant* 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar  
23. Dr. Anil Jain  
24. Shri Arun Singh  
25. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
26. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
27. Vacant 
28. Vacant 
29. Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
  
      1.   Shri Chander Mohan        -                   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Geeta Parmar                 -    Director 
3.   Shri Panna Lal                           -    Under Secretary 
 
* Vacant vice Shri Uday Pratap Singh, MP(LS) who resigned his seat in LS w.e.f. 06.12.2023. [Lok 
Sabha Secretariat Notification No. 21/1(1)/2023/T(B) dated 6th December, 2023]  

v 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2023-2024) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Forty-Ninth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty -Fourth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Fertilizer Subsidy Policy and Pricing Matters 
including need to continue Urea Subsidy Scheme’  pertaining to the Department of 
Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
2.  The Forty -fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 09 th August, 2023. The Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers furnished their replies on 10 th October, 2023 indicating Action Taken on  
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty -fourth Report. The 
Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on  
14th December, 2023. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty -Ninth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
14 December, 2023 CHAIRPERSON, 
23 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report deals with Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers contained in 
their Forty -Fourth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Fertilizer Subsidy Policy and Pricing 
Matters including the need to continue Ure a Subsidy Scheme’ pertaining to the 
Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
1.2 The Forty-Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on  
09th August, 2023. The Report contained 21 Observations/Recommendations .  
Action Taken Replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Report have been received and are categorized as under:  
   
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
         Rec. Para No. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,12,13,14,15, 17,18,19,20 and 21   
    (Total=18) 
Chapter-II 
   
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire   
 to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 Rec. Para No. Nil                   (Total = 00) 
                              Chapter-III 
    
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee which require 
reiteration: 
  Rec. Para No. 11 and 16                    (Total=02) 
 
                                   Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of 
the Government are still awaited: 
  Rec. Para No. 10                            (Total = 01)  
                                                                                                      Chapter-V 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and Chapter -V of this Report may  be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
1.5      The Committee had noted in their original Report that IFFCO had started nano 
urea production at its Kalol unit with an annual capacity of 4.95 crore bottles, at Aonla 
and Phulpur units with an annual capacity of 6.0 crore bot tles each of 500 ml. and  is 
also establishing nano liquid urea plants at Bengaluru and Deogarh with an annual 
capacity of 6.0 crore bottles each and at Guwahati with an annual capacity of 4.95 crore 
bottles. Moreover, RCF’s nano urea plant is likely to be  commissioned at Trombay by 
March, 2024 and NFL’s nano urea facility at Nangal by July, 2024. The Committee had 
desired the Department to ensure the targeted production of 44 crore bottles of nano 
urea by 2024 -25 and hence take immediate measures to facili tate the transfer of nano 
fertilizers technology by IFFCO to other PSUs to enhance its production in the country.  
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) and Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited 
(RCF) have signed Non -Disclosure Agreement (NDA) & Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with IFFCO to transfer the technology of Nano Urea from 
IFFCO. RCF’s Nano urea facility at Trombay is likely to be c ommissioned by 
March, 2024 and NFL’s Nano urea facility at Nangal by July, 2024. Further, 
IFFCO was requested to transfer the technology of Nano urea to Brahmaputra 
Valley Fertilizers Company Limited (BVFCL) and Fertilizers & Chemicals 
Travancore Limited (FACT) for free of cost. However, IFFCO has conveyed that 
the license fee for grant of license & know -how and the production based 
Royalty Fee would be on chargeable basis for setting up Nano Urea (Liquid) 
fertilizer plant in India based on IFFCOs proprietary technology.” 
 

3 
 
1.7  The Committee had desired that the Department, in order to ensure 
targeted production of 44 crore bottles of nano urea by 2024 -25 and also for 
meeting its future requirements, should take immediate measures to facilitate the 
transfer of nano fertilizers technology of IFFCO to other PSUs to enhance its 
production in the country. From the Action Taken reply, the Committee note that 
the Nano Urea plants of RCF and NFL are likely to be commissioned by March 
and July 2024, respectively with the help of technology transferred from IFFCO. 
However, with regard to the transfer of technology of Nano urea to Brahmaputra 
Valley Fertilizers Company Limited (BVFCL) and  Fertilizers & Chemicals 
Travancore Limited (FACT) free of cost,  IFFCO has conveyed that the license fee 
for grant of license & know -how and the production based Royalty Fee would be 
on a chargeable basis for setting up a Nano Urea (Liquid) fertilizer pla nt in India 
based on IFFCOs proprietary technology.  
In this context, the Committee would desire that the Department should 
pursue the matter with IFFCO for transfer of nano urea technology to other PSUs 
as was done in the case of RCF and NFL to facilitate  the targeted production of 
Nano urea by 2024 -25.  The Committee would like to be informed of the progress 
made in this regard.  
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 Target Energy Norms (TEN) 
 
1.8         The Committee had noted that as per the New Urea Policy 2015 which has 
been aimed at maximizing indigenous urea production, promoting energy efficiency in 
urea production and rationalizing the subsidy burden on the Government, 25 gas -based 
urea units had been classified into three groups as per the Target Energy Nor ms (TEN), 
which may be continued upto 31 st March, 2025. Further, NUP -2015 had resulted in 
budgetary saving of ₹ 8,851 crore due to the reduction in energy consumption levels in 
urea plants from 1987-88 to 2021-22.  While observing that out of the 25 urea u nits only 
18 units had successfully implemented the TEN and remaining 7 units were at different 
stages of TEN implementation, the Committee had desired that the Department should 
extend support to these units through suitable incentives to help them in imp lementing 

4 
 
TEN, thus facilitating an increase in urea production and reduction in energy 
consumption. 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Reply furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
“There are 7 units viz., PPL -Goa, GSFC -Vadodara, NFCL-I, NFCL-II, NFL -
Vijaipur-I, KFCL -Kanpur and SFC -Kota which could not achieve the target 
energy norms under NUP -2015 till date. As decided by Cabinet Committee 
on Economic Affairs in its meeting dated 13 th November 2022, which has 
been notifi ed by Department of Fertilizers on 18 th November 2022, the 
energy norms of the 4 units namely PPL -Goa, GSFC-Vadodara, NFCL-I and 
NFCL-II units are to be examined by Department of Fertilizers in consultation 
with the Department of Expenditure. Further, for the KFCL-Kanpur and SFC-
Kota, which are coal -based units, revised Target Energy Norms was to be 
decided.  
Accordingly, the energy norms of the PPL -Goa, GSFC -Vadodara, KFCL -
Kanpur and SFC -Kota was reviewed in consultation with the DoE and 
followings have been decided: 
a. The Revised Energy norms of NUP -2015 (REN) of the PPL -Goa is 
extended with the penalty of 30% of the difference between REN and Target 
Energy Norms prescribed under NUP-2015 (TEN) till 31st December, 2023 or 
till PPL -Goa achieves the TEN, which ever is earlier, Thereafter, no further 
extension will be allowed. 
b. The Revised Energy Norms of NUP -2015 (REN) of the GSFC -
Baroda is extended till 31 st March 2024 with the penalty of 30% of the 
difference between REN and TEN or till the unit achieves the TEN, whichever 
is earlier.  
c. Expert Group constituted under NITI Aayog has been requested to 
examine the energy norms of SFC -Kota and KFCL -Kanpur and to 
recommend the revised target energy norms (TEN) for these units. In the 
meantime, the REN of the SFC -Kota and KFCL -Kanpur is extended with 
deduction of 30% of the difference between REN and TEN till 31 st March, 
2024 or the fixation of revised TEN of these units, whichever is earlier.   
Further, the energy norms of NFCL-I, II and NFL-Vijaipur-I with effect from 1st 
April 2023 is under examination in the Department of Fertilizers to submit a 
proposal to the Department of Expenditure.  
It is also pertinent to mention here that the Energy Norms prescribed under 
NUP-2015 are effective till 31 st March 2025. Thereafter, energy norms of the 
units are to be decided based on the recommendation of the expert group 
constituted under the NITI-Aayog.”  
 

5 
 
1.10 The Committee take note of the measures being taken by the Department to 
ensure that 7 urea plants achieve the target energy norms under NUP -2015.  
Energy norms have been reviewed in consultation with the Department of 
Expenditure in respect of PPL -Goa, GSFC-Vadodara, SFC-Kota and KFCL-Kanpur 
with the provision of penalty clause, etc. However, the Committee observe that 
energy norms in respect of NFCL - I, II and NFL-Vijaipur-I with effect from 1 st April 
2023 are still being examined by the Department of Fertilizers and, therefore, 
desire that the same should be reviewed expeditiously. The Committee would 
also like to be a pprised of the status with regard to the achievement of TEN by 
each of these units from time to time.  
(Recommendation No. 11)  
 
Reassessment of Dealers’/ Distribution Margin 
1.11      The Committee had noted that the dealers’/distribution margin in case o f the 
sale of Urea is ₹ 354 per Metric Tonne while the Retailers’ Margin is ₹ 50 per Metric 
Tonne.  Further, as the labour charges for loading and unloading of a 45 kg urea bag is 
even more than the retailers’ margin of ₹ 2/ - per bag,  the retailers/ dealers may indulge 
in malpractices in the sale of urea. The Committee, had, therefore, desired that 
immediate and expeditious corrective steps be taken by the Department through a 
revision in the dealer’s/distribution margin in the sale of urea through POS dev ices so 
as to enhance their financial viability and thus check the malpractices in the sale/ 
distribution of fertilizers.   A need was also expressed to review the fertilizer subsidy 
scheme in consultation with all the stake holders so that it meets the obj ectives of the 
scheme in an effective manner. 
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
“Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 28 th 
June, 2023 has inter -alia approved to continue the present system of subsidy 
on urea till 2024 -25. The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) chaired by 
Secretary (Expenditure) will review the scheme during 2024 -25 for 
continuation of the scheme beyond 2024-25.” 
1.13 The Committee find that the Action Taken reply of the Department is silent 
on their recommendation to examine/review the dealers’/ distribution margin in 
the sale of Urea through POS devices to make it financially viable and thus check 
the malpra ctices, if any, in the sale/distribution of fertilizers so as to fulfill the 

6 
 
objective of the fertilizer subsidy scheme. The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their earlier recommendation. 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 
Separate tariff codes for Urea used for Agricultural and non-agricultural purposes 
1.14      The Committee in their Report had noted that, at present, the agricultural urea 
which is available at ₹ 5 to ₹ 6 per kg as well as the technical grade urea, which is sold 
at around ₹ 70 -80 per kg, comes under the same tariff code that gives ample scope for 
the diversion of agricultural urea for use in industrial or non -agricultural purposes.   
The Committee had, therefore, desired the Department to take suitable corrective steps 
by creating a separate tariff code for urea used for non -agricultural purposes so as to 
prevent its diversion for industrial or non-agricultural purposes. 
1.15 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
“The Fertilizer is an essential commodity in terms of the Essential Commodities 
Act 1955 read with the Fertilizer Control Order, 1985 and Fertilizer (Movement 
Control) Order 1973, which provides adequate powers to arrest adulteration, 
smuggling, black marketing and hoarding of fertilizers. 
The State Governments are adequately empowered under FCO to check fo r the 
quality of the fertilizers and to stop diversion of fertilizers for non -agriculture 
purposes and to take punitive action against any individual / fertilizer company 
involving in black marketing / smuggling / adulteration of fertilizers which are 
violative of the provisions of Fertilizer Control Order, 1985 read with Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955. 
The Department of Fertilizers, alongwith the Agriculture Department officers of 
the respective State Governments conducts regular joint inspections of fert ilizer 
and related units. Apart from checking of samples, wherever other violations are 
observed, punitive action as per prevailing law(s) is initiated against the violators. 
To differentiate the Agricultural Grade Urea (AGU) from the Technical Grade 
Urea (TGU), presently, the AGU comes with Neem Oil Coating, which can be 
easily tested to find out the difference. 
During the periodical surprise checks at the Units where the Urea is in use i.e., 
the units involved in manufacture of Plywood, Resin etc., sample s are lifted and 
sent for lab testing, in terms of Schedule I [clause 2(h) & (g) of the Fertilizer 
Control Order, 1985.  
Negative results of the TGU for the above test confirms that the same is 
Technical Grade Urea (TGU).   Wherever the test is positive, pu nitive action is 
initiated by the States. 

7 
 
 To handle the issue still more efficiently at the State Governments level, active 
involvement of the related departments of the state governments i.e., 
Departments of Finance, Industry and Environment would be req uired who can 
check the evasion of taxation, adherence to the license conditions and 
maintenance of pollution control levels etc. The Department of Fertilizers is, 
accordingly, separately taking up the issue with the State Governments for 
effective fertilizer management.” 
 
1.16 The Committee in their Report had noted that both the Agricultural Grade 
Urea (AGU) as well as the Technical Grade Urea (TGU) come under the same tariff 
code. The Committee also took note of the submission of the Department that, 
creating a separate tariff code for Urea used for non -agricultural purposes will 
enable better monitoring, as the TGU is sold at around ₹ 70 -80 per kg, whereas 
the AGU being subsidized is available at ₹ 5 to ₹ 6 per kg, leaving a lot of scope 
for the diversion of Agricultural urea for industrial or non-agricultural purposes. If 
there are different codes, the quantity of import of urea and the quantity used by 
the industry can be better monitored. The Committee had, therefore, desired that 
the Department should take suitable corrective steps for creating a separate tariff 
code for the urea used for agricultural purposes so as to prevent its diversion for 
industrial or non-agricultural purposes.  
 The Department in their Action Taken reply has mentioned the measu res in 
place/being taken to stop the diversion of fertilizers for non -agriculture purposes, 
however, the reply is silent on the recommendation of the Committee to create  
separate tariff codes for AGU and TGU to monitor their use. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation.  
  

8 
 
CHAPTER – II 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
 BY THE GOVERNMENT 
  
  
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
2.1         The Committee note that for promoting use of fertilizers and to avoid the rise in 
crop prices, it is important that fertilizers are made available to the farmers at subsidized 
rates.  Thus, farm gate prices are fixed much below the average cost of produ ction of 
fertilizers and Government provides the difference between the two as subsidies to the 
fertilizer manufacturing companies. It is, however, a matter of concern that all major 
fertilizers consumed in the country like Urea, Di -ammonium Phosphate (DAP ), Muriate 
of Potash (MoP), Nitrogen Phosphorus Potash (NPK) and Single Super Phosphate 
(SSP) are covered under subsidy. The budget for fertilizer subsidy has been increasing 
constantly over the years. Moreover, the country is dependent on imports of ferti lizers to 
the extent that 30% of its urea requirement; 100 percent MOP, 60% DAP and 10% NPK 
is imported. According to World Bank data, the consumption of fertilizers in India is 209 
kg/hectare against the world average of 164 kg/hectare. 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee are of the view that the Government 
should aim to increase production of fertilizers in the country so as to reduce its import 
dependencies.  The Committee derive some solace to observe that production of 
fertilizers has increased,  though marginally, from 434 LMT in 2020 - 21 to 436 LMT in 
2021-22. The Committee while commending various policy initiatives taken up by 
the Department to increase indigenous production of urea, which have been 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs, desi re that momentum be continued 
unabated with added thrust and impetus by taking further initiatives for the 
growth of the domestic fertilizer industry.  
2.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“As regards to the Committee’s recommendation that the Department should 
take all remedial measures to contain the deficit of various types of fertilizers 
in the country specially Urea, as consumption of urea is the highest in the 
country, and make the country more self -reliant. In this regard, it is submitted 
that after setting up six new Ammonia -Urea units under the New Investment 
Policy (NIP) – 2012, the annual installed capacity of indigenous urea 
production has increased from 207.54 LMT durin g F.Y. 2014 -15 to 283.74 
LMT during F.Y 2022 -23. Further, incentivization of urea production beyond 
the Re-Assessed Capacity by the existing units under New Urea Policy -2015 

9 
 
(NUP-2015) has added about 20 -25 LMT additional urea production annually 
in the co untry. Due to above measures, India recorded highest ever urea 
production of 284.95 LMT during F.Y. 2022 -23 and urea production is 
expected to cross 300 LMT during   F.Y. 2023-24. Further, an exclusive policy 
has also been notified on 28 th April 2021 for the revival of Talcher unit of FCIL 
by setting up a new green field urea plant of 12.7 LMT per annum through coal 
gasification route. 
In addition to above, introduction of PM Programme for Restoration, 
Awareness Generation, Nourishment and Amelioration of Mo ther-Earth (PM-
PRANAM), Market Development Assistance (MDA) to promote Organic 
Fertilizers, Promotion of Sulphur Coated Urea with the name of ‘Urea Gold’ 
and production of Nano Urea is expected to reduce use of chemical fertilizers 
particularly urea”. 
(Recommendations No. 2) 
Promotion of fertilizers production 
2.3        The Committee note that there are 36 Urea manufacturing units in the country 
and under the New Investment Policy (NIP), 2012, 06 units of 12.77 LMT capacity have 
been set up. At present, the annual production capacity of urea is 283.74 LMT. Besides, 
one new unit at Talcher with installed capacity of 12.7 LMT is being set up and that will 
make indigenous capacity up to 296.44 LMT. The Department has submitted that with 
the availability of nan o liquid urea, there will not be any need to set up new plants or 
revive conventional urea plants. However, as reported to the Committee, the results of 
nano liquid urea are yet to be assessed and presently it cannot fulfill the requirements of 
fertilizers in the country. In this regard , the Committee are of the opinion that this is 
an area which requires Department's utmost attention and, therefore, correct 
assessment of the results of nano liquid urea should be expeditiously done so 
that nano urea meets the requirements of fertilizers in the country in a convincing 
manner in near future. 
2.4 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“ICAR conducted field studies during Kharif -2021 at 20 lo cations on Rice, 
Maize, Finger Millet, Pearl Millet and Ginger. They found that there was yield 
advantage of 3 -8% of various crops   and Urea saving of 25 -50% was 
observed due to Nano urea application. ICAR has been requested to continue 
with the study on effectiveness of Nano Urea at fields”. 
  

10 
 
(Recommendations No. 3) 
2.5         The Committee find to their satisfaction that IFFCO has started nano urea 
production at its Kalol unit in August, 2021 with annual capacity of 4.95 crore bottles of 
500 ml and at its Aonla and Phulpur units with annual capacity of 6.0 crore bottles of 
500 ml.   Furthermore, IFFCO is establishing 3 more plants of nano liquid urea. The 
Bengaluru and Deogarh plants have annual capacity of 6.0 crore bottles while the 
Guwahati plant has the annual capacity of 4.95 crore bottles. Besides, National 
Fertilizers Limited (NFL) and Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF) have 
signed Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) & Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with 
IFFCO to transfer the technology of Nano Urea from IFFCO.  RCF’s nano urea facility at 
Trombay is likely to commissioned by March, 2024 and NFL’s nano urea facility at 
Nangal by July, 2024.   While commending these steps, the Committee would like the 
Department to take all such measures ne cessary to ensure that   the expected target of 
producing 44 crore bottles of  nano urea by 2024 -25 is achieved within the stipulated 
time. The Committee would further desire that the Department should gear up its 
efforts to meet the progressive or the expo nential demand of nano liquid urea 
that may surge up in near future. Immediate measures are needed to be taken to 
facilitate transfer of nano fertilizers technology by IFFCO to other PSUs to 
enhance its production.  
2.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished  to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) and Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers 
Limited (RCF) have signed Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) & Memorandum 
of Understanding (MoU) with IFFCO to tr ansfer the technology of Nano Urea 
from IFFCO. RCF’s Nano urea facility at Trombay is likely to commissioned by 
March, 2024 and NFL’s Nano urea facility at Nangal by July, 2024. Further, 
IFFCO was requested to transfer the technology of Nano urea to Brahma putra 
Valley Fertilizers Company Limited (BVFCL) and Fertilizers & Chemicals 
Travancore Limited (FACT) for free of cost. However, IFFCO has conveyed 
that the license fee for grant of license & know -how and the production based 
Royalty Fee would be on charg eable basis for setting up Nano Urea (Liquid) 
fertilizer plant in India based on IFFCOs proprietary technology”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
  

11 
 
  (Recommendation No. 4) 
Adequate Budgetary allocation at BE stage. 
2.7         The Committee note that though the budgetary support for subsidy on 
indigenous urea at BE stage is lesser than the projected amount, sufficient budget is 
being provided at RE stage.  According to the Department, the BE figures are only initial 
projection and a conservative estimate. The requirement of additional funds is re -
assessed during the course of the year taking into account trends in the demand of 
fertilizers and also prices of cost of inputs for manufacturing of urea. The Committee are 
deeply concerned to note that  during 2022 -23, the Department was allocated ₹ 1.05 
lakh crore at BE stage under its fertilizer subsidy schemes while a higher amount of ₹ 
1.09 lakh crore was allocated in supplementary demands. The reason for the s ame is 
stated to be that the import prices of urea, gas and raw materials for DAP, NPK had 
increased in the middle of the year, however, quantities of import remained the same.   
The Committee do not find the reasons adduced    by the Department in this rega rd as 
very persuasive, particularly when it is already known that our country is dependent on 
imports to fulfill the need of fertilizers and raw materials .  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should introduce purchase policy reforms an d 
enter into long term contracts for import of various types of fertilizers  and raw 
materials so as to offset the effects of international price rise in the short/medium 
term. Besides, it is imperative that the Department should be more realistic in 
projecting their demands of funds at BE stage and get adequate funds to facilitate 
timely and optimum utilizations of funds.  
 
2.8 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
  
“It is true that the re was an unprecedented increase in the international prices 
of raw materials as well as finished P&K fertilizers in last 2 years. However, 
the prices in the fertilizer international market have shown a downward trend in 
last few months. However, to reduce  the adverse effects of such types of 
increase in fertilizer prices, the department has been encouraging MOUs and 
Long term agreements on supply of raw materials as well as finished fertilizers 
between Indian companies and companies in the resource rich co untries. The 
Government is also trying to diversify the suppliers of fertilizers as well to 
reduce the effects of volatile international fertilizer market such as  suppliers 
from various countries like Saudi Arabia, Russia, Morocco, Israel, Canada, 
Jordan, Germany etc. Further, the realistic demand of funds are projected by 
the Department at BE/RE stage.   However, the recommendation of the 
committee for more realistic projections of demands of funds at BE stage has 
been noted down for future compliance”. 

12 
 
(Recommendations No. 5) 
 Target Energy Norms (TEN) 
 
2.9         The Committee observe that New Urea Policy -2015 (NUP-2015) was notified 
by the Department with the objective to maximize indigenous urea production, promote 
energy efficiency in urea production and rationalize subsidy burden on the Government. 
Pursuant to that, 25 gas -based urea units have been classified into three groups and 
given Target Energy Norms which may be continued upto 31 st March, 2025. Further, an 
expert body under NITI Aayog would be  engaged to recommend the energy norms to 
be achieved from 01 st April, 2025. According to the Department, the lesser the energy 
level, the more energy efficient is the Unit.    The Committee are happy to note that the 
NUP-2015 has resulted in budgetary saving of ₹ 8,851 crore.  It is also encouraging that 
the energy consumption trend of the urea plants from 1987 -88 to 2021 -22 reflects 60 
percent reduction in energy consumption resulting in average energy consumption 
coming down to 5.8 Gcal/MT from 8.87 Gcal/MT.  
 
            So far, out of the 25 urea units, which were given TEN, 18 units have been able 
to successfully implement the TEN. The rest 7 units are at different stages of 
implementation of TEN.   The Committee would like the Department to ensure that 
TEN is implemented by the remaining 7 urea units also.   While appreciating the 
measures taken by the Department to make urea units more energy efficient, the 
Committee trust that Department would continue in its endeavour to devise more 
such policy initiat ives in the coming years and   extend support to the urea 
manufacturing units through suitable incentives to achieve TEN to enhance their 
energy efficiency level which will in turn augment production of urea and result in 
budgetary savings. 
2.10 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“There are 7 units viz., PPL -Goa, GSFC -Vadodara, NFCL -I, NFCL -II, NFL -
Vijaipur-I, KFCL -Kanpur and SFC -Kota which could not achieve the target 
energy norms under NUP-2015 till date. As decided by Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs in its meeting dated 13 th November 2022, which has been 
notified by Department of Fertilizers on 18 th November 2022, the energy 
norms of the 4 units namely PPL -Goa, GSFC-Vadodara, NFCL-I and NFCL-II 
units are to be examined by Department of Fertilizers in consultation with the 
Department of Expenditure. Further, for the KFCL -Kanpur and SFC -Kota, 
which are coal-based units, revised Target Energy Norms was to be decided.  

13 
 
Accordingly, the energy norms of the PPL -Goa, GSFC-Vadodara, KFCL-Kanpur 
and SFC -Kota was reviewed in consultation with the DoE and followings have 
been decided: 
d.  The Revised Energy norms of NUP -2015 (REN) of the PPL -Goa is 
extended with the penalty of 30% of the dif ference between REN and 
Target Energy Norms prescribed under NUP -2015 (TEN) till 31 st 
December, 2023 or till PPL -Goa achieves the TEN, whichever is earlier, 
Thereafter, no further extension will be allowed. 
e.  The Revised Energy Norms of NUP -2015 (REN) of th e GSFC-Baroda is 
extended till 31 st March 2024 with the penalty of 30% of the difference 
between REN and TEN or till the unit achieves the TEN, whichever is 
earlier.  
f.  Expert Group constituted under NITI Aayog has been requested to 
examine the energy norms  of SFC -Kota and KFCL -Kanpur and to 
recommend the revised target energy norms (TEN) for these units. In the 
meantime, the REN of the SFC -Kota and KFCL -Kanpur is extended with 
deduction of 30% of the difference between REN and TEN till 31 st March, 
2024 or the fixation of revised TEN of these units, whichever is earlier.   
 Further, the energy norms of NFCL-I, II and NFL-Vijaipur-I with effect from 
1st April 2023 is under examination in the Department of Fertilizers to 
submit a proposal to the Department of Expenditure.  
 It is also pertinent to mention here that the Energy Norms prescribed 
under NUP -2015 are effective till 31 st March 2025. Thereafter, energy 
norms of the units are to be decided based on the recommendation of the 
expert group constituted under the NITI-Aayog”.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendations No. 6) 
Commissioning of Talcher Fertilizers plant 
2.11         The Committee note that Department of Fertilizers   has decided to revive the 
erstwhile Talcher plant of FCIL on coal gasification technology on nomination basis 
through a consortium of Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers   (RCF), Gas Authority of 
India Limited (GAIL) and Coal India Limited (CIL),   considering the strategic advantage 
of the location of erstwhile Talcher Fertilizers  Plant (TFL) being in close proximity of the 
coal mines and developing an alternate feedstock for manufacture of urea. The 
Committee, however, are constrained to find that though the coal gasification contract 

14 
 
was awarded to M/s Wuhuana China based company in November, 2019, the project 
activities at TFL came to a virtual standstill due to Covid -19 pandemic leading to time 
and cost overruns. There were further delays in placement of orders of project items by 
M/s Wuhuan. Now, the plant is expected to be commissioned by September, 2024. In 
the light of the fact that TFL has the installed capacity of 12.7 LMT, which will 
immensely affe ct the total annual production capacity of urea in the country, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should take all concrete measures to 
ensure that the Talchar Fertilizers Plant is commissioned by September, 2024 to 
avoid further time and cost overrun.  
2.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“Government of India mandated revival of Talcher Plant of FCIL by forming 
Joint Venture Company of nominated PSUs i.e. RCF, GAIL, CIL and FCIL for 
setting up Ammonia -Urea plant of 12.7 LMTPA Capacity based on Coal 
Gasification Technology. The commissioning of TFL Plant is mainly delayed 
due to Covid-19 Pandemic and subsequent disruptions. However, all concrete 
measures are being taken by  Department of Fertilizers to ensure that the TFL 
is commissioned within stipulated time schedule. Regular and close monitoring 
of TFL Project is being done by the Department. During the review meetings, 
CMDs of all JV Partners, Chairman and MD of TFL  have been directed to 
have regular review meetings, maintain proper coordination among all stake 
holders, deploy requisite man power, expedite recruitment process, expedite 
award of all critical packages etc. Department of Fertilizers is also facilitating 
TFL to take up matters with concerned Ministries/Departments for getting early 
clearance/approvals”. 
(Recommendations No. 7) 
Third Party evaluation of Urea Subsidy Scheme 
2.13         The Committee learn that in the Third -Party Evaluation report on the Urea 
Subsidy Scheme (USS), it has been observed that USS has a great impact on 
agricultural sector in increasing crop yield and reducing the expenditure of farmers for 
cultivation. Due to this scheme, most farmers get their total requirement of good quality 
urea on time and there is improvement in energy efficiency of urea industries. Thus, the 
necessity was felt for continuation of the Scheme to help the urea industries, the 
farmers and the agriculture Sector.   Also, the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) 
had concurred for the continuation of USS till 2024 -25. The Department has stated to 
have prepared a Note for taking approval of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
(CCEA) in this regard. The Committee are happy to learn that the Government on 28 
June, 202 3 has decided to continue the current urea subsidy scheme for three years 

15 
 
ending March 2025, with an outlay of ₹3.68 lakh crore which would ensure the 
availability of urea to the farmers at the same price of ₹ 242/ - per 45 kg bag excluding 
taxes and neem coating charges and moderate input costs.   The Committee trust that 
Department would take all required measures to ensure that the urea subsidy 
scheme safeguards the interest of the urea industries, the farmers and the 
agriculture Sector. The scheme should focus on achieving its objectives which 
include, inter -alia, its timely and adequate availability at statutory controlled 
price, optimize urea production, rationalize subsidy outgo, bring energy 
efficiency and help the urea units to sustain their operation s in an effective 
manner. 
2.14 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
“Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 28 th 
June, 2023 has inter -alia approved to con tinue the present system of subsidy 
on urea till 2024 -25. The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) chaired by 
Secretary (Expenditure) will review the scheme during 2024 -25 for 
continuation of the scheme beyond 2024-25”. 
(Recommendations No. 8) 
2.15         It has further been recommended in the Third -Party Evaluation report on urea 
subsidy scheme that it will not be a suitable option to transfer the subsidy directly in the 
accounts of farmers since DBT to farmers is a complex system. Thus, it is suggested 
that under the scheme, subsidy amount to the manufacturing/importing companies 
should be given as per the current policy. At the same time, necessary modalities 
should be developed to reduce the delay in release of subsidy amount. As per the 
submission of th e Department, there is no unnecessary delay in releasing the subsidy 
amount to the urea manufacturing units except when delays are unavoidable due to 
delay in receipt of requisite data from the manufacturing unit, insufficient budget 
allocation, etc. In th is context, the Committee would emphasize that the Department 
should develop a robust mechanism to expeditiously resolve the issues pertaining to the 
settlement of subsidy amount of the urea manufacturing units and, if need be, to 
accurately project the ad ditional fund requirements at RE stage for timely settlement of 
payment of subsidy bills . The Committee, therefore, desire the Department to take 
suitable steps in this regard. 
2.16 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 

16 
 
 “So far as indigenous urea is concerned, settlement of subsidy/DBT claims of 
fertilizers companies are being done regularly subject to availability of funds. 
Against the projected amount of Rs. 1,43,962.00 Cr, an amount  of Rs. 
1,04,063.18 Cr. have been allocated under BE 2023 -24 for subsidy for 
indigenous urea. The BE figure is only initial projection at this stage. Cost of 
Natural Gas is a major cost element towards cost to producing urea and 
currently gas price is showing decreasing trend and if this trend sustains, it will 
ease expenditure on indigenous urea subsidy outgo during 2023-24. However, 
the requirement of additional funds will be re -assessed and demanded at the 
time of RE/Supplementary for 2023-24”. 
(Recommendations No. 9) 
2.17         Further, the Third -Party Evaluation report of urea subsidy scheme has 
observed that farmers have very little knowledge and understanding of the use of 
appropriate amount of urea in view of the soil conditions as well as the crop ping 
patterns and recommended for awareness programs to be conducted in villages to 
make the farmers aware about soil testing and balanced use of urea. The Department 
of Fertilizers has, however, contended that as per allocation of business rule, such 
awareness programs do not come under its domain. Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers’ Welfare and State Governments conduct such awareness programs. Also, the 
PM- Programme for Restoration, Awareness, Nourishment and Amelioration of Mother 
Earth (PM -PRANAM) is  likely to motivate the State Governments to conduct such 
awareness programs. The Committee, however, feel that the responsibility of making 
the farmers aware about soil testing and balanced use of urea should be shouldered by 
the Department of Fertilizers  also and both the Ministries and respective State 
Governments should act in proper coordination and unity of purpose to fulfill the 
objective. The Committee are happy to note that the Government has approved PM -
PRANAM scheme to incentivize States to promo te alternative fertilizers  and reduce the 
use of chemical fertilizers.  The  Committee hope that the Department of Fertilizers   
will extend their full support to the respective State Governments in successful 
implementation of the scheme and trust   that the  PM-PRANAM scheme,  subject  
to  its  effective implementation, will help achieve the intended objective of 
minimizing the subsidy burden on chemical fertilizers.  
2.18 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
“The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 
28th June, 2023 has approved the “PM Programme for Restoration, 
Awareness Generation, Nourishment, and Amelioration of Mother -Earth (PM-

17 
 
PRANAM)”. The initiative aims to support the mass movement started by 
States/UTs to save the health of Mother Earth by promoting sustainable and 
balanced use of fertilizers, adopting alternate fertilizers, promoting organic 
farming and implementing resource conservation technologies.  
Under the said scheme, it is proposed that 50% of the fertilizer subsidy saved 
by a State/UT in a particular financial year by way of reduction in consumption 
of chemical fertilizers (Urea, DAP, NPK, MOP) compared to previous 3 years’ 
average consumption, will be passed on to that State/UT as Grant. The PM -
PRANAM scheme is being implemented for a period of three years (FY 2023 -
24 to FY 2025-26)”. 
  (Recommendations No. 12) 
Market Development Assistance (MDA) for Organic and Bio-fertilizers  
2.19       The Committee are gravely concerned to observe that though the 
recommended dose for use of Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potash is 4:2:1, it has 
increased to 8:3:1 indicating more consumption of Nitrogen fertilizers and consequently 
affecting the soil health.   As such, ICAR suggests soil test based balanced and 
integrated nutrient management through conjunctive use of both inorganic and organic 
sources (Manure, bio-fertilizers, etc) of plant nutrients to maintain good soil health in t he 
country. The Committee feel that the Department need to pay special attention to what 
ICAR has suggested to maintain the soil health. After all soil is the basis of agriculture 
and protecting soil is the responsibility of each and every farmer to sustai n agriculture. 
The Department will have to take a lead and devise strategies in consultation with 
all the stakeholders to educate the farmers as to how to reduce the use of 
chemical fertilizers while maintaining agricultural production.  
2.20 In their Acti on Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
         “The Government has approved the Market Development Assistance (MDA) 
@ ₹1,500/MT to promote organic fertilizers produced at plants under 
GOBARdhan ini tiative covering different biogas/CBG support schemes/ 
programmes of stakeholders Ministries/Departments at the total outlay of 
₹1,451.84 Crore (FY 2023-24 to FY 2025-26), which includes a corpus of ₹360 
Crore for research gap funding, etc. It will promote  integrated nutrient 
management and reduce overuse of chemical fertilizers ensuring 
sustainability, soil health and better use efficiency of inputs. 
  
        The Government has also approved the PM Programme for Restoration, 
Awareness Generation, Nourishm ent and Amelioration of Mother Earth (PM -

18 
 
PRANAM) for three years (FY 2023 -24 to FY 2025 -26) to incentivize 
States/UTs to promote alternative fertilizers and balanced use of chemical 
fertilizers. This will incentivize the farmers to reduce the overall consumption of 
fertilizers for improving soil health and fertility and sustainable productivity. 
  
 The Government has been promoting use of bio -fertilizers and organic 
fertilizers and bio -pesticides under organic farming through the scheme of 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) and Mission Organic Value Chain 
Development in North East Region (MOVCDNER) since 2015-16. Under these 
schemes, farmers are primarily encouraged for organic cultivation using 
organic inputs and end to end support to farmers, i.e.,   from production to 
marketing of organic produce is ensured. Hands -on training to farmers about 
on-farm production of organic fertilizers and its use are integral part of these 
schemes. Farmers are provided subsidy of ₹31,000/ha/3 years under PKVY 
and ₹32,50 0/ha/3 years under MOVCDNER for on -farm organic inputs 
including bio -fertilizers and bio -pesticides as well as for procurement of off -
farm organic inputs. 
 Trainings are provided to farmers on use of bio/organic fertilizers by National 
Centre for Organic a nd Natural Farming (NCONF) and Indian Council for 
Agricultural Research (ICAR). ICAR has developed improved and efficient 
strains of bio -fertilizers specific to different crops and soil types with higher 
shelf life. 
 National Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility has been 
implemented to assist States in promoting Integrated Nutrient Management 
(INM) through judicious use of chemical fertilizers including secondary and 
micro nutrients in conjunction with organic manures & bio fertilizers for 
improving soil health and its productivity. 
         All these initiatives of the Government on promotion of organic fertilizers and 
alternative fertilizers address the imbalanced use of chemical fertilizers 
thereby restoring the standard NPK ratio”. 
(Recommendations No. 13) 
2.21       The Committee further note that the Department had sent a proposal for 
introduction of ₹ 1500 per MT Market Development Assistance on organic and bio -
fertilizers to the Department of Expenditure (DoE).   Also, compressed  
bio-gas p lants are being commissioned under the ' SATAT' (Sustainable Alternative 
Towards Affordable Transportation) scheme to promote Compressed Bio-Gas (CBG) as 
an alternative green transport fuel. The GOBARdhan scheme is also being pursued to 
augment income of fa rmers by converting biodegradable waste into CBG.   The 

19 
 
Committee are glad to learn that the Government has approved PM -PRANAM (PM 
Programme for Restoration, Awareness, Generation, Nourishment and Amelioration of 
Mother Earth) scheme, for grant of ₹ 1500 pe r MT Market Development Assistance on 
organic and bio -fertilizes, to incentivize the States to reduce the use of chemical 
fertilizers and promote alternative fertilizers, which will help maintain crop and soil 
health.  The Committee, therefore, impress upo n the Department to chalk out a 
programme for effective implementation of the scheme.  Moreover, the role of the 
Department as a facilitator to implement the scheme and in commissioning of the 
compressed bio-gas plants under SATAT and GOBARdhan schemes thr oughout 
the country requires to be strengthened to yield the required result.  
 2.22 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
“The Government has approved that the Market Development Assistance 
(MDA) @ ₹1,500/MT will be provided to promote organic fertilizers, produced 
at plants under umbrella Galvanizing Organic Bio -Agro Resources Dhan 
(GOBARdhan) initiative covering different Biogas/CBG support 
schemes/programmes of stakeholder Minis tries/ Departments such as 
Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable Transportation (SATAT) scheme 
of Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoP&NG), ‘Waste to Energy’ 
programme of Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE), Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Grameen) o f Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation (DDWS), 
etc. with total outlay of ₹1,451.84 Crore (FY 2023 -24 to FY 2025 -26), which 
includes a corpus of ₹360 Crore for research gap funding, etc. 
  
The Government has also approved the PM Programme for Restorati on, 
Awareness Generation, Nourishment and Amelioration of Mother Earth (PM -
PRANAM) for three years (FY 2023 -24 to FY 2025 -26) to incentivize 
States/UTs to promote alternative fertilizers and balanced use of chemical 
fertilizers. This will incentivize the farmers to reduce the overall consumption of 
fertilizers for improving soil health and fertility and sustainable productivity. 
  
The Government has further approved that a Steering Committee chaired by 
Secretary (Fertilizers) and comprising of atleast Joint  Secretary level Officers 
from the Department of Expenditure, NITI Aayog, Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare, Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation, Ministry of New 
& Renewable Energy, Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Ministry of 
Petroleum & Natural Gas and Department of Animal Husbandry & Dairying will 
oversee operational aspects and detailed guidelines for MDA including 
packaging size, retail price, manner of disbursement of MDA, subject to the 
approval of Hon’ble Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers on the 
recommendations of the Steering Committee. 
  

20 
 
The Steering Committee in its first meeting held on 1 st August, 2023 had 
detailed deliberations on implementation of Market Development Assistance to 
promote organic fertilizers and implementa tion of PM -PRANAM to incentivize 
States/UTs to promote alternative fertilizers and balanced use of chemical 
fertilizers ensuring reduction in overall consumption of fertilizers resulting in 
improvement of soil health and fertility and sustainable productivity”. 
  
  
(Recommendations No. 14) 
 Streamlining Procurement process of gas for production of Urea. 
2.23       The Committee observe that more than 80% of the cost of production of Urea 
in the country is attributed to the cost of energy (i.e. natural gas).   Out of the total gas 
requirement, only 10% is domestic and the remaining 90% is imported Regasified 
Liquefied Natural Gas (RLNG). The Government by means of policy provisions such as 
NUP-15, etc. is facilitating the units to become more efficient in ener gy consumption. 
The Government has also been monitoring the delivered price of natural gas and 
advising/facilitating the units in procuring the natural gas from cheaper sources so that 
the cost of production can be brought down resulting in reduction in the subsidy outgo. 
The Committee are concerned to note that the average cost of gas purchased 
through Empowered Pool Management Committee (EPMC) in short term tender was 52 
dollars per mmbtu whereas its rate in the long term agreement   is about 20 dollars pe r 
mmbtu, which shows a huge volatility in the gas prices.   The EPMC rate tenders were 
being invited on quarterly basis for each unit separately.   The Committee derive some 
satisfaction to note that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has already book ed 
long term tenders and gas shall be available at cheap rates from 2027 -28 onwards. 
However, the Government is still trying to procure gas on medium term contracts for 
three year period from 2024 to 2027.   As the country is too dependent on imported 
RLNG and the volatility in the international market influences the purchase price 
of gas, the Committee recommend that the Government should bring policy 
reforms in EPMC gas procurement mechanism and chalk out short term, medium 
term and long term plans after p ooling the gas requirement of all the urea units 
through monthly tender, guaranteed off take, etc. so as to purchase spot gas at 
cheaper rates and to provide gas to all the urea units at uniform price. This will 
not only offset the effects of international  price escalation in procurement of 
RLNG by the country but also result in reduction of subsidy outgo.  
 2.24 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“Policy reforms in EPMC gas procurement mechanism has been made 
applicable since January-2023. Reforms include as under: 

21 
 
a. Monthly bidding for the aggregated additional requirement of the gas for 
all the urea manufacturing units unlike the erstwhile system of quarterly and 
unit wise bidding.  
b. Matching to L1 price. 
c. Take off guarantee for the 40% of the bid quantity unlike the e rstwhile 
system of reasonable endeavor basis.  
Above measures have resulted in substantial reduction in the price of natural 
gas procured through the EPMC route. 
In addition to the above, due to regular follow ups and instructions from the 
Department of Fe rtilizer the urea units have entered into various long term, 
mid-term and short term gas arrangement which includes 4 MMSCMD of 
HPHT natural gas. Further, M/s GAIL had imposed cut of 10% in the supply of 
LT RLNG to the urea units during 2021 -22 and some pe riod of 2022 -23, 
supply of which has been restored due to which dependency on procurement 
of gas through EPMC has reduced to around 4 MMSCMD from the level of 13-
14 MMSCMD.  
In view of the above it may be stated that the procurement process of gas for 
the production of Urea has been already streamlined. Further, Department of 
Fertilizers is actively monitoring the supply of gas to the natural gas”.  
(Recommendations No. 15) 
Measures to stop irregularities in the sale of fertilizers   
2.25       The Committe e observe that there are reported cases of diversion, black 
marketing, hoarding and supply of sub-standard quality of fertilizers  across the country. 
The reason being, besides agriculture, urea is also used in many other industries, like 
UF resin/glue, pl ywood, resin, crockery, moulding powder, cattle feed, dairy and 
industrial mining explosives, etc. The Committee derive some satisfaction from the fact 
that fertilizers have been declared as an essential commodity under the Essential 
Commodities Act 1955 ( EC Act) and are notified under Fertilizers Control Order, 1985.   
State   Governments are empowered to take action against persons involved in black -
marketing and hoarding as per provisions of EC Act.  In this connection, the Department 
also conducts weekly  raids along with the inspectors of the Central Fertilizers   Quality 
Testing Institute to stop diversion of fertilizers   for uses other than agriculture and take 
action as per EC Act to streamline the system of sale of fertilizers   in the country. 
Considering these steps to be in right direction,  the Committee trust that many more 
initiatives will be devised in consultation with all the stakeholders/State 
Governments to check malpractices in the supply of fertilizers. The Department 

22 
 
should also develop a ce ntral monitoring mechanism to conduct random checks 
to prevent diversion of fertilizers meant for use by farmers for purposes other 
than agriculture in order to ensure uninterrupted supply of fertilizers at statutorily 
fixed prices to the farmers. 
 2.26 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
“All the Fertilizer Companies registered under Urea subsidy scheme and NBS 
schemes produce Urea and P & K fertilizers like DAP, MOP, SSP & approved 
NPK Grades conforming to the standards and specifications as laid down in 
the Fertilizer Control Order 1985.  
The Fertilizer is an essential commodity in terms of the Essential Commodities 
Act 1955 read with the Fertilizer Control Order 1985 and Fertilizer  (Movement 
Control) Order 1973, which provides adequate protection to arrest 
adulteration, smuggling, black marketing and hoarding of fertilizers by the 
State Governments. 
The State Governments are adequately empowered under FCO to check for 
the quality of  the fertilizers and to stop diversion of fertilizers for non -
agriculture purposes and to take punitive action against any individual / 
fertilizer company involving in black marketing / smuggling / adulteration of 
fertilizers which are violative of the pro visions of Fertilizer Control Order 1985 
read with Essential Commodities Act 1955. 
The Department of Fertilizers, along with the Agriculture Department officers 
of the respective State Governments conducts regular joint inspections of 
fertilizer and relate d units. Apart from checking of samples, wherever other 
violations are observed, punitive action as per prevailing law(s) is initiated 
against the violators by the State Governments”. 
(Recommendations No. 17) 
National Level advisory/guidelines to ensure pr oper availability and distribution 
of fertilizers  
2.27       The Committee note that Department of Fertilizers is responsible for   supply of 
fertilizers  upto the States and supply of fertilizers   within the State is the responsibility 
of the State Government.   However, it is a matter of concern that there are repor ts of a 
mismatch between the supply and availability of fertilizers   in the States which clearly 
speaks of the unpreparedness on the part of the States in supply of fertilizers  according 
to demand. As submitted, the Department has been giving regular dire ctions to State 

23 
 
Governments besides conducting weekly video conference with the State Governments 
to ensure adequate and on time availability of fertilizers in the States. Taking note of 
measures taken by the Department , the Committee exhort the Department  to 
continue similar efforts and try to make iFMS system, an online web based 
monitoring system for movement of all major subsidized fertilizers, more robust 
so that flow/supply chain of fertilizers   can be tracked without failure at each 
stage and leakage /deficiency at any point could be identified and timely 
corrective action is taken through coordinated efforts of Central Government/ 
State Governments and concerned agencies.   
 2.28 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of  
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
  
“The suggestion of the committee regarding  regular directions to State 
Government besides conducting weekly video conference with the State 
Governments to ensure adequate and on time availability of fertilizers in the  
States have been noted”. 
  
(Recommendations No. 18) 
Issue of Soil Health Card 
2.29       The Committee note that the Government has launched a National Mission on 
Soil Health Card to evaluate fertility of soils/arable land across the country and provide 
soil test-based fertilizers recommendation to farmers in the country. Under the National 
Mission on Soil Health Card, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has 
developed location specific soil test -based fertilizers prescriptions equations for various 
crops to provide soil test -based fertilizers recommendations to the farmers in the 
country. It has also prepared a soil testing manual including method of sampling and 
contributed towards development of Soil Health Card portal.   Digital soil test k its have 
been developed for estimating all the 12 parameters enlisted in soil health card. 
Besides, ICAR imparts training and organizes Front Line Demonstrations (FLDs) to 
educate farmers on soil test based balanced and integrated nutrient management.  
In this regard, the Department shared the apprehension of the Committee on the 
effectiveness of about 22 crore soil health cards issued so far to the farmers as the 
KVKs, Agricultural Universities or the State Governments are not taking optimum 
measures to fa cilitate soil testing at the district and block levels. Even though 
awareness generation falls under the jurisdiction of the Agriculture Department and the 
State extension machinery, the Department has stated to be assisting and coordinating 
in this regard  through its companies, PSUs, KVKs and PM Kisan Samridhi Kendras. In 

24 
 
this context , the Committee feel that concerted efforts from the Department of 
Fertilizers, Agriculture Department and State Government are warranted so that 
optimum required measures are  taken to facilitate soil testing to evaluate fertility 
of soils/arable land across the country so as to provide soil test -based fertilizers 
recommendations to farmers. There is a need to develop a proper monitoring 
mechanism at the Centre to ensure that t he concerned agencies regularly visit 
the villages as per the prescribed schedule for testing of soil and educate the 
farmers about appropriate usage of fertilizers. The Department should take 
appropriate measures accordingly. 
 2.30 In their Action Taken N ote furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
  
The Soil Health & Fertility scheme is being implemented to promote Integrated 
Nutrient Management through judicious use of chemical fertilizers including 
secondary and micronutrients in conjunction with organic manures & bio -
fertilizers for improving soil health and its productivity. Under this scheme, all 
State Governments/UTs are assisted to evaluate the fertility in farm holdings 
across the country and test soil sampl es to issue the soil health cards to 
farmers. Soil Samples is processed as per standard procedures and analyzed 
for various parameters viz, pH, electrical conductivity (EC), Organic Carbon, 
available N, P, K, S and micro nutrients (Zn, Cu, Fe, Mn & B). Soi l health 
cards provide information to farmers on nutrient status of their soil along with 
recommendations on appropriate dosage of nutrients to be applied for 
improving soil health and its fertility. Under this scheme: 
(a)      The scheme is being monitore d through frequent visits of department 
officers dealing with the subject, video conferences & correspondence with 
State Governments/UTs. Issue of soil health cards to farmers, demonstrations 
on balanced use of fertilizers based on soil health card recomme ndations and 
training to the farmers on proper and integrated use fertilizers are integral part 
of the scheme. 
(b)      In Cycle-I (2015 to 2017), 10.74 crore grid based soil health cards have 
been distributed to farmers. In Cycle -II (2017 to 2019), 12.19 crore grid based 
soil health cards have been distributed to farmers. In Model Village 
Programme (2019-20), 23.71  lakh land holding based soil health cards have 
been distributed to farmers across the country. During the year  2020-21, 
11.52 lakh land holdings based Soil Health Cards have also been distributed. 

25 
 
(c)       Since 2015, around 6.45 lakh demonstrations,  93781 lakh farmer’s 
trainings and 7425 farmers melas have been organized/conducted to educate 
farmers on proper and integrated use of fertilizers under the programme. 
             The Department is closely monitoring the implementation of the Soil 
Health Card Scheme. The dedicated SHC portal and a mobile app is in place.   
Soil Health Card is generated online through mobile application on SHC portal. 
Farmers can download the card from portal. SMS link is also  sent to mobile of 
Farmers for downloading of SHC Card. Soil Health Card gives 
recommendation of fertilizer to be used and suitable crop to be grown on the 
farmers’ fields. The  Scheme is implemente d through State Governments. 
Farmers are educated from time to time by SRLM SHGs, like Krishi Sakhi, 
State officials etc about appropriate usage of fertilizers based on Soil Health 
Card. So far as monitoring mechanism is concerned, progress of the scheme 
is reviewed through regular meeting and Video Conferences. Farmers mela, 
training and demonstration to farmers are also arranged through state govts 
from time to time for farmers awareness. 
 
(Recommendations No. 19) 
Guidelines for evaluation of reasonableness of MRP of P&K fertilizers  
2.31       The Committee are informed that as per reasonableness guidelines dated 
15.11.2019 issued by the Department in respect of P&K fertilizers under NBS scheme, 
any profit earned above 12% on cost of sales is treated as ‘unreasonable profit’ and the 
same is recovered from the company.   The cost data analysis of cost incurred by P&K 
fertilizers companies in manufacturing/importing products is done by FICC (attached 
office of the Depa rtment). Further, under NBS policy, Government has constituted an 
Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) which recommends NBS rates for various nutrients 
i.e. N, P, K & S on the basis of ‘Benchmark International Prices’ of major consumed 
fertilizers  i.e. Urea, DAP, MOP & Sulphur. IMC also considers other relevant factors like 
requirement of nutrients in the country, balanced use of fertilizers , subsidy burden, 
MRP of fertilizers   etc. while recommending the subsidy rates for different nutrients.   
The latest NB S rates were applicable till 31.03.2023 only. The Committee are 
concerned to note that the reasonableness guidelines regarding fixing of prices of 
fertilizers are presently under abeyance. The Committee urge the Department to 
ensure that NBS rates are revi sed regularly on annual/ bi -annual basis  in view of 
the volatility of prices of N, P, K & S nutrients in the international market to 
ensure availability of DAP, NPK fertilizers   to the farmers at affordable prices 
under the NBS subsidy Policy in future al so.  The matter should receive greater 
priority in the interest of the farmers and the country at large. 

26 
 
 2.32 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“It is informed that the department has taken cognizance of the volatility of 
prices of N, P, K & S nutrients in the international market and has shifted from 
annual fixation of NBS rates to bi-annual fixation of NBS rates since last 2021-
22. This has helped the Government to provide timely relief to farmers from 
the adverse of effects of increased international prices of raw materials as well 
as finished P&K fertilizers”. 
(Recommendations No. 20) 
Measures to secure cheaper purchases of fertilizers  and raw materials 
2.33       It has been br ought to the notice of the Committee that to secure cheaper 
purchases of P&K fertilizers and raw materials, the Department has facilitated long term 
MoUs between the Indian fertilizers companies and fertilizers companies of other 
countries based on formula -based pricing. Under the initiative, Joint venture for mining, 
manufacturing fertilizers intermediates and finished fertilizers have also been initiated/ 
extended. Their progress is reviewed from time to time at various levels. The Committee 
are, however, concerned to note that prices of P&K fertilizers, which are decontrolled, 
have increased in the past due to geo -political and other reasons, which necessitated 
an increase in NBS subsidy rates to make them available to the farmers at affordable 
prices. The Committee would like the Department to encourage the fertilizers 
companies to establish joint venture production facilities, with long term buy 
back arrangements and diversify sources of purchase of fertilizers 
/intermediates/raw materials from various resource rich countries. The Committee 
trust that the Department will take suitable steps accordingly and apprise the 
Committee of the same. 
 2.34 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
  
      “ The Government of India has been encouraging Indian companies to 
establish Joint Ventures abroad in countries which are rich in fertilizer 
resources for production facilities with buy back arrangements and to enter 
into long term agreement for sup ply of fertilizers and fertilizer inputs to India. 
Further the department is also working with the goal of having access to 
acquisition of fertilizer raw materials abroad. During the said year a number of 
initiatives were taken for signing of MOUs with res ource rich nations for 
secured supply of finished fertilizers, raw materials and intermediates.  The 
department has also encouraged the diversifying of the MOUs, Long term 

27 
 
agreements on supply of raw materials as well as finished fertilizers between 
Indian companies and foreign suppliers. Such agreements have been done by 
Indian companies with suppliers from various countries like Saudi Arabia, 
Russia, Morocco, Israel, Canada, Jordan, Germany etc”.  
 
 (Recommendations No. 21) 
Freight Subsidy on Single Super Phosphate (SSP) 
2.35       The Committee are concerned to note that   India is 100% dependent on 
imports in Potassic sector and to the extent of 90% in Phosphatic sector, in the form of 
either finished products or raw materials. As submitted, as part of new  initiatives in P&K 
sector, apart from coming up with new P&K plants, Potash Derived from Molasses 
(PDM), which is 100% indigenously manufactured and can substitute potash to a certain 
extent, have been included under NBS scheme. Currently, the country imp orts 60 per 
cent of its potash requirement and the promotion of PDM may reduce its import.   To 
increase indigenous production of P&K fertilizers, the Government included Single 
Super Phosphate (SSP) under freight subsidy on pilot basis for Rabi and Kharif seasons 
2022-23.  As the raw material for imported SSP is available in Rajasthan and Madhya 
Pradesh, it is now 100 per cent indigenously produced.  The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the outcome of pilot project for including SSP under freight 
subsidy for Rabi and Kharif seasons 2022 -23 and be assured that the Department 
will take a favorable decision in this regard and continue to include SSP under 
freight subsidy which will help promote its indigenous production and hence, 
reduce import of P&K fertilizers. 
 2.36 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
“Department has introduced the freight subsidy for SSP at first for Kharif 2022 
(w.e.f 1.4.2022 to 30.9.2022) on pilot basis and ha s continued it in the Rabi 
2022-23 Season (from 1.10.2023 to 31.3.2023) and again in the Kharif 2023 
(w.e.f 1.4.2023 to 30.9.2023). The Department acknowledges the promotion of 
SSP as it is indigenously manufactured and has accordingly acted in this 
direction by continuing the freight Subsidy on SSP for agriculture season” 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER – III 
  
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
(Recommendations No. 11) 
Reassessment of Dealers’/ Distribution Margin 
4.1.       The Committee are informed that the dealers’/distribution margin in case of sale 
of Urea is Rs 354 per Metric Tonne (i.e. Rs. 0.354 per kg) while the Retailers’ Margin is 
Rs. 50 per Metric Tonne (i.e. Rs. 0.05 per kg). The Department has clarified that the 
incentive of Rs. 50/MT was given to retailers for acknowledging the receipt of fertilizers 
in the mobile- Fertilizers Management System (m-FMS). Now since the manual entry in 
m-FMS is not necessary and the urea manufacturers/companies are responsible for 
installing POS devices, their maintenance, etc; they recover the cost of purchase of 
POS devices, maintenance, etc. from the incentive of Rs. 50/MT notified for the 
retailers. However, in view of the fact that the labour charges for loading and unloading 
of a 45 kg Urea bag is even more than the retailers’ margin of Rs 2 per bag,   the 
retailers’/ dealers’ may indulge in malpractices in sale of urea. The matter, therefore, 
requires immediate attention of the Department and expeditious corrective steps are 
called for.  The Department has, however, informed that at present there is no proposal 
for increasing the dealers’/retailers’ margin. According to them, in case the rates are 
revised, it will add up to the subsidy burden of the Ministry.  The Committee, however, 
recommend a revision in the dealer’s/distribution margin in sale of urea through 
POS devices as it would enhance their financial viability and thus check the 
malpractices in sale/ distribution of fertilizers.   The Committee are of the strong 
opinion that the fertilizer subsidy scheme needs to be reviewed in consultation 
with all the stake holders including the State Governments, PSUs, etc. to remove 
deficiencies, if any, in the scheme, so that it meets the objectives of the scheme 
in an effective manner. 
4.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
“Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 28 th 
June, 2023 has inter -alia approved to continu e the present system of subsidy 
on urea till 2024 -25. The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) chaired by 
Secretary (Expenditure) will review the scheme during 2024 -25 for 
continuation of the scheme beyond 2024-25”. 

30 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
Separate tariff codes for Urea used for Agricultural and non -agricultural 
purposes. 
4.3       The Committee find it significant to note that at present, agricultural urea as well 
as technical grade urea come under the same tariff code.   While the technical grade 
urea is sold at around ₹ 70 -80 per kg, the agricultural grade urea being subsidized, is 
available at ₹ 5 to ₹ 6 per kg.   Therefore, there is an ample scope left for diversion of 
agricultural urea for industrial or non -agricultural purposes. The Department has 
admitted that creating a separate tariff code for urea used for non -agricultural purposes 
will enable better monitoring. If there are different codes, then the quantity of  import of 
urea and the quantity used by the industry can be better monitored.  In view of the 
above, the Committee desires the Department to take suitable corrective steps on 
an urgent basis to prevent further diversion of agricultural urea for industrial  or 
non-agricultural purposes.  
4.4 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 “The Fertilizer is an essential commodity in terms of the Essential 
Commodities Act 1955 read with the Fertili zer Control Order 1985 and 
Fertilizer (Movement Control) Order 1973, which provides adequate powers to 
arrest adulteration, smuggling, black marketing and hoarding of fertilizers. 
The State Governments are adequately empowered under FCO to check for 
the qu ality of the fertilizers and to stop diversion of fertilizers for non -
agriculture purposes and to take punitive action against any individual / 
fertilizer company involving in black marketing / smuggling / adulteration of 
fertilizers which are violative of  the provisions of Fertilizer Control Order 1985 
read with Essential Commodities Act 1955. 
The Department of Fertilizers, alongwith the Agriculture Department officers of 
the respective State Governments conducts regular joint inspections of 
fertilizer and  related units. Apart from checking of samples, wherever other 
violations are observed, punitive action as per prevailing law(s) is initiated 
against the violators. 

31 
 
To differentiate the Agricultural Grade Urea (AGU) from the Technical Grade 
Urea (TGU), presently, the AGU comes with Neem Oil Coating, which can be 
easily tested to find out the difference. 
During the periodical surprise checks at the Units where the Urea is in use i.e., 
the units involved in manufacture of Plywood, Resin etc., samples are lift ed 
and sent for lab testing, in terms of Schedule I [clause 2(h) & (g) of the 
Fertilizer Control Order 1985.  
Negative results of the TGU for the above test confirms that the same is 
Technical Grade Urea (TGU).   Wherever the test is positive, punitive action is 
initiated by the States. 
  
To handle the issue still more efficiently at the State Governments level, active 
involvement of the related departments of the state governments i.e., 
Departments of Finance, Industry and Environment would be required who 
can check the evasion of taxation, adherence to the license conditions and 
maintenance of pollution control levels etc. The Department of Fertilizers is, 
accordingly, separately taking up the issue with the State Governments for 
effective fertilizer management”. 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
(Recommendations No. 10) 
Introduction of smaller size bags of urea 
5.1       The Committee note that introduction of Neem Coated Urea (NCU) has 
increased the Nitrogen use efficiency and, therefore, in order to reduce the consumption 
of urea and promote balanced use of fertilizers, the Department has introduced 45 kg 
bag of Urea in place of 50 Kg bag in the year 2017 at proportionate price. While 
commending such a policy initiative as being in the right direction,  the Committee 
would like the Department to introduce more efficient varieties of Urea  and other 
fertilizers and they are made available to the farmers in bags of even more 
smaller sizes/quantity (i.e. 20kg, 35kg etc.) at proportionate prices to facilitate all 
farmers including marginal farmers to purchase   urea and other fertilizers as per  
their requirement for a more balanced and appropriate use throughout the 
country.   
 
5.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “The matter is under examination of the Department”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                 DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
14 December,  2023                                               Chairperson, 
23 Agrahayana 1945 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on     
                                       Chemicals and Fertilizers. 

33 
 
APPENDIX-II  
ANALYSIS OF ACTION T AKEN BY THE GOVERNME NT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONT AINED IN THE FORTY -FOURTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SAB HA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTIL IZERS (2023 -24) ON F ERTILIZER SUBSIDY POL ICY 
AND PRICING MATTERS INCLUDING THE NEED T O CONTINUE UREA 
SUBSIDY SCHEME’ OF T HE MINISTRY OF CHEMI CALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS).  
 
 
 
 
 Total No. of Recommendations 21 
I Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
(Recommendation Nos. 11,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,12,13,14,15, 17,18,19,20 
and 21)  
  
 18 
Percentage of Total 86%   
II Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not like to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
NIL 
  
00 
Percentage of Total      0% 
III Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies given 
by the Government  have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:  
(Recommendation No.  11 and 16)   
 
02 
Percentage of Total 9%    
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  the final replies 
of the Government are still awaited:  
(Recommendation No.  10 
 
1 
Percentage of Total  5%    