1 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
                                          MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
                                  (DEPARTMENT OF  CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in the ir Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth  
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2021-22’ of the  Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of  Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
           
    TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
DECEMBER, 2021 /AGRAHAYANA, 1943 (SAKA) 
 
 


2 
 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations of the Commi ttee 
contained in their Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Report) on “Demands for Grants 2021-22” 
of the  Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of  Chemicals and Petrochemicals)] 
  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.12.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02.12.2021 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2021 /AGRAHAYANA, 1943 (SAKA) 
  


3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) (iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22) (v) 
INTRODUCTION (vi) 
Chapter I Report  1 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
21 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
34 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
36 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
41 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2020-21) held on 16 November, 2021. 
45 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (17 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers on  
“Demands for Grants 2021- 22” pertaining to the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of  Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals). 
47 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Deepak Baij 
4 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
5 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
6 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
7 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8 Shri Pakauri Lal 
9 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
11 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
12 Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
13 Shri Atul Kumar Singh alias Atul Rai 
14 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15 Shri M. Selvaraj 
16 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
17 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
18 Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
19 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
20 Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari# 
21 Vacant* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26 Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27 
28 
Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
Shri Arun Singh$ 
29 Shri A.D. Singh 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora - OSD (Officer on Special Duty) 
2. Shri Nabin Kumar Jha - Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary 
 
________________________________________________________________________________ 
$Re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.12.2020. 
#Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 28.12.2020 vice Shri Nandigam Suresh. 
*Vacant vice Shri Er. Bishweswar Tudu nominated MoS on 07.07.2021. 

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri Deepak Baij 
5. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
6. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
7. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
8. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
10. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
11. Shri Vasava Prabhubhai Nagarbhai  
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt Aparupa Poddar (Afrin Ali) 
14. Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
15. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
16. Shri M. Selvaraj 
17. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
18. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
19. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
21. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
24. Dr. Anil Jain 
25. Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27. Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Arun Singh 
29. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
30. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
31. 
 
Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Nabin Kumar Jha - Director  
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary 
 
  

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2021-22 ) 
having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their beh alf this Twenty Sixth 
Report on Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendation s of the 
Committee contained in their Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants 2021- 22’, pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya  Sabha on 
17th March, 2021. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) furnished their replies on 29th June, 2021 indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report. The Committee at their sitting held on 16th 
November, 2021 considered and adopted the Draft Report. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sa bha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
4. For the facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/  
Observations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body o f  
the Report. 
 
 
 
   New Delhi;                                    Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
 16 November, 2021                                          Chairperson, 
 25 Kartika, 1943 (Saka)                                                Standing Committ ee on 
                                   Chemicals and Fertilizers 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
1.1 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on 'Demands for Grants 2021-22’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
1.2 The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya  Sabha on 
17.03.2021.  It contained 14 Observations / Recommendations and the Action Taken  
Replies of Government in respect of all the recommendations were  received on 29 th June 
2021.  The replies furnished by the Department have been categorized as follows:- 
 (i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Gove rnment :- 
 Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 10 and 11.                                                 (Total =07)                    
 These are included in Chapter II of the Report.        Percentage: 50.0% 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursu e 
in view of the Government’s reply :- 
SI. Nos. 13.                            (Total =01)     
These are included in Chapter-III of the Report                       Percentage: 7.2% 
 (iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Governmen t   
have not been accepted by the Committee:- 
 Sl. Nos . 3, 8 and 14                           (Total = 03 )  
         These are included in Chapter IV of the Report.                     Percentage: 21.4% 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 
  SI. Nos. 7, 9 and 12.                        (Total= 03 )  
 These are included in Chapter V of the Report.                      Percentage: 21 .4% 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observation s / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and the final replies to recommendations 
categorized in Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished expeditiously and not later than 
three months from the date of presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments. 
Recommendation No. 1 
Budgetary allocation for the Department 
1.5 In regard to the Budgetary allocation for the Department, the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
“The committee note that the Ministry of Finance was able to allocate only  
Rs.233.14 crore at BE stage for 2021-22 to the Department of chemicals a nd 
Petrochemicals against the requirement of Rs.276.60 crore by the Department. 
According to the Department, the pace of Developmental activities for New Sche me 
of Petrochemicals (NSP) & Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering and 
Technology (CIPET) is likely to be affected to some extent due to  curtailment of BE 
to the tune of Rs.43 crore for the year 2021-22. During 2020-21, Rs.21 8.34 was 
allocated at BE stage and the same was increased to Rs.295.70 crore b ut the actual 
expenditure incurred by the Department was only Rs.219.87 crore on 29/01/20 19. 
The enhancement of RE to Rs.295.70 crore during 2020-21 was main ly due to 
Rs.73.70 crore for interest free loan to Hindustan Fluorocarbons Ltd. (HFL) for 
paying liabilities towards VRS/VSS on account of closure of HFL as approved by 
Cabinet and Rs.50.00 crore as Grant- in- Aid General to Central Institute of 
Petrochemicals Engineering Technology (CIPET) for retaining its sustainability in the 
COVID-19 Pandemic. The pace of utilization of funds under the Heads  for New 
Scheme of Petrochemicals and CIPET were not up to the mark during 2020 -21. 
COVID-19 pandemic has been shown as reason for slow utilization of fun ds under 
these heads during the year. The Committee also note that the Ministry of  Finance 
allocates funds at BE stage to the Department based on the expe nditure trend in the 
last few years and according to the Medium Term Expenditure Frame work. 
Additional requirement, whenever required by the Department will be provide d at 
supplementary/Revised Estimates (RE) stage. Hence, the Committee recommend 
that the Department take proactive steps for timely utilization of funds all ocated 
under various Heads for 2021-22 so as to enable the Ministry of Finance a llocate the 
rest of the funds required by the Department at RE stage of 2021-22 for the holistic 
implementation of its Schemes and programmes.  It should also place proper and 
timely demand before the Ministry of Finance for allocation of rest of t he funds 
required for developmental activities during 2021-22 at supplementary/RE stage . 
Moreover, the Committee feel that there is a strong need for further develop ment of 
the chemical and petrochemical sector in the country in order to meet the 

3 
 
requirements of this huge country but the present Schemes and programme s of the 
Department and the financial outlays for the same seems to be high ly inadequate. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make a complete 
review of its Schemes and programmes in consultation with various stake holders  
and also study the successful models of other countries in this regard for making a  
road map for the holistic development of the chemical and petrochemical industry in 
the country.”  
Reply of the Government 
1.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Che micals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 “The Department was able to spend the entire amount of RE allocated  for 
the FY 2020-21. The amount of spending was low due to the slowdown in progress 
due to COVID pandemic. As far as FY 2021-22 is concerned, the Department h as 
released Rs.9.00 cr till May, 2021 as per the limits imposed by the DoE  and 
chalked out a proper plan to utilize the entire B.E. in the FY 2021-22.  
1.7 The Department has recently revised the Scheme guidelines for the Sch eme of 
Setting up of Plastic Parks to make the scheme more efficient and attract ive. 
Various changes have been made in the scheme to accommodate the inputs/views 
of various stakeholders. Further, the Department has also evaluated the schem e 
through Third Party Evaluation in order to identify gaps in the schemes a nd also 
remove the bottlenecks that causing the delay in the implementation of th e 
scheme. The Department will further put in its best efforts to identify various 
successful international practices in the field of Petrochemicals. 
 
CIPET:- 
1.8 CIPET was committed to meet the assigned target in all the domains of its 
activities and programmes for the FY 2020-21. More focussed attention given in 
enhancing the students ’ intake capacity, Skill development training programme, 
undertaking more number of Technology Support Services assignments and 
sponsored R&D projects in the emerging area of Polymer Science & Technology to 
enriched interface with industries/ elite institutions across the globe. 
1.9 CIPET had proposed a budget of Rs.98.25 Crore for the 2020-21  at BE stage but 
received only an amount of Rs.96.30 Croreduring the year 2020-21. Due t o Covid-
19 impacts, CIPET had requested an amount of Rs.144.00 Crore as one time grant 
from Govt. of India for meeting the unavoidable minimum recurring expend iture for 
the year 2020-21. Against this demand, an amount of Rs. 50.00 Crore was 
sanctioned and released by Govt. of India as one-time Grant- in-Aid (General) 
duringFY 2020-21.  CIPET has received the total RE of Rs.146.30 Cr ore (i.e 
Rs.96.30 Grants for CCA + Rs.50.00 GIA – General) during the year 2020- 21 
which were released and utilized by CIPET fully within the stipulated time frame.” 
  

4 
 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.10 The Committee note that the Department has released Rs.9.00 crore till May, 
2021 as per the limits imposed by the Department o f Expenditure and chalked out a 
proper plan to utilize the entire B.E. of Rs.233.14 crore in the FY 2021-22.  The 
Committee hope that the Department would take concrete steps to utilize the 
allocated funds resourcefully and timely as per the plan chalked out by it.  Progre ss 
made in this regard should be informed to the Committee.   
1.11 The Committee further note that the action taken reply furnished by the 
Department has not adequately addressed   the recommendation made by the 
Committee to make a complete review of its Schemes and programmes in 
consultation with various stake holders and also study the successful models of 
other countries for making a road map for the holistic development of the chemical 
and petrochemical industry in the country.  In reply, the Department  has merely 
stated that it has  recently revised the Scheme guidelines for the Scheme of S etting 
up of Plastic Parks to make the scheme more efficient and attractive and that it will 
further put in its best efforts to identify various successful international practices in 
the field of Petrochemicals.  Chemicals and  Petrochemicals is a vast sector a nd 
value additions in the petrochemicals chain cater to the needs of textiles, 
agriculture, infrastructure, irrigation, drinking water, health care, automobiles, 
power, electronics and telecommunication, etc. Being a big country with huge 
population, the country ’s multifarious requirements for chemicals and  
petrochemicals may be increasing day by day.  As such, there is a strong need for 
the development of the sector in a holistic manner to meet the requirements of the 

5 
 
country without resorting to imports.  Presently, the Department has revised only 
the scheme on plastic parks.   What is needed is the comprehensive review of all its 
schemes and programmes including Petroleum Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
regions (PCPIRs) and to come up with a concrete action plan    to make the country 
a front runner in the field of chemicals and petrochemicals.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate the earlier recommendation and expect a specific reply from the 
Department on the same including study of international best practices and 
appropriate action plan for their implementation in the country. 
  
Recommendation No. 2 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR NEW SCHEME OF PETROCHEMICALS (NSP) 
1.12 In regard to Budgetary allocation for New Scheme of Petrochemicals (NS P) the 
Committee made the following recommendation:- 
“The Committee note that there are two sub schemes presently under New 
Schemes of Petrochemicals (NSP) viz. Setting up of Plastic Parks and Setting  up of 
Centres of Excellence (CoEs). The Ministry of Finance has allocated Rs. 53.73 crore 
at BE 2021-22 for this Scheme against the proposal of the Departmen t for Rs. 76.78 
crore. During 2020-21, an amount of Rs.53.79 Crore was allocated at B E stage and 
the same was reduced to Rs.22.35 crore at RE stage but the Department could use 
only Rs.11.74 Crore as on 29/01/2021. According to the Department, the pace of 
expenditure during 2020-21 was slow due to the ongoing pandemic. T his has 
resulted in Special Purpose Vehicles, which are engaged in setting up of plastic  
parks and CoEs, facing difficulties in completing their stipulated targets and hence  
failing to achieve the milestones required for being eligible for receiving further grants 
as per the respective scheme guidelines. However, the Ministry has assured the 
Committee that it would be in a position to spend the entire amount o f R.E allocated 
for 2020-21. In this regard, the Committee hope that the Department would be able to 
chalk out a proper planning for the timely utilization of the funds all ocated under this 
scheme for 2021-22 so that the demand for additional fund may b e put before the 
Ministry of Finance at RE stage. The larger objective of the Plastic Parks scheme is 
to contribute to the economy by increasing investment, production, export i n 
downstream Plastic Processing Sector and also generation of employment. CoE 
scheme aims at improving the existing petrochemicals technology and research in 
the country and to promote development of new applications of polym ers and 
plastics. In view of the above, any fund crunch would be an impediment t o the timely 

6 
 
execution of these two sub schemes. During 2020-21, the Ministry o f Finance 
resorted to fund reduction to the tune of 41.50 per cent at RE stage for th is important 
scheme. In this regard, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of 
Finance should carefully examine the funds requirements of the Scheme and allocate 
necessary funds for the Scheme at RE stage of 2021-22.” 
Reply of the Government 
1.13 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“The Department was able to spend the entire amount of RE allocated for th e FY 
2020-21. The amount of spending was low due to the slowdown in progress due to 
Covid pandemic. As far as FY 2021-22 is concerned, the Department has released  
Rs.9.00 crore till May, 2021 as per the limits imposed by the Department of 
Expenditure and chalked out a proper plan to utilise the entire BE i n the FY 2021-
22. Any additional fund requirements at the RE stage will be notified to the Ministry 
of Finance.” 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.14 The Committee in the original recommendation had noted with concern that 
financial allocation for two   sub schemes of the New  Scheme of 
Petrochemicals (NSP) viz. setting up of Plastic Parks and setting up of 
Centers of Excellence (CoEs) was reduced drastically from Rs.76.78 Crore to 
Rs.53.73 Crore for the year 2021- 22.  In the financial year 2020-21 also the 
budgetary allocation was reduced from Rs.53.79 Crore to Rs.22.35 Crore at 
RE stage.  Keeping in view this drastic cut in the financial allocation for two 
consecutive years , the Committee had inter-alia recommended that the 
Ministry of Finance should carefully examine the fund requirement of the 
scheme and allocate necessary funds for the scheme at RE stage of 2021-2 2. 
However in their action taken note , the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has not mentioned or referred to any reply  received from  
the Ministry of Finance to the recommendation of the Committee. It is also 
not clear whether the Ministry had forwarded the recommendation of the 
Committee to the Ministry of Finance or not. The Committee, therefore , 

7 
 
recommend that the observations/recommendations of this Committee 
should invariably be conveyed to the Ministry of Finance and their response 
should also be suitably included in the action taken reply.  In the present 
case, the Department should obtain the specific reply of the Ministry of 
Finance and furnish the same to the Committee within three months.  
Recommendation No. 3 
CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PETROCHEMICALS ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY 
(CIPET) - REQUIREMENT OF ADDITIONAL FUNDS. 
1.15 In regard to additional Funds requirement of Central Institute of Petro chemicals 
Engineering Technology (CIPET), the Committee made the following recommendation:- 
“The Committee note that Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering 
Technology (CIPET) is a premier national Institution fully devoted to skil l 
development, technology support, academic and research activities for the growth  
of polymer and allied industries in the country. CIPET conducts different lon g term 
training programs including undergraduate, post graduate and doctoral 
programmes and also conducts vocational skill development programmes in the 
entire gamut of Petrochemicals Engineering Technology in line with th e Skill India 
Mission of the Government of India. CIPET has been operating on self- sustainable 
mode since 2008-09 onwards and the Government of India provides fund s only for 
strengthening CIPET's civil and technical facilities. CIPET was allocated Rs.98.25 
Cr at B.E. 2020-21. However, due to lockdown in the country for Covid-19 , the 
Institute could not continue its various activities such as regular courses, etc. and 
suffered loss of revenue. Therefore, it proposed a one-time grant of Rs.144.00  
crore from the Govt. However only an amount of Rs.50.00 crore was agreed to by 
Ministry of Finance at RE 2020-21 and the overall Budget allocation for CIP ET was 
enhanced to Rs. 146.30 crore at RE 2020-21. Against the requirement of Rs. 
134.46 crore for 2021-22, only Rs. 117.88 crore has been allocated in BE 2021- 22 
for CIPET. Since CIPET is providing yeoman service to the nation in the field of 
petrochemical engineering technology, the Committee feel that it is necessary to 
allocate the requisite funds for its infrastructural and technical development. The 
Ministry of Finance should encourage further such successful models with  the 
allocation of suitable funds for further development. The Committee, therefo re, 
recommend that the Ministry of Finance should consider allocating the additional 
fund requirement of Rs.16.58 crore to CIPET at R.E. stage during 2021-22.” 
Reply of the Government 
1.16 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 

8 
 
“CIPET proposed a budget of Rs.134.45 Crore for the FY 2021-22, 
however, an amount of Rs.117.88 Crore has been allocated to CIPE T at BE stage 
for 2021-22 which will be utilized as per the details given below; 
(Rs. in crores) 
Scheme etc. Allocated 2021-22 
Enhancing capabilities in Academics and Skill Development 
at CIPET 
96.87 
Enhancing capabilities in R&D and Technology Support at 
CIPET 
21.01 
TOTAL 117.88 
1.17 The amount of Rs.117.88 Crore is lesser than the projected requirem ent to meet the 
execution of existing schemes for the current year. This may affect the con struction of 
Hostels, procurement of plant & machinery, planned training programme with conse quent 
effect of less skill development training.” 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.18 The Committee note that Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering 
Technology (CIPET) proposed a budget of Rs.134.45 Crore for the financial year 
2021-22 but a lesser amount of Rs.117.88 Crore was allocated .  According to the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals the lesser allocation of funds may  
affect the construction of hostels,  Procurement of plant and machinery, training 
programmes etc. In this regard, the Committee would like to know the response of 
the Ministry of Finance to the earlier recommendation of the Committee that the 
Ministry of Finance should consider allocating the additional fund requirement to 
CIPET at R.E stage during 2021-22.    Against this backdrop, the Committee 
recommend that the allocated amount of Rs. 117.88 crore be judiciously used by 
CIPET.  Further the Department  should put forth their demand more effectively to the 
Ministry of Finance to get a supplementary grant of the remaining amount of Rs. 

9 
 
16.57 crore and the matter should be pursued vigorously at the highest level with the 
Ministry of Finance.   
Recommendation No. 5 
IMPORT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
1.19 In regard to Import of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, the Committee made t he 
following recommendation:- 
“The Committee are concerned to note the increasing volume of imports o f 
chemicals and petrochemicals as imported products are cheaper than man y 
indigenous products. The import of major chemicals and petrochemicals had ri sen 
to the tune of 14.4% of the total national imports during the peri od from April, 2020 
to September, 2020 when compared to 11.1% during the period of 2019. On the 
one hand the Government is promoting the Idea of self-reliant India and o n the 
other hand many domestic industries are facing losses/closures due to increasing 
cheaper imports of the products which in turn are depleting the domestic capacity. 
The Committee are, therefore, of the view that in the interest of Self-relia nt India, 
the Government should provide appropriate safeguards to the domestic producers  
against the cheap imports, in line with WTO guidelines. In this regard, t he 
Committee note that the Department on a consistent basis looks for measures to 
put both tariff as well as Non-Tariff barriers to protect the domestic in dustry. 
According to the Department, it has made the standards for the chemicals / 
petrochemicals mandatory to meet the BIS quality parameters for the e xporters as 
well as for domestic manufacturers in respect of 34 chemicals and petrochemicals  
and for about 50 chemicals and petrochemicals the process is at different stag es. 
The Department has also taken steps for rationalization of Basic Custom Duty 
(BCD) viz. BCD on basic feedstock/ building blocks is proposed to be kept at th e 
minimum & on intermediates is kept moderately high. BCD on finished prod ucts is 
kept higher than that is applicable to intermediates. In the Finance B ill, 2021 it has 
been proposed that BCD on Naptha which is a basic feed stock decreased from  
4% to 2.5% and it has also been decreased in some other materials like nylon 
chips. However, BCD has been increased on some other materials like Carbon 
Black, Poly Carbonates, Bis Phenol, etc. mainly to protect the domestic industry. 
Since it is very much necessary to safeguard the interests of domestic chemic al 
and petrochemical units and also to develop the chemicals and petrochemical 
industry according to the increasing needs of the country, the Committee 
recommend the following:-  
(i)  Concrete steps should be taken to realize the goals envisaged under Vision 
Statement 2024 which aims to seize the opportunity to establish India as a leading 
chemicals & petrochemicals manufacturing hub with the thrust on reduction in 
import dependency by attracting investments for manufacturing quality products.  
(ii)  Two cracker units are likely to get commissioned by 2021-22, and  one by 
2023. A comprehensive assessment should be made on the require ments of 

10 
 
cracker units for the country and necessary measures should be initiated for setting 
up of more cracker units in the country.  
(iii)  The Government should also look in to making the domestic industry more 
competitive by providing them cheaper raw materials and fuels so that they  can 
compete with the prices in global market and the import bill on account of i mport of 
chemicals and petrochemicals be brought down.  
(iv)  Increase of Basic Custom Duty on some chemicals/petrochemicals has 
been proposed in Finance Bill, 2021 particularly to protect the interests of domestic 
manufacturers. In this regard, it is also necessary to take appropriate steps to 
ensure that the increase in BCD does not result in price rise of the end prod ucts 
which may affect the consumers.”           
 
Reply of the Government  
1.20 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“(i) Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has prepared a Vision 
2024 Plan. To achieve the objectives of this plan, certain initiatives are being ta ken 
by the Department viz. strengthening of PCPIRs, incentives for mega investment, 
ensuring quality by formulating new standards and making those standards  
mandatory, Skilling & Employment generation, technology support services to 
SMEs, better trade intelligence with the creation of new HS codes for the pro ducts 
falling under “others” category appearing in ITC HS Code. An Advisory Forum as a 
permanent platform for interaction with industry has been created in the 
Department, to improve industry facilitation. Under Vision 2024, yearly targets have 
been set up and the progress made is reviewed at the end of every year to achieve 
the objectives of the Vision 2024 Plan within the stipulated period. 
Also, apart from other investor awareness programs, the Department in association 
with the FICCI, organized the 11th edition of ‘INDIA CHEM ’ during 17- 19thMarch 
2021 at New Delhi.  The theme of the event was “India: Global Manufacturing Hub 
for Chemicals and Petrochemicals ”. The event was also hosted on the digital 
platform along with the digital exhibition for the growth and development  of the 
Chemical and Petrochemical sector. 
(ii)         Chemical sector plays an indispensable role in the industrial and 
agricultural development of the country. It contributes significantly to the eco nomic 
development and growth of various key sectors such as construction, automo tive, 
electronics, pharmaceuticals etc. Manufacture of most chemical products is 
delicensed and deregulated in India. Accordingly, in order to ensure better planning 
for the Petrochemical sector augmentation/expansion, The Department had 
initiated work on the preparation of “Perspective Plan for the Petrochemical 
industry"  to highlight the likely demand-supply scenario over the next 15-20  years 
and to present options to bridge the gap between domestic demand and supply. 

11 
 
Rationalization of customs duty structure of chemical products has been a 
longstanding demand of the chemical industry. To address this issue, Budget 
2021- 22 has proposed revision of customs duty of several chemical product s 
which will boost the domestic chemical industry making India ‘AtmaNirbhar’ in 
chemical sector. 
Customs duty on some of the key raw materials such Naphtha is reduced to 
2.5% to enhance competitiveness of domestic manufacturing units. Additionally, 
customs duty has been increased on some chemical & petrochemical products to 
support optimum utilization of domestic capacity and attract large scale 
investments in establishing new manufacturing units for these chemical products. 
(iii)        In order to curb imports, for creation of new capacity and to p romote 
investment; DCPC recommends for change in custom duty on important 
petrochemicals. Increase in custom duty will help to reduce imports and encourag e 
establishing domestic capacities and for production of downstream chemicals 
(other than polymers). Department has also prepared Production Linked Incentive 
scheme by providing financial support to domestic industry to boost domes tic 
manufacturing for various chemicals and petrochemicals products and 
recommended for further course of action. 
Presently, BIS standards of majority of chemicals are voluntary in nature. 
Sometimes, inferior and spurious chemicals are imported into India, which do not 
meet the quality requirements as per BIS standards. These chemicals may b e 
hazardous to human health and environment. To overcome this proble m, DCPC 
has initiated an exercise to make BIS standards as mandatory under Sectio n 16 of 
BIS Act, 2016, so that both domestic manufacturers and overseas suppliers m eet 
the BIS standards to ensure adequate safety to human & animal hea lth and 
environment. Accordingly, Department has made BIS Standards mandatory  for 44 
chemicals & petrochemicals and issued Quality Control Orders in this regard. 
(iv)  Import duty on Naphtha which isthe basic raw material for production of 
major petrochemicals, has been reduced from 4% to 2.5%. The decreased custom 
duty on naphtha is likely to further improve the utilization of crackers resulting i n 
availability of cost competitive olefins and aromatics. Low cost naphtha wil l also 
make a way into the availability of ethylene and propylene for petroc hemical 
intermediates in value chain,further boost to the production of major basic  
petrochemicals.” 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.21   The Committee note that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals have 
initiated certain steps to safeguard the interests of domestic chemical and petroc hemical 
units and also to develop the chemicals and petrochemical industry according to th e 
increasing needs of the country.  Under Vision 2024, yearly targets have  been fixed by 
the Department and the progress made is reviewed at the end of eve ry year to achieve 

12 
 
the objectives of the Vision 2024 Plan within the stipulated period.   In this regard, the 
Committee may be furnished the details of yearly targets fixed and the 
achievements made thereon under Vision 2024 plan .  The Committee also note that 
the Department has also prepared a Production Linked Incentive scheme by p roviding 
financial support to domestic industry to boost domestic manufacturing for v arious 
chemicals and petrochemicals products .  Since it is a welcome move, the Committee 
may be apprised of the further steps taken for the early approval and 
implementation of the Scheme.  The Committee further note that the  Department had 
initiated work on the preparation of a  “Perspective Plan for the Petrochemical 
industry"  to highlight the likely demand-supply scenario over the next 15-20 years and to 
present options to bridge the gap between domestic demand and supply. Since it is very 
much necessary to visualize the demand and supply scenario of the future and to 
initiate concrete measures to bridge the gap between the demand and supply, the 
Committee hope that the perspective plan for petrochemical industry  would be 
prepared in a time bound manner and the necessary steps would be taken for 
implementation of the same.  Progress made in this regard may be apprised to the 
Committee. 
   
 Recommendation No. 8 
DELAYS IN SETTING UP OF PLASTIC PARKS 
1.22 In regard to Delays in Setting up of Plastic Parks the Committee mad e the 
following recommendation:- 
“The Committee are not satisfied at the pace with which the Plastic Parks scheme  
is being implemented by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. The  
scheme aims at setting up of need based plastic parks, an ecosystem with state-of-
the-art infrastructure and enabling common facilities through cluster developmen t 

13 
 
approach, to consolidate and synergize the capacities of the domestic d ownstream 
Plastic Processing Industry. Under the scheme, the Government of India provides 
grant funding up to 50% of the project cost, subject to a ceiling of Rs. 40 crore per 
project. The remaining project cost is funded by the State Government or State 
Industrial Development Corporation or similar agencies of State Government, 
beneficiary industries and loan from financial institutions. Under the Scheme, 7 
Plastic Parks have been given final approval and 3 Plastic Parks have be en given 
“in-principle” approval. These parks are under various stages of implementation. 
This Scheme was started in 2013, but none of these plastic parks h ave become 
fully functional due to slow development of infrastructure at these parks and other 
reasons. 100% physical progress of the park has been completed only in respect 
of Tamot, Madhya Pradesh and it is 95% completed in respected of Paradeep, 
Odhisha. Since it is necessary to complete the work in a time bound manner, the  
Committee recommend that while granting approval for the parks, the Department 
should put strict timeframe for the state governments for initiation and completion 
of different stages of work in the park and if any State Government/SPV is unable 
to adhere to the timeframe, it has to withdraw from the Scheme so that  delay in 
execution may be avoided and cost over runs which occur due to such de lays may 
also be avoided. Further, the Committee recommend that the Department shoul d 
review progress of all the ten parks approved in various states on monthly b asis 
and problems/difficulties associated with each park should be resolved in a tim e 
bound manner for the complete setting up and full-fledged functioning  of each of 
the parks.” 
Reply of the Government 
1.23 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Che micals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“The issue of slow progress is ascertained on regular basis by the Department. 
The issues are regularly raised by DCPC during various meetings with all the stake 
holders. Some of the remedial steps taken:  
i. As per Scheme guidelines, a Scheme Steering Committee has been 
constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary (C&PC) which meets at regular 
intervals and monitors the progress made by the Plastic Parks. 
ii. As per Scheme guidelines, Programme Manager is also responsible for 
monitoring the progress and furnish regular reports to the Department.  
iii. The Department also monitor progress of plastic parks regularly for which 
progress reports are being received from SPV of respective plastic parks, which are 
then analysed and appropriate directions are being given to SPVs time to time.  
iv.  The Department has further revised the Scheme Guidelines to make the 
scheme more efficient and comprehensive.” 
 
 

14 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.24 The Committee note that the scheme of Plastic Parks was launched in the y ear 
2013 and final approval for 07 Plastic Parks were given and then “in principle ” 
approval was given for 03 Plastic Parks. However, out of these 10 approve d Plastic 
Parks just one Plastic Park at Tamot, Madhya Pradesh could be completed and the 
remaining are under various stages of completion even after the lapse of about eight 
years time. Noting the delay in setting up of Plastic Parks,  the Department  has suo-
moto tried to ascertain the reasons for the delay and has initiated some remedial 
measures which include (i) constitution of a scheme steering Committee for 
monitoring the progress made by the Plastic Parks,  (ii) monitoring and furnishing of 
Reports by the Programme Manager to the Ministry ,  (iii) monitoring the progress of 
Plastic Parks by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals  and (iv)revising  
the scheme guidelines to make it more efficient and comprehensive.   Despite the 
initiation of these steps and monitoring the progress of plastic parks by the 
Department, the pace of setting up of the Plastic Parks could not pick up the desired 
momentum. It appears that some more stringent measures need to be taken by the 
Department for expediting the setting up of the Plastic Parks. In this regard, the 
Committee in the original report had specifically recommended that the Ministry 
should put a strict time schedule for the State Governments for initiation/completion 
of different stages of work in the Plastic Parks and also the progress of all the  Plastic 
Parks be reviewed on monthly basis. However the Committee regret to note that the 
Department has not given any reply on these two recommendations of the Committee 
and expect that specific reply will be furnished  furnished by the Department to these 
recommendations.  

15 
 
1.25   The Committee further desire to be apprised of the number of sittings of the 
“Steering Committee ” held since its Constitution and details of the 
recommendation(s) it has made, if any, so far for expediting setting up of the Plastic 
Parks. The Committee further desire to know the number of Reports submitted by the 
Programme Mangers to the Department and the action taken thereon by the 
Department and finally the details of the direction issued by the Department on the 
basis of its monitoring of the progress of Plastic Parks. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the entire process of setting up the Plastic Parks be streamlined and 
the  Plastic Parks be set up without further loss of time. A detailed reply may be 
furnished  the present status of setting up of each of the Plastic Park .   
 
Recommendation No. 10 
PLASTIC WASTE MANAGEMENT CENTERS (PWMCS). 
1.26 In regard to Plastic Waste Management Centers (PWMCS ) the Committee made the 
following recommendation:- 
“The Committee note that Plastic Waste Management Centres are being se t 
up in four Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering and Technology (CIP ET) 
Centres in Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Patna, and Varanasi generating 241.50 , 313.87, 
12.60 and 25.92 tonnes/day plastic waste with the total Project cost of Rs. 2 4 crore 
and with the Government of India ’s contribution of Rs. 21.60 crore therein. All the 4 
PWMCs is expected to be functional by the end of FY 2021-22. Th e basic objectives 
of setting up of these PWMCs are Segregation / sorting, cleaning and recy cling of 
plastic waste, product development for economic aspects, develop skill manpower for 
plastic recycling industries etc. The Committee note that the plastic waste have 
become one of the most pressing environmental issues as rapidly increasing 
production of disposable plastic products overwhelms country ’s ability to deal with 
them. According to a Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) report (2018-19) the 
total annual plastic waste generation in India is 3.3 million metric tonnes per year. It is 
also noted that there are many cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata which are 
generating much more plastic waste than other cities and where no PWMCs have 
been set up. Since PWMCs at CIPET Centres in four cities may not be ade quate, the 
committee recommend that the number of these PWMCs should be increa sed and 
PWMCs should be set up in all CIPET centres across the country to manage  the 
issue of plastic waste management. The possibility of setting up of PWMCs in oth er 
cities and towns where there is no CIPET centre should also be explored and 

16 
 
initiative should be made to open PWMCs in all cities and towns, giving priori ty to 
those cities which are generating more plastic waste, in coordination with State 
Governments. Budget allocation for the purpose should be increased 
proportionately. “ 
Reply of the Government 
 1.27 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“Total budget of Rs.24.00 Crore (an amount of Rs.21.60 Crore from Govt.  of India 
and Rs.2.40 Crore from CIPET) has been allocated for PWMCs. An amou nt of 
Rs.11.60 Crore has been allocated in the B.E 2021-22, out of total budget of 
Rs.117.88 Crore allocated to CIPET for the year 2021-22. 
The Plastic Waste Management Centres proposed to be set up are (i) Ahmedabad, 
(ii)  Bengalure, (iii)  Patna, and (iv)  Varanasi. 
CIPET centres are in coordination with local State Govt. for allotment of identif ied 
land at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Patna & Varanasi and the allotment of  land is 
delayed due to Covid-19 pandemic situation. 
Setting up of more PWMCs will be taken up by the Department of Chemic als and 
Petrochemicals on the successful completion of these PWMCs and on receiving  
the proposal from CIPET for the same.” 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.28  The Committee note that Rs.11.60 Crore has been allocated in BE 
2021-22 to CIPET for the setting up of Plastic Waste Management Centers 
(PWMCs) at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Patna & Varanasi.   As per the earlier 
information furnished to the Committee,  all the four  PWMCs were expected 
to be functional by the end of FY 2021-22 but in the action taken reply 
furnished by the Department it has been stated that CIPET centres are in 
coordination with local State Govt. for allotment of identified land at 
Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Patna & Varanasi and the allotment of land is 
delayed due to Covid- 19 pandemic situation. In this regard, the Committee 
recommend that the Department, instead of leaving the entire land allotment 
process to CIPET, should take up the matter with the concerned State 

17 
 
Government at top level for the early allotment of land for the construction of 
PWMCs.    Progress made in this regard should be intimated to the 
Committee. 
1.29    The Committee also note the reply given by the Department that 
setting up of more PWMCs will be taken up by the Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals on the successful completion of the afore-stated four 
PWMCs and on receiving the proposals from CIPET for the same.  Since the 
plastic waste management has become one of the most pressing 
environmental issues, the Committee strongly recommend that the  
Department instead of waiting for completion of the work of setting up  of 
four PWMCs and the proposals from CIPET for the setting up of more 
PWMCs, suo moto  initiate steps for the setting up of PWMCs in the 
cities/towns where CIPET centres are already functioning as a first phase 
initiative and subsequently steps should be taken for the setting up of more 
PWMCs  in other cities/towns in the country in the second phase.    
Recommendation No. 14 
BHOPAL GAS LEAK DISASTER (BGLD) - REMOVAL OF TOXIC WASTE. 
1.30 In regard to the  removal of Toxic Waste  from the site of Bhopal Gas Leak 
Disaster (BGLD), the Committee made the following recommendation:- 
“The Committee take a serious view that there is a huge pile of toxic waste still 
lying at the UCIL site even after 36 years of the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster. It could 
not be disposed of due to one reason or another. The toxic waste may contaminate 
the ground water and is a potential health hazard for the people living  in the area. 
In this regard, the Committee note that a trial run was taken under the dir ection of 
Hon’ble Supreme Court to incinerate 10 metric tons of about 350 metric tons o f 

18 
 
waste lying in the site and that was successfully done. In this regard, the 
Committee note that It was decided that the Government of Madhya Pradesh 
should dispose of the remaining waste on the same line. State Gove rnment has to 
float a tender to get a party to incinerate all the toxic waste. According to th e 
Department, this has not really happened even after repeated persua sion and 
follows up with the State Government. In this context, the Committee fe el that the 
non-disposal of toxic waste even after 36 years of tragedy indicate the 
lackadaisical attitude of both the Union and State Governments towards this 
potential danger which has already played havoc among the people of Bhopal. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should take up th e 
matter of disposal of remaining toxic waste lying at the UCIL site and the 
remediation of the site with the state government at Chief Minister ’s level and the 
sentiments expressed by this Committee may also be intimated to him so  as to 
complete the task by the year 2022 positively. In case, the State Government is not 
forthcoming, the Union Government should take necessary steps for the immediate 
disposal of toxic waste lying at the UCIL site of the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
1.31 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 “Department of Chemicals & Petrochemical has been continuously taking up 
the matter with the Govt. of Madhya Pradesh. In this regard, the matter ha s been 
discussed in Review Meetings held on 17.2.2016, 3.8.2016, 7.2.2017, 6.9. 2017, 
23.3.2018, 2.7.2018, 9.1.2019, 28.8.2019 and 9.12.2019. Lette rs dated 27.9.2016, 
20.11.2017, 11.5.2020, 19.8.2020 and 16.12.2020 were also writte n to GoMP to 
prepare a comprehensive proposal including an execution plan for disposal of the 
remaining waste at the UCIL site and send to this Department with the consen t of 
M/o Environment, Forest & Climate Change. Despite these efforts no response has 
been received from GoMP so far.  
 Recently, as directed by Hon'ble Minister(C&F), a Review Meeting was held 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary(C&PC) on 25.3.2021 to discuss the various 
issues including issue related with remediation of toxic waste at UCIL site, Bhopal. 
Govt. of Madhya Pradesh was once again requested to prepare a compr ehensive 
proposal with an execution plan for disposal of the remaining waste at the  site. 
Once, the GoMP prepares the plan and selects the operator for disposal of the  
toxic waste and communicates the same to M/o EF&CC, the Oversight Committee 

19 
 
under the Chairmanship of Hon'ble Minister (EF&CC) will endorse the proposal 
and request Department of Expenditure for release of funds to GoMP for dispo sal 
of UCIL waste. Alternatively, if required, the un-utilzed funds available w ith GoMP 
under various components of New Action Plan may be re-appropriated for this 
purpose.  
 Further, Hon'ble Minister(C&F) has also written a letter to Hon'ble Minister 
(Medical Education & Bhopal Gas Tragedy Relief and Rehabilitation), Government 
of Madhya Pradesh on 5.5.2021 to instruct the concerned officia ls in his 
Department to expedite the matter, so that further necessary action may  be taken 
up by this Department.”   
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.32 The Committee note that  the Department  is continuously taking up the 
matter of disposal of toxic waste in the Bhopal Gas Leak site with the Government 
of Madhya Pradesh. In this regard several review meetings have been held so far 
and a number of letters have also been written to the Government of Madhya 
Pradesh to prepare and submit a comprehensive proposal including an execution 
plan for disposal of the toxic waste, with the approval of the Ministry of 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change, to the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers. However, response of the Government of Madhya Pradesh is still  
awaited. In this regard, the Committee made a specific recommendation to take up 
the matter at Chief Minister ’s level with the Government of Madhya Pradesh but the 
Department had chosen to take up the matter with the concerned Minister in the 
Government of Madhya Pradesh.  Since 37 years already lapsed and the furthe r 
delay in this regard is detrimental to the environment as well as to the people of  
Bhopal, the Committee reiterate the earlier recommendation that the matter be 
brought to the notice of Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh.   A tripartite meeting of 
high level officers of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers,   Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the Government of Madhya Pradesh 
may also be arranged to resolve the issue over the table without further loss of  

20 
 
time.  In case no solution is found, the Union Government may explore the 
possibilities of taking necessary steps on its own for the immediate disposal of 
toxic waste. Progress made in this regard may be intimated to the Committee. 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation No. 1 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR THE DEPARTMENT 
 2.1 In regard to Budgetary Allocation for the Department the Committee ma de the 
following recommendation:- 
“The committee note that the Ministry of Finance was able to allocate only  
Rs.233.14 crore at BE stage for 2021-22 to the Department of chemicals a nd 
Petrochemicals against the requirement of Rs.276.60 crore by the Department. 
According to the Department, the pace of Developmental activities for New Sche me 
of Petrochemicals (NSP) & Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering and 
Technology (CIPET) is likely to be affected to some extent due to  curtailment of BE 
to the tune of Rs.43 crore for the year 2021-22. During 2020-21, Rs. 218.34 was 
allocated at BE stage and the same was increased to Rs.295.70 crore b ut the actual 
expenditure incurred by the Department was only Rs.219.87 crore on 29/01/20 19. 
The enhancement of RE to Rs.295.70 crore during 2020-21 was main ly due to 
Rs.73.70 crore for interest free loan to Hindustan Fluorocarbons Ltd. (HFL) for 
paying liabilities towards VRS/VSS on account of closure of HFL as approved by 
Cabinet and Rs.50.00 crore as Grant- in- Aid General to Central Institute of 
Petrochemicals Engineering Technology (CIPET) for retaining its sustainability in the 
COVID-19 Pandemic. The pace of utilization of funds under the Heads  for New 
Scheme of Petrochemicals and CIPET were not up to the mark during 2020 -21. 
COVID-19 pandemic has been shown as reason for slow utilization of fun ds under 
these heads during the year. The Committee also note that the Ministry of  Finance 
allocates funds at BE stage to the Department based on the expe nditure trend in the 
last few years and according to the Medium Term Expenditure Frame work. 
Additional requirement, whenever required by the Department will be provide d at 
supplementary/Revised Estimates (RE) stage. Hence, the Committee recommend 
that the Department take proactive steps for timely utilization of funds a llocated 
under various Heads for 2021-22 so as to enable the Ministry of Finance a llocate the 
rest of the funds required by the Department at RE stage of 2021-22 for the holistic 
implementation of its Schemes and programmes. It should also place proper and 
timely demand before the Ministry of Finance for allocation of rest of t he funds 
required for developmental activities during 2021-22 at supplementary/RE stage . 
Moreover, the Committee feel that there is a strong need for further develop ment of 
the chemical and petrochemical sector in the country in order to meet the 
requirements of this huge country but the present Schemes and programme s of the 
Department and the financial outlays for the same seems to be high ly inadequate. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should make a complete 
review of its Schemes and programmes in consultation with various stake holders  
and also study the successful models of other countries in this regard for making a  

22 
 
road map for the holistic development of the chemical and petrochemical industry in 
the country.”  
Reply of the Government 
2.2 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Che micals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“NSP:- The Department was able to spend the entire amount of RE 
allocated for the FY 2020-21. The amount of spending was low due to  the 
slowdown in progress due to COVID pandemic. As far as FY 2021-22 is 
concerned, the Department has released Rs.9.00 cr till May, 2021 as per the limits 
imposed by the DoE and chalked out a proper plan to utilize the entire B.E. in the 
FY 2021-22.  
4.3 The Department has recently revised the Scheme guidelines for the 
Scheme of Setting up of Plastic Parks to make the scheme more efficient and 
attractive. Various changes have been made in the scheme to accomm odate the 
inputs/views of various stakeholders. Further, the Department has also evaluate d 
the scheme through Third Party Evaluation in order to identify gaps in the schem es 
and also remove the bottlenecks that causing the delay in the implement ation of 
the scheme. The Department will further put in its best efforts to identify vario us 
successful international practices in the field of Petrochemicals. 
CIPET:- 
CIPET was committed to meet the assigned target in all the domains of its  
activities and programmes for the FY 2020-21. More focussed attention given in 
enhancing the students ’ intake capacity, Skill development training programme, 
undertaking more number of Technology Support Services assignments and 
sponsored R&D projects in the emerging area of Polymer Science & Technology to 
enriched interface with industries/ elite institutions across the globe. 
4.4 CIPET had proposed a budget of Rs.98.25 Crore for the 2020-21 at BE 
stage but received only an amount of Rs.96.30 Croreduring the year 2 020-21. Due 
to Covid-19 impacts, CIPET had requested an amount of Rs.144.00 Crore as  one 
time grant from Govt. of India for meeting the unavoidable minimum recurring 
expenditure for the year 2020-21. Against this demand, an amount of  Rs. 50.00 
Crore was sanctioned and released by Govt. of India as one-time Grant- in-Aid 
(General) duringFY 2020-21.  CIPET has received the total RE of Rs.146.30 
Crore (i.e Rs.96.30 Grants for CCA + Rs.50.00 GIA – General) during the year 
2020-21 which were released and utilized by CIPET fully within the stipulate d time 
frame.” 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 

23 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR NEW SCHEME OF PETROCHEMICALS (NSP) 
2.3 In regard to Budgetary allocation for New Scheme of Petrochemicals (NS P) the 
Committee made the following recommendation:- 
“The Committee note that there are two sub schemes presently under New 
Schemes of Petrochemicals (NSP) viz. Setting up of Plastic Parks and Setting  up of 
Centres of Excellence (CoEs). The Ministry of Finance has allocated Rs. 53.73 crore 
at BE 2021-22 for this Scheme against the proposal of the Department for Rs. 76.78 
crore. During 2020-21, an amount of Rs.53.79 Crore was allocated at B E stage and 
the same was reduced to Rs.22.35 crore at RE stage but the Department could use 
only Rs.11.74 Crore as on 29/01/2021. According to the Department, the pace of 
expenditure during 2020-21 was slow due to the ongoing pandemic. This has 
resulted in Special Purpose Vehicles, which are engaged in setting up of plastic  
parks and CoEs, facing difficulties in completing their stipulated targets and hence  
failing to achieve the milestones required for being eligible for receiving further grants 
as per the respective scheme guidelines. However, the Ministry has assured the 
Committee that it would be in a position to spend the entire amount o f R.E allocated 
for 2020-21. In this regard, the Committee hope that the Department would be able to 
chalk out a proper planning for the timely utilization of the funds all ocated under this 
scheme for 2021-22 so that the demand for additional fund may b e put before the 
Ministry of Finance at RE stage. The larger objective of the Plastic Parks scheme is 
to contribute to the economy by increasing investment, production, export i n 
downstream Plastic Processing Sector and also generation of employment. CoE 
scheme aims at improving the existing petrochemicals technology and research in 
the country and to promote development of new applications of polym ers and 
plastics. In view of the above, any fund crunch would be an impediment t o the timely 
execution of these two sub schemes. During 2020-21, the Ministry o f Finance 
resorted to fund reduction to the tune of 41.50 per cent at RE stage for th is important 
scheme. In this regard, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of 
Finance should carefully examine the funds requirements of the Scheme and allocate 
necessary funds for the Scheme at RE stage of 2021-22.” 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Che micals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“ The Department was able to spend the entire amount of RE allocated for the  
FY 2020-21. The amount of spending was low due to the slowdown in progress 
due to Covid pandemic. As far as FY 2021-22 is concerned, the Department  has 
released Rs.9.00 crore till May, 2021 as per the limits imposed by the Departm ent 
of Expenditure and chalked out a proper plan to utilise the entire BE in th e FY 
2021-22. Any additional fund requirements at the RE stage will be notif ied to the 
Ministry of Finance.” 

24 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 Recommendation No. 4 
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO CIPET FOR LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO COVID 19 
PANDEMIC 
2.5 In regard to Financial assistance to CIPET for loss of revenue due to Covid 1 9 
Pandemic the Committee made the following recommendation:- 
“Moreover, the Committee note that CIPET has resumed regular training 
courses through online mode for all the Long Term Courses and for skilli ng, offline 
courses are also started at few centres as per the operating guidelines of th e 
respective States. CIPET is committed to generate an income of Rs.330.00 crore 
with the budgeted revenue expenditure of Rs.270.00 crore. However, CIPET h as 
generated an income of only Rs.147.56 Crore till January, 2021 In this regard, the 
Committee recommend that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
should assess fund requirements of CIPET for 2021-22 in view of the loss of 
revenue suffered due to non operation of regular courses due to COVID 19 
pandemic and take steps for providing requisite amount of financial assistance at 
RE stage of 2021-22, if necessary.”  
Reply of the Government 
2.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Che micals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“ CIPET had requested an amount of Rs.144.00 Crore as one time grant  from 
Govt. of India for meeting the unavoidable minimum recurring expenditure for the  
year 2020-21. Out of Rs.144.00 Crore, an amount of Rs.50.00 Crorew as 
sanctioned and released by Govt. of India as one-time Grant- in-Aid (General). The 
amount of Rs.50.00 Crore has been utilized for the purpose of meetin g the 
unavoidable recurring expenditure of CIPET Centres. 
2.5 CIPET has resumed regular training courses through online mode for all the  
Long Term Courses and for skilling, offline courses are also started at fe w centres 
as per the operating guidelines of the respective States. 
2.6 However, the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals would assess 
fund requirements for CIPET for 2021-22 at RE stage, on receiving the request 
from CIPET for the same.” 
 
 

25 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
IMPORT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS 
2.7 In regard to Import of Chemicals and Petrochemicals the Committee made the  
following recommendation:- 
“The Committee are concerned to note the increasing volume of imports o f 
chemicals and petrochemicals as imported products are cheaper than man y 
indigenous products. The import of major chemicals and petrochemicals had ri sen 
to the tune of 14.4% of the total national imports during the peri od from April, 2020 
to September, 2020 when compared to 11.1% during the period of 2019. On the 
one hand the Government is promoting the Idea of self-reliant India and o n the 
other hand many domestic industries are facing losses/closures due to increasing 
cheaper imports of the products which in turn are depleting the domestic capacity. 
The Committee are, therefore, of the view that in the interest of Self-relia nt India, 
the Government should provide appropriate safeguards to the domestic producers  
against the cheap imports, in line with WTO guidelines. In this regard, t he 
Committee note that the Department on a consistent basis looks for measures to 
put both tariff as well as Non-Tariff barriers to protect the domestic in dustry. 
According to the Department, it has made the standards for the chemicals / 
petrochemicals mandatory to meet the BIS quality parameters for the e xporters as 
well as for domestic manufacturers in respect of 34 chemicals and petrochemicals  
and for about 50 chemicals and petrochemicals the process is at different stag es. 
The Department has also taken steps for rationalization of Basic Custom Duty 
(BCD) viz. BCD on basic feedstock/ building blocks is proposed to be kept at th e 
minimum & on intermediates is kept moderately high. BCD on finished prod ucts is 
kept higher than that is applicable to intermediates. In the Finance B ill, 2021 it has 
been proposed that BCD on Naptha which is a basic feed stock decreased from  
4% to 2.5% and it has also been decreased in some other materials like nylon 
chips. However, BCD has been increased on some other materials like Carbon 
Black, Poly Carbonates, Bis Phenol, etc. mainly to protect the domestic industry. 
Since it is very much necessary to safeguard the interests of domestic chemic al 
and petrochemical units and also to develop the chemicals and petrochemical 
industry according to the increasing needs of the country, the Committee 
recommend the following:-  
(i)  Concrete steps should be taken to realize the goals envisaged under Vision 
Statement 2024 which aims to seize the opportunity to establish India as a leading 
chemicals & petrochemicals manufacturing hub with the thrust on reduction in 
import dependency by attracting investments for manufacturing quality products.  
(ii)  Two cracker units are likely to get commissioned by 2021-22, and  one by 
2023. A comprehensive assessment should be made on the require ments of 
cracker units for the country and necessary measures should be initiated for setting 
up of more cracker units in the country.  

26 
 
(iii)  The Government should also look in to making the domestic industry more 
competitive by providing them cheaper raw materials and fuels so that they  can 
compete with the prices in global market and the import bill on account of i mport of 
chemicals and petrochemicals be brought down.  
(iv)  Increase of Basic Custom Duty on some chemicals/petrochemicals has 
been proposed in Finance Bill, 2021 particularly to protect the interests of domestic 
manufacturers. In this regard, it is also necessary to take appropriate steps to 
ensure that the increase in BCD does not result in price rise of the end prod ucts 
which may affect the consumers.”           
Reply of the Government  
2.8 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Che micals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“(i) Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has prepared a Vision 
2024 Plan. To achieve the objectives of this plan, certain initiatives are 
being taken by the Department viz. strengthening of PCPIRs, incentives for 
mega investment, ensuring quality by formulating new standards and 
making those standards mandatory, Skilling & Employment generation, 
technology support services to SMEs, better trade intelligence with the 
creation of new HS codes for the products falling under “others” category 
appearing in ITC HS Code. An Advisory Forum as a permanent platform fo r 
interaction with industry has been created in the Department, to improve 
industry facilitation. Under Vision 2024, yearly targets have been set up  and 
the progress made is reviewed at the end of every year to achieve the 
objectives of the Vision 2024 Plan within the stipulated period. 
Also, apart from other investor awareness programs, the Department 
in association with the FICCI, organized the 11th edition of ‘INDIA CHEM ’ 
during 17-19thMarch 2021 at New Delhi.  The theme of the event was “India: 
Global Manufacturing Hub for Chemicals and Petrochemicals ”. The event 
was also hosted on the digital platform along with the digital exhibition for 
the growth and development of the Chemical and Petrochemical sector. 
(ii)         Chemical sector plays an indispensable role in the industrial and 
agricultural development of the country. It contributes significantly to the 
economic development and growth of various key sectors such as 
construction, automotive, electronics, pharmaceuticals etc. Manufacture of 
most chemical products is delicensed and deregulated in India. Accordingly, 
in order to ensure better planning for the Petrochemical sector 
augmentation/expansion, The Department had initiated work on the 
preparation of “Perspective Plan for the Petrochemical industry"  to highlight 
the likely demand-supply scenario over the next 15-20 years and  to present 
options to bridge the gap between domestic demand and supply. 
Rationalization of customs duty structure of chemical products has 
been a longstanding demand of the chemical industry. To address this 
issue, Budget 2021- 22 has proposed revision of customs duty of several 

27 
 
chemical products which will boost the domestic chemical industry making 
India ‘AtmaNirbhar’ in chemical sector. 
Customs duty on some of the key raw materials such Naphtha is 
reduced to 2.5% to enhance competitiveness of domestic manufacturing 
units. Additionally, customs duty has been increased on some chemical & 
petrochemical products to support optimum utilization of domestic capacity 
and attract large scale investments in establishing new manufacturing units 
for these chemical products. 
(iii)        In order to curb imports, for creation of new capacity and to p romote 
investment; DCPC recommends for change in custom duty on important 
petrochemicals. Increase in custom duty will help to reduce imports and 
encourage establishing domestic capacities and for production of 
downstream chemicals (other than polymers). Department has also 
prepared Production Linked Incentive scheme by providing financial support 
to domestic industry to boost domestic manufacturing for various chemicals 
and petrochemicals products and recommended for further course of action. 
Presently, BIS standards of majority of chemicals are voluntary in 
nature. Sometimes, inferior and spurious chemicals are imported into India, 
which do not meet the quality requirements as per BIS standards. These 
chemicals may be hazardous to human health and environment. To 
overcome this problem, DCPC has initiated an exercise to make BIS 
standards as mandatory under Section 16 of BIS Act, 2016, so that bo th 
domestic manufacturers and overseas suppliers meet the BIS standards to 
ensure adequate safety to human & animal health and environ ment. 
Accordingly, Department has made BIS Standards mandatory for 44 
chemicals & petrochemicals and issued Quality Control Orders in this 
regard. 
(iv)  Import duty on Naphtha which isthe basic raw material for production 
of major petrochemicals, has been reduced from 4% to 2.5%. The 
decreased custom duty on naphtha is likely to further improve the utiliza tion 
of crackers resulting in availability of cost competitive olefins and aromatics. 
Low cost naphtha will also make a way into the availability of ethylene  and 
propylene for petrochemical intermediates in value chain,further boost to the 
production of major basic petrochemicals.” 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
  

28 
 
 Recommendation No. 6 
Chemical Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS). 
2.9 In regard to Chemical Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS) the 
Committee made the following recommendation:- 
 “The Committee note that Chemical Promotion and Development Scheme 
(CPDS) envisages promotion and development of Indian chemicals and 
petrochemicals industry by providing grants- in-aid and logo support to Industry 
Associations for organizing seminars, workshops, conferences, etc. Funds for 
CPDS are being used for two purposes viz. (i) knowledge creation & other 
promotional activities like study, exhibition, workshop, etc. and (ii) National Awards 
for Technology Innovation in Petrochemicals and downstream Plastic Processing 
Industry. The Department has been allocated Rs. 3.00 crore for this scheme in B E 
2021-22 as proposed by the Department. The Committee are of the view that this 
scheme should be implemented at a much larger scale for the promotion and 
development of Indian chemicals and petrochemicals industry particularly to a ttract 
foreign entrepreneurs to invest in India by showcasing country ’s ease of doing 
business environment and the facilities being offered for investment in the co untry. 
Further there is a need for encouraging innovation in Petrochemicals and 
downstream Plastic Processing Industry by increasing the number of winners and 
runner ups for National Awards for Technology Innovation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should take necessary steps to wide n 
the scope of this Scheme for the promotion and development of the S cheme on a 
large scale. Moreover, the Department should also examine the adequacy of 
present level of budget allocation of Rs.3 Crore or so for the large scale promotion 
and development of this crucial sector and take necessary action for the alloca tion 
of requisite amount of funds for the Scheme.” 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“The funds allocated under the CPDS are utilized for promotion and 
development of chemical and petrochemical sector by extending soft support to the 
industry associations, organizations, Govt. institutions, etc. for organization of 
seminars/ conferences/ summits, etc. An Internal Committee was constituted in the 
Department for the evaluation of the scheme. The Committee has made the 
following major recommendation:-  
(i) Department may explore the possibilities of roping in more industry associations 
to widen the scope of the Scheme through publicity;  
(ii) A Committee may be constituted by the Department for providing nationa l 
awards in Chemicals sector. The awards in Chemical Sector may be implemented 
through suitable organization/PSUs/ABs/ association.  

29 
 
(iii) Certain categories may be identified for the National Awards for MSME sectors.  
1.20 The report of the Committee is under consideration of the Departme nt for 
extending the scheme for another period of 5 years and to revise the  existing 
guidelines to the extent feasible. The recommendations of the Committee w ill 
widen the scope of the scheme.  
Further, a National Level Committee has been constituted under the Chairman ship 
of Secretary (C&PC) for steering the research in the Chemicals Petrochemicals 
sector with CIPET as its Secretariat. If required, the financial support for the 
Secretariat of the National Level Committee will be provided through CPDS. 
Keeping in view the recommendations of the Internal Committee and the 
constitution of National Level Committee, Department has proposed to increase 
the budget allocation under the scheme from Rs.3.00 crore to Rs.8.00 crore for the 
current FY and onwards. For extending the Scheme up to 2026, the app raisal 
proposal along with the report of the Internal Committee is under consideration of 
the Department.” 
Further Comments of the Committee 
2.11 The Committee note that funds allocated under the Chemical Promo tion and 
Development Scheme (CPDS) are utilized for promotion and development  of Che mical  
and Petrochemicals sector by extending soft support to the industry associations, 
organizations, Governement Institutions for organization of seminars/conferences /summits 
etc. For the evaluation of CPDS an Internal Committee was constituted by the Ministry 
which inter-alia made certain recommendations like exploring the possibilities of roping in 
more industry associations to widen the scope of the CPDS, Constitution of a Committee for 
providing national awards in Chemicals sector and identification of certain categories fo r the 
National Awards for Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) sector.  These 
recommendations  are stated to be under consideration of the Ministry for e xtending the 
CPDS for another five years term and also to revise the existing guidlines. The Commit tee 
further note that another National level Committee has also been constituted  by the Ministry 
for steering the research in the Chemical, Petrochemicals Sector of the co untry. Based on 
the recommendation of the internal Committee as well as keeping in view  the Constituion of 
the National level Committee the Ministry had proposed to increase the budget allocation for 
CPDS from Rs. 3.00 crore to Rs. 8.00 crore.  However, for extending the scheme for a term 
of five years i.e upto 2026, the appraisal proposal as well as the recom mendations of the 
internal Committee, are under consideration of the Ministry. The Committee there fore 
recommend that the matter may be expedited and a decision regarding extending the CPDS 
scheme be taken at the earliest for the promotion and development of t he CPDS on a large 

30 
 
scale and also for encouraging innovation in Petrochemicals and Plastic processing industry 
in the country. 
Recommendation No. 10 
PLASTIC WASTE MANAGEMENT CENTERS (PWMCS). 
 2.12 In regard to Plastic Waste Management Centers (PWMCS ) the Committee made the 
following recommendation:- 
“The Committee note that Plastic Waste Management Centres are being se t 
up in four Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering and Technology (CIP ET) 
Centres in Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Patna, and Varanasi generating 241.50,  313.87, 
12.60 and 25.92 tonnes/day plastic waste with the total Project cost of Rs. 2 4 crore 
and with the Government of India ’s contribution of Rs. 21.60 crore therein. All the 4 
PWMCs is expected to be functional by the end of FY 2021-22. Th e basic objectives 
of setting up of these PWMCs are Segregation / sorting, cleaning and recy cling of 
plastic waste, product development for economic aspects, develop skill manpower for 
plastic recycling industries etc. The Committee note that the plastic waste have 
become one of the most pressing environmental issues as rapidly increasing 
production of disposable plastic products overwhelms country ’s ability to deal with 
them. According to a Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) report (2018-19) the 
total annual plastic waste generation in India is 3.3 million metric tonnes per year. It is 
also noted that there are many cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata which are 
generating much more plastic waste than other cities and where no PWMCs have 
been set up. Since PWMCs at CIPET Centres in four cities may not be ade quate, the 
committee recommend that the number of these PWMCs should be increa sed and 
PWMCs should be set up in all CIPET centres across the country to manage  the 
issue of plastic waste management. The possibility of setting up of PWMCs in oth er 
cities and towns where there is no CIPET centre should also be explored and 
initiative should be made to open PWMCs in all cities and towns, giving priori ty to 
those cities which are generating more plastic waste, in coordination with State 
Governments. Budget allocation for the purpose should be increased 
proportionately. “ 
Reply of the Government 
 2.13 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry o f Chemicals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“Total budget of Rs.24.00 Crore (an amount of Rs.21.60 Crore from Govt.  of India 
and Rs.2.40 Crore from CIPET) has been allocated for PWMCs. An amo unt of 
Rs.11.60 Crore has been allocated in the B.E 2021-22, out of total budget of 
Rs.117.88 Crore allocated to CIPET for the year 2021-22. 
The Plastic Waste Management Centres proposed to be set up are (i) Ahmedabad, 
(ii)  Bengalure, (iii)  Patna, and (iv)  Varanasi. 

31 
 
CIPET centres are in coordination with local State Govt. for allotment of identif ied 
land at Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Patna & Varanasi and the allotment of  land is 
delayed due to Covid-19 pandemic situation. 
Setting up of more PWMCs will be taken up by the Department of Chemic als and 
Petrochemicals on the successful completion of these PWMCs and on receiving  
the proposal from CIPET for the same.” 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Development of Environmental Friendly Pesticides by IPFT 
2.14 In regard to Development of Environmental Friendly Pesticides by IPFT  the 
Committee made the following recommendation:- 
“ The Committee note that Institute of Pesticides Formulation Technology 
(IPFT) is the only Institute of its kind in the country devoted to the developmen t of 
state-of-the-art user and environment friendly new generation pesticide form ulation 
technologies. An allocation of Rs.12 Crore has been made for IPFT in BE 20 21-22 
which is more than the RE allocation of Rs.10.50 Crore for 2020-21. It is also noted 
that Rs. 8.98 crore has already been spent by the IPFT by 29 January 2021. The 
Committee hope that the remaining amount would be utilized by the end  of FY 
2020-21. According to IPFT, the conventional formulations Emulsifiable 
Concentrate (EC), Soluble Concentrate (SL), Wettable powder (WP), Dust (DP), 
and Granules (Gr.) give sufficient bio-efficacy but have shortcomings in respect of 
safety to mammalians, non target organisms and environment. To con trol the 
target pests, high amounts of conventional formulations are used, which cause  
environmental contamination, health hazards to the farmers and pesticide residue 
problem in food products. In this regard, IPFT has developed many en vironmental 
and user friendly pesticide formulations. The Committee are of the view tha t a 
major thrust be given on the development of safer and environmen tal friendly 
pesticides in the interest of human/animal health and safer environmen t. Even 
though the Committee understand that increasing agricultural output is necessary  
but health and welfare of human and other living beings which are aff ected by the 
harmful pesticides should be accorded top priority by the Government. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that more Centres of IPFT should be set up i n 
various regions of the country to cater to the requirements of those regions a nd 
appropriate corresponding Budgetary allocation be given for the same.”     
 
 

32 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.15 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“The grant released during the year 2020- 21 was fully utilized by the 
Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology {IPFT, Gurugram}. IPFT has mad e 
efforts for developing environment and user friendly bio-pesticides an d the 
research (work) in progress. This will lead to development of environmentally 
benign agrochemical products for the control of agricultural pe sticide and 
reducing the load of pesticides in the agro-ecosystem a nd environment.  To 
minimize the risks and disadvantages of conventional formulations, IP FT is 
developing following types new generation pesticide formulations and bio-bo tanical 
formulations for safety of human health and environment: 
(i)         In collaboration with ICAR- National Research Centre for Seed S pices 
(NRCSS), Ajmer, formulation of different bio- botanical pesticides are being 
developed. The formulation development work is being done by IPFT and bio-
efficacy  studies on seed spices crops are conducted by ICAR-NRCSS. The Nano-
emulsion formulation of Pine wood resin has been recently developed. Th e bio-
efficacy studies results indicate that the formulation is very effective in 
management of aphids in coriander, fenugreek and cumin crops. The work fo r 
developing bio-pesticide formulations from Guar seed (Cluster Beans) extract and 
Aak (Calotropisgigantea) for agricultural insect control applications is under 
progress. 
(ii)        The work for developing the formulations for controlling Orob anche weeds, 
which is a serious threat to mustard crop has been started in collaboration with 
ICAR-Directorate of Rapeseed Mustard Research (DRMR), Bharatpur. The 
samples of new formulations have been sent for bio-efficacy evaluation a t ICAR-
DRMR. 
(iii)       Microbial pesticide based combination formulation for agricultural inse cts 
and mosquito control applications is on progress.  The development work on slow  
release formulation of Pyriproxyfen for mosquito larvae control and Pen conazole 
Nano-emulsion formulation for fungal disease control in plants has been initiated. 
(iv)       During last few years, Locust spread across different regions in India and 
in-spite of measures taken for its control, it devoured various crops and cau sed 
serious agricultural damages. Locust pose serious threat to agriculture and all 
possible steps are being taken to find effective solutions to this serious 
problem.  IPFT has also started development of synthetic and bio-botanic al based 
formulations for Locust control. 
 Opening of new Centres of IPFT in different regions of the country 
2.16 The Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
has submitted a draft proposal to the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemic als 
for establishment of four (04) new Advanced Research Centres of IPFT atLuckno w 
(Uttar Pradesh), Bengaluru (Karnataka), Dahej (Gujarat) and Guwahati 

33 
 
(Assam).    The Department has requested the concerned State Governm ents to 
get the proposal examined and accord in principle approval for establishm ent of 
IPFT Centres.” 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
Recommendation No. 13 
BHOPAL GAS LEAK DISASTER (BGLD) - COMPENSATION TO THE VICTIMS 
3.1 In regard to Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (BGLD ) - Compensation to the Victims the 
Committee made the following recommendation:- 
“ The Committee note that BE 2021-22 for the BGLD is Rs 22.06 crore out of 
which 14.9 crore has been estimated for Action Plan and 7.06 crore for the Welfare 
Commissioner Establishment which comprises of Salaries, wages, Office expenses 
etc. of the Establishment of the Welfare Commissioner. Thus, nearly 2 /3rd of the 
BE is for compensation of the victims of BGLD and 1/3rd for the Welfare 
Commission Establishment. Even after 36 years of the disaster the compen sation 
process for the victims has still not been completed. The Committee are of the view 
that the process of paying compensation to the victims should be completed in a 
time bound manner and it should not be a never-ending process. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that Department should look into the matter and take 
necessary steps for the early completion of the compensation process so  that the 
Bhopal gas victims need not wait indefinitely for the compensation.” 
Reply of the Government 
3.2 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Che micals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“ Office of the Welfare Commissioner, Bhopal Gas Victims, Bhopal has 
disbursed an amount of Rs.1549.33 crore as original compensation in 5,74,393 
awarded cases, Rs.1517.89 crore as pro-rata compensation in 5,63,124 awarde d 
cases and Rs.854.64 crore in 51,127 awarded cases under Ex-gratia. As per 
decision of Cabinet in June, 2010, a sum of Rs.179 cr was sanctioned for 12,000 
cases (10550 cancer and 1450 ESRD). Further, approval for additional 300 cases 
@ Rs.1.5 Lakh amounting to Rs.4.50 crore under ESRD category has been given  
during FY 2020-21. The applications claiming ex-gratia are still being received. A 
total of 22,135 applications (15,617 Cancer and 6518 ESRD) have been  received 
till 31.05.2021. As the claims being received on regular basis, no cut-off da te has 
been fixed for receiving these applications.  
2.18 The claims filed by the victim are decided through Judicial Procedure under 
the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Processing of Claims) Act, 1985 and the Scheme  
framed there under, which provides the claimants the right to appeal. If the  
claimant is not satisfied with the decision of Dy. Welfare Commissioner, he is  
entitled to file an appeal as well as revision under the Act, in the Cou rts of Addl. 

35 
 
Welfare commissioner/Hon'ble Welfare Commissioner, as also before the Hi gh 
Court of Madhya Pradesh seeking change of Category under the scheme, w hich 
were decided by the above Authorities on the basis of medical evidence . The 
pending appeals/revisions in various courts are indicated below:-  
(As on 27thMay, 2021) 
Appeal Court (Addl. Welfare Commissioner) 923 
Revisional Court (Welfare Commissioner) 550 
High Court of MP/Supreme Court 21 
2.19 Unless these appeals/revisions are decided by competent Court, it is not 
feasible to fix the cut-off date for settlement of Ex-gratia gas claims. The 
adjudication of these cases has resulted in increase of cases in the Permanent 
partial Disability Category, after the commencement of ex-gratia Scheme. Due  to 
the above reasons, no time frame can be given for settlement of all claims.” 
  

36 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PETROCHEMICALS ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY 
(CIPET) - REQUIREMENT OF ADDITIONAL FUNDS. 
 4.1 In regard to Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering Technology (CIPET ) - 
Requirement of additional funds the Committee made the following recommendation:- 
“The Committee note that Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering 
Technology (CIPET) is a premier national Institution fully devoted to skil l 
development, technology support, academic and research activities for the growth  
of polymer and allied industries in the country. CIPET conducts different lon g term 
training programs including undergraduate, post graduate and doctoral 
programmes and also conducts vocational skill development programmes in the 
entire gamut of Petrochemicals Engineering Technology in line with th e Skill India 
Mission of the Government of India. CIPET has been operating on self- sustainable 
mode since 2008-09 onwards and the Government of India provides funds only for 
strengthening CIPET's civil and technical facilities. CIPET was allocated Rs.98.25 
Cr at B.E. 2020-21. However, due to lockdown in the country for Covid-19 , the 
Institute could not continue its various activities such as regular courses, etc. and 
suffered loss of revenue. Therefore, it proposed a one-time grant of Rs.144.00  
crore from the Govt. However only an amount of Rs.50.00 crore was agreed to by 
Ministry of Finance at RE 2020-21 and the overall Budget allocation for CIPE T was 
enhanced to Rs. 146.30 crore at RE 2020-21. Against the requirement  of Rs. 
134.46 crore for 2021-22, only Rs. 117.88 crore has been allocated in BE 2021- 22 
for CIPET. Since CIPET is providing yeoman service to the nation in the field of 
petrochemical engineering technology, the Committee feel that it is necessary to 
allocate the requisite funds for its infrastructural and technical development. The 
Ministry of Finance should encourage further such successful models with  the 
allocation of suitable funds for further development. The Committee, therefo re, 
recommend that the Ministry of Finance should consider allocating the additional 
fund requirement of Rs.16.58 crore to CIPET at R.E. stage during 2021-22.” 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Chem icals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 

37 
 
“ CIPET proposed a budget of Rs.134.45 Crore for the FY 2021-22, how ever, 
an amount of Rs.117.88 Crore has been allocated to CIPET at B E stage for 2021-
22 which will be utilized as per the details given below; 
 
(Rs. in crores) 
Scheme etc. Allocated 2021-22 
Enhancing capabilities in Academics and Skill Development 
at CIPET 
96.87 
Enhancing capabilities in R&D and Technology Support at 
CIPET 
21.01 
TOTAL 117.88 
  
            The amount of Rs.117.88 Crore is lesser than the projected requirement to meet 
the execution of existing schemes for the current year. This may affect the construction of 
Hostels, procurement of plant & machinery, planned training programme with conseque nt 
effect of less skill development training.” 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 Recommendation No. 8 
DELAYS IN SETTING UP OF PLASTIC PARKS 
4.3 In regard to Delays i n setting up of Plastic Parks the Committee made the following 
recommendation:- 
“The Committee are not satisfied at the pace with which the Plastic Parks 
scheme is being implemented by the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals. The scheme aims at setting up of need based plastic p arks, an 
ecosystem with state- of-the-art infrastructure and enabling common facilities 
through cluster development approach, to consolidate and synergize the capacities 
of the domestic downstream Plastic Processing Industry. Under the scheme, t he 
Government of India provides grant funding up to 50% of the project cost, subject 
to a ceiling of Rs. 40 crore per project. The remaining project cost is funded by  the 
State Government or State Industrial Development Corporation or similar agencies 
of State Government, beneficiary industries and loan from financial institution s. 
Under the Scheme, 7 Plastic Parks have been given final approval and 3 P lastic 
Parks have been given “in-principle” approval. These parks are under various 

38 
 
stages of implementation. This Scheme was started in 2013, but none of these 
plastic parks have become fully functional due to slow development of 
infrastructure at these parks and other reasons. 100% physical progress of the 
park has been completed only in respect of Tamot, Madhya Pradesh and it is 95% 
completed in respected of Paradeep, Odhisha. Since it is necessary to complet e 
the work in a time bound manner, the Committee recommend that while gran ting 
approval for the parks, the Department should put strict timeframe for the  state 
governments for initiation and completion of different stages of work in the park 
and if any State Government/SPV is unable to adhere to the timefra me, it has to 
withdraw from the Scheme so that delay in execution may be avoided  and cost 
over runs which occur due to such delays may also be avoided. Further, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should review progress of all the ten 
parks approved in various states on monthly basis and problems/difficulties 
associated with each park should be resolved in a time bound manner for the 
complete setting up and full-fledged functioning of each of the parks.” 
Reply of the Government 
4.4 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Che micals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“The issue of slow progress is ascertained on regular basis by the 
Department. The issues are regularly raised by DCPC during various meetings 
with all the stake holders. Some of the remedial steps taken:  
i. As per Scheme guidelines, a Scheme Steering Committee has been 
constituted under the chairmanship of Secretary (C&PC) which meets at regular 
intervals and monitors the progress made by the Plastic Parks. 
ii. As per Scheme guidelines, Programme Manager is also responsible for 
monitoring the progress and furnish regular reports to the Department.  
iii. The Department also monitor progress of plastic parks regularly for which 
progress reports are being received from SPV of respective plastic parks, which are 
then analysed and appropriate directions are being given to SPVs time to time.  
iv.  The Department has further revised the Scheme Guidelines to make the 
scheme more efficient and comprehensive.” 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 

39 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
BHOPAL GAS LEAK DISASTER (BGLD) - REMOVAL OF TOXIC WASTE. 
4.5 In regard to Bhopal Gas leak disaster (BGLD ) - Removal Of Toxic Waste the 
Committee made the following recommendation:- 
“The Committee take a serious view that there is a huge pile of toxic w aste 
still lying at the UCIL site even after 36 years of the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster. It 
could not be disposed of due to one reason or another. The toxic wa ste may 
contaminate the ground water and is a potential health hazard for the pe ople living 
in the area. In this regard, the Committee note that a trial run was take n under the 
direction of Hon’ble Supreme Court to incinerate 10 metric tons of about 350 metric 
tons of waste lying in the site and that was successfully done. In this regard, the 
Committee note that It was decided that the Government of Madhya Pradesh 
should dispose of the remaining waste on the same line. State Gove rnment has to 
float a tender to get a party to incinerate all the toxic waste. According to th e 
Department, this has not really happened even after repeated persua sion and 
follows up with the State Government. In this context, the Committee fe el that the 
non-disposal of toxic waste even after 36 years of tragedy indicate the 
lackadaisical attitude of both the Union and State Governments towards this 
potential danger which has already played havoc among the people of Bhopal. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should take up the 
matter of disposal of remaining toxic waste lying at the UCIL site and the 
remediation of the site with the state government at Chief Minister ’s level and the 
sentiments expressed by this Committee may also be intimated to him so  as to 
complete the task by the year 2022 positively. In case, the State Government is not 
forthcoming, the Union Government should take necessary steps for the immediate 
disposal of toxic waste lying at the UCIL site of the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster.”  
Reply of the Government 
4.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Chem icals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“Department of Chemicals & Petrochemical has been continuously taking up 
the matter with the Govt. of Madhya Pradesh. In this regard, the matter h as been 
discussed in Review Meetings held on 17.2.2016, 3.8.2016, 7.2.2017, 6.9. 2017, 
23.3.2018, 2.7.2018, 9.1.2019, 28.8.2019 and 9.12.2019. Lette rs dated 27.9.2016, 
20.11.2017, 11.5.2020, 19.8.2020 and 16.12.2020 were also writte n to GoMP to 
prepare a comprehensive proposal including an execution plan for disposal of the 
remaining waste at the UCIL site and send to this Department with the consent of 
M/o Environment, Forest & Climate Change. Despite these efforts no response has 
been received from GoMP so far.  
Recently, as directed by Hon'ble Minister(C&F), a Review Meeting was held 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary(C&PC) on 25.3.2021 to discuss the various 
issues including issue related with remediation of toxic waste at UCIL site, Bhopal. 

40 
 
Govt. of Madhya Pradesh was once again requested to prepare a comp rehensive 
proposal with an execution plan for disposal of the remaining waste at the  site. 
Once, the GoMP prepares the plan and selects the operator for disposal of the  
toxic waste and communicates the same to M/o EF&CC, the Oversight Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Hon'ble Minister (EF&CC) will endorse the proposal 
and request Department of Expenditure for release of funds to GoMP for dispo sal 
of UCIL waste. Alternatively, if required, the un-utilzed funds available w ith GoMP 
under various components of New Action Plan may be re-appropriated for this 
purpose.  
Further, Hon'ble Minister(C&F) has also written a letter to Hon'ble Minister 
(Medical Education & Bhopal Gas Tragedy Relief and Rehabilitation), Government 
of Madhya Pradesh on 5.5.2021 to instruct the concerned officia ls in his 
Department to expedite the matter, so that further necessary action may be taken 
up by this Department.”   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.29 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation No. 7 
NATIONAL AWARD FOR TECHNOLOGY INNOVATION 
5.1 In regard to National award for Technology Innovation the Committee mad e the 
following recommendation:- 
“The Committee note that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is 
implementing an award scheme to provide incentive for meritorious innovations & 
inventions in various fields of petrochemicals and downstream plastics processing 
industry. The scheme aims at incentivizing meritorious innovations and institutions in 
petrochemicals and downstream plastics processing industry by giving awards to 
each of these innovations. Presently, the Scheme is being operated as  sub-scheme 
of the Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme. The National Awards for 
Technology Innovation are given in various categories for innovation in areas such as 
Polymeric Materials, Polymeric Products, Polymer Waste Management and 
Recycling Technology and related areas. The prize money for winners is Rs. 3 Lakhs 
and Rs. 1 Lakh for the runner- ups. The Committee note with dissat isfaction that the 
number of winners and runners up are coming down during the last few ye ars. In 
2015-16, 17 winners and 14 runners up were awarded and the same came down to 4 
winners and 9 runners up in 2019-20. In this regard, the Committee recommend the 
following:-  
(i)  the Department should review the Scheme guidelines so as to give more 
awards on liberal terms so as to encourage more people to come forward fo r 
innovation in the field;  
(ii)  steps should be taken for increasing publicity on these awards so that more 
persons engaged in research and development in this field benefitted of t he Scheme 
apply for these awards.  
(iii)  Quantum of price money for winners and runners up may be increase d so as 
to award befittingly the innovators and the budgetary allocation for the S cheme may 
enhanced accordingly.” 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Che micals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“The Department has already constituted an Expert Committee for revision  of the 
Scheme Guidelines of the National Awards scheme and committee will submit their 

42 
 
recommendation soon. The Department is also considering the suggestions an d 
directions issued by the Central Awards Support Unit (CASU) of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs in order to promote the National Awards.” 
 
 Recommendation No. 9 
CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE (COE) IN POLYMER TECHNOLOGY 
 
5.3 In regard to Centres of Excellence (COE) in Polymer Technology the Committe e 
made the following recommendation:- 
“The Committee note that the scheme aims at improving the existing petro chemicals 
technology and research in the country and to promote development of new 
applications of polymers and plastics. In phase-I of the Scheme implemented  up to 
the 2017, the Government of India provided financial support to the exten t of 
maximum of 50% of the total cost of the project subject to an uppe r limit of Rs. 6 
Crore over a period of 3 years. The Scheme was extended upto y ear 2020 with 
modified guidelines in 2016-17, which aim at promoting applied resea rch and 
technology transfer from Lab to Industry and funding of Rs. 5 crore per CoE. S o far, 
eleven Centres of Excellence (CoE) within the premises of reputed 
educational/research institutes are approved and established. The Comm ittee are 
glad to learn that these CoEs are making immense contribution in Research and 
Development in Polymer Technology and technology transfer to the industrie s. The 
Committee note the various achievements made at these CoEs such as:-  
  Development of Light weight sustainable bio composites from long and short fiber 
reinforced composites and nano composites for fuel efficient automobiles.  
 Development of Nano enhanced structural hybrid composites from natural fib er 
derivatives.  
 Catalyst development for newer class of meta-stable polyethylene ’s. 
                
The Committee are of the firm view that the investments in scientific advancement 
and R&D are the most important drivers of economy, as they lead to creation of 
wealth. Any new R&D or innovation that occurs in a nation drives productio n of 
completely new commodities and industries that creates wealth, jobs and im proves 
living standards. In view of the above the Committee recommend that this sch eme 
should be continued and even expanded to other reputed researc h institutes which 
are willing to work in the field of polymer technology. The Committee also 
recommend that separate budgetary allocation should be made for the Research and 
Development efforts of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. 
  

43 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.4 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Che micals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
“ The continuation and expansion of the Scheme for setting up of Cen tres of 
Excellence is under consideration. The suggestion regarding separate budgetary 
allocation for the Research and Development is appreciated and the same wil l be put 
forward to the Ministry of Finance.” 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
HINDUSTAN ORGANIC CHEMICALS LIMITED(HOCL) 
5.5 In regard to Hindustan Organic Chemicals Limited (HOCL) the Committee made the 
following recommendation:- 
“The committee note that Rasayani unit of Hindustan Organic Chemicals 
Limited (HOCL) was closed down under HOCL ’s restructuring plan. However, 
disposal of unencumbered land assets of HOCL at Rasayani (Maharastra) has 
been delayed due to various reasons. So far, out of total of approx . 684 acres of 
land approved by the Govt. for sale to BPCL, sale & registration of only abou t 374 
acres have been completed. Sale of balance approx. 310 acres land has b een 
affected by law & order situation due to protests by the local villagers to fe ncing of 
the purchased land by BPCL and their demand for compensation. A Com mittee 
under Divisional Commissioner, Konkan, constituted by the Maharashtra Govt. to 
address the concerns and demands of villagers in respect of remaining HOCL land 
for sale to BPCL has submitted its report to State Government. Decision of the 
State Govt. on the said report is awaited. In this regard, the Committee recommend 
that the Department should take up this matter with the State Government at th e 
highest level so that the issue is resolved at the earliest. The Committee wou ld 
also like to know the response of the State Government in this regard.” 
Reply of the Government 
5.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Che micals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 
“Secretary, DCPC had a meeting with Chief Secretary, Government of 
Maharashtra along with other Revenue authorities and BPCL through Video 
Conferencing on 12/04/2021. The issues in respect of sale of HOCL land at  

44 
 
 
 
Rasayani & Panvel were discussed in detail. Chief Secretary, Govt. of 
Maharashtra assured that the decision in the matter will be conveyed. Howev er, 
the decision of Govt. of Maharashtra is still awaited.” 
 
 
   New Delhi;                                      Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
  16 November,  2021                                            Chairperson, 
  25 Kartika, 1943 (Saka)                                                  Sta nding Committee on 
                                     Chemicals and Fertilizers 
  

45 
 
 
                                MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2021-22) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 16 th November, 2021 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1700.hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
K. KANIMOZHI -    CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
4. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
5. Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
6. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
7. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
8. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
9. 
 
 
 
       10  
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
 
Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
11 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
12 Dr. Anil Jain 
13 Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
14 Shri Arun Singh 
 
 SECRETARIAT  
1.  Shri  N. K. Jha  -  Director 
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director   
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Panna Lal   - Under Secretary 
  
  2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the newly constituted Commi ttee 
and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consider Memorandum No.1 regarding 
selection of subjects for examination during the year (2021-22) and also to discuss the future course 
of action of the Committee during the tenure.  
 
3. The Committee then considered Memorandum No. 1 and after discussion s elected 
the following subjects pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers for de tailed 
examination during 2021-22:- 
                                  
APPENDIX - I 
 
 

46 
 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
1. Nano-fertilizers for sustainable crop production and maintaining soil    health.   
2. Tax structure on fertilizers sector in terms of GST and import duties – analysis of 
the tax structure of raw material and final products and its impact on self-
sufficiency and use of fertilizers. 
3. Prices, Availability and distribution of fertilizers.  
 
II.
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
4.  Vision 2024 - To establish India as a leading manufacturer of che micals and 
petrochemicals. 
5.  Insecticides – promotion and development including safe usage -    licensing 
regime for insecticides. 
6.  Disposal of toxic waste from Bhopal Gas Leak site. 
7. Environmental Impact of Petrochemical products. 
 
III. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
8.    Promotion of Medical Device Industry.  
9.    Availability of Medicines and Medical devices for COVID Management.  
10.  Self sufficiency of key starting Material and intermediates. 
 
4. The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft Action  Taken 
Reports unanimously without any amendment/change:- 
 
i.     XXX    XXX     XXX  
 
ii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
iii. ATR on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in the 
Nineteenth Report on “Demands for Grants (2021- 22)” (Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals). 
 
iv.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
v.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
vi.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
vii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
5  The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to finalize and prese nt the Action 
Taken Reports to the Parliament in the ensuing session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  

47 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para-3 of Introduction to Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS ON THE SUBJECT 'DEMAND AND AVAILABILITY OF 
PETROCHEMICALS INCLUDING IMPORT AND EXPORTS ' OF THE MINISTRY OF 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 14 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1,2, 4, 5, 6, 10 and 11)   
7 
 
Percentage of Total 50.0% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
(Vide Recommendation No.  13)   
 
01 
 
Percentage of Total   7.2% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:-   
 (Vide Recommendation No. 3, 8 and 14)                                                         
03 
Percentage of Total 21.4% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
(Vide Recommendation No. 7, 9 and 12)                                                         
03 
Percentage of Total 21.4% 
Total 100% 
 