1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
                               MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
                               
                      (DEPARTMENT OF  FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in the ir Eighteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) ‘Revival of Closed and Sick Fertilizers units ’ of the  Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of  Fertilizers)] 
 
 
 
 
    TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
       LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
            DECEMBER, 2021 / AGRAHAYANA, 1943 (SAKA) 
24 

2 
 
  
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Eighteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on “Revival of 
Closed and Sick Fertilizers units” of the  Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of  Fertilizers)] 
  
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.12.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02.12.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
         DECEMBER 2021 / AGRAHAYANA, 1943 (SAKA) 
 
  


3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) (iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22) (v) 
INTRODUCTION (vi) 
Chapter I Report  1 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
18 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
24 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
29 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
36 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2021-22) held on 16th November 2021 
41 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report  
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers on the subject “Revival of Closed and Sick 
Fertilizers Units” pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of  Fertilizers). 
43 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Deepak Baij 
4 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
5 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
6 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
7 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8 Shri Pakauri Lal 
9 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
11 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
12 Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
13 Shri Atul Kumar Singh alias Atul Rai 
14 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15 Shri M. Selvaraj 
16 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
17 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
18 Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
19 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
20 Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari# 
21 Vacant* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26 Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27 
28 
Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
Shri Arun Singh$ 
29 Shri A.D. Singh 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora    -  Officer on Special Duty 
2. Shri  Nabin Kumar Jha   -  Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram   -  Additional Director 
4. Shri Panna Lal    - Under Secretary 
5. Shri P.R. Siva Prasad   - Assistant Committee Officer  
 
$Re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.12.2020. 
#Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 28.12.2020 vice Shri Nandigam Suresh. 
*Vacant vice Shri Er. Bishweswar Tudu nominated MoS on 07.07.2021. 

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri Deepak Baij 
5. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
6. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
7. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
8. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
10. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
11. Shri Vasava Prabhubhai Nagarbhai  
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt Aparupa Poddar (Afrin Ali) 
14. Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
15. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
16. Shri M. Selvaraj 
17. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
18. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
19. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
21. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
24. Dr. Anil Jain 
25. Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27. Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Arun Singh 
29. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
30. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
31. 
 
Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Nabin Kumar Jha - Director  
2. Shri C.Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary 
4 Shri Panna Lal - Under Secretary 
5. Shri P. R. Siva Prasad - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
  

6 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
  
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 (2021-22) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on the ir behalf, 
present this Twenty Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Eighte enth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilize rs  
(2020-21) on the subject ‘Revival of Closed and Sick Fertilizers Units ’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of  Fertilizers). 
 
2. The Eighteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committe e on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 17.03.2021 and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 17.03.2021. The Action Taken replies of Government to  all observations / 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 14.07.2021.  The  Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2021- 22) considered and adopted this Report 
on Action Taken Replies at their sitting held on 16th November 2021. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (Seventeen th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the further comments of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in Chapter-I of the Report.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                         
New Delhi;                                                                        KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
16 November, 2021                                                                                   Chairperson,               
 25 Kartika, 1943 (Saka)                                                       Standing Committee on 
                   Chemicals and Fertilizers

1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER – I  
  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2020-21) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommend ations 
contained in the Eighteenth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on “Revival of Closed and Sick Fertilizer Units” of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 17.3.2021. In all, the Committee made 9 Observations/Recommendations in 
the Report. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were requeste d 
to furnish Action Taken Replies to the Observations/ Recommendations contained in th e 
Eighteenth Report on the subject “Revival of Closed and Sick Fertilizers Units ” within 
three months from the date of presentation of the Report i.e. by 17.06.2021. However, the 
Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 9 Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report were furnished by the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) vide their O.M. No.11021/4/2021-PARL. Dated 
14.07.2021.   These Replies have been examined and categorized as follows:-   
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Governme nt 
 
 Rec. Nos.  1, 3, 4 and 5                        (Total =  04) 
  These are included in Chapter-II of the Report 
       
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to p ursue 
in view of the Government’s reply-  
 
Sl. No. 2, 6 and 9                        (Total =   03) 
  These are included in Chapter-III of the Report     
      
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies given b y the  
Government are not acceptable to the Committee   
                                                                                       (Total = 02) 
  Sl.No. 7 and 8 
  These are included in Chapter-IV of the Report   
   
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited- 
                                                                   (Total = 02) 
  Sl.No. 3 and 5 
      These are included in Chapter V of the Report     
      
 

2 
 
 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on further comments/ 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I and Chapter-V should be furnished 
expeditiously and not later than three months from the presentation of the Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments.   
  
Recommendation Nos. 3 & 4 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
Revival of Talcher   Unit of FCIL 
 
 
1.5 Stressing the need for commissioning of Talcher Fertilizers Unit of FCIL  within the 
originally fixed scheduled time frame and project cost, the Committee recommende d as 
under:-  
 
“The Committee note that the erstwhile Talcher  unit of FCIL is being revived 
through  setting up of  a new coal based urea plant with a capacity of 12.7 LMTPA of urea 
by a Joint Venture company named M/s. Talcher Fertilizers Ltd, (TFL) which wa s formed 
on 27- 10-2015 with  the equity holdings among RCF, GAIL, CIL and  FCIL.   Th e 
Committee note that the total cost of the project  is Rs.13,227 Crore with 10% cost 
escalation as per the revised Detailed Feasibility Report(DFR) which is much higher when 
compared to the other four fertilizer units which are also  being revived currently.  The 
cost of other four projects range between Rs.7000 crore to Rs.7100crore. The main 
reason for higher cost of this project is it is coal based while the others are gas based 
urea plants.  In this regard, the Committee note the submission of the Departme nt that 
this plant would use clean coal technology which will reduce dependence on n atural gas 
for fertilizer production and likely to open up new avenues for using v ast coal reserves in 
the country.  Further, the Committee note that the operational cost of this  plant will be 
lower and the end product will not be costlier.    Presently, the pre-project activities are in 
progress and it is targeted to be commissioned by September, 2023. Howeve r, the 
commissioning of the plant may be delayed by six to nine months due to Covid 19 lock 
down.   Since it is a high cost project and its cost of construction has already b een 
escalated by 10% as per the revised Detailed Feasibility Report(DFR), the Committee 
recommend that a comprehensive assessment may be made immediately about the 
impact of lockdown on the progress of the project work particularly on the asp ect of cost 
escalation and based on the assessment concrete steps should be taken to  ensure that 
necessary impetus is given  for completing and commissioning the fertilizer plant during 
2023 within the originally fixed cost of the project. Action taken by the Department of 
Fertilizers in this regard may be apprised to the Committee.”  
 

3 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
1.6 “The Committee note that Lump Sum Turn Key (LSTK) contracts have bee n awarded 
to M/S Wuhuan of China for Coal Gasification and Ammonia /Urea packages of th e Talcher 
project valuing approximately Rs.7900 Crore.  In this regard, the Committee would like to 
know the mode of selection of the Chinese firm, terms of the contracts a warded to it, 
progress of the works undertaken by this firm and the present status of the se contracts 
particularly in the wake of recent developments after COVID 19 pandemic.”  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT (RECOMMENDATION Nos. 3 & 4) 
 1.7 In their Action Taken Reply to the aforementioned recommendation of  the Committee, 
the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 
“As recommended by the Committee, DoF vide letter dated 08.06.2021 has reque sted 
TFL to carry out a comprehensive assessment immediately about the impact of  
lockdown due to Covid-19 pandemic on the progress of the project work particularly  
on the aspect of cost escalation and suggest concrete steps to be tak en to ensure 
completion of the project within scheduled time. On receipt of the report, the 
committee would be apprised accordingly.  With respect to Lump Sum Turn Key 
(LSTK) contract awarded to M/s Wuhan Engg. Company Ltd, information on mod e of 
selection, terms of the contract, progress of work and impact of Covid-19 pa ndemic is 
given in Annexure given below.” 
 
 
Annexure pertains to Recommendation No. 4  
Revival of Talcher unit of FCIL  
 
1.8   Award of Lump Sum Turn Key (LSTK) contracts for Coal Gasification Plant and 
Ammonia /Urea Plants to M/s Wuhuan Engineering Company, China. 
 
1. Mode of selection of Firm 
 
(a) Tender was floated on ” Open International Competitive Bidding basis ” and 
Press Notification was published in leading National Dailies 
(b)  Prequalification of Bids was done against the Prequalification Criterion o f NIT 
(Tender) 
(c) Technical and Commercial Evaluation of Bids was done for the Pre-q ualified 
Bids  
(d)  Price Bids were opened and evaluated for the Prequalified and Tech no – 
commercially qualified bids. Opened Bids were evaluated and price 
negotiation meetings were done by the duly nominated committee w ith the 
Lowest (L1) Bidder, M/s Wuhuan Engineering Company, China 
(e)  After the Price Negotiation, placement of Order has been done 
 
 
2.  Terms of the Contracts awarded to it: 

4 
 
 
LSTK Contracts have been awarded to M/s Wuhuan based on terms and  conditions of 
NIT (Tender) on single responsibility basis. The major terms of the contracts are as 
follows: 
 
Sl  Particulars Coal Gasification Package Ammonia/Urea Package 
1 Issuance of LoI 11.09.2019 19.09.2019 
2 Zero Date of 
project 
19.09.2019 
3 Approx. 
Contract Price 
incl. taxes 
USD 292.65 million + INR 
3,412.41 cr. 
USD 148.10 million + INR 
1410.31 cr 
4 Contract 
Effective Date 
11.11.2019 19.04.2020 
5 Time schedule  Mechanical Completion – 
41 months from Sl. 4 
 Preliminary Acceptance – 
46 months from Sl. 4 
 Mechanical Completion – 
36 months from Sl. 4  
 Preliminary Acceptance – 
41 months from Sl. 4 
6 Technology 
Licensors 
 Gasification: Air Products 
(Formerly Shell)  
 Purification: Linde AG 
 Ammonia plant – KBR LLC 
 Urea plant – Stamicarbon 
B.V 
7 Contract 
Security 
10% of the contract value 10% of the contract value 
8 Defect Liability 
Period 
12 months from date of 
acceptance by TFL 
12 months from date of 
acceptance by TFL 
9 Seat of 
Arbitration 
New Delhi New Delhi 
 
3. Progress of the works undertaken by the firm 
 
Due to continued impact of COVID – 19 pandemic in India and China since Dec., 2019 
and other contextual issues, the progress of the works undertaken by M/s Wuh uan is 
lagging behind and is as follows : 
 
Sl  Package Scheduled Actual 
1 Coal Gasification 40.72% 9.17% 
2 Ammonia/Urea 34.66% 9.07% 
 
4. The present status of these contracts particularly in the wake of recent 
developments after COVID 19 pandemic 
 
With easing of lockdown restrictions, the physical activities at site are undergoing af ter 
following COVID-19 protocol. Currently piling activity is under progress at site along with 
laying of construction water infrastructure inside Coal Gasification & Ammonia Urea  
plant area. Currently 12 nos. of Wuhuan ’s officials are stationed in India and VISA of 
additional 06 nos. of manpower has also been approved on 15thJune 2021.  
 
  (Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. 
11021/4/2021-PARL   dated 14.7.2021) 
 

5 
 
 Further Comments of the Committee  
 
 1.9 The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers has   requested 
M/s. Talcher Fertilizers Ltd, (TFL)  to carry out a comprehensive assessment 
immediately about the impact of lockdown due to Covid-19 pandemic on the 
progress of the project work particularly on the aspect of cost escalation for 
taking concrete steps for  completion of the project within scheduled time.   The 
Committee further note that Lump Sum Turn Key (LSTK) contracts for Coal 
Gasification Plant and Ammonia /Urea Plants  have been awarded to M/s Wuhuan 
Engineering Company, China. Due to continued impact of COVID – 19 pandemic 
in India and China since Dec., 2019 and other contextual issues, the progress of 
the works undertaken by M/s Wuhuan is lagging behind.   Against the scheduled 
completion of 40.72% of Coal Gasification Plant, only 9.17% of the work has been 
completed.  As regards, Ammonia/Urea Plant, 9.07% of work has only been 
completed against the scheduled completion of 34.66%.  With the easing of 
lockdown, now the construction activities have again been started by M/s 
Wuhuan.  In this regard, the Committee hope that the Department of Fertilizers 
would ensure completion of comprehensive assessment by TFL in a time bound 
manner and based on the assessment concrete steps would be taken for the 
completion of the project within in original time frame and cost.  Progress made in 
this regard may be intimated to the Committee.  
Recommendation No. 5 
 
Revival of Gorakhpur and Sindri Units of FCIL and Barauni Units of HFCL 
 
1.10 Stressing the need for early commissioning of the Gorakhpur & Sindri units of FCIL 
and Barauni Unit of HFCL by M/s. Hindustan Urvarak & Rasayan Limited (HURL) an d for 
infusion of funds to meet the cost overrun occurred due to Covid- 19 lockdowns, the 
Committee recommended as under:-  
 

6 
 
“The Committee note that the revival of erstwhile  Gorakhpur & Sindri units of  FCIL 
and erstwhile  Barauni Unit of HFCL is being done by M/s. Hindustan Urvarak &  
Rasayan Limited (HURL) which  is a Joint Venture Company of National Thermal 
Power Corporation Limited (NTPC), Coal India Ltd (CIL), Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited (IOCL) as lead promoters with FCIL & HFCL as other partners
  for setting up 
of new  Gas-based Urea Plants with a capacity of 12.7 lakh MTPA of Ure a at each of 
these locations. Considerable progress has been made in commissioning these plants 
viz. completion of pre-project activities, environment clearances obtained, LSTK 
contracts awarded, gas supply agreements signed, etc. As per original programme, 
Gorakhpur plant was likely to be commissioned by February, 2021 and Sindri and 
Barauni units were to be commissioned by May, 2021.    However, lock do wns due to 
COVID 19 pandemic has created huge impact on progress of construction work in a ll 
the three plants.  As of July, 2020 only 80.5% of work has been comp leted against the 
original plan of 94.9% in respect of Gorakhpur Plant, 74.2% against the plan of 91.4% 
in respect of Sindri Plant and 72.9% against 91.4% in respect of Baruni Plan t.  As a 
result, completion and commissioning of these projects are likely to be delayed b y five 
to seven months.  The Committee note that the Department has only assesse d the 
quantum of delay likely to occur due to COVID 19 lockdowns but the subs equent 
quantum of cost overrun has not yet been estimated by the Departmen t.  The 
Department informed the Committee that there are delays   
  in receipt of Steel 
structure/fabricated equipment from all over India due to closure of workshops for 3 to 
4 months, delays in shipment of LSTK equipment for Barauni and Sindri plants and 
invoking of ‘Force Majeure ’ clause on account of COVID by LSTK & other agencies.  
So there is likely hood of cost escalation of all the three projects.   The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should study the impa ct of 
COVID 19 lockdowns on the progress of work in respect of all the revival projects 
particularly on the  cost overrun due to lockdowns  and should take imm ediate 
necessary action for the timely completion and commissioning of the projects including 
infusion of funds for cost overrun occurred due to lockdowns. The issue of inv oking of 
‘Force Majeure ’ clause on account of COVID by LSTK & other agencies should also 
be studied and appropriate action should be taken against those LSTK c ontractors for 
violations if any.   Action taken in this regard may be intimated to the Committee.” 
  
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
1.11 In their Action Taken Reply to the aforementioned recommendation of  the Committee, 
the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 
“The overall progress achieved by end of May 2021 by Gorakhpur unit is 
91.2%, by Sindri unit is 89.4% and by Barauni unit is 88.7%. With respect to 
impact of COVID-19 lockdown on the progress of work of HURL projects, it 
may be informed that DoF vide letter dated 08.06.2021, has requested HURL 
to carry out the study on the impact of lockdowns due to COVID-19 pande mic 
on the progress of work with respect to revival projects particularly on the cost 
overrun due to lockdowns and suggest necessary steps to mitigate the impact. 
On receipt of the report, the Committee would be apprised accordingly.” 
 
               
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
 
1.12 The Committee note   that the overall progress achieved by  the end of May, 2 021 
in construction of  Gorakhpur, Sindri and Barauni units  w as  91.2%, 89.4% and  88.7% 
respectively. Further as recommended by the Committee, the Department has 
requested HURL to carry out the study on the impact of lockdowns due to COVID- 19 
pandemic on the progress of work with respect to revival projects particularly on the 
cost overrun due to lockdowns.  Since  the  earliest revival of these plant s  is vital for  
making  the  country self-sufficient  in the fertilizer production ,  the Committee hope 
that assessment would be completed in a time bound manner and based on the 
outcome of the assessment , cost overrun aspect including infusion of necessary 
funds, if any, would be addressed and the work on all the three plants would  be 
completed in a time bound manner with the aim of  completing the work within the 
original cost.  The progress made in this regard should be intimated to the Committee.  
Further, the reply furnished by the Department is silent on whether any of the LSTK 
contractors invoked the clause of “
Force Majeure”.  In this regard, specific reply may 
be furnished by the Department including the information on action taken on those 
LSTK contractors who invoked the clause.  
 

8 
 
Recommendation No. 7 
Financial restructuring of FACT 
 
1.13 Emphasizing the need for an in-depth study for financial restructuring of FACT in 
view of its present economic condition and CAPEX programmes, so as to tra nsform it into 
a profit making company, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
“The Committee are concerned to note that the progress made in regard to 
financial restructuring of FACT is not satisfactory.  FACT became a sick CPSU 
when its net worth became negative in 2012-13.   Subsequently, the     Department 
of Fertilizers moved a Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) Note in 
2014 on revival plan of FACT by infusion of funds and waiver of Government of 
India(GoI) loans & interest.    Since the matter remained inconclusive, another    
CCEA note on Financial Restructuring of FACT was circulated on 23.2.2018  for 
Inter Ministerial Consultation (IMC) having the proposals for approval for 
sale/leverage of surplus land possessed by the company, write-off of GoI loan a nd 
its interest, etc. Subsequently a meeting was held in Prime Minister ’s Office on 
10.08.2018 to discuss the issues connected with the revival of FACT wherein it 
was decided to delink the sale of land of FACT from the Cabinet note for fina ncial 
restructuring of FACT and to conduct a drawing board study on the fe asibility of 
merger of FACT and MFL with other Fertilizer Units of  Department of  Fertilizers 
by NITI Aayog subject experts.   Then the Union Cabinet approved the sale of 
surplus   lands to BPCL and the Government of Kerala and utilization of the sale 
proceeds by FACT to  address its  working capital deficiency and  to enhance 
physical and financial performance by implementing capacity expansion projects 
for sustainable growth of the Company.  During 2018, FACT received Rs.420 crore 
through sale of land to BPCL and during 2019 received Rs.967.69 crore from the 
Government of Kerala for transfer of land.   Based on the sale proceed s, FACT 
Board had approved CAPEX plans for Rs.700 crore. On 22 nd January, 2020. The 
Department of Fertilizers received the NITI Aayog Report on “feasibility of merger 
of FACT & MFL with other fertilizer units of Department of Fertilizers and op tions 
for financial restructuring/revival of above PSUs ”.  After examination of the 
recommendations made in the Report, DoF sent its comments to PMO on 13 May, 
2020.  Even though this Committee is examining the subject, DoF had cho sen not 
to provide    NITI Aayog Report to the Committee.  As none of the Fertilizer Units 
had shown their interest in absorption/merger of FACT/MFL with them, this 
proposal seems to have been dropped by the Government.  In a subse quent 

9 
 
meeting held by the Prime Minister ’s office on 12 June, 2020 it was inter alia   
decided that  FACT should  try to rationalize its  manpower, enhance opera ting 
efficiencies to achieve the desired restructuring and no further expansion invo lving 
capital expenditure and no new recruitment should be taken up till the tim e the 
proposal is finalized.  In this regard, the Secretary DoF has been advised to   
revisit the proposal accordingly and submit revised financial restructuring 
proposals in the light of the observations made by the Prime Minister ’s office.    
The Committee find that the matter relating to waiver of GoI loan and th e 
accumulated interest has been put into cold storage.  Total GoI loan and t he 
accrued interest was Rs.1770.49 crore as on 31.03.2017 and the same has bee n 
increased to Rs.2248.50 crore as on 31.03.2019.  Moreover, negative ne t worth of 
the company had grown from (-)Rs.192.47 crore in 2012-13 to (-) Rs.1 523.69 
Crore in 2018-19.  However, the company earned a profit of Rs.163.15 cror e 
during 2018-19.  In view of the above, the Committee feel that it is nece ssary t o 
waive the Government of India loan and the accrued interest so as to ena ble the 
company to continue its profit making trend in view of the CAPEX programmes 
being undertaken by it.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the following:- 
 
(i) The Secretary, DoF  should make an indepth study of the present position  of the 
company and prepare a fresh financial restructuring proposal of the com pany 
taking into account the present economic condition of the company on the ba sis 
of sale proceeds received by it from the sale of surplus land, rationalization  of 
staff structure, etc.  The main objective of the proposal should be profitab le 
running of the company in a healthy atmosphere.   
(ii) The waiver of Government of India loan and the accrued interest should be 
considered favorably so as to enable the company function in a healthy manner. 
(iii) As an outcome of the discussion with PMO, no further expansion involving  
capital expenditure is to be carried out by FACT till the revised financial 
restructuring proposal is finalized and in this regard, it is not clear whether the 
CAPEX programmes already approved by the cabinet have been put on hold or 
not.   In case,   FACT has already embarked upon its CAPEX programme s, the 
same should not be stopped as it would it affect its expansion and 
modernization programmes.   
(iv) As on 31.03.2019, an amount of Rs. 503.23 crore was due to  be paid to FACT 
on account of fertilizer subsidy.  Such delays in payment of subsidy by DoF  

10 
 
would aggravate further the poor economic condition of the company.  A ll the 
dues of fertilizer subsidy to FACT should be immediately paid.    
(v) The Secretary, DoF should prepare the fresh financial restructuring proposal in  
a time bound manner and submit the same for the consideration of the  
competent authority at the earliest. 
 
The action taken on the above recommendations should be furnished to th e 
Committee within three months.”   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.14 In their Action Taken Reply to the aforementioned recommendation of  the Committee, 
the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 
“A high-level meeting held on June12, 2020.  It was inter-alia decided th at FACT  
should monetize their vacant lands, enhance operating efficiencies and rationalize their 
manpower to achieve the desired restructuring to ensure that as far as possible there 
should not be any financial outgo of Government of India.  Steps are be ing taken by 
DoF/FACT in accordance with the directions. 
 
  FACT was also asked to ensure the PMO ’s directive on manpower study is 
 fulfilled, so that further financial restructuring of FACT can be carried on. 
  As informed by FACT, FACT has engaged third party viz., Administrative Staff 
 College of India (ASCI), Hyderabad for study on the rationalization of manpower.  
 As proposed to the Government of India, FACT would be resorting to expansio n 
 projects at Cochin Division to augment capacity, which require additional 
 manpower.  Further, FACT has expanded marketing operations to Northern region 
 states of Gujarat, Maharashtra, West Bengal and Odisha and is in the process o f 
 appointment of Dealers.  The additional manpower requirements in the abov e 2 
 areas is also being assessed with the study on rationalization of manpower. The 
 report of the study is still awaited.  
  Competent Authority has approved restarting the operation of the Caprolactam 
 plant, by recruitment of proposed 234 manpower, out of which 50% i.e. 117 nos. 
 would be on regular basis through direct recruitment mode and the remaining 50% 
 through contractual/outsourcing mode, vide letter dated 5th May, 2021. The 
 approval is subject to the following conditions: - 
 
 

11 
 
I. FACT shall ensure the operational efficiency, sustenance and safety 
requirements of running the Caprolactum plant by judicious deployment of the 
thus recruited manpower; 
II. There shall be no financial outgo from the Government of India for 
operationalizing the Caprolactum plant including the expenses relating to the 
manpower.  
  With respect to CAPEX projects of Rs. 700 Crore, work on the sites at Ammonia 
 Barge with Bullets ,Phosphoric Acid Storage Tank at WI, Sulphuric Acid Sto rage 
 Tank at FACT-CD and Reconstruction of Ammonia berth at Willingdon island are in 
 progress.  In some other projects like NP Plant Project and Ammonia Storage 
 Tank, tenders have been re-floated by FACT.  The same has been in formed by 
 FACT. 
  As on 31.03.2019, Department of Fertilizers was paid the subsidy amounting  of Rs. 
 500.77 Crore to FACT. 
   With the approval of Cabinet, DIPAM has notified the New Public Sector Enterprise 
 ( “PSE”) Policy for Atmanirbhar Bharat vide OM dated 04 th February, 2021.  It has 
 been decided that Fertilizer Sector comes under the Non-Strategic Se ctors.  It has 
 been further decided that PSEs in non-strategic sectors shall be considered for  
 privatization, where feasible, otherwise such enterprises shall be considered fo r 
 closure.  The decision on financial restructuring will be taken after considering the  
 Government Policy. ” 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.15 The Committee are concerned to note that  the  decision on  financial 
restructuring of FACT has been put into back burner by the Department of 
Fertilizer  as the same will be  taken  up by the Department   after considering  
the  above stated  “New Public Sector Enterprise  Policy for Atmanirbhar 
Bharat”.  As a result of this move, all the efforts made for the financial 
restructuring of FACT since 2014 have gone in vain.  It is a matter of grave 
concern that the Department of Investment and Public Asset Management 
(DIPAM) has declared Fertilizers as a non-strategic sector and the fertilizer 
PSEs will  be considered  for either privatization or closure. 
In this regard, the 
Committee regret to note  that the Department of Fertilizers  has not been able  
to convince DIPAM about the need for making fertilizers a strategic sector as 
the production of required quantum of food grains is essential  for meeting  the 

12 
 
needs of huge population of the country .  It is very much necessary to hold 
consultations with various stake holders including fertilizer industry, farmers 
and ohters before taking such major decisions.    Since fertilizer is a core 
sector concerning food security of the country and the coexistence of both 
public and private sectors in the field of fertilizer production is essential to 
boost the agricultural production,  the Committee strongly recommend that the 
decision to declare fertilizer as a non-strategic sector should be reconsidered 
and this sector should be declared as a strategic sector.  This recommendation 
of the Committee should be sent to Secretary, DIPAM for specific reply within 
three months of presentation of the report.  
 
 
1.16  As the reply given by the Department  to  the  recommendation of the 
Committee on financial restructuring of FACT is not satisfactory and evasive , 
the Committee reiterate the earlier recommendation that the Secretary of the 
Department   should make an indepth study of the present position of the 
company and prepare a fresh financial restructuring proposal of the company 
taking into account the present economic condition of the company on the 
basis of sale proceeds received by it from the sale of surplus land, 
rationalization of staff structure, waiver of existing Government of India loan, 
etc  and take necessary steps for financial restructuring of the company and its 
continuous running as a profit making public sector enterprise.  Specific  reply 
should be given on this recommendation of the Committee. 
      
Recommendation No. 8 
Financial restructuring of MFL 
 
1.17 While emphasizing the need for in-depth study for financial restructuring of MFL in 
view of its present economic condition, etc. so as to facilitate it to transform into a profit 
making company in a time bound manner, the Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
“The Committee are constrained to note that  very little progress has only bee n 
made in financial restructuring of Madras Fertilizers Limited(MFL) which is public 
sector fertilizer manufacturing company rendering its service to the nation since  
1966.  The company ’s net worth gone into negative during 2003-04 and it remains 
negative till now.  The main reasons for its sickness are frequent shut downs, 
higher energy consumption, working capital crisis, Feedstock conversion project , 

13 
 
floods and Vardha Cyclone.  DoF informed the Committee that in terms o f 
Department of Public Enterprises guidelines dated 29.10.2015 on revival a nd 
restructuring of sick Central Public Sector Enterprises, M/s PDIL was engaged as a 
consultant for drawing of financial restructuring plans of MFL.   M/s PDIL ha d 
submitted their report on 20.12.2016 wherein it was inter alia  suggested  
replacement of old & problematic equipment, energy efficiency schemes, feedstock 
change over, conversion of GOI loan to equity and waiver of interest on GoI Loans.  
On the basis of PDIL Report, MFL Board submitted recommendations on revival 
plan to DoF on 01.06.17 with the suggestions for waiver of GoI loan and the 
accrued interest and raising loan from Financial Institutions/banks for its CAPEX 
Schemes.  Subsequently, a Draft CCEA Note containing proposal for financial 
restructuring of MFL was forwarded by DoF for Inter Ministerial Consultation on 
15.11.2017.  As per another decision, DoF moved a proposal with Depa rtment of 
Expenditure (DoE) for waiver of interest and conversion of outstanding loan to zero 
interest loan to be repaid over 15 years.  But DoE turned down the propo sal with 
the suggestion that it needs to be examined in the context of progress made on the 
administrative steps, viz. plan of action for land monetization, early complet ion of 
the gas pipeline for sustainability in cost of production, etc. Meanwhile, a meeting 
was held in Prime Minister ’s Office on 23.01.2018 wherein it was directed to 
explore possibility of monetization of surplus land of MFL. In a nother meeting held 
in Prime Minister ’s Office on 10.08.2018 to discuss the issues connected with the 
revival of MFL, it was inter-alia decided that NITI Aayog would conduct a drawing 
board study on the feasibility of merger of MFL with other Fertilizer Units u nder 
DoF.  After examination of the recommendations made in the NITI Ayog Report, 
DoF sent its comments to PMO on 13 May, 2020 wherein it was  stated that  
possibility/ viability of  merger of MFL with other fertilizer CPSEs and its  strategic 
disinvestment may be considered only after its  financial restructuring  is completed 
and it become financially sound to some reasonable extent. In a sub sequent 
meeting held by the Prime Minister ’s office on 12 June, 2020 it was inter alia   
decided that  MFL should  try to rationalize its  manpower, enhance operatin g 
efficiencies to achieve the desired restructuring and no further expansion invo lving 
capital expenditure and no new recruitment should be taken up till the tim e the 
proposal is finalized.  In this regard, the Secretary DoF has been advised to   
revisit the proposal accordingly and submit revised financial restructuring 
proposals in the light of the observations made by the Prime Minister ’s office.  In 
this regard, the Committee note that unlike FACT, the surplus land holding  of MFL 

14 
 
is very less and it is facing difficulties in selling the same.  Out of 70 Acres of lan d, 
MFL sold 4.98 acres to CPCL.   For selling the balance 65 acres of surplus land,  
MFL has taken up the matter with IOCL, other various CPSEs and the State 
Government of Tamil Nadu.  But it has not materialized so far.   On the other hand, 
the GoI loan alongwith its accrued interest has increased from Rs.1063.28 crore as 
on 31.3.2017 to Rs.1156.90 crore as on 31.03.2019 with the interest comp onent 
growing more than the principal component.  However, there is some silver lining 
in the functioning of MFL as it has converted its feedstock from Naptha to 
Gas(RLNG) and as a result it has started earning profit.  Moreover, MFL has 
initiated energy saving measures which may result in savings.  Further it has 
envisaged increasing production volume of fertilizers for increased earnings.  In 
view of the above, the Committee hope that MFL can be transformed int o a profit 
making company if the administrative reforms and the financial restructuring are 
undertaken in a time bound manner and would like to make the follo wing 
recommendations:-  
     
(i) The Secretary, DoF should make an indepth study of the present position of 
the company and prepare a fresh financial restructuring proposal of the compa ny 
taking into account the present economic condition of the company on the b asis of 
feedstock conversion from Naptha to Gas, energy saving schemes,  rationalizatio n 
of staff structure, difficulties being faced in land monetization etc.  The ma in 
objective of the proposal should be profitable running of the com pany in a healthy 
atmosphere.   
 
(ii)  Proposal of the MFL Board to waive the Government of India loan and the 
accrued interest thereon should be considered favorably so as to enable the 
company function in a healthy manner. 
(iii) Out of 70 Acres of land, MFL was able to monetize only 4.98 acres and  the 
rest of 65.02 acres remain unsold.  In this regard, DoF should find out ways to sell  
the remaining surplus land by taking up the matter with Public Sector Oil 
companies who have properties adjoining to MFL.  Government of Tamil Nadu 
may also be impressed upon to take over the land.  In case of continuing  
difficulties in selling the land, the options to monetize the land may also be 
explored.  
(iv) As on 31.03.2019, an amount of Rs. 706.52 crore was due to b e paid to 
MFL on account of fertilizer subsidy.  Such delays in payment of subsidy by  DoF 

15 
 
would aggravate further the poor economic condition of the company.  All the dues 
of fertilizer subsidy to MFL  should be immediately paid.    
 
(v) The Secretary, DoF should prepare the fresh financial restructuring proposal 
in a time bound manner and submit the same for the consideration of th e 
competent authority at the earliest.  
 
 The action taken on the above recommendations should be furnished to the 
Committee within three months.” 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.18    In their Action Taken Reply to the aforementioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:- 
 
“A high-level meeting held on June12, 2020.  It was inter-alia de cided that MFL 
should monetize their vacant lands, enhance operating efficiencies and rationaliz e 
their manpower to achieve the desired restructuring to ensure that as far as 
possible there should not be any financial outgo of Government of India.  Steps are 
being taken by DoF/MFL in accordance with the directions. 
 
 MFL was also asked to ensure the PMO ’s directive on manpower study are fulfilled, so 
that further financial restructuring of MFL can be carried on. 
 
 With respect to rationalization of Manpower, MFL has furnished the draft Notice Inviting 
Tender to hire an external expert agency to conduct a study on rationalization of 
Manpower of MFL wherein some suggestions were given by Department of  Fertilizers 
vide letter dated 18 th February, 2021.The suggestionshave been incorporated in the 
Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) by MFL.  Now, the tender has been floated by MFL. 
 
 So far as selling of remaining 65.02 acres of land, MFL has informed tha t as a part of 
repeated effort, MFL recently has written a letter to the Principal Secretary to  
Government of Tamil Nadu, Industry Department on 30.03.2021 for sale of land but not 
yet materialized. 
 
 As on 31.03.2019, Department of Fertilizers has paid all the subsi dy except theAddl. 
Fixed Cost Benefit i.e.Rs.  14.14 Cr.  This Department is in process of releasing th e 
same.   
 
 With the approval of Cabinet, DIPAM has notified the New Public Sector Enterprise 
(“PSE”) Policy for Atmanirbhar Bharat vide OM dated 04 th February, 2021.  It has been 
decided that Fertilizer Sector comes under the Non-Strategic Sectors.  It has been 
further decided that PSEs in non-strategic sectors shall be considered for privatiz ation, 

16 
 
where feasible, otherwise such enterprises shall be considered for closure.  The 
decision on financial restructuring will be taken after considering the Governme nt 
Policy.” 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.19 The Committee are constrained to note that very little progress has 
been made in the financial restructuring of Madras Fertilizers Ltd. (MFL).  Also 
the  above reply given by the Department  to the recommendation of the 
Committee that  the decision on financial restructuring will be taken after 
considering the Government Policy of privatization or closure of PSEs pertaining 
to non-strategic sectors is not acceptable to the Committee.  Since fertilizer 
sector is back bone of agriculture, as recommended in Para-1.15 above, the 
Department should take up with DIPAM prominently for the declaration of 
fertilizers as a strategic sector.  This recommendation should also be sent to 
secretary, DIPAM for specific action taken reply.  
 
1.20   After the feedstock conversion from Naptha to Gas, implementation of 
energy saving schemes,  rationalization of staff structure, monetization of 
surplus land, etc .,   there is a strong possibility that MFL can turn into  a profit 
making entity.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate  that the Secretary, DoF 
should prepare the financial restructuring proposal as recommended above and 
take necessary action for the approval of the same.  Progress made in this 
regard should be intimated to the Committee. 
1.21  The Committee are also concerned to note that the Department of 
Fertilzers has not taken any action in regard to monetization of surplus land of 
MFL  and left everything to MFL to act in the matter .   In this regard, the 
Committee would like to reiterate the earlier recommendation that Department of 
Fertilizers should  take  up the matter at Secretary level with Public Sector Oil 
companies who have properties adjoining to MFL and also with the  Government 

17 
 
of Tamil Nadu and impress upon them to take over the land.  In case of 
continuing difficulties in selling the land, the options to monetize the land may 
also be explored.  The Committee  may be informed about   the progress made in 
the matter. 
 
  
  
 
  

18 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
 BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Revival of Closed Fertilizer Units 
  
2.1 The Committee are concerned  to note that out of nine Public Sector fertilizer 
manufacturing companies under the Department of Fertilizers, two have been closed and 
three are  sick/loss making.  Fertilizer Corporation of India(FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilize r 
Corporation Ltd (HFCL) were closed  in 2002.  The main reasons for closure of thes e 
companies were the obsolete technology, high energy consumption due to high cost feed 
stocks, poor quality of power/frequent interruptions of power supply and  dearth of funds 
for repair and renewals.  In order to have a strong fertilizer manufacturin g base in the 
country, Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs gave in-principle approval in 2 007 to 
examine the feasibility of revival of closed units of FCIL and HFCL.   After many initiatives 
during the subsequent years, the Union Cabinet finally approved the p roposal for revival 
of five closed fertilizer units of FCIL and HFCL viz., Ramagundam Fertilizers a nd 
Chemicals Ltd. of FCIL, (ii) Talcher Unit of FCIL, (iii) Gorakhpur Unit of FCIL. (iv) Sindri 
Unit of FCIL and (v) Barauni unit of HFCL on 13.07.2016.  Subsequently th ese units are 
being revived by setting up new urea plants of 12.7 Lakh Metric T onnes Per Annum 
(LMTPA) capacity each at Ramagundam(Telengana), Talcher(odisha), Gorakhpur( Uttar 
Pradesh), Sindri(Jharkhand) and Barauni (Bihar) through nomination route through 
formation of Joint Ventures of leading Public Sector Undertaking Consortia.    As p er the 
information provided by the Department of Fertilizers, the total investment for reviv al of all 
the five fertilizer plants is about Rs.40503.50 Crore and the revival activities of these 
fertilizer plants are closely monitored by Department of Fertilizers alongwith NITI  Ayog 
and Prime  Minister ’s Office.   Since it is very much necessary to augment the production 
of fertilizers in the country so as to meet the demand domestically withou t resorting to 
imports, the Committee recommend that this welcome move of the Government to revive 
the closed fertilizer units should be pursued vigorously to complete and comm ission them 
in a time bound manner and  more importantly should be followed by successful running 
of these plants viz. fully utilizing production capacity, economic use of energ y, constantly 
upgrading technology for making them globally competitive, etc.  The Committee a lso 
recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should consider providing   technolog y 

19 
 
upgradation and maintenance  fund to these new fertilizer plants till th ey become 
economically self sustaining   so as to enable them overcome the problems  which were 
faced by the erstwhile fertilizer plants.  Moreover, captive power plants should a lso be set 
up in these fertilizer plants so that they operate without any power supply interruptions.    
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.2  It is re-iterated that Government of India is facilitating revival of close d units of 
FCIL / HFCL by setting up State- of-the-art Ammonia Urea plants of 12.7 Lakh Metric 
Tonne per annum capacity through formation of Joint Venture Companies of  nominated 
PSUs. Department of Fertilizers is pursuing vigorously to ensure that these revival 
plants are completed and commissioned in time bound manner. With regard to self-
sustainability of these plants, it may be informed that Ramagundam, Gorakh pur, Sindri 
and Barauni units are being revived under New Investment Policy (NIP)-2 012 read with 
it’s amendment dated 7 th Oct 2014 whereas CCEA in its meeting held on 20.04.2021 
has approved exclusive subsidy policy for Urea produced through coal gasificatio n route 
by TFL to take care of viability/sustainability of these units. Further, to ensu re viability of 
HURL plants, CCEA in its meeting held on 01.08.2018 has approved grant of Inte rest 
Free Loan (IFL) equivalent to Interest During Construction amounting to Rs. 1257.82 
crore to Gorakhpur, Sindri and Barauni units of HURL. It may also be informed that 
captive power plants are also being set up with all these plants except Talcher. 
 
(Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. 
11021/4/2021-PARL                                                              dated 14.7.2021) 
 
Recommendation Nos. 3 & 4 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
Revival of Talcher   Unit of FCIL 
 
 
2.3 The Committee note that    the erstwhile Talcher  unit of FCIL is being revived 
through  setting up of  a new coal based urea plant with a capacity of 12.7 LMTPA of urea 
by a Joint Venture company named M/s. Talcher Fertilizers Ltd, (TFL) which wa s formed 
on 27- 10-2015 with  the equity holdings among RCF, GAIL, CIL and  FCIL.   Th e 
Committee note that the total cost of the project  is Rs.13,227 Crore with 10% cost 
escalation as per the revised Detailed Feasibility Report(DFR) which is much higher when 
compared to the other four fertilizer units which are also  being revived currently.  The 

20 
 
cost of other four projects range between Rs.7000 crore to Rs.7100crore. The main 
reason for higher cost of this project is it is coal based while the others are gas based 
urea plants.  In this regard, the Committee note the submission of the Departme nt that 
this plant would use clean coal technology which will reduce dependence on n atural gas 
for fertilizer production and likely to open up new avenues for using v ast coal reserves in 
the country.  Further, the Committee note that the operational cost of this  plant will be 
lower and the end product will not be costlier.    Presently, the pre-project activities are in 
progress and it is targeted to be commissioned by September, 2023. Howeve r, the 
commissioning of the plant may be delayed by six to nine months due to Covid 19 lock 
down.   Since it is a high cost project and its cost of construction has already b een 
escalated by 10% as per the revised Detailed Feasibility Report(DFR), the Committee 
recommend that a comprehensive assessment may be made immediately about the 
impact of lockdown on the progress of the project work particularly on the asp ect of cost 
escalation and based on the assessment concrete steps should be taken to  ensure that 
necessary impetus is given  for completing and commissioning the fertilizer plant during 
2023 within the originally fixed cost of the project.       Action taken by the Department of 
Fertilizers in this regard may be apprised to the Committee.   
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
2.4 The Committee note that Lump Sum Turn Key (LSTK) contracts ha ve been awarded 
to M/S Wuhuan of China for Coal Gasification and Ammonia /Urea packages of th e Talcher 
project valuing approximately Rs.7900 Crore.  In this regard, the Committee would like to 
know the mode of selection of the Chinese firm, terms of the contracts a warded to it, 
progress of the works undertaken by this firm and the present status of the se contracts 
particularly in the wake of recent developments after COVID 19 pandemic 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT (RECOMMENDATION Nos. 3 & 4 ) 
 
 
2.5 As recommended by the Committee, DoF vide letter dated 08.06.2021 has 
requested TFL to carry out a comprehensive assessment immediately about the impact 
of lockdown due to Covid-19 pandemic on the progress of the project work particularly 
on the aspect of cost escalation and suggest concrete steps to be taken to ensure 
completion of the project with in scheduled time. On receipt of the report, the co mmittee 
would be apprised accordingly. With respect to Lump Sum Turn Key (LSTK) co ntract 
awarded to M/s Wuhan Engg. Company Ltd, information on mode of selection, terms of 
the contract, progress of work and impact of Covid-19 pandemic is given in      
Annexure A. 
 

21 
 
Annexure A 
 
Annexure pertains to Recommendation No. 4 (Report No. 18) 
Revival of Talcher unit of FCIL  
 
 Award of Lump Sum Turn Key (LSTK) contracts for Coal Gasification Plant and 
Ammonia /Urea Plants to M/s Wuhuan Engineering Company, China. 
 
2. Mode of selection of Firm 
 
(f) Tender was floated on ” Open International Competitive Bidding basis ” and 
Press Notification was published in leading National Dailies 
(g)  Prequalification of Bids was done against the Prequalification Criterion of NIT 
(Tender) 
(h) Technical and Commercial Evaluation of Bids was done for the Pre-q ualified 
Bids  
(i)  Price Bids were opened and evaluated for the Prequalified and Te chno – 
commercially qualified bids. Opened Bids were evaluated and price 
negotiation meetings were done by the duly nominated committee w ith the 
Lowest (L1) Bidder, M/s Wuhuan Engineering Company, China 
(j)  After the Price Negotiation, placement of Order has been done 
 
2.  Terms of the Contracts awarded to it: 
 
LSTK Contracts have been awarded to M/s Wuhuan based on terms and  conditions of 
NIT (Tender) on single responsibility basis. The major terms of the contracts are as 
follows: 
 
Sl  Particulars Coal Gasification Package Ammonia/Urea Package 
1 Issuance of LoI 11.09.2019 19.09.2019 
2 Zero Date of 
project 
19.09.2019 
3 Approx. 
Contract Price 
incl. taxes 
USD 292.65 million + INR 
3,412.41 cr. 
USD 148.10 million + INR 
1410.31 cr 
4 Contract 
Effective Date 
11.11.2019 19.04.2020 
5 Time schedule  Mechanical Completion – 
41 months from Sl. 4 
 Preliminary Acceptance – 
46 months from Sl. 4 
 Mechanical Completion – 
36 months from Sl. 4  
 Preliminary Acceptance – 
41 months from Sl. 4 
6 Technology 
Licensors 
 Gasification: Air Products 
(Formerly Shell)  
 Purification: Linde AG 
 Ammonia plant – KBR LLC 
 Urea plant – Stamicarbon 
B.V 
7 Contract 
Security 
10% of the contract value 10% of the contract value 
8 Defect Liability 
Period 
12 months from date of 
acceptance by TFL 
12 months from date of 
acceptance by TFL 

22 
 
9 Seat of 
Arbitration 
New Delhi New Delhi 
 
4. Progress of the works undertaken by the firm 
 
Due to continued impact of COVID – 19 pandemic in India and China since Dec., 2019 
and other contextual issues, the progress of the works undertaken by M/s Wuh uan is 
lagging behind and is as follows : 
 
Sl  Package Scheduled Actual 
1 Coal Gasification 40.72% 9.17% 
2 Ammonia/Urea 34.66% 9.07% 
 
4. The present status of these contracts particularly in the wake of recent 
developments after COVID 19 pandemic 
 
With easing of lockdown restrictions, the physical activities at site are undergoing af ter 
following COVID-19 protocol. Currently piling activity is under progress at site along with 
laying of construction water infrastructure inside Coal Gasification & Ammonia Urea 
plant area. Currently 12 nos. of Wuhuan ’s officials are stationed in India and VISA of 
additional 06 nos. of manpower has also been approved on 15thJune 2021.  
 
  (Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. 
11021/4/2021-PARL   dated 14.7.2021) 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
   
2.6 (For Recommendation 3, please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 Recommendation No. 5  
 
Revival of Gorakhpur and Sindri Units of FCIL and Barauni Units of HFCL 
 
2.7 The Committee note that the revival of erstwhile  Gorakhpur & Sindri un its of FCIL and 
erstwhile  Barauni Unit of HFCL is being done by M/s. Hindustan Urvarak & Rasayan  Limited 
(HURL) which  is a Joint Venture Company of National Thermal Power Corporation Limited 
(NTPC), Coal India Ltd (CIL), Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) as lead promoters with  
FCIL & HFCL as other partners  for setting up of new  Gas-based Urea Plants with a capacity 
of 12.7 lakh MTPA of Urea at each of these locations. Considerable progress has been made 
in commissioning these plants viz. completion of pre-project activities, environmen t 
clearances obtained, LSTK contracts awarded, gas supply agreements signed, etc. As per 
original programme, Gorakhpur plant was likely to be commissioned by February, 2 021 and 
Sindri and Barauni units were to be commissioned by May, 2021.    Howe ver, lock downs due 
to COVID 19 pandemic has created huge impact on progress of construction work in all the 
three plants.  As of July, 2020 only 80.5% of work has been completed a gainst the original 
plan of 94.9% in respect of Gorakhpur Plant, 74.2% against the plan of 91.4 % in respect of 

23 
 
Sindri Plant and 72.9% against 91.4% in respect of Baruni Plant.  As a result, completion and 
commissioning of these projects are likely to be  delayed by five to seven m onths.  The 
Committee note that the Department has only assessed the quantum of  delay likely to occur 
due to COVID 19 lockdowns but the subsequent quantum of cost overrun has not yet been 
estimated by the Department.  The Department informed the Committee tha t there are delays     
in receipt of Steel structure/fabricated equipment from all over India due to clos ure of 
workshops for 3 to 4 months, delays in shipment of LSTK equipment for Bara uni and Sindri 
plants and invoking of ‘Force Majeure ’ clause on account of COVID by LSTK & other 
agencies.  So there is likely hood of cost escalation of all the three projects.   The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should study the impact of COVID 19 
lockdowns on the progress of work in respect of all the revival projects particularly on the  cost 
overrun due to lockdowns  and should take immediate necessary action fo r the timely 
completion and commissioning of the projects including infusion of funds for c ost overrun 
occurred due to lockdowns. The issue of invoking of  
‘Force Majeure ’ clause on account of 
COVID by LSTK & other agencies should also be studied and appropriate action should  be 
taken against those LSTK contractors for violations if any.   Action taken in this regard may be 
intimated to the Committee. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
2.8  The overall progress achieved by end of May 2021 by Gorakhpur unit is 
91.2%, by Sindri unit is 89.4% and by Barauni unit is 88.7%. With resp ect to impact of 
COVID-19 lockdown on the progress of work of HURL projects, it may be informed that 
DoF vide letter dated 08.06.2021, has requested HURL to carry out the study on th e 
impact of lockdowns due to COVID-19 pandemic on the progress of work with respect to 
revival projects particularly on the cost overrun due to lockdowns and suggest n ecessary 
steps to mitigate the impact. On receipt of the report, the Committee would be apprised 
accordingly. 
 
               
 (Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. 
11021/4/2021-PARL dated 14.7.2021) 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
2.9 (Please see Para No. 1.11  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT LIKE  TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S  REPLY 
 
 
Recommendation  No.  2 
 
 
Ramagundam Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd of FCIL 
 
3.1 The Committee note that Ramagundam Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd (RFCL),  
which is one of the five closed units being revived, is a joint venture project  of Nat ional 
Fertilizers Ltd., Engineers India Limited, Fertilizer Corporation of India and  th e  
Government of Telangana.   RFCL was incorporated on 17.2.2015 for setting up gas 
based urea manufacturing unit at  Ramagundam,   Telangana.  Erstwhile  Ramagundam 
unit of FCIL is being revived by setting up a  new gas based Ammonia Ur ea plant of 12.7 
LMTPA capacity through nomination route by forming Joint venture company in February, 
2015.  This project was expected to be commissioned during first quarter of 20 20 but the 
schedule of commissioning of the plant has been impacted due to COVID 19 P andemic.   
Department of Fertilizers informed that the cumulative work progress in resp ect of the 
project as on 15- 07-2020 was 99.64% and the commercial production is likely to start by 
the second week of November, 2020.   The Committee appreciate that co nsiderable 
progress has been made in commissioning the plant and the Committe e hope that the 
Department  will leave no stone unturned to ensure the timely completion   of the project  
and starting of   commercial production during November, 2020.   The  progress made in 
this regard may be intimated to the Committee.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
3.2 With regard to progress of RFCL Plant, it may be informed that mechanical 
completion of Ammonia Unit was achieved on 07.01.2021, mechanical com pletion of 
Urea Unit was achieved on 31.01.2021 and commercial production of Urea by RFCL plant 
has started on 22ndMarch 2021. 
  
(Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. 
11021/4/2021-PARL  dated 14.7.2021) 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
Recommendation No. 6  
 
Revival of Korba Unit of FCIL and Durgapur and Haldia Unit of HFCL 
 
3.3   The Committee note that there are total eight units – five units of FCIL and three 
units of HFCL which need to revived.  Out of the five units of FCIL viz. (i ) Sindri, (ii) 
Gorakhpur, (iii) Ramagundam, (iv) Talcher and (v) Korba, only first four units have  been 
taken up for revival while construction of Korba unit has not taken up so far.   Similarly, 
out of three Units of HFCL viz. (i) Barauni, (ii) Durgapur and (iii) Haldia, only B arauni Unit 
has been taken up for revival.  Haldia Unit has not been commissioned as its 
commissioning was stopped in October, 1986 on the orders of Government  of India and 
Durgapur Unit’s revival has not been considered by the Government. 
  From the foregoing, the Committee would like to know the reason of non -
construction of Korba Unit of FCIL and non-commissioning of Haldia Unit of HFCL.  The 
Committee would also like to know the reason for not considering the revival o f Haldia 
Unit of HFCL.  The Committee are of the view that in order to attain self suff iciency in 
fertilizer sector the revival of the remaining three units should also be considered  by 
removing all the obstacles. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
3.4 With regard to revival of Korba unit of FCIL and Haldia and Durgapu r units of 
HFCL, it may be informed that presently four units of FCIL i.e. Ramagunda m, Talcher, 
Gorakhpur & Sindri and one unit of HFCL i.e. Barauni are being revived by setting up new 
Ammonia Urea plants of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonne per annum (LMTPA) cap acity through 
formation of Joint Venture Companies of nominated PSUs. Cabinet in its meeting held on 
21.05.2015 inter-alia has approved setting up of new Brownfield ammonia-urea unit in the 
premises of BVFCL, Namrup. Further, two urea plants of 12.7 LMTPA Capacity each  at 
Gadepan, Kota (Rajasthan) by M/s Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Ltd an d at 
Panagargh (West Bengal) by M/s Matix Fertilizers & Chemicals Ltd have come  up in 
private sector. Therefore, decision with respect to revival of Korba unit of FCIL and Hal dia 
and Durgapur units of HFCL would be taken based on the assessment of d emand supply 
gap after operationalization of all these plants. 
(Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. 
11021/4/2021-PARL    dated 14.7.2021) 
 
  

26 
 
Recommendation No.9 
 
Revival  of  BVFCL 
 
3.5  The Committee note that   BVFCL has become loss making due to multifarious 
reasons including obsolete and unproven technology, inordinate delay  in implem entation 
of the revamp project in the Namrup II plants and subsequent cost ove rruns,  etc.   
Namrup II plants are, three decades old and they were kept closed for some time b ut a 
vain attempt was made to make these plants operative by way of rev amp. Substantial 
investments have been infused in it but the performance is below par.  Fu rther the 
Committee note that the Namrup III plants, which are the latest of BVFCL,  have  better 
performance results compared to Namrup I & II. The technology adopted e ven for 
Namrup III plants is also of old generation. Hence performance with respect to energ y is 
very poor compared to latest plants in the country.  Seeing the meager performance of 
Namrup II & III plants, BVFCL assigned the revamp study to HTAS for amm onia plants 
and PDIL for urea plants and utility facilities. The study reports have been su bmitted by 
both consultants. In the reports, various measures have been suggested to achieve the 
sustained production with minimum level of energy usage. Nevertheless PDIL had given 
its opinion for not to go for second revamp considering economic non-viability of spending 
huge amount for minor improvement only and  return on investment to be  made for these 
proposals for revamp, works out to be negative. Based on this suggestion, the Union 
Cabinet approved on  21 stMay 2015 the proposal  for setting up of a new brown field 
Ammonia-Urea complex (Namrup-IV) in the existing premises of BVFCL having ca pacity 
of 8.646 Lakh MT per annum  through a JV under Public Private  Partnership (PPP) mode 
with equity participation of 48% and 52%. However, due to poor response fr om private 
parties, DoF is in the process of exploring possibilities for equity participation of remaining 
52% equity also on nomination basis to CPSEs and installation of a standa rd size gas 
based Ammonia-Urea Plant with a capacity of 12.7 LMTPA in place o f 8.646 LMTA by 
forming a Joint Venture company.  On 10.06.2020, a meeting was he ld under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary (Fertilizers) wherein it was decided to explore p ossibilities of 
new equity partner PSUs like North Eastern Electric Power Corporation, Oil & Natural 
Gas Corporation Limited, Gas Authority of India Limited, Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited etc. which have considerable business interest in the North Eastern 
Region.  Since it is very much necessary to run BVFCL in a healthy manner to meet t he 
fertilizer needs of North Eastern region, the recommend the following:- 
 

27 
 
(i) Concrete and time bound steps should be taken to romp in PSUs like North 
Eastern Electric Power Corporation, Oil & Natural Gas Corporation Limited, 
Gas Authority of India Limited, Indian Oil Corporation Limited etc. which 
have considerable business interest in the North Eastern Region for equity 
participation  in  the  proposed  Namrup – IV plant; 
(ii) After finalization of Joint Venture Equity Participation by various PS Us,   an 
expert management team may be formed for setting up of a new b rown field 
Ammonia-Urea complex (Namrup-IV) in the existing premises of BVFCL 
with a definite time schedule. 
(iii) Necessary financial assistance may be considered for continuous running  of 
Namrup II and III plants till the commissioning of Namrup-IV plant. Subsidy 
dues to BVFCL should be released without any delays. 
(iv) Since the Committee were informed that considerable amount of money has 
been spent in vain for the revival of Namrup-II Plants,  DoF may consider a 
probe into the angle of any misuse of financial powers in this regard by th e 
concerned.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
3.6 Reply : The point-wise reply are as follows:- 
(i) & (ii):  With regard to progress of setting up new ammonia urea plant Nma rup-IV at 
BVFCL, it may be informed that in a meeting held on 21.01.2021 under the 
chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister for Chemicals and Fertilizers, it has been decided 
to allocate equity contribution on nomination basis to Government of Assam (26%), 
M/s Oil India Ltd (18%), M/s BVFCL (11%), M/s Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers 
Ltd (17%) and National Fertilizers Ltd (28%). Accordingly, vide letter dated 
22.02.2021, NFL / BVFCL have been requested to submit Techno Econ omic 
Feasibility Report (TEFR) of the project and detailed demand for Viability Gap 
Funding to make the Namrup-IV project viable to this Department at the earliest so 
that matter may be taken up with Cabinet for approval of the same 
 
(iii): In order to ensure the safe, sustainable and economic operation of the  plants for a 
period of another about 4 -5 years, Department of Fertilizers has move d a CCEA 
Note for approval of grant- in-aid to the extent of Rs.100 Crore (Rupees One 
Hundred Crore only) to Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited, Namrup 
(Assam). 
CCEA accorded the approval to the proposal to grant- in-aid to Rs. 100 Crore to 
BVFCL, Namrup to sustain operation of its urea manufacturing units during the  
meeting held on 10th February, 2021.  

28 
 
This Department is in process of disbursing the amount of Rs. 100 Crore (Rs. On e 
Hundred Crore only)  to BVFCL at the earliest.   
 
(iv):  A
n enquiry was conducted by the Standing Committee on time and cost ove rrun of 
the Namrup revamp project of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited 
(BVFCL) and submitted their report on 17.08.2005. The Committee concluded that 
responsibility be fixed on the following officers who were prima-facie responsible 
for the time and cost overrun in the Namrup Revamp Project. They were: 
 
(i) Shri J. Nehru, Former CMD, HFCL for the period from 07.07.1997 to 30.01.2001 . 
(ii) Shri NK Borah, Former CMD, HFC with charge of OSD/CMD, BVFCL for the from 
26.05.1995 to 02.06.1997 and from 03.06.1997 to 31.01.2001 as a project head. 
(iii) Dr.Bodeiah, CMD, BVFCL for the period from 26.05.2003 to till the date of the 
writing of the report.  
(iv) Shri ON Kapur, Former CMD, PDIL for the period from 18.10.1994 to 17.0 8.2000. 
(v) Shri K. K. Roy, CMD, PDIL, joined as CMD PDIL on 26.04.2002. 
 
(B). The matter was examined in the Department of Fertilizers and it was found that 
since all the officers (except Shri K.K. Roy, then CMD, PDIL) had by that tim e 
already retired on attaining of the age of superannuation, it was not possible for the 
Department to initiate any action for the lapses on their part for the time  and cost 
overrun of the Namrup Revamp Project. Hence, it was decided to commu nicate 
Government’s ‘Displeasure’ to all the officers. However, Shri J.Nehru had 
challenged the ‘Memorandum of Displeasure’ dated 28.04.2006 before the Hon ’ble 
High court, Delhi. As per directions of the Hon ’ble High court, the ‘Memorandum of 
Displeasure’ was withdrawn by the Department of Fertilizers. Thereafter, he filed 
defamation case vide CS(OS) No. 59152/2016 titled as J. Nehru Vs D. Bannerji & 
others against 09 respondents for award of damages of Rs.1 crore in favour of him 
for harm and injury caused to his reputation by issuing ‘Memorandum of 
Displeasure’ on 28.04.2006. Five respondents are members of the committee 
constituted in D/o Expenditure which fixed the responsibility against liable officer. 
05 respondents are officers of D/o Fertilizers who had issued the ‘Memorandum of 
Displeasure’ on the basis of report submitted by D/o Expenditure. The defamation 
case is sub-judice in the Patiala House Court. 
 
 
 
(Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. 11021/4/2 021-
PARL  dated 14.7.2021) 
 
  

29 
 
              
CHAPTER-IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLIES 
GIVEN BY THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
   
Recommendation No. 7 
 
Financial restructuring  of FACT 
 
4.1    The Committee are concerned to note that the progress made in regard to financial  
restructuring of FACT is not satisfactory.  FACT became a sick CPSU when its net worth 
became negative in 2012-13.   Subsequently, the     Department of Fertilizers moved a 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) Note in 2014 on revival plan of FACT 
by infusion of funds and waiver of Government of India(GoI) loans & interest.    Since the 
matter remained inconclusive, another    CCEA note on Financial Restructuring of FACT 
was circulated on 23.2.2018 for Inter Ministerial  Consultation(IMC) having the  propo sals 
for approval for sale/leverage of surplus land possessed by the company , write-off of GoI 
loan and its interest, etc. Subsequently a meeting was held in Prime Minister ’s Office on 
10.08.2018 to discuss the issues connected with the revival of FACT wherein it was 
decided to delink the sale of land of FACT from the Cabinet note for financial restructuring 
of FACT  and  to conduct a drawing board study on the feasibility of m erger of FACT and 
MFL with other     Fertilizer Units of  Department of  Fertilizers by NITI Aayo g subject 
experts.   Then the Union Cabinet approved the sale of surplus   lands to BPCL and the 
Government of Kerala and  utilization of the sale proceeds by FACT to  add ress its  
working capital deficiency and  to enhance physical and financial performa nce by 
implementing capacity expansion projects for sustainable growth of the Company.  During 
2018, FACT received Rs.420 crore through sale of land to BPCL and during 2019 
received Rs.967.69 crore from the Government of Kerala for transfer of land.   Base d on 
the sale proceeds, FACT Board had approved CAPEX plans for Rs.700 crore. On  22 nd 
January, 2020. The Department of Fertilizers received the NITI Aayog Report on 
“feasibility of merger of FACT & MFL with other fertilizer units of Department of Fe rtilizers 
and options for financial restructuring/revival of above PSUs ”.  After examination of the 
recommendations made in the Report, DoF sent its comments to PMO on 13 Ma y, 2020.  
Even though this Committee is examining the subject, DoF had chosen not to provide    
NITI Ayog Report to the Committee.  As none of the Fertilizer Units had sho wn their 
interest in absorption/merger of FACT/MFL with them, this proposal seems to have b een 

30 
 
dropped by the Government.  In a subsequent meeting held by the Prime Minister’s office 
on 12 June, 2020 it was inter alia   decided that  FACT should  try to rationalize its  
manpower, enhance operating efficiencies to achieve the desired restructuri ng and no 
further expansion involving capital expenditure and no new recruitment should be  taken 
up till the time the proposal is finalized.  In this regard, the Secretary DoF ha s been 
advised to   revisit the proposal accordingly and submit revised financial restructuring 
proposals in the light of the observations made by the Prime Minister ’s office.    The 
Committee find that the matter relating to waiver of GoI loan and the accumu lated interest 
has been put into cold storage.  Total GoI loan and the accrued interest was Rs.1770.49 
crore as on 31.03.2017 and the same has been increased to Rs.2248.50 crore a s on 
31.03.2019.  Moreover, negative net worth of the company had grown from  (-)Rs.192.47 
crore in 2012-13 to (-)Rs.1523.69 Crore in 2018-19.  However, the company  earned a 
profit of Rs.163.15 crore during 2018-19.  In view of the above, th e Committee feel that it 
is necessary to waive the Government of India loan and the accrued inte rest so as to 
enable the company to continue its profit making trend in view of the CAPEX programmes 
being undertaken by it.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the following:- 
 
(i) The Secretary, DoF  should make an indepth study of the present position of 
the company and prepare a fresh financial restructuring proposal of the 
company taking into account the present economic condition of the company  
on the basis of sale proceeds received by it from the sale of surplus land, 
rationalization of staff structure, etc.  The main objective of the proposal shoul d 
be profitable running of the company in a healthy atmosphere.   
(ii) The waiver of Government of India loan and the accrued interest sho uld be 
considered favorably so as to enable the company function in a healthy 
manner. 
(iii) As an outcome of the discussion with PMO, no further expansion involving  
capital expenditure is to be carried out by FACT till the revised financial 
restructuring proposal is finalized and in this regard, it is not clear whether the 
CAPEX programmes already approved by the cabinet have been put on hold or 
not.   In case,   FACT has already embarked upon its CAPEX programmes, t he 
same should not be stopped as it would it affect its expansion and 
modernization programmes.   
(iv) As on 31.03.2019, an amount of Rs. 503.23 crore was due to b e paid to FACT 
on account of fertilizer subsidy.  Such delays in payment of subsidy by  DoF 

31 
 
would aggravate further the poor economic condition of the compan y.  All the 
dues of fertilizer subsidy to FACT should be immediately paid.    
(v) The Secretary, DoF should prepare the fresh financial restructuring proposal in 
a time bound manner and submit the same for the consideration of the 
competent authority at the earliest.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.2 A high-level meeting held on June12, 2020.  It was inter-alia decided that FACT  
should monetize their vacant lands, enhance operating efficiencies and ration alize their 
manpower to achieve the desired restructuring to ensure that as far as possible there 
should not be any financial outgo of Government of India.  Steps a re being taken by 
DoF/FACT in accordance with the directions. 
 
 FACT was also asked to ensure the PMO ’s directive on manpower study are fulfilled, 
so that further financial restructuring of FACT can be carried on. 
 
 As informed by FACT, FACT has engaged third party viz., Administrative Staff College 
of India (ASCI), Hyderabad for study on the rationalization of manpower.A s proposed 
to the Government of India, FACT would be resorting to expansion projects at Coch in 
Division to augment capacity, which require additional manpower.  Further, FACT has  
expanded marketing operations to Northern region states of Gujarat, Maharashtra,  
West Bengal and Odisha and is in the process of appointment of Dea lers.  The 
additional manpower requirements in the above 2 areas is also being assessed  with 
the study on rationalization of manpower. The report of the study is still awaited.  
 
 Competent Authority has approved restarting the operation of the Caprolactam p lant, 
by recruitment of proposed 234 manpower, out of which 50% i.e. 117 nos. would be on 
regular basis through direct recruitment mode and the remaining 50% through 
contractual/outsourcing mode, vide letter dated 5th May, 2021. The app roval is subject 
to the following conditions: - 
 
I. FACT shall ensure the operational efficiency, sustenance and safety   
 requirements of running the Caprolactum plant by judicious deployment of the thus 
 recruited manpower; 
II. There shall be no financial outgo from the Government of India for  
   operationalizing the Caprolactum plant including the expenses relating to the 
   manpower.  
 With respect to CAPEX projects of Rs. 700 Crore, work on the sites at Ammonia Barge 
with Bullets,Phosphoric Acid Storage Tank at WI, Sulphuric Acid Storage Tank at 
FACT-CD andReconstruction of Ammonia berth at Willingdon island are in progress.  
In some other projects like NP Plant Project and Ammonia Storage Tank, tendersha ve 
been re-floated by FACT.  The same has been informed by FACT. 
 
 As on 31.03.2019, Department of Fertilizers was paid thesubsidy am ounting of Rs. 
500.77 Crore to FACT. 

32 
 
 
 With the approval of Cabinet, DIPAM has notified the New Public Sector E nterprise 
(“PSE”) Policy for Atmanirbhar Bharat vide OM dated 04 th February, 2021.  It has been 
decided that Fertilizer Sector comes under the Non-Strategic Sectors.  It has been 
further decided that PSEs in non-strategic sectors shall be considered for privatiz ation, 
where feasible, otherwise such enterprises shall be considered for closure.  The 
decision on financial restructuringwill be taken after considering the Governm ent 
Policy. 
 
(Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. 11021/4/20 21-
PARL    dated 14.7.2021) 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.3  (Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
Financial restructuring of MFL 
 
4.4       The Committee are constrained to note that very little prog ress has only been 
made in financial restructuring of Madras Fertilizers Limited(MFL) which is public se ctor 
fertilizer manufacturing company rendering its service to the nation since 1966 .  The 
company’s net worth gone into negative during 2003-04 and it remains neg ative till now.  
The main reasons for its sickness are frequent shut downs, higher energy consum ption, 
working capital crisis, Feedstock conversion project, floods and Vardha Cyclone.  Do F 
informed the Committee that in terms of Department of Public Enterprise s guidelines 
dated 29.10.2015 on revival and restructuring of sick Central Public Sector Enterprises, 
M/s PDIL was engaged as a consultant for drawing of financial restructuring p lans of 
MFL.   M/s PDIL had submitted their report on 20.12.2016 wherein it was inter alia  
suggested  replacement of old & problematic equipment, energy efficien cy schemes, 
feedstock change over, conversion of GOI loan to equity and waive r of interest on GoI 
Loans.  On the basis of PDIL Report, MFL Board submitted recommendations on revival 
plan to DoF on 01.06.17 with the suggestions for waiver of GoI loan and th e accrued 
interest and raising loan from Financial Institutions/banks for its CAPEX Schemes.   
Subsequently, a Draft CCEA Note containing proposal for financial restructuring  of MFL 
was forwarded by DoF for Inter Ministerial Consultation on 15.11.2017.  As per another 
decision, DoF moved a proposal with Department of Expenditure (DoE) fo r waiver of 
interest and conversion of outstanding loan to zero interest loan to be repa id over 15 

33 
 
years.  But DoE turned down the proposal with the suggestion that it need s to be 
examined in the context of progress made on the administrative steps, viz. plan of action 
for land monetization, early completion of the gas pipeline for sustain ability in cost of 
production, etc. Meanwhile, a meeting was held in Prime Minister ’s Office on 23.01.2018 
wherein it was directed to explore possibility of monetization of surplus land o f MFL. In 
another meeting held in Prime Minister ’s Office on 10.08.2018 to discuss the issues 
connected with the revival of MFL, it was inter-alia decided that NITI Aayog would 
conduct a drawing board study on the feasibility of merger of MFL with othe r Fertilizer 
Units under DoF.  After examination of the recommendations made in the NITI A yog 
Report, DoF sent its comments to PMO on 13 May, 2020 wherein it was  stated th at  
possibility/ viability of  merger of MFL with other fertilizer CPSEs and its  strate gic 
disinvestment may be considered only after its  financial restructuring  is com pleted and it 
become financially sound to some reasonable extent. In a subsequent meeting held by 
the Prime Minister ’s office on 12 June, 2020 it was inter alia  decided that  MFL should  
try to rationalize its  manpower, enhance operating efficiencies to achieve the desired 
restructuring and no further expansion involving capital expenditure and n o new 
recruitment should be taken up till the time the proposal is finalized.  In th is regard, the 
Secretary DoF has been advised to   revisit the proposal accordingly and sub mit revised 
financial restructuring proposals in the light of the observations made by the  Prime 
Minister’s office.  In this regard, the Committee note that unlike FACT, the surplus lan d 
holding of MFL is very less and it is facing difficulties in selling the same.  Out of 7 0 Acres 
of land, MFL sold 4.98 acres to CPCL.   For selling the balance 65 acres of surplu s land, 
MFL has taken up the matter with IOCL, other various CPSEs and the St ate Government 
of Tamil Nadu.  But it has not materialized so far.   On the other hand, the GoI loan 
alongwith its accrued interest has increased from Rs.1063.28 crore as on 31.3.201 7 to 
Rs.1156.90 crore as on 31.03.2019 with the interest component growing more than the 
principal component.  However, there is some silver lining in the functioning of MFL  as it 
has converted its feedstock from Naptha to Gas(RLNG) and as a result it has started 
earning profit.  Moreover, MFL has initiated energy saving measures which may result in 
savings.  Further it has envisaged increasing production volume of fertilizers for increased 
earnings.  In view of the above, the Committee hope that MFL can  be transformed into a 
profit making company if the administrative reforms and the financial restructuring a re 
undertaken in a time bound manner and would like to make the fo llowing 
recommendations:-  
     

34 
 
(i) The Secretary, DoF  should make an indepth study of the present position of 
the company and prepare a fresh financial restructuring proposal of the 
company taking into account the present economic condition of the company  
on the basis of feedstock conversion from Naptha to Gas, energy saving 
schemes,  rationalization of staff structure, difficulties being faced in land 
monitisation etc.  The main objective of the proposal should be profita ble 
running of the company in a healthy atmosphere.   
(ii) Proposal of the MFL Board to waive the Government of India loan and the 
accrued interest thereon should be considered favorably so as to enable the 
company function in a healthy manner. 
(iii) Out of 70 Acres of land, MFL was able to monetize only 4.98 acres and th e rest 
of 65.02 acres remain unsold.  In this regard, DoF should find out ways to sell 
the remaining surplus land by taking up the matter with Public Sector Oil 
companies who have properties adjoining to MFL.  Government of Tamil Nadu 
may also be impressed upon to take over the land.  In case of con tinuing 
difficulties in selling the land, the options to monetize the land may also be 
explored.  
(iv) As on 31.03.2019, an amount of Rs. 706.52 crore was due to be paid to MFL 
on account of fertilizer subsidy.  Such delays in payment of subsidy by  DoF 
would aggravate further the poor economic condition of the compan y.  All the 
dues of fertilizer subsidy to MFL  should be immediately paid.    
(v) The Secretary, DoF should prepare the fresh financial restructuring proposal in 
a time bound manner and submit the same for the consideration of the 
competent authority at the earliest.  
 The action taken on the above recommendations should furnished to t he 
Committee with three months.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.5    A high-level meeting held on June12, 2020.  It was inter-alia de cided that MFL 
should monetize their vacant lands, enhance operating efficiencies and ra tionalize their 
manpower to achieve the desired restructuring to ensure that as far as po ssible there 
should not be any financial outgo of Government of India.  Steps are be ing taken by 
DoF/MFL in accordance with the directions. 
 
 MFL was also asked to ensure the PMO ’s directive on manpower study are fulfilled, so 
that further financial restructuring of MFL can be carried on. 
 
 With respect to rationalization of Manpower, MFL has furnished the draft Notice Inviting 
Tender to hire an external expert agency to conduct a study on rationalization of 

35 
 
Manpower of MFL wherein some suggestions were given by Department of  Fertilizers 
vide letter dated 18 th February, 2021.The suggestionshave been incorporated in the 
Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) by MFL.  Now, the tender has been floated by MFL. 
 
 So far as selling of remaining 65.02 acres of land, MFL has informed tha t as a part of 
repeated effort, MFL recently has written a letter to the Principal Secretary to  
Government of Tamil Nadu, Industry Department on 30.03.2021 for sale of land but not 
yet materialized. 
 
 As on 31.03.2019, Department of Fertilizers has paid all the subsi dy except theAddl. 
Fixed Cost Benefit i.e.Rs.  14.14 Cr.  This Department is in process of releasing th e 
same.   
 
 With the approval of Cabinet, DIPAM has notified the New Public Sector E nterprise 
(“PSE”) Policy for Atmanirbhar Bharat vide OM dated 04 th February, 2021.  It has been 
decided that Fertilizer Sector comes under the Non-Strategic Sectors.  It has been 
further decided that PSEs in non-strategic sectors shall be considered for privatiz ation, 
where feasible, otherwise such enterprises shall be considered for closure.  The 
decision on financial restructuring will be taken after considering the Governme nt 
Policy. 
 
(Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. 11021/4/20 21-
PARL    dated 14.7.2021) 
 
FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
4.6 (Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED   
 
 
Recommendation No. 3   
 
Revival of Talcher   Unit of FCIL 
 
 
5.1 The Committee note that the erstwhile Talcher  unit of FCIL is being revived 
through  setting up of  a new coal based urea plant with a capacity of 12.7 LMTPA of urea 
by a Joint Venture company named M/s. Talcher Fertilizers Ltd, (TFL) which wa s formed 
on 27- 10-2015 with  the equity holdings among RCF, GAIL, CIL and  FCIL.   The  
Committee note that the total cost of the project  is Rs.13,227 Crore with 10% cost 
escalation as per the revised Detailed Feasibility Report(DFR) which is much higher when 
compared to the other four fertilizer units which are also  being revived currently.  The 
cost of other four projects range between Rs.7000 crore to Rs.7100crore. The main 
reason for higher cost of this project is it is coal based while the others are g as based 
urea plants.  In this regard, the Committee note the submission of the Departme nt that 
this plant would use clean coal technology which will reduce dependence on n atural gas 
for fertilizer production and likely to open up new avenues for using v ast coal reserves in 
the country.  Further, the Committee note that the operational cost of this  plant will be 
lower and the end product will not be costlier.    Presently, the pre-project activities are in 
progress and it is targeted to be commissioned by September, 2023. Howeve r, the 
commissioning of the plant may be delayed by six to nine months due to Covid 19 lock 
down.   Since it is a high cost project and its cost of construction has already b een 
escalated by 10% as per the revised Detailed Feasibility Report(DFR), the Committee 
recommend that a comprehensive assessment may be made immediately about the 
impact of lockdown on the progress of the project work particularly on the asp ect of cost 
escalation and based on the assessment concrete steps should be taken to  ensure that 
necessary impetus is given  for completing and commissioning the fertilizer plant during 
2023 within the originally fixed cost of the project.       Action taken by the Department of 
Fertilizers in this regard may be apprised to the Committee.   
 
5.2 The Committee note that Lump Sum Turn Key (LSTK) contracts ha ve been awarded 
to M/S Wuhuan of China for Coal Gasification and Ammonia /Urea packages of th e Talcher 
project valuing approximately Rs.7900 Crore.  In this regard, the Committee would like to 
know the mode of selection of the Chinese firm, terms of the contracts aw arded to it, 

37 
 
progress of the works undertaken by this firm and the present status of the se contracts 
particularly in the wake of recent developments after COVID 19 pandemic 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
  
5.3 As recommended by the Committee, DoF vide letter dated 08.06.2021 has 
requested TFL to carry out a comprehensive assessment immediately about the impact 
of lockdown due to Covid-19 pandemic on the progress of the project work particularly 
on the aspect of cost escalation and suggest concrete steps to be taken to ensure 
completion of the project with in scheduled time. On receipt of the report, the co mmittee 
would be apprised accordingly. With respect to Lump Sum Turn Key (LSTK) co ntract 
awarded to M/s Wuhan Engg. Company Ltd, information on mode of selection, terms of 
the contract, progress of work and impact of Covid-19 pandemic is given in      
Annexure A. 
 
Annexure A 
  
Revival of Talcher unit of FCIL  
 
 Award of Lump Sum Turn Key (LSTK) contracts for Coal Gasification Plant and 
Ammonia /Urea Plants to M/s Wuhuan Engineering Company, China. 
 
3. Mode of selection of Firm 
 
(k) Tender was floated on ” Open International Competitive Bidding basis ” and 
Press Notification was published in leading National Dailies 
(l)  Prequalification of Bids was done against the Prequalification Criterion of NIT 
(Tender) 
(m) Technical and Commercial Evaluation of Bids was done for the Pre- qualified 
Bids  
(n)  Price Bids were opened and evaluated for the Prequalified and Tech no – 
commercially qualified bids. Opened Bids were evaluated and price 
negotiation meetings were done by the duly nominated committee w ith the 
Lowest (L1) Bidder, M/s Wuhuan Engineering Company, China 
(o)  After the Price Negotiation, placement of Order has been done 
 
2.  Terms of the Contracts awarded to it 
 
LSTK Contracts have been awarded to M/s Wuhuan based on terms and  conditions of 
NIT (Tender) on single responsibility basis. The major terms of the contracts are as 
follows: 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
Sl  Particulars Coal Gasification Package Ammonia/Urea Package 
1 Issuance of LoI 11.09.2019 19.09.2019 
2 Zero Date of 
project 
19.09.2019 
3 Approx. 
Contract Price 
incl. taxes 
USD 292.65 million + INR 
3,412.41 cr. 
USD 148.10 million + INR 
1410.31 cr 
4 Contract 
Effective Date 
11.11.2019 19.04.2020 
5 Time schedule  Mechanical Completion – 
41 months from Sl. 4 
 Preliminary Acceptance – 
46 months from Sl. 4 
 Mechanical Completion – 
36 months from Sl. 4  
 Preliminary Acceptance – 
41 months from Sl. 4 
6 Technology 
Licensors 
 Gasification: Air Products 
(Formerly Shell)  
 Purification: Linde AG 
 Ammonia plant – KBR LLC 
 Urea plant – Stamicarbon 
B.V 
 
7 Contract 
Security 
10% of the contract value 10% of the contract value 
8 Defect Liability 
Period 
12 months from date of 
acceptance by TFL 
12 months from date of 
acceptance by TFL 
9 Seat of 
Arbitration 
New Delhi New Delhi 
 
5. Progress of the works undertaken by the firm 
 
Due to continued impact of COVID – 19 pandemic in India and China since Dec., 2019 
and other contextual issues, the progress of the works undertaken by M/s Wuh uan is 
lagging behind and is as follows : 
 
Sl  Package Scheduled Actual 
1 Coal Gasification 40.72% 9.17% 
2 Ammonia/Urea 34.66% 9.07% 
 
4. The present status of these contracts particularly in the wake of recent 
developments after COVID 19 pandemic 
 
With easing of lockdown restrictions, the physical activities at site are undergoing af ter 
following COVID-19 protocol. Currently piling activity is under progress at site along with 
laying of construction water infrastructure inside Coal Gasification & Ammonia Urea  
plant area. Currently 12 nos. of Wuhuan ’s officials are stationed in India and VISA of 
additional 06 nos. of manpower has also been approved on 15thJune 2021.  
 
  (Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. 
11021/4/2021-PARL   dated 14.7.2021) 
 
5.4 (Please see Para No. 1.8 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 

39 
 
 Recommendation No. 5  
 
Revival of Gorakhpur and Sindri Units of FCIL and Barauni Units of HFCL 
 
 5.5 The Committee note that the revival of erstwhile  Gorakhpur & Sindri un its of FCIL and 
erstwhile  Barauni Unit of HFCL is being done by M/s. Hindustan Urvarak & Rasayan  Limited 
(HURL) which  is a Joint Venture Company of National Thermal Power Corporation Limited 
(NTPC), Coal India Ltd (CIL), Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) as lead promoters with  
FCIL & HFCL as other partners  for setting up of new  Gas-based Urea Plants with a capacity 
of 12.7 lakh MTPA of Urea at each of these locations. Considerable progress has  been made 
in commissioning these plants viz. completion of pre-project activities, environment 
clearances obtained, LSTK contracts awarded, gas supply agreements signed, etc. As per 
original programme, Gorakhpur plant was likely to be commissioned by February, 20 21 and 
Sindri and Barauni units were to be commissioned by May, 2021.    Howe ver, lock downs due 
to COVID 19 pandemic has created huge impact on progress of construction work in all the 
three plants.  As of July, 2020 only 80.5% of work has been completed a gainst the original 
plan of 94.9% in respect of Gorakhpur Plant, 74.2% against the plan of 91.4% in respect of 
Sindri Plant and 72.9% against 91.4% in respect of Baruni Plant.  As a result, completion and 
commissioning of these projects are likely to be  delayed by five to seven m onths.  The 
Committee note that the Department has only assessed the quantum of de lay likely to occur 
due to COVID 19 lockdowns but the subsequent quantum of cost overrun has not yet been 
estimated by the Department.  The Department informed the Committee tha t there are delays   
  
in receipt of Steel structure/fabricated equipment from all over India due to clos ure of 
workshops for 3 to 4 months, delays in shipment of LSTK equipment for Bara uni and Sindri 
plants and invoking of ‘Force Majeure ’ clause on account of COVID by LSTK & other 
agencies.  So there is likely hood of cost escalation of all the three projects.   The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should study the impact of COVID 19 
lockdowns on the progress of work in respect of all the revival projects particularly on the  cost 
overrun due to lockdowns  and should take immediate necessary action fo r the timely 
completion and commissioning of the projects including infusion of funds fo r cost overrun 
occurred due to lockdowns. The issue of invoking of  
‘Force Majeure ’ clause on account of 
COVID by LSTK & other agencies should also be studied and appropriate action should  be 
taken against those LSTK contractors for violations if any.   Action taken in this regard may be 
intimated to the Committee. 
  
 
 
 
 

40 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 5.6 The overall progress achieved by end of May 2021 by Gorakhpur u nit is 91.2%, by 
Sindri unit is 89.4% and by Barauni unit is 88.7%. With respect to impact of COV ID-19 
lockdown on the progress of work of HURL projects, it may be informed that DoF vide  letter 
dated 08.06.2021, has requested HURL to carry out the study on the imp act of lockdowns 
due to COVID-19 pandemic on the progress of work with respect to revival proje cts 
particularly on the cost overrun due to lockdowns and suggest necessary steps to mitigate 
the impact. On receipt of the report, the Committee would be apprised accordingly. 
               
(Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
O.M. No. 11021/4/2021-PARL dated 14.7.2021) 
 
5.7 (Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
  
   
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                        KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
16 November, 2021                                                                                   Chairperson,               
 25 Kartika, 1943 (Saka)                                                       Standing Committee on 
                   Chemicals and Fertilizers 
  

41 
 
Minutes of the FIRST Sitting of the 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2021-22) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 16th November, 2021 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1700.hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
K. KANIMOZHI -    Chairperson 
Members 
 
                  Lok Sabha 
     2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
4. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
5. Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
6. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
7. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
8. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
9. 
 
 
 
       10  
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
 
Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
11 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
12 Dr. Anil Jain 
13 Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
14 Shri Arun Singh 
 SECRETARIAT  
 
1.  Shri  N. K. Jha  -  Director 
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director   
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Panna Lal   - Under Secretary 
  
  2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the newly constituted Commi ttee 
and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consider Memorandum No.1 reg arding 
selection of subjects for examination during the year (2021-22) and also to discuss the fu ture 
course of action of the Committee during the tenure.  
 
3. The Committee then considered Memorandum No. 1 and after discussion selecte d 
the following subjects pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers for deta iled 
examination during 2021-22:- 
 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
1. Nano-fertilizers for sustainable crop production and maintaining soil    health.   
2. Tax structure on fertilizers sector in terms of GST and import duties – analysis 
of the tax structure of raw material and final products and its impact on se lf-
sufficiency and use of fertilizers. 
3. Prices, Availability and distribution of fertilizers.  
 
APPENDIX - I 
 

42 
 
 
 
 
 
II.
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
4.  Vision 2024 - To establish India as a leading manufacturer of chem icals and 
petrochemicals. 
5.  Insecticides – promotion and development including safe usage -   licensing 
regime for insecticides. 
6.  Disposal of toxic waste from Bhopal Gas Leak site. 
7. Environmental Impact of Petrochemical products. 
 
III. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
8.    Promotion of Medical Device Industry.  
9.    Availability of Medicines and Medical devices for COVID Management.  
10.  Self sufficiency of key starting Material and intermediates. 
 
4. The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft Action  Taken 
Reports unanimously without any amendment/change:- 
 
i. ATR on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained  in the 
Eighteenth Report on “Revival of Closed and Sick Fertilizers units ” (Department of 
Fertilizers). 
 
ii.  XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
iii.  X XX    XXX     XXX 
 
iv.  XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
v.  XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
vi.  XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
vii.  XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
 
5  The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to finalize and present the  Action 
Taken Reports to the Parliament in the ensuing session. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

43 
 
Appendix – II 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
      
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE  EIGHTEENTH REPORT   
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2020-21) ON “REVIVAL OF CLOSED AND SICK 
FERTILIZERS UNITS ”   OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS). 
  Total No. of Recommendations  09 
I Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1,3,4,5)   
  
 04 
Percentage of Total 44.4%   
II Observations/Recommendations that the Committee do not 
like to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
(Vide Recommendation No. 2,6,9)   
  
03 
Percentage of Total      33.3% 
III Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
replies given by the Government are not acceptable to the 
Committee: 
 (Vide Recommendation No. 7, 8)   
  
 
02 
Percentage of Total 22.2%    
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  the 
final replies of the Government are still awaited:  
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 3, 5) 
 
--* 
Percentage of Total   --* 
 
* Even though recommendation Nos. 3 and 5 are accepted by the Government,  
reply given are interim in nature and therefore also merit further comments by the  
Committee.  
 
  
 