1 
 
38   
 
 
 
 
 
              STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Thirty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2022-2023)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2022/ Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
38 

2 
 
CC&F NO. 166 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Thirty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2022-2023)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08 August, 2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08 August, 2022 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2022/ Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2021-22) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter I Report 1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
16 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
33 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
34 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
44 
 APPENDICES  
 I Government Initiatives for the Medical Devices Sector 45 
II & III Office Memorandum No. 35030/57/2021-Scheme dated 26 th May, 
2022 of Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals regarding forwarding of recommendations No. 7 
and 8 of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers to 
Ministry of Finance. 
49 
IV Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2021-22) held on
 4thAugust, 2022. 
53 
V Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report (17th 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers 
on ‘Demands for Grants (2022-2023)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
55 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri Deepak Baij 
5. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
6. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
7. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
8. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
10. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
11. Shri Vasava Parbhubhai Nagarbhai  
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt Aparupa Poddar (Afrin Ali) 
14. Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
15. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
16. Shri M. Selvaraj 
17. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
18. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
19. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
21. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
24. Dr. Anil Jain 
25. Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
26. Shri Arun Singh 
27. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
28. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
29. Vacant* 
30. Vacant* 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Vinay Kumar Mohan  : Joint Secretary  
2. Shri  Nabin Kumar Jha   : Director  
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh   : Deputy Secretary  
4. Ms. Sonia Sankhla   : Executive Officer 
 
* Vacant vice Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar (LJD), MP (RS) retired on 02.04.2022 from the Membership of Rajya Sabha. (RSS I.D. No. 
1(2)/2019- Coord dated 18.01.2022).  
 
* Vacant vice Shri Jaiprakash Nishad (BJP), MP (RS) retired on 04.07.2022 from the Membership of Rajya Sabha. (RSS I.D. No. 1(2)/2019- 
Coord dated 18.01.2022).  

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2021-2022) 
having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this Thirty-Eighth 
Report on Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Thirty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2022-23)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Departm ent 
of Pharmaceuticals). 
2.  The Thirty-Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 21 st March, 2022. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) furnished their replies on 28 th June, 2022 indicating Action Taken on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report. The 
Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 4th August, 
2022. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
 08 August, 2022______________ CHAIRPERSON, 
13 Sravana, 1944 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS. 
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
1.1 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observa tions/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contains in their Thirty-Fourth (17th Lok Sabha) on 
'Demands for Grants (2022-23)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of Pharmaceuticals). 
1.2  The Thirty-Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajy a Sabha 
on 21st March 2022. It contained 19 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of 
Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received a nd 
categorized as follows:-  
 (i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
          Sl.Nos. 3,4,5,8,9,11,12,15,16,17,18 and 19                                (Total=12)                            
 
   These are included in Chapter II of the Report.                  Percentage: 64%                         
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire   
 to pursue in view of the Government ’s reply:- 
 Sl.No. Nil                                                                      (Total = 0) 
 These are included in Chapter III of the Report.            Percentage:00.00% 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the     
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration:- 
    Sl.No.  1,2,6,7,10,13 and14         (Total = 7)          
    These are included in Chapter IV of the Report.      Percentage 36% 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 
    Sl.No. NIL                                        (Total=0)  
 These are included in Chapter V of the Report.              Percentage: 00.00%  
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be 

2 
 
furnished expeditiously and not later than three months from the date of 
presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4   The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further 
comments.  
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
Budgetary allocation for the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
 
1.5 With regard to the Budgetary allocation for the Department, the C ommittee had 
recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that a gross budgetary allocation of Rs.2244.15 Cro re has 
been made for the Department of Pharmaceuticals at Budget Estima te (BE) stage of 
2022-23 against the outlay of Rs.10383.25 Crore proposed by the Depa rtment for the 
year.  In comparison, the Gross Budgetary allocation for the year 20 21-22 was Rs. 
470.41 Crore against the proposed outlay of Rs.2600.52 Crore which was o nly 18% of 
the outlay proposed by the Department and this time it has increased to 21.6%.  Even 
though the actual allocation for the year 2022-23 is very less when co mpared to the 
demand of the Department, the major chunk of this allocation has been m ade for 
Central Sector Schemes of the Department.   Against the proposal of Rs.2313.02 Crore, 
an allocation of Rs. 2202.50 Crore has been made for the Central Secto r Schemes of 
the Department.  For the Heads relating to the “Development of Pharmaceutical 
Industry”, Rs.1729.00 Crore has been allocated against the demand of Rs.1767.0 2 
Crore of the Department.  Under the Capital Section of “Assistance to PSUs ” , the 
Department demanded Rs.8026.78 Crore but only an allocation of Rs.5 .30 Crore has 
been made at the BE stage of 2022-23.  Since the demand for grants of the Department 
for implementing its developmental schemes has almost been fully met by the 
budgetary allocation, the Committee feel that the ball is now in the co urt of the 
Department.  Unlike previous years, this year the hands of the Department hav e been 
strengthened with the requisite amount of budgetary allocation by the Ministry  of 
Finance.  Now the Department has to prove its mettle through effective imp lementation 
of all its development schemes.  In this regard, the Committee recommen d that an 
annual action plan with monthly achievable targets should be chalked out by the 
Department in respect of all the developmental schemes for which requisite amou nt of 
budgetary allocation has been made under Major Heads 2852 and 255 2 and concrete 
steps should be taken for achieving targets under each of the develop mental Schemes 
for timely and resourceful utilization of budgetary allocations made for the year.    An 
effective monitoring of implementation of each of the development Sch emes should be 
made at highest level in the Department and it should be ensured that th e targets fixed 
for each of the Schemes are achieved in a time bound manner duri ng the year 2022- 23 
through the full utilization of budgetary allocation.  Progress made i n this regard should 
be intimated to the Committee”. 

3 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry o f 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
 
“For the FY 2022-23, the Department had proposed Rs. 10383.25 crore as 
Budget Estimates for the financial year. However, only Rs. 2244.15 crore was allo cated 
by the Ministry of Finance.  Department will seek additional funds from the Ministry of 
Finance at RE Stage, if need be. The Details in respect of various schem es are 
as under: 
 
NIPER: Department has set targets, which have been conveyed to the individual  
NIPERs. Monthly review meetings with Directors of all NIPERs are held at the level of 
Secretary of the Department and on quarterly basis at the level of Hon ’ble Minister for 
Chemicals & Fertilizers.  It will be ensured that the funds allocated by Depa rtment of 
Expenditure will be utilized for construction of campuses of NIPERs at Raeba reli, 
Ahmedabad, Kolkata, Hyderabad and Hajipur and also for purchase of equipm ent as 
well to meet recurring expenditure of the Institute. 
  
Development of Pharmaceuticals and PLI Schemes: The Department has a concrete 
plan to achieve the targets envisaged schemes such as PLI, strengthening the  
Pharmaceutical Industry, etc. The prescribed monitoring mechanism envisage d under 
the Schemes such as Empowered Committee for the PLI schemes of Bu lk Drugs and 
Medical Devices and the Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) of the SPI scheme, etc will 
be fully involved in the monitoring of the implementation of the sche mes. Further, the 
Project Management Agencies (PMAs) appointed under the PLI and SPI schem es will 
be fully involved in monitoring the progress of the schemes, as per the milestones 
envisaged.  Department has proposed an amount of Rs. 1767.02 crore as BE 2022-
2023 for the Scheme “Development of Pharmaceutical Industry . However, Rs. 
1729.00 crore has been allocated. The additional funds will be sought from the Ministry 
of Finance at RE Stage if need be. 
  
Jan Aushadhi Schemes: Department has proposed an amount of Rs. 100.00 crore as 
BE- 2022-23 for PMBJP to meet  the target  to open 1,000 new K endras and enhance 
the product basket up to 1,800 medicines and 280 surgicals.  However, an  amount of 
Rs. 72.50 Crores only have been allotted under BE 2022-23. In orde r to effectively 
implement the scheme and achieve the vision targets under PMBJP, th e Department 
will seek additional funds from the Ministry of Finance at RE stage.    
NPPA:   The total budget provision for the scheme Consumer Awareness, Publicity and 
Price Monitoring (CAPPM) for the F.Y. 2022-23 is Rs. 6.00/- crore, viz. (i) Grant inAid 
for Assistance to PMRUs Rs. 5.00 Crore and (ii) Advertising and Publicity Rs.1.00 
Crore. The budget allocation for Grant in Aid to PMRU for the F.Y. 2022-23 is Rs. 5.00 
Crore which is at par with the budget allocation that was made in the F.Y. 2021-22. 
Price Monitoring and Resource Units (PMRUs) have been set up in Twenty Th ree (23) 

4 
 
States/UTs till 31st March 2022. There is a target to set up PMRUs in six (6) States in 
the F.Y. 2022-23 and in all the States/ UTs by the F.Y. 2023-24. 
   
PSU:  Department proposed an amount of Rs. 8026.78 crore for meeting va rious 
outstanding liabilities of various banks and other unsecured liabilities in respect o f 
Department PSUs, i.e., HAL and IDPL. However, against the proposed amount,  only, 
Rs. 5.30 crore have been allocated which shall be utilized for meeting co ntingent 
expenditure, court cases etc. for the FY 2022-23.  Additional funds w ill be sought from 
the Ministry of Finance at RE Stage based on the requirements”.  
 
 
1.7 The Committee note that for the 2022-23, the BE of the Department was Rs. 
10383.25 crore but it was revised downward to just Rs. 2244.15 crore.  Thus  a 
drastic cut of about Rs 8139.10 crore has been made.  Similarly for the y ear 2021-
22 the BE was Rs. 2600.52 crore but it was revised downwards to Rs. 470.41 crore 
and a major cut of Rs. 2130.11 crore was made.  Further for the year 2022- 23 an 
allocation of Rs. 2202.50 crore has been made for the Central Sector Schemes of 
the Department.  Noting the meagre amount allocated to the Department the 
Committee had recommended that (i) an annual action plan with monthly 
achievable targets should be chalked out by the Department in respect of all the 
developmental schemes for which requisite amount of budgetary allocation has 
been made under Major Heads 2852 and 2552 and (ii) concrete steps should be 
taken for achieving targets under each of the developmental Schemes for timely 
and resourceful utilization of budgetary allocations made for the year.  However 
the Ministry has submitted that for ‘NIPER’ the Department has set targets which 
have also been conveyed to the individual NIPERs and monthly review meetings 
are also stated to be convened but their details have not been furnished to the 
Committee.  Similarly, the Ministry has submitted that they have a ‘Concrete Plan’ 
for Development of Pharmaceuticals and PLI schemes but details thereof have 
not been furnished.  Further for ‘Jan Aushadhi Schemes’ and ‘NPPA’ just their BE 
and RE have been furnished to the Committee.  It appears to the Committee that 
the Department has not paid serious consideration to the recommendation of the 
Committee.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
desire that the Ministry should come out with the action plan with monthly 
achievable targets along with effective monitoring of implementation of all the 
Central Sector Schemes and the Committee be apprised accordingly.  

5 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
Construction of campuses for National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research (NIPER) 
  
1.8 With regard to the Construction of campuses for National Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER) , the Committee had recommended 
as follows:- 
The Committee note that an allocation of Rs.395.00 Crore has been  made for 
NIPERS (in MH 2552 + 2852) against the proposal of the Department for Rs.440.00 
Crore for 2022- 23.  The fund allocated by the Ministry of Finance will be utilized for 
construction of NIPER Campuses at Raebareli, Ahmedabad, Kolkata, Hyderabad  and 
Hajipur and also for purchase of equipments/meeting recurring expenditures of  the 
institutes.   As far as construction of NIPER campuses is concerned, the Dep artment 
proposes to complete 100% of construction in respect of Ahmedabad NIPER and  30% 
of construction in respect of Hajipur, Hyderabad, Raebarelli and Kolkata 
NIPERS.  Recently, the Committee visited NIPERS at Guwahati and Kolkata.  While  
construction of permanent campus for Guwahati was almost complete, the Kolkata 
NIPER was functioning in small rented premise which is not commensurate with the 
status of ‘Institution of National Importance ’.   The Committee, therefore, feel that it is a 
matter of utmost importance that the state of the art  permanent camp uses for Hajipur, 
Hyderabad, Raebarelli and Kolkata NIPERS is created in a time bound manne r so as to 
enable them to function in the true spirit of ‘Institutions of National Importance ’.   The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the construction of permanent 
campuses for these four NIPERs should be completed within two years.   Departme nt, 
now proposed to complete 30% of construction during 2022-23 with the budgetary funds 
allocated for the purpose.   Instead the Department may plan to comp lete 50% of 
construction of all the four NIPERs during 2022-23 and rest of the construction  may be 
completed during 2023- 24.  In case of requirement of more funds for construction of 
these four NIPERs namely Hajipur, Hyderabad, Raebarelli and Kolkata additional 
demand may be made at RE /supplementary demands during 202 2-23.   This 
recommendation of the Committee may also be sent to the Ministry of Finance  for its 
consideration.   The Action taken in this regard should be intimated to the Committee. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.9 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
MoUs have been signed between CPWD and NIPERs for construction of campus 
at Raebareli, Kolkata and Haripur. Construction of campus at NIPER Ahmeda bad is at 
full swing and expected to be completed by August, 2022 while con struction of campus 
NIPER Hyderabad will start shortly by M/s NPCC Limited, the PMC appointed for 
construction of campus. Progress of construction activities is regularly reviewed at 
Department level.  Additional funds at RE stage will also be sought to com plete the 

6 
 
targeted quantum of construction activities. Further, the recommendation of the 
Committee has been sent to the Ministry of Finance for its consideration. 
 
1.10 The Committee have been informed that for construction of NIPERs MoUs 
have been signed with CPWD at Raebareli, Kolkata and Hajipur. Construction of 
campus at NIPER Ahmedabad is at full swing and expected to be completed by 
August, 2022 while construction of campus NIPER Hyderabad will start shortly by 
M/s NPCC Limited. Progress of construction activities is regularly reviewed at 
Department level.  In this regard the Committee had strongly recommended that 
the construction of four NIPERs should be completed with in two years.  However 
the Department proposed to complete 30% of construction during 2022-23 but the 
Committee were of the view that the Department may plan to complete 50 percent 
of construction during 2022-23 and rest of the construction be completed by 
2023-24.  However, in the reply furnished by the Department such seriousness is 
not reflecting as no target date for construction of NIPERs have been furnished.  
In this regard, the Committee note that though the construction of campus at 
NIPER Ahmedabad is expected to be completed by August, 2022 but construction 
of campus NIPER Hyderabad is yet to commence and MoUs have been signed 
between CPWD and NIPERs for construction of campus at Raebareli, Kolkata and 
Hajipur.  It appears that completion of even 30% construction work of these 
NIPERs as committed by the Department during 2022-23 seems to be difficult.   
Reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that a target date for construction of NIPERs may be fixed and the 
construction may be vigorously reviewed to complete the construction work in 
time.  
(Recommendation No. 6) 
Setting up of five new NIPERS 
  
1.11 With regard to the Setting up of five new NIPERS, the committee h ad 
recommended as follows:- 
 

7 
 
“The Committee are constrained to note that the proposal to set up fiv e new 
NIPERs in Tamil Nadu (Madurai), Karnataka (Bangalore), Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and 
Maharashtra are still on paper without any concrete action to set up them .  In this 
regard, the Committee note that the Department had asked the Expenditure Fin ance 
Committee (EFC) to allocate Rs.4300.00 Crore for present seven NIPERs and 
additional five NIPERs for the next five years.  However, EFC has earmarked  only 
Rs.1500.00 Crore for NIPERs with the rider that this allocation should be utilized  only 
for the existing seven NIPERs.  In this regard, the Department of Pharmaceuticals now 
proposed to explore the alternate ways of funding of these NIPERs.  S ince the present 
number of seven NIPERs are hardly sufficient to meet the requirements of  the country 
in the field of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, the Committee strongly 
recommend that all necessary steps should be taken by the Department o f 
Pharmaceuticals for the early setting up of five new NIPERs.  In this regard, a fresh 
proposal may be submitted to EFC for reconsideration of their decision and th e concern 
expressed by this Committee may be conveyed to them.  The Departm ent may also 
explore alternate ways of funding of these NIPERs including financial contributio n by 
both the Union and the concerned state Governments so that these five NIPERs are 
also developed and completed in a time bound manner.  Progress made  in this regard 
may be conveyed to the Committee”. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 1.12 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of  
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
 
“The recommendations of the Committee have been noted and a Committee h as 
since been set up with the approval of Hon ’ble Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers for 
exploring other options for setting up of new NIPERs”.  
 
1.13 The Department has submitted that the recommendation of the Committee 
have been noted and a Committee has since been set up with the approval 
of Hon’ble Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers for exploring other options for 
setting up of new NIPERs.  However, the details of the Committee and steps taken 
by it so far for exploring alternate ways of funding of NIPERs have not been 
furnished . The Committee desire that the details regarding composition of the 
Committee, date of constitution of the Committee, sittings held so far by the 
Committee, a gist of major recommendations made and major decision taken etc. 
may please be furnished for the consideration of the Committee at the earliest. 
 
 
  

8 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) 
  
1.14 With regard to the Pradhan Mantri BhartiyaJanaushadhiPariyojana (PMBJP ), the 
Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that a Budgetary allocation of Rs. 72.50 Crore ha s been 
made for PMBJP against the Department of Pharmaceutical ’s proposal for Rs. 100.00 
Crore for 2022-23.  Under this Scheme, a target has been fixed to open new 1000 
Kendras and enhance the product basket upto 1,800 medicines and 280 surgicals 
during the year 2022-23. Further, a sale target of Rs. 775.00 Cro re has also been 
prescribed for the year.  As per the Department, the funds allocated at BE stage are not 
sufficient and less allocation of funds will hamper effective implementation of  the 
scheme. The Scheme aims to make available quality generic medicines a t affordable 
prices to all especially for the poor and the deprived ones.   As o n 15.02.2022, 8683 
PMBJP outlets have been opened in the country with product basket of  1451 medicines 
and 240 surgicals.  In this regard, the Committee feel that the number of P MBJP outlets 
in the country are inadequate when compared to nine lakh plus medical sh ops in the 
country.   Further with regard to the present population of the country i.e. near about 
140.52 crore it is noted that one Kendra is catering to approximately 16 lakh  population. 
Hence, there is a need to increase the number of PMBJP outlets in the country and also 
to increase the product basket of the outlets.  The Committee, therefore, re commend 
that the Department of Pharmaceuticals should impress upon the Ministry of Finance for 
the allocation of remaining funds (Rs. 27.50 Crore) required for effective implementation 
at RE stage of 2022-23.  This recommendation of the Committee should a lso be sent to 
the Ministry of Finance for its implementation”. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
1.15 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-     
The government has set up a target to open 10,000 stores by March, 2024. This 
will imply about one store for a population of 1.50 lakhs. The Kendra s have been 
opened in all district of the country. Now the government intends to reach all the Blocks, 
with more stress towards aspirational districts, NE areas, hilly and island territories.  
However, financial viability of individual Kendra is also required to be taken i nto 
consideration, while expanding the scheme. 
During the financial year 2022-23, a target has been fixed to open  about new 
1,000 Kendras with cumulative total to about 9300 Kendras and to en hance the product 
basket up to 1,800 medicines and 280 surgicals. 
The Recommendation of the Committee for allocation of additional funds h as 
been sent to the Ministry of Finance on 26.05.2022 for necessary a ction.  Department 
will approach M/o Finance at RE stage 2022-23 for allocation of additional funds. 
 

9 
 
1.16 The Committee note an amount of Rs. 72.50 crore has been made for 
PMBJP against the proposal for Rs. 100.00 crore during the year 2022-23.  Thus 
there is a shortfall of Rs. 27.50 crore and the Department has submitted that at RE 
stage the matter would be taken up with the Ministry of Finance for allocation of 
the remaining amount.  The Committee further note that the target to set up 
10,000 stores by March, 2024 has been set by the Government.  The Committ ee, 
therefore, desire to know about the utilization of funds out of the allocated 
amount of Rs. 72.50 crore so far and steps taken for achievement of the target for 
opening 10,000 stores.  
(Recommendation No. 10) 
Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS) 
  
1.17 With regard to the Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance  Scheme 
(PTUAS), the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Department had sought Rs 100.00 Crore f or the 
Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS) but the 
approved BE allocation is Rs 62.00 Crore for the year 2022-23.   According  to the 
Department, the reason for this difference in proposed and approved BE a llocation 
is the present revision of scheme guidelines of PTUAS as per EFC approval.  Once 
approved, eligible applications will be considered in FY 2022-23.  Only token allocation 
was made to this important Scheme during the financial years 2019-20, 2020-21 and 
2021-22.  For the first time, the scheme has got the needed financial support o f Rs 
62.00 Crore at BE stage of 2022- 23.  The aim of PTUAS is to provide interest 
subvention to the Pharmaceutical Medium Small and Micro Enterprises (Pha rma 
MSMEs) to upgrade their standards both in terms of quality and techniq ue to WHO-
Good Manufacturing Practices so that the Pharma MSMEs would be able to produce 
quality drugs and become globally competitive.  This Scheme enables upgradation of 
these enterprises from Schedule M to WHO-GMP standards so that they are eligible  to 
export in global markets and earn foreign exchange.  Out of 6790 SMEs i n 
manufacturing bulk and API drugs, only 2006 are WHO-GMP certified and more than 
4500 remain outside the purview of WHO-GMP certification.  The Committee a re 
constrained to note that this Scheme remained on paper with token allocation s during 
the last three financial years.  With the allocation of funds made fo r 2022-23,  it is time 
for the Department to initiate concrete and time bound efforts  to start implementing this 
Scheme from 2022-23 onwards.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend: 
  
i) Guidelines of the scheme should be finalized quickly and the fund all ocated for 2022-
23 should be fully utilized”. 

10 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.18  In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
 i) The guidelines of the Scheme “Strengthening of Pharmaceuticals Industry ” (SPI) 
has been finalized and published in the Department's Website on 11. 03.2022, which 
includes the sub-scheme PTUAS. The sub-scheme, PTUAS has been inco rporated 
under the Scheme SPI with the budget allocation of Rs. 300.10 crore for Fi nancial Year 
2021-2022 to 2025-2026. Further, M/s SIDBI have been appointe d as the Project 
Management Consultant (PMC) for implementation of the Scheme. 
ii)        Department will seek additional funds from the Ministry of Finance at RE Stage, 
if need be. 
iii)       Under the PTUAS scheme,  a  target  has been set by the Department to provide 
support to about 420 Pharma MSMEs for upgrading their technology to meet WHO-
GMP or Schedule M standards till March 2026. Efforts will be made to achieve  the 
above targets in a time bound manner. 
 
1.19 The Committee note that for the year 2022- 23, an amount of Rs. 62.00 crore 
have been allocated for Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance 
Scheme (PTUAS) whereas during the year 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 only 
token allocation was made.  This is for the first time that needed financial support 
of Rs. 62.00 crore has been made.  The Committee further note that the aim of 
PTUAs is to provide interest subvention to the Pharmaceuticals, Medium, Small 
and Micro enterprises (Pharma MSMEs) to upgrade their standards both in term s 
of quality and technique to WHO-GMP Manufacturing practices to enable them to 
produce quality drugs and become globally competitive.  Considering there 
important facts, the Committee had recommended that the guidelines of the 
schemes be finalized and they have been finalized too.  However, with regard to 
upgrading of MSMEs (Pharma MSMEs) the Committee had noted that out of 6790 
Pharma MSME only 2006 are WHO-GMP certified and more than 4500 remained 
outside the purview of WHO-GMP certification.  In this regard, the Department has 
submitted that a target to provide support to just 420 pharma MSMEs for 
upgrading their technology to meet WHO-GMP or schedule M standards till March 
2026 has been set up.  The Committee are surprised to note the small figure of 
MSMEs taken up for up-gradation that too upto 2026.  When about 4500 MSMEs 
remained outside the purview of WHO-GMP certification.  The Committee strongly 

11 
 
recommend that the Department should review the target of upgrading just 420 
MSMEs by the year 2026 and increase this figure as well try to decrea se the time 
period involved in the process. The Committee desire that the remaining  4 500 
MSMEs also be upgraded to WHO-GMP certification at the earliest.  
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks (Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common 
Facilitation Center) 
  
1.20 With regard to the Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks (Assistance to Bulk Drug 
Industry for Common Facilitation Center), the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
 
(i) “The Committee note that the objective of this sub scheme is to promote three 
Bulk Drug Parks by providing Grants- in-Aid for creation of World class 
Common Infrastructure facilities (CIF).  A Financial assistance of Rs. 1000 
crore per Park or 70% of the cost of the CIF, whichever is less is provided. 
The assistance would be 90% for North East Region and Hill States. Total 
financial  outlay for the Scheme is Rs. 3000.00 crore and the duration o f its 
implementation is 2020-21 to 2024-25. The Committee note that this Sche me 
has not been able to take off since 2019-20. During 2019-20 only a  token 
allocation was made. Later during 2020-21, Rs.1.68 Crore was utilized ou t of 
RE allocation of Rs.1.69 Crore for Project Management Agency.  Further 
during 2021-22, Rs.36.24 Crore at RE stage remained unutilized as the 
process to select beneficiary states could not be completed.    However, it is 
noted that an amount of Rs.900.00 Crore has been allocated in BE 2 022-23. 
This amount will be used to give first instalment of Rs. 300.00 Cror e each to 
the three selected states for creation of Common Infrastructure Facilities 
(CIFs) as grant- in-aid.  Thirteen states have applied for assistance under the 
Scheme.  Since the Project Management Agency (PMA) has identified ce rtain 
issues in the proposals received under this scheme during 2021-22, an 
advisory Committee has been constituted with CEO NITI Aayog, Secretary, 
DoP and representatives of DPIIT & Department of Expenditure which has 
advised the Department to apply a set of qualitative filters to the propo sals 
received looking at the higher technology, market and environmental risks 
emerging in the last year in respect of the Bulk Drug segment. The process in 
this regard is presently underway in the Department.  The country is in urgent 
need of meeting the requirements of bulk drugs indigenously rather than 
dependence on other countries.  The Committee, therefore, recommend t hat 
the process of selection of three beneficiary states should be expedited a nd 
the first instalment of Rs.300.00 Crore should be released to the State s which 
are to be selected for implementation of the Scheme so that the unde sirable 
situation of surrender of unutilized budgetary allocation does not rec ur 
again”.  

12 
 
(ii) The Committee also feel that three bulk drug parks are not adequ ate to meet 
the production needs of bulk drugs in the country particularly keeping in view 
its status of “World Pharmacy”.  Since there is vast potential for export in the 
pharma sector, the Committee recommend that more Bulk Drug Parks may 
be set up in all the aspiring states and the Ministry of Finance may be  
approached for requisite budgetary allocation for the purpose.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 1.21 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of  
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-      
 
(i) “The recommendation of the committee is well taken. It is further stated that 
as provided by the guidelines of the scheme, the selection of States shall take 
place once in-principle approval is granted and DPRs are finalized. In 
pursuance to the same and guidance provided by the Advisory Committee 
constituted under the chair of CEO, NITI Aayog, continuous effort is being 
undertaken by the Department to ensure early selection of States and 
subsequent release of financial assistance under the aforesaid Scheme”. 
 
(ii) After implementation of the scheme for 3 bulk drug parks and evaluation of 
performance thereof, a considered view may be taken to assess need for 
expansion in view of prevailing situation in terms of level of drug security 
achieved, proliferation of parks/clusters, adequacy of market incentives and 
incentives given by respective State Governments, etc. 
 
1.22 The Committee note that the objective of the Assistance to Bulk Drug 
Subsidy for common facilitation Centre is to promote three Bulk Drug Parks b y 
providing Grant- in-aid for creation of world class common infrastructure 
facilities.  In this regard, thirteen states have applied for assistance under the 
scheme, and an advisory committee has been constituted with CEO NITI Aayog, 
Secretary DoP, representative of DPIIT and Department of Expenditure.  The 
Committee have been informed that the selection of states shall take place once 
‘in-principle’ approval is granted and DPRs are finalized and continuous efforts 
are being undertaken to ensure early selection of States and subsequent release 
of financial assistance under the scheme.  In this regard, the Committee in the 
first instance desire to know the precise reason for delay in according ‘in-
principle’ approval and finalization of DPRs.   The Department should had ‘in-
principle’ approval and DPRs finalized before requesting states to provide their 
inputs.  The Committee strongly recommend that the Department should pursue 

13 
 
the matter at the highest level and the needed ‘in-principle’ approval etc be 
accorded.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken by the 
Department in this regard.  
 
Recommendation No. 14 
Promotion of Medical Devices Parks   (Assistance to Medical Device Industry for 
Common Facilitation Center) 
 
 1.23 With regard to the Promotion of Medical Devices Parks   (Assistance to Medic al 
Device Industry for Common Facilitation Center), the Committee had recommended as  
follows:- 
 
i. The Committee note that the objective of the scheme is to promote 4 M edical 
Device Parks by providing Grants- in-Aid for creation of Common Infrastructure 
facilities (CIF). Total financial outlay for the Scheme is Rs.400.00 Crore for the 
period 2020-21 to 2024-25. Financial assistance is Rs.100.00 Crore per Park o r 
70% of the cost of the CIF, whichever is less. The assistance would be 90% for 
North Eastern Region and Hill States.  The Committee are concerned to note 
funds allocated for this Scheme during 2020-21 and 2021-22 w ere not fully 
utilized.  During 2020-21, out of Revised Estimate allocation of Rs.21.0 5 Crore, 
only Rs.7.49 Crore was spent. During 2021-22, the Department had 
spent    Rs.50.62 Crore out of allocated amount of Rs. 137.02 Crore at RE stage 
till the time information was furnished to the Committee.  In this regard, the 
Department has assured the Committee that the remaining amount would be 
released to the States before the end of the financial year.  The de tails of Actual 
Expenditure incurred as on 31 March, 2022 may be furnished to the 
Committee.  In this backdrop, Rs.120.00 Crore has been provisioned in BE 2022 -
23 which the Department will release as the 2 nd grant to 4 Medical Device Parks 
States with proportionate contribution by the State Implementing Agencies  
(SIAs). Medical Devices Sector being a sunrise sector of the Indian Economy, 
creation of state of the art Common Infrastructure Facilities (CI F) in Medical 
Devices Parks is need of the hour and their creation will attract private invest ment 
in Medical devices Industry. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the Department  should take necessary steps for the early release of budgetary 
funds to four Medical Devices Parks being set up in Himachal Pradesh, Ma dhya 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh and it should also be monitored by  the 
Department whether the released funds are resourcefully utilized by the 
concerned states.  The progress made in achieving the physical and financial 
targets set under the scheme should be intimated to the Committee. 

14 
 
ii. The Committee also recommend to examine the necessity of setting up o f more 
Medical Devices Parks in the country and appropriate steps should be initiated 
there for the setting up of Medical Devices Parks in other States as well”.  
1.24 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of  
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
1."i. The Department, in full agreement with the recommendations of the committ ee, 
has taken steps to release the funds to the four Medical Device Parks, 
sanctioned  to the States of Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nad u 
and Uttar Pradesh and progress in this regard, is being reviewed regularly The 
details of Expenditure under the scheme are as follows: In FY 2020-21 , Rs.7.49 
Crore was allocated at BE stage and later at RE stage, additional funds of 
Rs.21.05 Crore were requested but the funds could not be allocated. Hence, only  
Rs.7.49 Crores was spent during FY 2020-21. In FY 2021-22, Rs.60 Cr ore was 
allocated at BE stage which was later increased to Rs. 137.02 crore at RE stag e 
under the Scheme “Promotion of Medical Device Parks ” (erstwhile known as 
“Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility Centre ”). The entire 
Budget of Rs.137.02 Cr were fully utilized as on 31 st March, 2022. This includes 
release of an amount of Rs.30 Crores each as 1 st installment of Grant- in-aid to 
the States of Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Uttar  
Pradesh in FY 2021-22. Accordingly, in BE 22-23, Rs. 120 Cr has been 
requisitioned to process for release of 2 nd instalment to the States, subject to 
commensurate release from the States to the Parks and commensurate progress  
as per the committed timelines. There is proper mechanism to monitor the 
utilization of funds as well as monitor the progress in achieving the physical and 
financial targets under the scheme through the Project Management Agency  
(PMA) for the scheme. The progress made in achieving the physical and financial 
targets set under the scheme is being monitored through the Quarterly Review 
Reports (QRR) and the Special Purpose Vehicle formed by the State 
Governments to develop the medical device parks shall furnish a quarterly 
progress report to the Department as per the scheme guidelines. Same will be 
furnished to the Committee as requested. 
ii. Based on the budget provisioned and based on the examination of  the 
proposals received under the Scheme, four States of Madhya Pradesh, Himachal 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have been selected and being 
supported to create common infrastructure facilities. Presently, no budget is 
available under the scheme to support creation of common infrastructure facilities 
in the Medical Device Parks being developed or planned to be developed by  
other States. The States, interested to develop such Medical Device Parks i n 
their States, will, however, be provided necessary technical guidance." 

15 
 
1.25 The Committee have been informed that the objective of the scheme 
‘Promotion of Medical Devices Parks ’ is to promote Medical Device Parks ’ by 
providing Grants-in aid for creation of common infrastructure facilities.  The 
Committee have also been informed that first installment of Grant- in-aid of Rs. 30 
crore to each of the four states namely Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, 
Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh during the year 2021-22 and for the release of 2 nd 
installment to the States Rs. 120 crore has been requisitioned and is under 
process.  However, the Committee note with concern that at present budget is not 
available under the scheme to support creation of common infrastructure 
facilities in the medical Device Parks being developed or planned to be developed 
by States other than  Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Uttar 
Pradesh.  Though the Department would provide necessary technical guidance to 
states interested to develop Medical Device Parks.  The Committee desire that in 
order to create Common infrastructure facilities in other states too, the 
Department should consider allocation of budgetary funds/support to them.  The 
Committee would also like to know as to how many ’other states ’ have shown 
interest to set up medical Device Park in their states so far.  
 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
 
Monitoring the Performance of NIPERs 
  
2.1 With regard to the Monitoring the Performance of NIPERs, the Commit tee had 
recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee are concerned to note that NIPERs have only published 
602  Research publications as on 15 February, 2022 against the target of 900 Research 
publications for 2021-22.  Similarly, only 13 patents have been fil ed /granted against the 
target of 45 for the year.    Presently NIPERS at Mohali and Guwa hati are functioning in 
permanent campuses with very good infrastructure facilities but their per formance in 
terms of student intake, research paper publication and patents filin g is not better than 
other NIPERs which are presently lacking sound infrastructure facilities.  For the year 
2022-23, for instance Guwahati NIPER has set physical target regarding intake o f 185 
students, 140 Research Publications and only 8 patents which are less than Hyderabad, 
Mohali and Ahmedabad NIPERs.   In this regard, the Committee expect th at the 
NIPERs with own infrastructure and requisite number of faculties should perform b etter 
than others.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals should regularly monitor the performance of NIPERs and en sure that 
the targets fixed in respect of student intake, research publications and patents are 
achieved by them without fail.   A quarterly review of performan ce of each NIPER may 
be made at the Department level and the difficulties being faced by NIPERs in achieving 
their targets may be addressed to by the Department”. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.2 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
  
“Department of Expenditure has created 156 faculty post for 6 NIPERs in 
February, 2019. Framing of their RRs and actual filling took some time  and as of now 
about nearly 80% posts have been filled while, remaining are under process . Due to 
absence of regular faculty, there has been a shortfall in achieving the targets.  Further, 
as the educational institutes could not function to their full capacity due to COVID lock 
downs/ restrictions, there has been a slight decline.   
  
The matter has been also deliberated regularly at the Institute/ Board an d 
department level, and all NIPERs have been directed to achieve the vision  targets. As 
of 31 st March, 2022(FY 2021-22), about 795 research papers have bee n filed and 30 
patents have been filed by NIPERs. Further, monthly Review Meetings und er the 

17 
 
chairmanship of Secretary (Pharma) are held regularly to monitor the perfor mance of 
NIPERs and ensure achievement of the targets fixed”. 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
Assistance in Research and Development by NIPERs 
  
2.3 With regard to the Assistance in Research and Development by NIPERs, the 
Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee also note that NIPERs are presently functioning in an insulated 
atmosphere without much public visibility and engagements.  As per the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, a Common Research Programme has been worked out under w hich 
most common health problems faced by the people of the country have been identified 
for common research by NIPERS.  Major pharmaceutical companies in private se ctor 
have their own R & D facilities but Pharma Medium Small and Micro Ent erprises 
(MSMEs) lack them.  Since it is very much necessary for NIPERs to play a catalytic role  
in pharmaceutical research, the Committee would like to make the following 
recommendations:- 
 
i. A time bound programme should be chalked  out for Common Research 
Programme of NIPERS and a few areas of health concerns of the country may 
be identified for common research by NIPERs 
ii. NIPERs may render research and development assistance to MSMEs and a 
workable model in this regard may be worked out by Department of 
Pharmaceuticals in coordination with the NIPERs”.   
 
 REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.4 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
  “The recommendations of the committee, which are very valuable have been  
noted for compliance. In this regard, it is mentioned that the Department is taking 
monthly reports from NIPERs on implementation of the Common Research Programme. 
It has taken steps for enhance academia – industry linkage and in this regard has 
recently launched NIPER Research Portal to disseminate information about research 
activities, patents filed etc. by NIPERs. Further, Innovation and Entrepreneurship  
Guidelines have been finalized recently and circulated to NIPERs for compli ance. 
Department has also finalized draft Policy for catalyzing Research & Innovatio n in 
Pharma- MedTech sector, which has been submitted to the Cabinet for app roval. 
Further, in all schemes, including PLIs, Parks and scheme especially designed f or 
MSME sector, viz., Pharmaceutical Technological Up-gradation Scheme, the NIP ERs 
have been involved for providing technical assistance”. 
  

18 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
Filling up of faculty positions in NIPERs 
 2.5 With regard to the Filling up of faculty positions in NIPERs, the Committe e had 
recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Department of Expenditure has created 156 faculty 
posts for NIPERs in February, 2019.  Presently 70% of the faculty positions have  been 
filled up and the remaining are under process.   Since the availability of requisite 
number of faculty is very much essential for the effective performance of NIP ERs, the 
Committee recommend that the process of recruitment of requisite number of faculty  for 
all NIPERs should be a continuous process till the recruitment of all the sanction ed 
posts of faculties in all NIPERs.  Progress made in this regard may be intimated to  the 
Committee”. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
 
“NIPERs have been advised to fill up the posts of faculty based on the 
requirement while taking in consideration AICTE's guidelines. Presently, ab out 80% 
sanctioned posts have been filled while remaining are under process”. 
  
  
(Recommendation No. 8) 
Coverage and product basket of PMBJP 
2.7 With regard to the Coverage and product basket of PMBJP, the Committee ha d 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that all 739 districts of the country have alre ady been covered 
under Pradhan MantriBharatiyaJanaushadhiPariyojana (PMBJP).  In order to p opularize 
the Scheme and expand opening of Kendras in the aspirational d istricts, Himalayan, 
Island territories and the North-Eastern States, a new incentive plan has been launched. 
Such Kendras now get a one- time grant of ₹ 2 lakh in addition to normal incentives viz. 
Rs.1.50 lakh for reimbursement of furniture and fixtures and Rs.0.50 lakh for 
reimbursement for computer, internet, printer, scanner etc. Pharmaceuticals and 
Medical Devices Bureau of India (PMBI) has released various newspaper 
advertisements for inviting applications for opening of PMBJP outlets in July, 20 21 for 
opening of PMBJP outlets in 265 districts of the different States where cov erage is 
less.  Since continuous  efforts are to be made for expanding coverage  of the Scheme 
so as to achieve its objectives of providing quality generic medicines and m edical 
devices at affordable prices to the people of the country, the Committee wo uld like to 
make the following recommendations:- 

19 
 
i.  An action plan  should be chalked out to open more Jan Aushadi 
outlets  in  urban fringes particularly near slum pockets and other urban areas 
where concentration of poor and below poverty line people is  more, semi u rban 
areas, rural areas,   remote areas and  hilly areas so as to enable the peop le of 
these areas get  benefited from  the Scheme.   
ii. Additional Incentives which are offered to the entrepreneurs of aspirational 
districts, Himalayan, Island territories and the North-Eastern States may be 
offered to all the entrepreneurs who come forward to set PMBJP outlets in an y 
part of the country so as to make it attractive to them. 
iii. A study/evaluation may be conducted by the Department of Pharmaceuticals and 
PMBI on the continuous viability of these outlets even after the incentiv e period 
including the need for permission to sell other products alongwithJanaush adi 
medicines and medical devices and necessary follow up action may be ta ken up 
according to the outcome of the Study/evaluation. 
iv.  Measures should be taken by the Department along with PMBI and  National 
Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority (NPPA) to educate the people about t he 
quality, efficacy and affordability of generic medicines being sold thr ough PMBJP 
outlets so as to attract more people towards these outlets. 
v. Department of Pharmaceuticals, NPPA and the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare may make coordinated efforts to make the medical practitioners 
prescribe quality generic medicines rather than exorbitant branded 
medicines.  This recommendation may also be sent to the Ministry of Health an d 
Family Welfare. 
Specific Action Taken Reply may be given with respect to each of the abov e 
recommendations”. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.8  In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
 “The requisite details are as under: 
(i)  Department of Pharmaceuticals & PMBI are continuously making efforts for 
expanding the scheme so as to achieve its objectives of providing generic m edicines at 
affordable prices to the people of the country.  In order to have  better coverage of the 
PMBJKs in the under-covered areas of the country, Department of Pharmaceuticals and 
PMBI sends letters to various authorities of all the State Governme nts regularly for 
expediting opening of PMBJKs. 
  
The Committee ’s recommendation has been noted. PMBI has recently invited 
applications for opening Kendras in urban fringes at  Block levels for abo ut 3,500 
locations, particularly where concentration of poor and below poverty line  people is 
more. 

20 
 
 
(ii) The present budgetary allocation will not suffice for expanding the sco pe of 
beneficiaries eligible for additional incentives. Department of Pharmaceuticals will 
approach Ministry of Finance with recommendations of the Committee for additiona l 
funds for the purpose. 
  
(iii)  As per policy, the Kendras are not permitted to sell other products along  with 
Janaushadi medicines and medical devices. As per field reports of PMBI, mo st of the 
Kendras are viable after end of incentive period. The recommendation of the Committee 
for conducting a study/ evaluation has, however, been noted for 
compliance.  Accordingly, necessary action is being taken for inclusion of the  study 
under Pharmaceutical Promotion and Development Scheme (PPDS) of the Department. 
  
(iv) Department/ PMBI is spreading awareness about the salient features of PMBJ P 
through various types of advertisements such as Print Media, Radio adv ertisement, TV 
advertisement, Cinema Advertisements and Outdoor publicity like Hoardings, B us 
Queue Shelter branding, Bus branding, Auto wrapping, etc. In addition, PM BI is also 
educating the public about the usages of Janaushadhi generic med icines through social 
media platforms like Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube, etc. regularly on daily 
basis. In addition, PMBI spreads 7 th March every year as Jan AushadhiDiwas. During 
the week-long celebrations held   from 1st to 7 th March, 2022 this year, various activities 
like organizing seminars, health camps, heritage, health walks and award distribution 
etc. were organized. On 7 th March, 2022, awards under various categories were given 
and Hon'ble PM interacted with the beneficiaries and other stakeholders. 
 (v)  Department of Pharmaceuticals, on its part, regularly takes up the issue with the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare as well as State/ UT governments to issue 
directions to Government doctors to prescribe generic drugs only.  The 
Recommendation of the Committee has been sent to the Ministry of Hea lth & Family 
Welfare on 26.05.2022 (ANNEXURE-III) for necessary action”.  
 
 (Recommendation No. 9) 
Scheme for strengthening the Pharmaceutical Industry 
  
 2.9   With regard to the Scheme for strengthening the Pharmaceutical Ind ustry, the 
Committee had recommended as follows:- 
  “The Committee note that Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) has 
recommended to de-link 
three sub 
schemes  viz (i) Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS); 
(ii) Assistance to Pharmaceutical Industry for Common Facilities (APICF) and (iii) 
Pharmaceutical Promotion and Development Scheme (PPDS) from the Umbrella 
scheme of Development of Pharmaceutical Industry and implement them as a  separate 
scheme.  Accordingly, 
the Department is implementing a particular scheme called 
Scheme for strengthening the Pharmaceutical Industry.  Above mentioned t hree 
Schemes have been included under this new Scheme.  According to the Department, 
EFC has earmarked Rs.500 crore for five years to implement these three schemes. In  

21 
 
this regard, the Department has done extensive stakeholders ’ consultation before 
arriving at the scheme guidelines, which are being accordingly revised and put up for 
the approval for the Minister.  As recommended by the Committee last ye ar, th e 
Department is in the process of appointing professional PMC – Project Management 
Consultant for the implementation of these Schemes in a systemic, professional an d 
transparent manner without any delay.   Keeping in view the assured financial allocation 
for next five years, the Committee is now hopeful that the Department will raise the level 
of implementation of these sub-schemes so that the Department will be able to achieve 
the goal of ensuring drug security for the country. In this regard, the Committe e 
recommend that the Department should act swiftly to finalize the revised guidelines for 
the Scheme with the approval of the Minister and each  sub scheme sh ould be 
implemented from 2022-23 onwards in letter and spirit.  Progress made in th is regard 
should be intimated to the Committee”. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
2.10   In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
“The Department has incorporated three sub-scheme i.e. “Pharmaceutical 
Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS), “Assistance to Pharmaceutical 
Industry for Common Facilities ” and “Pharmaceutical Promotion and Development 
Scheme (PPDS) ” in a single scheme namely “Strengthening of Pharmaceuticals 
Industry” (SPI) with the approval of Hon ’ble Minister (C&F) and released the guidelines 
of the Scheme on 11.03.2022 on the website of the Departmen t. The selection of 
Project Management Consultant (PMC) for implementation of the Scheme throu gh open 
tender basis is also finalized and M/s SIDBI has been appointed as PM C and work 
order has been issued on 25.5.2022. 
Further, Secretary, DoP has written to Chief Secretaries of all the States/UTs a nd 
Industry departments of all the States/UTs on 25.5.2022, seeking sup port for the 
dissemination of the schemes to the eligible Pharma Industries in the States/U Ts and 
to encourage eligible Pharma Industries to avail benefits under the Sch eme. Further, it 
is planned to issue notification to invite applications under the sub schemes ‘API-CF’ 
and ‘PTUAS’ as early as possible”. 
 
 (Recommendation No.11) 
 
Assistance to Pharmaceuticals Industry for Common Facilitation Center 
(previously known as Cluster Development) 
  
2.11 With regard to the Assistance to Pharmaceuticals Industry for Common 
Facilitation Center (previously known as Cluster Development, the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
 
(i) “The Committee note that the scheme Assistance to Pharmaceuticals Industry for 
Common Facilitation Center Scheme (previously known as Cluster Development) is 

22 
 
implemented in a Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. Financial assistance  under 
this sub-scheme is provided for creation of Common Facilities, such as Common 
Testing Centre, Training Centre, R&D Centre, Central Effluent Treatment Plan (CETP), 
Common Logistic Centre, etc. For the ensuing year 2022-23, the Departmen t has been 
allocated an amount of Rs. 36.00 Crore which is 50 percent hike in compariso n to RE 
stage allocation of Rs. 15.61 Crore during 2021- 22.  However, during 2021-22 the 
Committee noticed sheer underutilization of funds. The actual utilization as o n 
11.02.2022 is only 9.6 percent that is Rs. 1.51 Crore out of Rs 15.61 Crore a vailable at 
Revised Estimates stage with the Department.  In this regard, the Committee note th e 
assurance given by the Department that they will release funds to some projects before 
31 March, 2022.  The details of actual fund utilized under the Scheme on or before 31 
March 2022 should be intimated to the Committee.  Having noted that so me Common 
Effluent Treatment Plants, Testing laboratory etc. are under approval/implementatio n 
stages under the Scheme, the Committee recommend that concrete and tim e bound 
steps should be initiated by the Department for the successful completion and 
commissioning of these projects during 2022-23 and for fully utilizing the funds allocated 
for the year. 
  
(ii)        The Committee also recommend that the Department should ta ke steps for the 
expansion of PPP projects under the scheme so as to involve all the State s/UTs that 
have strong presence of private Pharma industries and also the States/UTs which strive 
to develop pharma industries”. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.12  In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, th e Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-   
  
(i) “It is submitted that the utilization of fund under the Scheme “Assistance to 
Pharmaceutical Industry for Common Facilities ” (API-CF) for FY 21-22 till 31.03.2022 is 
Rs. 9.88 Crore.  Further, under the scheme, an amount of Rs.55.44 lakhs has been 
released in first quarter of FY 2022-23 for the approval given in FY 21-22. 
  
(ii)       Secretary, DoP has written to Chief Secretaries of all the States/UTs and 
Industry departments of all the States/UTs on 25.5.2022, seeking their  support for 
dissemination of the schemes to the eligible Pharma Industries in the States/U Ts and 
to encourage eligible Pharma Industries to avail benefits under the Scheme”. 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
Pharmaceutical and Medical Devices Promotion Development Scheme (PMPDS) 
  
2.13 With regard to the Pharmaceutical and Medical Devices Promotion Development 
Scheme (PMPDS), the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
 

23 
 
(i) “The Committee note that the  Pharmaceutical and Medical Devices Promotion 
Development Scheme (PMPDS) aims at  promotion, development and export promotion 
in Pharmaceutical sector by extending financial support for conducting seminars, 
conferences, exhibitions, conducting studies/ consultancies etc.  Presently, the new  
scheme guidelines are being finalized by the Department.  Out of RE all ocation of Rs. 
2.00 Crore for 2021-22, the Department has utilized only Rs.1.01 Crore as on 
11.02.2022. In this regard, the Committee note that 5 studies have been approved in FY 
2021-22 and part instalments are to be released for the purpose. Further, few  events, 
seminars, conferences are to be organized and It is expected that entire RE will be 
utilized till 31 st March, 2022.  Progress made in regard to utilization of RE allocation 
during 2021-22 should be furnished to the Committee. For the year 2022 -23, the 
Department has again received an allocation of Rs. 2.00 Crore.              According to 
the Department, earlier studies conducted under the scheme were ad-hoc and  now the 
Department has collected the requirements of study from all the 
Departments/Organizations’/Industry and is now conducting studies in a systematic 
way.  The Committee feel that the effective implementation of this Scheme will provide a 
helping hand in promotion and development of the pharma sector in the country and 
hence the Committee recommend  that  an annual calendar of events  to be 
organized/studies to be conducted under the Scheme should be chalked  ou t well in 
advance before the starting of a financial year and concrete steps  should be taken for 
resourceful spending of budgetary allocation made rather than rushing for last q uarter 
spending”.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
2.14 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
 (i) “The recommendation of the Committee is noted. The Department has sou ght 
inputs from various Divisions and Organizations/ Agencies under its aegis and  is in the 
process of finalization of Calendar of events / studies for Financial Year 2 022-2023 
under PPDS scheme. 
(ii) The recommendation of the Committee is noted. In this regard, it is submit ted that 
the Department, in coordination with FICCI, organized an annual mega-conference titled 
‘India Pharma and India Medical Devices 2022 ’, from April 25-27, 2022 at Dr BR 
Ambedhkar International Centre, New Delhi. This three days conference is seventh in 
series and included CEOs RoundTable of Pharma and MedTech industries and 
thematic full day conference sessions on various topics concerning the pha rma and 
MedTech industries. In this event, detailed deliberations were held for the holistic 
promotion and development of Pharma and MedTech Sector. The discussio ns were 
focused on envisaging the growth of the Industry for India@2047”. 
 
 
  

24 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Promotion of Domestic 
Manufacturing of Critical Key Starting Materials (KSMs)/ Drug Intermediates (DIs) 
and Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) 
 
 2.15    With regard to the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Promotion o f 
Domestic Manufacturing of Critical Key Starting Materials (KSMs)/ Drug Intermed iates 
(DIs) and Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs), the Committee had recommended 
as follows:- 
      
“The Committee note that the scheme provides for financial incentives to 
manufacturers selected under the scheme for manufacturing of 41 Key Starting 
Materials (KSMs)/ Drug Intermediates (DIs) and Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients 
(APIs). The scheme provides for incentives on incremental sales to selected 
participants for a period of 6 years. The total financial outlay of the scheme is Rs. 
6,940.00 Crore and its tenure is from FY 2020-2021 to 2029-30.  T he Committee note 
that the Department has been allocated an amount of Rs. 390.00 Crore at BE stage for 
the year 2022-23 in comparison to only Rs 2.79 Crore at RE stage in 2021-
22.  According to the Department, good response has been received from th e 
pharmaceutical sector. Total 239 applications were received in Round I and Rou nd II. 
49 applicants have been approved with committed investment of Rs. 3,685.3 8 Crore. 
Out of these 49 applicants, 8 have already commissioned their plants and 13 more are 
expected to commission their plants by the end of March, 2022.   Th e main objective of 
this scheme is to reduce dependency on imports for 41 critical APIs. However, th e 
Committee note that out of 41 critical APIs only 33 APIs found their bidders among 
domestic manufacturers  and  the response is poor in respect of other 8 APIs as these 
APIs do not have demand in the market and are fermentation based  whose technology 
is difficult as well as costly which requires greater investment.   Further, the privat e 
players hesitate to invest in these 8 APIs as their end products are not com petitive in 
global market. In this regard the Committee note that other countries are prov iding very 
high level of support in terms of power cost, water cost and the environm ental 
cost.   Since it is very much necessary to create a strong manufacturing base  for critical 
Key Starting Materials / Drug Intermediates  and Active Pharmaceutical Ing redients  so 
that the country entirely meet the requirements of these materials indigeno usly both for 
the domestic medicine needs as well as for exports, the Committee, therefo re strongly 
recommend the following:- 
 (i)         Department should chalk out an action plan for the time  bound and resourceful 
utilization of budgetary allocation of Rs.390.00 Crore under the Schem e. For that 
purpose, concrete steps should be taken by the Department for the expeditious 
commissioning of plants by all the 49 applicants approved under the Scheme and timely 
start of sales by these plants so that the incentive is disbursed to them in the form of 
production linked incentives. Progress made in this regard should be intimated to th e 
Committee”. 

25 
 
(ii)       Since fermentation technology is difficult and large scale investment is 
required, the Department should consider providing high level support to the 
entrepreneurs who come forward to set up these industries in terms of 
subsidized power cost, adequate water supply at low cost, single window 
environmental clearance, lower environmental cost, etc. in coordination with the 
State/UT Governments so as to attract more investment in this sector. 
(ii) The Department in consultation with various stake holders should prepare 
a list of alternate products in place of 8 APIs/KSMs which are no longer 
necessary because of less demand and seek Cabinet approval for those alternate 
APIs for inclusion under the Scheme. 
(iv) As the Fermentation based APIs are based on complex and costly 
technology, research and development may be encouraged for the invention of 
cost effective alternate technology for fermentation process. NIPERs may also be 
engaged in Research and Development in this regard. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 2.16 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
(i) “ Under the PLI scheme for Bulk Drugs, as on date, 10 projects have been  
commissioned and 12 more projects are expected to be ready for commissioning by 
June 2022. It is expected that Rs. 390 crores will be utilized by the end of F.Y. 2022-23. 
  
Further, applications were re-invited under Round III to fill the remaining slots 
under the scheme.  A total of 9 applications have been received, wh ich are under 
examination for final approval. 
  
  
(ii) The recommendation of the Committee is noted. The Department is h aving a 
Project Development Cell, maintained by Invest India, to facilitate and provide high  level 
support to the entrepreneurs and PLI applicants and participants t o resolve any issues 
regarding setting up the Industries. Further, under National Single Window  System of 
DPIIT, all the Participants of the PLI schemes have been oriented on 26.5.2022 to 
available the benefits of single window clearance of various regulator / stakeh older 
departments for the units, being set by them. The Department will take app ropriate 
action to coordinate with State/UT Governments as and when such representations are  
received from the PLI participants. 
 (iii)The recommendation of the Committee is noted. It is submitted that applications 
were re-invited under Round III to fill the 22 vacant slots including fermentation based 
products under the scheme. A total of 9 applications have been received which are 
under examination. The suggestion of the Committee has been duly no ted and will be 
taken in consideration at appropriate stage. 
  

26 
 
 (iv) NIPERs are institutes of national importance, which besides imparting 
postgraduate and doctorate education conduct high end research. The Depa rtment has 
involved NIPERs and their faculty for technical evaluation/ assistance of vari ous 
proposals under the PLI scheme. Further, all the NIPERs have come toge ther and 
formulated a Common Research Programme, based on national needs and their  
expertise and are engaged in R&D on various topics, including development of APIs”. 
  
Recommendation No. 16: 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing 
for Medical Device 
2.17 With regard to the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Prom oting 
Domestic Manufacturing for Medical Device, the Committee had recommended as  
follows:- 
(i)  “The Committee note that Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Promo ting 
Domestic Manufacturing of Medical Devices was approved by the Government of 
India on 20.03.2020 to address the challenges in manufacturing of med ical devices 
in India vis-à-vis other major manufacturing economies. The guidelines for  
implementation of the scheme were issued on 29.10.2020. The Scheme is 
applicable only to the Greenfield projects and intends to boost dom estic 
manufacturing and attract large investments in the Medical Devices Sector. The 
tenure of the scheme is from FY 2020-21 to FY 2027-28 with tota l financial outlay of 
Rs. 3,420.00 Crore. Under this Scheme, financial incentive will be given to  selected 
companies at the rate of 5% of incremental sales of medical devices manufac tured 
in India and covered under the target segments of the scheme, for a period  of five 
years.  The Committee note that for the year 2022-23, the Depa rtment has been 
allocated Rs.216.00 Crore at BE stage which is a marked enhancement in 
comparison to Rs.3.31 Crore allocated at RE stage during 2021- 22.  Further, the 
Department has approved 21 applicants under the scheme.  Since it is ve ry much 
important that all the 21 applicants commission their plants in a tim e bound manner 
and start production and sale of medical devices so that they become eli gible to get 
incentive under the Scheme, the Committee, therefore, recommend that con crete 
steps should be taken by the Department of Pharmaceuticals for timely  
commissioning of plants by these applicants and ensure full  utilization  of budgetary 
allocation of Rs.216.00 Crore for the disbursal of  incentives to them based on their 
production and sale of medical devices. A definite responsibility may be fixed  on 
Project Management Agency in this regard.  The details of progress made in 
implementation of the Scheme during 2022-23 should be intimated  to the 
Committee. 
(ii) The  Committee note that the incentives provided under the scheme are for 
incremental sales only and in no way address the major challenges faced b y 
Greenfield projects viz. poor infrastructure, weak domestic supply chain and 
logistics, high cost of project finance, inadequate power backup, limited design 
capabilities, low investment in R&D and skill development, etc. Unless these 
challenges are overcome it is difficult to visualize that the domestic Medical Device 

27 
 
Industry can reap the real benefits out of the PLI scheme.  Hence, the Committee 
recommend that the Department may ponder over  the ways and means to address 
these grass root challenges faced by the medical device industry and initiate 
appropriate steps thereon”. 
 REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.18 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-   
  
 (i)  “Under the PLI scheme for Medical Devices, 9 projects have been 
commissioned till date and 5 more will be commissioned by June 2022 . The 
Department has fixed the roles & responsibilities of PMA, which is responsible for 
examination of claims for disbursement of incentives and making appropria te 
recommendations to the Empowered Committee. 
  
(ii) The recommendation of the Committee is noted.  Knowing the need  for a holistic 
policy to accelerate growth and exploit the potential of the Sunrise med ical devices 
sector and to put in place a comprehensive set of measures for ensuring  sustained 
growth and development of the sector and to bring together the ran ge of interventions 
into a coherent policy framework that would facilitate focused and efficien t support and 
facilitation for the sector by the respective  agencies, due to diversity and m ulti-
disciplinary nature of the sector and for ensuring smooth transition to the regulation and 
licensing of Medical devices, after extensive consultation, the Department ha s 
circulated  a draft Cabinet Note on National Medical Devices Policy, 2022  to 
stakeholder departments for inter-ministerial consultations. Various initiatives taken  by 
Department to address issues faced by the Industry are given at Annexure-1”. 
 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme 
for Pharmaceuticals 
2.19         With regard to Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for 
Pharmaceuticals, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
   “The Committee note that the Production Linked Incentive scheme for 
Pharmaceuticals was approved by the Cabinet on 11.11.2020 with the objective to 
enhance India’s manufacturing capabilities by increasing investment and production 
in the sector and contributing to product diversification to high value goods in  the 
pharmaceutical sector. One of the further objectives of the scheme is to creat e 
global champions out of India who have the potential to grow in size an d scale using 
cutting edge technology and thereby penetrate the global value chains. The outlay of 
the scheme is Rs. 15,000.00 Crore and pharmaceutical goods will be incentiv ized 
under the scheme based on their incremental sales.  The tenure of the sch eme is 
proposed to be from FY 2021 to 2028-29. (Ref: Para 3.50) Howeve r for the year 
2022-23 the Department has received only Rs. 3.00 Crore at BE stage. During 2021-
22, out of total RE allocation of Rs. 3.00 Crore, Rs.1.24 Crore have been  released 
as service fee to Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI), the Proj ect 

28 
 
Management Agency and the remaining amount of Rs.1.76 Crore has been 
surrendered.  As on date 11 applicants under Group A, 9 applicant ’s Under Group 
‘B’ and 35 applicants under Group ‘C’ category have been shortlisted by the 
Selection Committee of the Department for assistance under the Scheme.  Since the 
implementation of the Scheme in letter and spirit will give a boost to the 
pharmaceutical sector in the country, the Committee, therefore recommend the 
following:- 
  
iii. Immediate steps should be taken for the effective implementation of the Scheme 
from 2022-23 onwards.  Particularly, the commissioning of plants by all the 55 
approved applicants belonging to all the three categories should be e nsured 
during 2022-23 so as to start disbursing incentives to them. 
iv. Allocation of only Rs.3.00 Crore for 2022-23 out of Rs.15,000.00 Crore earmarked 
for the Scheme is miniscule.  In this regard, the Department should make demand  
for requisite allocation of fund at RE stage for the disbursal of incentives to 
applicants who start production and sale during 2022-23. 
v. Under Category 2 of this Scheme, Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients / Key 
Starting Materials / Drug Intermediates have been included.  Since the re is a 
separate PLI Scheme for APIs/KSMs/DIs, the Department may examine th e 
necessity of Category 2 under this Scheme and take appropriate action thereon. 
vi. The number of applicants approved under all the three categorie s is less 
considering the scope of production of pharmaceuticals under these 
categories.  In this regard, the Department may create an enabling ecosyste m for 
the pharmaceutical start-ups and young entrepreneurs through this PLI sch eme 
and upscale the financial and physicals targets under the scheme to make  India 
world leader in production of medicines”. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.20 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of  
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
 
“Department is taking all necessary steps for effective implementation of the 
scheme. 
  
 (i)  As per the scheme guidelines, the scheme cover brownfield investments  as well. All 
the 55 PLI participants have their plants already running and hence implem entation 
does not seem to be a challenge. 
  
(ii) The allocation of ₹3 crore for FY 2022 -23 at BE stage is sufficient to meet payment 
of professional charges to the Project Management Agency (PMA), which is th e only 
stipulated expenditure to be incurred in the said FY. As regard incentive, FY 20 22-23 
will be the first production year and incentives are to be given on a nnual incremental 
sales in the following year, viz., FY 2023-24 as per the scheme guideli nes. The 
Department will consult with Department of Expenditure on the possibility of earl ier 
payment. 

29 
 
  
(iii) The Indian Pharmaceutical industry is 3 rd largest in the world by volume. India 
exported pharmaceuticals worth Rs.1,80,551 crore in the financial year 2020-21. India 
exported Bulk Drugs/ Drug Intermediates worth Rs.32,857 crore in financial year 202 0-
21. However, the country also imports various Bulk Drugs/ Active Pharmaceutica l 
Ingredients (APIs) for producing medicines from various countries. The Government 
strives to minimize country ’s dependence on imports and to give fillip to indigenous 
manufacturing. 
  
PLI scheme for Bulk Drugs covers 41 APIs/KSMs/DIs (Active Pharmaceutical 
Ingredients / Key Starting Materials / Drug Intermediates), based on the 
recommendation of the Technical Committee constituted in this regard, with the 
objective of reducing import dependency.  Under the PLI Scheme for Ph armaceuticals, 
APIs excluding those 41 already covered under the PLI Scheme for Bu lk Drugs are 
being considered. Based on the necessity to support the domestic manufacturi ng of 
APIs, the category-2 was incorporated under the scheme for Pharmaceuticals, to  cover 
the APIs, other than those covered under the PLI scheme for Bulk Drugs. 
  
(iv) Through PLI Schemes, the aim is to support creation of global champions in a self-
sustaining manner. Incentive is envisaged to be disbursed only after investment a nd 
production (and subsequently sales) takes place, as per criteria laid down in the 
scheme guidelines. Hence, only few entities which have attributes of a  champion, using 
cutting edge technology, are willing to make required investment and fulf ill criteria 
pertaining to incremental growth and the ability to grow in scale and size have been 
selected. 
  
Further, at present, there is no scope to upscale the physical and financial 
targets under the scheme as the Cabinet-approved physical and fina ncial targets have 
been attained with the selection of 55 PLI Participants. Department, in clo se 
coordination with other Department such as DPIIT, strives to create an enabling 
environment for the pharmaceutical start-ups”. 
  
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
Research and Development of Pharma Sector and future strategy 
 
2.21 With regard to the Research and Development of Pharma Sector and future 
strategy, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
(i ) “The Committee are concerned to note that only a token allocatio n of Rs.1 lakh 
has been made for Research and Development in Pharma Sector for the year 2 022-23. 
In this regard, the Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals has come 
out with a Policy for Catalyzing Research and Development and innovation i n 
pharmaceutical and medical sector. A draft Cabinet note has already been circulated. 
We have received extensive comments, both from industry as well as from the 
Departments. Now the Policy is under finalization stage. Since it is necessary to take 
pharma sector to the next level of development and to increase the va lue of this sector 

30 
 
in the global market, the Committee strongly recommend that this Policy shou ld be 
finalized at the earliest and necessary steps should be taken up by  the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals to implement the Policy in letter and spirit. Separate bud getary 
allocation is also ought to be made for Research and Development so as to put in the 
necessary finances into research and development in pharma sector speci fically in the 
medical devices industry. Department of Pharmaceuticals should impress upon the 
Ministry of Finance about the necessity of budgetary allocation for research a nd 
development in pharma sector. This recommendation of the Committee  may also be 
shared with that Ministry for the purpose. 
 
ii) The Committee feel that it is important that the Government should come ou t with 
clear strategies in terms of manner in which the support should be given to p harma 
sector for holistically developing the sector in all fronts and to make it a w orld leader. In 
this regard, the Committee recommend that the Government should chalk out a lo ng 
term plan/strategy with the help of best of the policy makers and experts in the field so 
as to create a world class infrastructure in the country for the all-round de velopment of 
the pharma sector in the country”. 
   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.22 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of  
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
  
  “A DCN on ‘Policy to Catalyse R&D and Innovation in the Pharma- MedTech 
Sector in India’ has been circulated for inter-departmental consultations on 22.10.2021 . 
Based on the comments/ suggestions from various departments and inputs received 
from industry stakeholders, the policy document has been refined, incorpo rating the 
suggestions, as appropriate. The Final Cabinet Note on R& D policy has also bee n sent 
to Cabinet Secretariat on 13.05.2022 for consideration and approval of the Cabinet. 
  
The policy is built upon three focus areas, viz., streamlining the regulatory 
framework, incentivizing investments and creating a Facilitatory ecosystem fo r 
Innovation. Policy focuses on incentivizing private sector investment in research an d 
evaluate various funding mechanisms – Budgetary support, Venture capital, CSR 
funding, etc. and fiscal incentives to support innovation. The policy focuse s on the 
provision of appropriate fiscal and non-fiscal incentives for Pharmaceuticals/ Med Tech 
innovations by introduction of direct/ indirect funding support to promote Ind ia as an 
innovation hub; and also mentions few measures to be explored, such a s; Creation of 
Pharma-Med-Tech Innovation fund, Introduction of long-term, secure “innovation 
bonds”, Reimbursement of R&D spending and appropriate fiscal incentives, and others.  
The recommendations of the Committee will be shared with Ministry of Fina nce for 
seeking requisite funds after approval of the Cabinet. 
   
(ii)  The recommendations of the committee, which are very valuable have been 
noted for compliance. In this regard, it is mentioned that the Department as part of its 
mandate and as per earlier recommendations of the Departmental Parlia mentary 
Standing Committee has set up an Inter-Departmental Committee (IDC) in January,  
2019 to periodically review & coordinate research in a collaborative, synchronized  & 

31 
 
synergized way, utilize funds allocated in an optimum manner and e nsure no over-
lapping and duplication of efforts and resources. The Committee includes 
representatives from various other scientific departments such as Dept of Health 
&Family Welfare/ Department of Health Research / Council of Scientific and  Industrial 
Research/ Dept of Biotechnology/ Dept of Science & Technology/ Departmen t of Higher 
Education/ Indian Council of Medical Research/ AYUSH. The Committee meets 
periodically and consider proposals from time to time. Six meetings of IDC h ave been 
convened till date. 
  
One of the pillars of the draft "Policy to Catalyse R&D and Innovation in the 
Pharma- MedTech Sector in India ’ is creation of world-class Facilitatory Ecosystem for 
Research and innovation in the Pharma sector. As soon as the policy is accorded 
approval by the competent authority a scheme would be devised and i mplemented by 
the department as proposed in the policy”. 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
Assistance to PSUs 
  
2.23 With regard to the Assistance to PSUs, the Committee had recommended as 
follows:- 
 
“The Committee are concerned to note that only Rs.5.30 Crore has been  allocated 
under the Head “Assistance to PSUs ” against the demand of Rs.8021.48 Crore by the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals for the year 2022-23.  The Department has proposed 
an amount of Rs. 6988.50 Crore for Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Ltd  (IDPL) and 
Rs. 1038.24 Crore for Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd (HAL).  However the allocated  amount 
at BE stage for 2022-23 is only Rs. 4.00 Crore and Rs. 1.26 Crore fo r these two PSUs 
respectively.  According to the Department of Pharmaceuticals, PSU Division of the 
Department has proposed   funds as sought by IDPL (Rs. 6988.50 Crore) and  HAL (Rs. 
1038.24 Crore) for meeting various liabilities like outstanding liabilities of va rious banks, 
financial institutions and unsecured liabilities. The pending employees due s 
(serving/retired/VRS) of IDPL,  HAL and  Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited 
(RDPL) have been settled by providing budgetary support as loans in FY 20 19-20, 
2020-21 & 2021-22 and EPFO interest payment of HAL employees (Rs. 76.00 Crore) 
released in 2021-22.  Now, only the minimum amount of Rs.5.30 Crore nee ded for 
meeting contingent expenditure, court cases etc.  has been provided  for HAL and IDPL 
in BE  2022-23.  Further, the Committee note that IDPL plants at various locations have 
been closed and the IDPL plant at Rishikesh is being returned back to the Government 
of Uttarakhand.  RDPL has also been closed and the proposal to trans fer it to the 
Government of Rajasthan is under active consideration of the Department.  Re garding 
other three PSUs, the Government proposed strategic sale of HAL which is loss making 
and strategic disinvestment of profit making KAPL and BCPL. Having concerned to note 
the way in which the affairs relating to the PSUs are being dealt by the Governme nt, the 
Committee strongly recommend the following:- 
  

32 
 
i. Appropriate steps should be taken for immediately clearing various liabil ities of 
IDPL and HAL like outstanding liabilities of various banks, financial institutions 
and unsecured liabilities.     
ii. The process of transferring the factories of IDPL, Rishikesh and RDPL to the  
respective State Governments should be completed in a time bound manner. 
iii. Efforts should be made to transfer the closed IDPL plants at Gurgaon, 
Hyderabad, Chennai and other places to the respective State Governments for 
their continuous operation”.  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.24 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
 
(i) “As per Cabinet ’s decision of December 2016, Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd. (HAL) 
is to be strategically disinvested after meeting its liabilities from sale of its surplus lan d. 
HAL has identified 87.7 acres land as surplus land, out which 3.5 acres land has been 
sold to EPFO at negotiated price of Rs.42 crore. It is proposed to refer HAL to DIPAM 
for strategic disinvestment. Whereas in respect of IDPL, which is under closure, the 
Department is proposing to transfer the free hold lands to the Special Purpos e Vehicle 
(SPV) to be constituted for the purpose of assets monetization by the Departme nt of 
Public Enterprises (DPE) and seek budgetary support for meeting its pending liabilities. 
   
 
(ii) The transfer of lease hold land of Rishikesh to Govt. of Uttarakhand is in a dvance 
stage. Valuations of Plants and Machinery have been done and Board ’s approval 
obtained. Lease of the land has already expired. The matter h as now been taken by the 
Hon’ble Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers with the Chief Minister, Uttarakhand to 
expedite the process. The approval of the Committee of Ministers is being sought for 
transfer of RDPL to the Government of Rajasthan instead of closure.  Thereaf ter, the 
Department may move a Cabinet Note. 
  
(iii) The Department has already conveyed approval to IDPL to continue the  process of 
disposal of movable assets in respect of its plants at Gurugram& Hyderabad and Bihar 
Drugs & Organic Chemicals Limited (BDOCL) Muzaffarpur through approved Auctioning 
Agency viz. M/s. Metal Scrap Trade Corporation Ltd. (MSTC) following DPE g uidelines. 
Accordingly, IDPL is taking action as per guidelines.   With regard to IDPL (TN), 
State Government has proposed to dispose of plant & machineries of its Chennai 
plant”.   
  

33 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
Budgetary allocation for the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
  
4.1 With regard to the Budgetary allocation for the Department, the C ommittee had 
recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that a gross budgetary allocation of Rs.2244.15 Cro re has 
been made for the Department of Pharmaceuticals at Budget Estima te (BE) stage of 
2022-23 against the outlay of Rs.10383.25 Crore proposed by the Depa rtment for the 
year.  In comparison, the Gross Budgetary allocation for the year 20 21-22 was Rs. 
470.41 Crore against the proposed outlay of Rs.2600.52 Crore which was o nly 18% of 
the outlay proposed by the Department and this time it has increased to 2 1.6%.  Even 
though the actual allocation for the year 2022-23 is very less when co mpared to the 
demand of the Department, the major chunk of this allocation has been m ade for 
Central Sector Schemes of the Department.   Against the proposal of Rs.2313.02 Crore, 
an allocation of Rs. 2202.50 Crore has been made for the Central Secto r Schemes of 
the Department.  For the Heads relating to the “Development of Pharmaceutical 
Industry”, Rs.1729.00 Crore has been allocated against the demand of Rs.1767.0 2 
Crore of the Department.  Under the Capital Section of “Assistance to PSUs ” , the 
Department demanded Rs.8026.78 Crore but only an allocation of Rs.5 .30 Crore has 
been made at the BE stage of 2022-23.  Since the demand for grants of the Department 
for implementing its developmental schemes has almost been fully met by the 
budgetary allocation, the Committee feel that the ball is now in the co urt of the 
Department.  Unlike previous years, this year the hands of the Department hav e been 
strengthened with the requisite amount of budgetary allocation by the Ministry  of 
Finance.  Now the Department has to prove its mettle through effective imp lementation 
of all its development schemes.  In this regard, the Committee recommen d that an 
annual action plan with monthly achievable targets should be chalked out by the 
Department in respect of all the developmental schemes for which requisite amou nt of 
budgetary allocation has been made under Major Heads 2852 and 255 2 and concrete 
steps should be taken for achieving targets under each of the develop mental Schemes 
for timely and resourceful utilization of budgetary allocations made for the  year.    An 
effective monitoring of implementation of each of the development Sch emes should be 
made at highest level in the Department and it should be ensured that th e targets fixed 
for each of the Schemes are achieved in a time bound manner duri ng the year 2022-23 
through the full utilization of budgetary allocation.  Progress made i n this regard should 
be intimated to the Committee”. 
  

35 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.2 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
 
For the FY 2022-23, the Department had proposed Rs. 10383.25 crore as 
Budget Estimates for the financial year. However, only Rs. 2244.15 crore was allo cated 
by the Ministry of Finance.  Department will seek additional funds from the Ministry of 
Finance at RE Stage, if need be. The Details in respect of various schem es are 
as under: 
 
NIPER: Department has set targets, which have been conveyed to the individua l 
NIPERs. Monthly review meetings with Directors of all NIPERs are held at the level of 
Secretary of the Department and on quarterly basis at the level of Hon ’ble Minister for 
Chemicals & Fertilizers.  It will be ensured that the funds allocated by Depa rtment of 
Expenditure will be utilized for construction of campuses of NIPERs at Raeba reli, 
Ahmedabad, Kolkata, Hyderabad and Hajipur and also for purchase of equipm ent as 
well to meet recurring expenditure of the Institute. 
  
Development of Pharmaceuticals and PLI Schemes: The Department has a concrete 
plan to achieve the targets envisaged schemes such as PLI, strengthening the  
Pharmaceutical Industry, etc. The prescribed monitoring mechanism envisage d under 
the Schemes such as Empowered Committee for the PLI schemes of Bu lk Drugs and 
Medical Devices and the Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) of the SPI scheme, etc will 
be fully involved in the monitoring of the implementation of the sche mes. Further, the 
Project Management Agencies (PMAs) appointed under the PLI and SPI schem es will 
be fully involved in monitoring the progress of the schemes, as per the milestones 
envisaged.  Department has proposed an amount of Rs. 1767.02 crore as BE 2022-
2023 for the Scheme “Development of Pharmaceutical Industry . However, Rs. 
1729.00 crore has been allocated. The additional funds will be sought from the Ministry 
of Finance at RE Stage if need be. 
  
Jan Aushadhi Schemes: Department has proposed an amount of Rs. 100.00 crore as 
BE- 2022-23 for PMBJP to meet  the target  to open 1,000 new K endras and enhance 
the product basket up to 1,800 medicines and 280 surgicals.  However, an  amount of 
Rs. 72.50 Crores only have been allotted under BE 2022-23. In orde r to effectively 
implement the scheme and achieve the vision targets under PMBJP, th e Department 
will seek additional funds from the Ministry of Finance at RE stage.    
NPPA:   The total budget provision for the scheme Consumer Awareness, Publicity and 
Price Monitoring (CAPPM) for the F.Y. 2022-23 is Rs. 6.00/- crore, viz. (i) Grant inAid 
for Assistance to PMRUs Rs. 5.00 Crore and (ii) Advertising and Publicity Rs.1.00 
Crore. The budget allocation for Grant in Aid to PMRU for the F.Y. 2022-23 is Rs. 5.00 
Crore which is at par with the budget allocation that was made in the F.Y. 2021-22. 
Price Monitoring and Resource Units (PMRUs) have been set up in Twenty Th ree (23) 
States/UTs till 31st March 2022. There is a target to set up PMRUs in six (6) States in 
the F.Y. 2022-23 and in all the States/ UTs by the F.Y. 2023-24. 

36 
 
   
PSU:  Department proposed an amount of Rs. 8026.78 crore for meeting va rious 
outstanding liabilities of various banks and other unsecured liabilities in respect o f 
Department PSUs, i.e., HAL and IDPL. However, against the proposed amount,  only, 
Rs. 5.30 crore have been allocated which shall be utilized for meeting co ntingent 
expenditure, court cases etc. for the FY 2022-23.  Additional funds w ill be sought from 
the Ministry of Finance at RE Stage based on the requirements.  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
Construction of campuses for National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research (NIPER) 
  
4.3 With regard to the Construction of campuses for National Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER) , the Committee had recommended 
as follows:- 
“The Committee note that an allocation of Rs.395.00 Crore has been m ade for 
NIPERS (in MH 2552 + 2852) against the proposal of the Department for Rs.440.00 
Crore for 2022- 23.  The fund allocated by the Ministry of Finance will be utilized for 
construction of NIPER Campuses at Raebareli, Ahmedabad, Kolkata, Hyderabad and 
Hajipur and also for purchase of equipments/meeting recurring expenditures o f the 
institutes.   As far as construction of NIPER campuses is concerned, the Dep artment 
proposes to complete 100% of construction in respect of Ahmedabad NIPER and  30% 
of construction in respect of Hajipur, Hyderabad, Raebarelli and Kolkata 
NIPERS.  Recently, the Committee visited NIPERS at Guwahati and Kolkata.  While  
construction of permanent campus for Guwahati was almost complete, the Kolkata 
NIPER was functioning in small rented premise which is not commensurate with the 
status of ‘Institution of National Importance ’.   The Committee, therefore, feel that it is a 
matter of utmost importance that the state of the art  permanent camp uses for Hajipur, 
Hyderabad, Raebarelli and Kolkata NIPERS is created in a time bound manne r so as to 
enable them to function in the true spirit of ‘Institutions of National Importance ’.   The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the construction of permanent 
campuses for these four NIPERs should be completed within two years.   Departme nt, 
now proposed to complete 30% percent of construction during 2022-23 w ith the 
budgetary funds allocated for the purpose.   Instead the Department may  plan to 
complete 50% of construction of all the four NIPERs during 2022-23 and rest  of the 
construction may be completed during 2023- 24.  In case of requirement of more funds 
for construction of these four NIPERs namely Hajipur, Hyderabad, Raebarelli and 
Kolkata additional demand may be made at RE /supplementary deman ds during 2022-
23.   This recommendation of the Committee may also be sent to the Ministry of 
Finance for its consideration.   The Action taken in this regard should be intimated to the 
Committee. 

37 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.4 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
MoUs have been signed between CPWD and NIPERs for construction of campus 
at Raebareli, Kolkata and Haripur. Construction of campus at NIPER Ahmeda bad is at 
full swing and expected to be completed by August, 2022 while con struction of campus 
NIPER Hyderabad will start shortly by M/s NPCC Limited, the PMC appointed for 
construction of campus. Progress of construction activities is regularly reviewed at 
Department level.  Additional funds at RE stage will also be sought to co mplete the 
targeted quantum of construction activities. Further, the recommendation of the 
Committee has been sent to the Ministry of Finance for its consideration. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 (Recommendation No. 6) 
Setting up of five new NIPERS 
  
4.5 With regard to the Setting up of five new NIPERS, the committee ha d 
recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee are constrained to note that the proposal to set up fiv e new 
NIPERs in Tamil Nadu (Madurai), Karnataka (Bangalore), Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and 
Maharashtra are still on paper without any concrete action to set up them .  In this 
regard, the Committee note that the Department had asked the Expenditure Fin ance 
Committee (EFC) to allocate Rs.4300.00 Crore for present seven NIPERs and 
additional five NIPERs for the next five years.  However, EFC has earmarked  only 
Rs.1500.00 Crore for NIPERs with the rider that this allocation should be utilized  only 
for the existing seven NIPERs.  In this regard, the Department of Pharmaceutica ls now 
proposed to explore the alternate ways of funding of these NIPERs.  S ince the present 
number of seven NIPERs are hardly sufficient to meet the requirements of  the country 
in the field of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, the Committee strongly 
recommend that all necessary steps should be taken by the Department o f 
Pharmaceuticals for the early setting up of five new NIPERs.  In this regard, a fresh 
proposal may be submitted to EFC for reconsideration of their decision and th e concern 
expressed by this Committee may be conveyed to them.  The Departm ent may also 
explore alternate ways of funding of these NIPERs including financial contributio n by 
both the Union and the concerned state Governments so that these fiv e NIPERs are 
also developed and completed in a time bound manner.  Progress made  in this regard 
may be conveyed to the Committee”. 
 

38 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 4.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
 
“The recommendations of the Committee have been noted and a Committee h as 
since been set up with the approval of Hon ’ble Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers for 
exploring other options for setting up of new NIPERs”.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 (Recommendation No. 7) 
 
Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) 
  
4.7 With regard to the Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana  (PMBJP), 
the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
  
“The Committee note that a Budgetary allocation of Rs. 72.50 Crore has been 
made for PMBJP against the Department of Pharmaceutical ’s proposal for Rs. 100.00 
Crore for 2022-23.  Under this Scheme, a target has been fixed to open new 1000 
Kendras and enhance the product basket upto 1,800 medicines and 280 surgicals 
during the year 2022-23. Further, a sale target of Rs. 775.00 Cro re has also been 
prescribed for the year.  As per the Department, the funds allocated at BE stage are not 
sufficient and less allocation of funds will hamper effective implementation of  the 
scheme. The Scheme aims to make available quality generic medicines a t affordable 
prices to all especially for the poor and the deprived ones.   As o n 15.02.2022, 8683 
PMBJP outlets have been opened in the country with product basket of  1451 medicines 
and 240 surgicals.  In this regard, the Committee feel that the number of P MBJP outlets 
in the country are inadequate when compared to nine lakh plus medical shops in the 
country.   Further with regard to the present population of the country i.e. near about 
140.52 crore it is noted that one Kendra is catering to approximately 16 lakh  population. 
Hence, there is a need to increase the number of PMBJP outlets in the country and also 
to increase the product basket of the outlets.  The Committee, therefore, recom mend 
that the Department of Pharmaceuticals should impress upon the Ministry of Finance for 
the allocation of remaining funds (Rs. 27.50 Crore) required for effective implementation 
at RE stage of 2022-23.  This recommendation of the Committee should a lso be sent to 
the Ministry of Finance for its implementation. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 4.8 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:- 
     
The government has set up a target to open 10,000 stores by March, 2024. This 
will imply about one store for a population of 1.50 lakhs. The Kendr as have been 

39 
 
opened in all district of the country. Now the government intends to reach all the Blocks, 
with more stress towards aspirational districts, NE areas, hilly and island territories. 
However, financial viability of individual Kendra is also required to be taken i nto 
consideration, while expanding the scheme. 
During the financial year 2022-23, a target has been fixed to open  about new 
1,000 Kendras with cumulative total to about 9300 Kendras and to en hance the product 
basket up to 1,800 medicines and 280 surgicals. 
The Recommendation of the Committee for allocation of additional funds h as 
been sent to the Ministry of Finance on 26.05.2022 ( ANNEXURE-II) for necessary 
action.  Department will approach M/o Finance at RE stage 2022-23 fo r allocation of 
additional funds. 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 (Recommendation No. 10) 
Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS) 
  
4.9 With regard to the Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme 
(PTUAS), the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Department had sought Rs 100.00 Crore f or the 
Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS) but the 
approved BE allocation is Rs 62.00 Crore for the year 2022-23.   According  to the 
Department, the reason for this difference in proposed and approved BE a llocation 
is the present revision of scheme guidelines of PTUAS as per EFC approval.  Once 
approved, eligible applications will be considered in FY 2022-23.  Only token allocation 
was made to this important Scheme during the financial years 2019-20, 2020-21 and 
2021-22.  For the first time, the scheme has got the needed financial support o f Rs 
62.00 Crore at BE stage of 2022- 23.  The aim of PTUAS is to provide interest 
subvention to the Pharmaceutical Medium Small and 
  
Micro Enterprises (Pharma MSMEs) to upgrade their standards both in terms of qu ality 
and technique to WHO-Good Manufacturing Practices so that the Pharma  MSMEs 
would be able to produce quality drugs and become globally competitive.  This Scheme 
enables upgradation of these enterprises from Schedule M to WHO-GMP standa rds so 
that they are eligible to export in global markets and earn foreign exchan ge.  Out of 
6790 SMEs in manufacturing bulk and API drugs, only 2006 are WHO-GMP certified 
and more than 4500 remain outside the purview of WHO-GMP certification.  The 
Committee are constrained to note that this Scheme remained on paper with token 
allocations during the last three financial years.  With the allocation of funds made for 
2022-23,  it is time for the Department to initiate concrete and time bound efforts  t o 
start implementing this Scheme from 2022-23 onwards.  The Committe e, therefore, 
strongly recommend: 

40 
 
  
i) Guidelines of the scheme should be finalized quickly and the fund all ocated for 2022-
23 should be fully utilized”. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.10  In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
 i) The guidelines of the Scheme “Strengthening of Pharmaceuticals Industry ” (SPI) 
has been finalized and published in the Department's Website on 11. 03.2022, which 
includes the sub-scheme PTUAS. The sub-scheme, PTUAS has been inco rporated 
under the Scheme SPI with the budget allocation of Rs. 300.10 crore for Fi nancial Year 
2021-2022 to 2025-2026. Further, M/s SIDBI have been appointe d as the Project 
Management Consultant (PMC) for implementation of the Scheme. 
ii)        Department will seek additional funds from the Ministry of Finance at RE Stage, 
if need be. 
iii)       Under the PTUAS scheme,  a  target  has been set by the Department to provide 
support to about 420 Pharma MSMEs for upgrading their technology to meet WHO-
GMP or Schedule M standards till March 2026. Efforts will be made to achieve  the 
above targets in a time bound manner. 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks (Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common 
Facilitation Center) 
  
4.11 With regard to the Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks (Assistance to Bulk Drug 
Industry for Common Facilitation Center), the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that the objective of this sub scheme is to promote thre e 
Bulk Drug Parks by providing Grants- in-Aid for creation of World class Common 
Infrastructure facilities (CIF).  A Financial assistance of Rs. 1000 crore per Park or 70% 
of the cost of the CIF, whichever is less is provided. The assistance would be 90 % for 
North East Region and Hill States. Total financial  outlay for the Scheme is Rs. 3000.00 
crore and the duration of its implementation is 2020-21 to 2024-25. The Committee note 
that this Scheme has not been able to take off since 2019-20. During 20 19-20 only a 
token allocation was made. Later during 2020-21, Rs.1.68 Crore was utiliz ed out of RE 
allocation of Rs.1.69 Crore for Project Management Agency.  Further during  2021-22, 
Rs.36.24 Crore at RE stage remained unutilized as the process to select benef iciary 
states could not be completed.    However, it is noted that an amount o f Rs.900.00 
Crore has been allocated in BE 2022-23. This amount will be used to give first 
instalment of Rs. 300.00 Crore each to the three selected states for creation o f 

41 
 
Common Infrastructure Facilities (CIFs) as grant-in-aid.  Thirteen states have applied for 
assistance under the Scheme.  Since the Project Management Agency (PMA) has 
identified certain issues in the proposals received under this scheme during 2021-22, an 
advisory Committee has been constituted with CEO NITI Aayog, Secretary, DoP and 
representatives of DPIIT & Department of Expenditure which has advised the 
Department to apply a set of qualitative filters to the proposals receive d looking at the 
higher technology, market and environmental risks emerging in the last year in respect 
of the Bulk Drug segment. The process in this regard is presently underway in th e 
Department.  The country is in urgent need of meeting the requirements of bulk drugs 
indigenously rather than dependence on other countries.  The Committe e, therefore, 
recommend that the process of selection of three beneficiary states should be expedited 
and the first instalment of Rs.300.00 Crore should be released to the S tates which are 
to be selected for implementation of the Scheme so that the undesir able situation of 
surrender of unutilized budgetary allocation does not recur again”.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 4.12 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of  
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-      
 
“The recommendation of the committee is well taken. It is further stated tha t as 
provided by the guidelines of the scheme, the selection of States shall ta ke place once 
in-principle approval is granted and DPRs are finalized. In pursuance to the same and 
guidance provided by the Advisory Committee constituted under the chair of CEO, NI TI 
Aayog, continuous effort is being undertaken by the Department to ensure early 
selection of States and subsequent release of financial assistance under the afo resaid 
Scheme”. 
  
ii The Committee also feel that three bulk drug parks are not adequate to meet the 
production needs of bulk drugs in the country particularly keeping in view its 
status of “World Pharmacy ”.  Since there is vast potential for export in the 
pharma sector, the Committee recommend that more Bulk Drug Parks may be set 
up in all the aspiring states and the Ministry of Finance may be approached for 
requisite budgetary allocation for the purpose.  
After implementation of the scheme for 3 bulk drug parks and evaluatio n of 
performance thereof, a considered view may be taken to assess need fo r expansion in 
view of prevailing situation in terms of level of drug security achieved, proli feration of 
parks/clusters, adequacy of market incentives and incentives given by respective S tate 
Governments, etc. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 14 

42 
 
Promotion of Medical Devices Parks   (Assistance to Medical Device Industry for 
Common Facilitation Center) 
 
 4.13 With regard to the Promotion of Medical Devices Parks   (Assistance to Medical 
Device Industry for Common Facilitation Center), the Committee had recommended as  
follows:- 
 
vii. The Committee note that the objective of the scheme is to promote 4 Medical 
Device Parks by providing Grants- in-Aid for creation of Common Infrastructure 
facilities (CIF). Total financial outlay for the Scheme is Rs.400.00 Crore for the 
period 2020-21 to 2024-25. Financial assistance is Rs.100.00 Crore per Park o r 
70% of the cost of the CIF, whichever is less. The assistance would be 90% for 
North Eastern Region and Hill States.  The Committee are concerned to note 
funds allocated for this Scheme during 2020-21 and 2021-22 w ere not fully 
utilized.  During 2020-21, out of Revised Estimate allocation of Rs.21.0 5 Crore, 
only Rs.7.49 Crore was spent. During 2021-22, the Department had 
spent    Rs.50.62 Crore out of allocated amount of Rs. 137.02 Crore at RE stage 
till the time information was furnished to the Committee.  In this regard, the 
Department has assured the Committee that the remaining amount would be 
released to the States before the end of the financial year.  The de tails of Actual 
Expenditure incurred as on 31 March, 2022 may be furnished to the 
Committee.  In this backdrop, Rs.120.00 Crore has been provisioned in BE 2022 -
23 which the Department will release as the 2 nd grant to 4 Medical Device Parks 
States with proportionate contribution by the State Implementing Agencies  
(SIAs). Medical Devices Sector being a sunrise sector of the Indian Economy, 
creation of state of the art Common Infrastructure Facilities (CIF) in Medical 
Devices Parks is need of the hour and their creation will attract private invest ment 
in Medical devices Industry. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the Department  should take necessary steps for the early release of budgetary 
funds to four Medical Devices Parks being set up in Himachal Pradesh, Ma dhya 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh and it should also be monitored by  the 
Department whether the released funds are resourcefully utilized by the 
concerned states.  The progress made in achieving the physical and financial 
targets set under the scheme should be intimated to the Committee. 
viii. The Committee also recommend to examine the necessity of setting u p of more 
Medical Devices Parks in the country and appropriate steps should be initiated 
there for the setting up of Medical Devices Parks in other States as well.  
4.14 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of  
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) has stated as follows:-    
 1. The Department in their action taken reply has stated as under: 

43 
 
"i. The Department, in full agreement with the recommendations of the 
committee, has taken steps to release the funds to the four Medical Device 
Parks, sanctioned  to the States of Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Ta mil 
Nadu and Uttar Pradesh and progress in this regard, is being reviewed regularly 
The details of Expenditure under the scheme are as follows: In FY 202 0-21, 
Rs.7.49 Crore was allocated at BE stage and later at RE stage, additional f unds 
of Rs.21.05 Crore were requested but the funds could not be alloca ted. Hence, 
only Rs.7.49 Crores was spent during FY 2020-21. In FY 2021-22, Rs.60 Cr ore 
was allocated at BE stage which was later increased to Rs. 137.02 crore at RE 
stage under the Scheme “Promotion of Medical Device Parks ” (erstwhile known 
as “Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility Centre ”). The 
entire Budget of Rs.137.02 Cr were fully utilized as on 31 st March, 2022. This 
includes release of an amount of Rs.30 Crores each as 1 st installment of Grant-
in-aid to the States of Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu a nd 
Uttar Pradesh in FY 2021-22. Accordingly, in BE 22-23, Rs. 120 Cr has b een 
requisitioned to process for release of 2 nd instalment to the States, subject to 
commensurate release from the States to the Parks and commensurate progress 
as per the committed timelines. There is proper mechanism to monitor the 
utilization of funds as well as monitor the progress in achieving the physical and 
financial targets under the scheme through the Project Management Agency  
(PMA) for the scheme. The progress made in achieving the physical and financial 
targets set under the scheme is being monitored through the Quarterly Review 
Reports (QRR) and the Special Purpose Vehicle formed by the State 
Governments to develop the medical device parks shall furnish a quarterly 
progress report to the Department as per the scheme guidelines. Same will be 
furnished to the Committee as requested. 
iii. Based on the budget provisioned and based on the examination of  the 
proposals received under the Scheme, four States of Madhya Pradesh, Himachal 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have been selected and being 
supported to create common infrastructure facilities. Presently, no budget is 
available under the scheme to support creation of common infrastructure facilities 
in the Medical Device Parks being developed or planned to be developed by  
other States. The States, interested to develop such Medical Device Parks i n 
their States, will, however, be provided necessary technical guidance." 
 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No. 1.25 of chapter –I of the Report) 
 
  
 

44 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
NIL 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                       KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
 08 August,  2022                                                       Chairperson, 
 13 Sravana 1944 (Saka)                                        Standing Committee on     
                                        Chemicals & Fertilizers. 
  

45 
 
Annexure-1 
 Government Initiatives for the Medical Devices Sector 
The Government of India has recognized medical devices as a sunrise sector under the  
‘Make in India’ campaign in 2014. Subsequent Union Budgets have announced several 
measures to encourage manufacturing, streamline regulatory approvals and announced 
attractive fiscal incentives. To further promote the medical devices sector in the country 
with a focus on indigenization and reducing share of imports, the Governmen t has 
implemented following key incentives and schemes: 
 
1.    Scheme for Promotion of Medical Device Parks: 
1.1. The sub-scheme termed as “Assistance to Medical Device Industry for 
Common Facility Centre ” was a Central Sector Scheme under the umbrella 
scheme for Development of Pharmaceutical Industry. The total size of the a bove 
sub-scheme was ₹ 100 crore for 2018 -2020. The sub-scheme proposed to 
provide a one-time grant- in-aid of ₹ 25 crore or 70% of the project cost, 
whichever was less, to be released for creation of identified infrastructure and 
common facilities to a State Implementing Agency (SIA) set up for the purpose.  
The purpose of the grant was to render financial assistance for establishme nt of 
common facilities in any upcoming Medical Device Park promoted by a State 
Government/State Corporation. The Department has supported the proposal of 
Andhra Pradesh Medtech Zone Ltd. (AMTZ), Andhra Pradesh under the said 
sub-scheme. 
1.2. Recognizing the need for higher levels of investments for the creation o f 
testing and laboratory facilities, the sub-scheme “Assistance to Medical Device 
Industry for Common Facility Centre ” has been revised and renamed 
as “Promotion of Medical Device Parks ” which has been approved by the 
Government of India on 20th March 2020. The parks will provide common  
testing and laboratory facilities/centre at one place reducing the manufacturing 
cost significantly and will help in creating a robust ecosystem for medical device 
manufacturing in the country. The total fin ancial outlay of the scheme is ₹ 400 
crore and the maximum assistance under the scheme for one Medical Device 
Park would be limited to ₹ 100 crore. Under the Scheme, the selected M edical 
Device Park project will be implemented by a State Implementing Agency (SIA). 
1.3. A total number of 16 States submitted their proposals under the scheme. 
The Government has in-principally approved financial assistance for common 
infrastructure facilities for 4 medical device parks i.e. Himachal Pradesh, Tamil 
Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. Subsequent to evaluation of their 
DPRs, Final Approvals have been given to all the four States. First installment of 
30 Cr is also released to all the four States. States  are taking neces sary actions 
to establish the Parks as per the DPRs. 
 
2.    Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Promoting Domestic 
Manufacturing of Medical Devices: 
2.1. The domestic medical devices industry faces challenges related to 
considerable cost of manufacturing disability, among other things, on accoun t of 
lack of adequate infrastructure, domestic supply chain and logistics, high cost of 

46 
 
finance, inadequate availability of quality power, limited design ca pabilities and 
low investments on R&D and skill development. With a view to address thes e 
challenges in manufacturing of medical devices in India vis-à-vis other major 
manufacturing economies, a scheme called “Production Linked Incentive 
Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing of Medical Devices ” has been 
approved by the Government of India on 20th March, 2020. 
2.2. The Scheme is applicable only to the Greenfield projects  and intends to 
boost domestic manufacturing and attract large investments in the Medical 
Devices Sector. Under the Scheme, financial incentive will be given to selecte d 
companies at the rate of 5% of incremental sales of medical devices 
manufactured in India and covered under the Target segments of the scheme, 
for a period of five (5) years. The tenure of the scheme is from FY 2020-21 to FY 
2027-28. The total financial outlay of the Scheme is ₹ 3,420 crore. 
2.3. The identified products under this Scheme have been catego rized into four 
Target Segments which is (i) “Cancer care/Radiotherapy medical devices, (ii) 
Radiology & Imaging medical devices (both ionizing & non-ionizing radiation 
products) and Nuclear Imaging devices (iii) Anaesthetics& Cardio-Respiratory 
medical devices including Catheters of Cardio Respiratory Category & Renal 
Care medical devices and (iv) All Implants including implantable electronic 
devices”. 
3.    Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for Pharmaceuticals: 
3.1. To enhance India’s manufacturing capabilities by increasing investment and 
production in the sector and contributing to product diversification to high value 
goods in the pharmaceutical sector, a scheme called “Production Linked 
Incentive Scheme for Pharmaceuticals ” has been approved by the Government 
of India on 24th March, 2021. The guidelines of the scheme were issued on 1st 
June, 2021. The scheme covers In-vitro diagnostic devices amongst other 
pharmaceutical goods. Five (5) industry applicants have been selected under  
the scheme for In-vitro diagnostic medical devices and the scheme provides for 
incentives based on their incremental sales for 6 years. The tenure of the 
scheme is from FY 2020-2021 to 2028-29. 
3.2. Further, the challenges for the Sector are in terms of regulatory streamlining 
of the medical devices which is at a nascent stage, skilling of human reso urces 
and lack of technology for high end equipment and lack of appropriate 
infrastructure. Medical devices sector has seen significant activity in recent 
years with increase in demand, roll out of the regulatory timeline, introduction  of 
PLI Schemes etc., all of which have contributed to a need to take  on board a 
range of views on important policy issues.  Medical devices sector had 
segmented participation from well-established Global MNCs (importing, 
manufacturing, exporting & investing in innovation, research & development),  
Indian firms and start-ups manufacturing, exporting & innovating a limited range 
of Medical Devices. The sector requires special co-ordination and 
communication among Industry and Stakeholders because of its diversified 
nature, continuous innovation & variation.  
 
4.    Attractive Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) Policy : In order to attract 
investments in this sector, the Government has allowed 100% foreign direct 

47 
 
investments (FDI) in medical devices sector with estimated inflows of around USD 
2.17 billion from April 2000 to December 2020. 
 
5.    The National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA)  is monitoring the 
prices of Non-scheduled medical devices and fixed the ceiling prices of for 
scheduled Medical Devices. 
5.1. TRADE MARGIN RATIONALISATION ON MEDICAL DEVICES : NPPA 
capped the trade margin for Oxygen Concentrators at 70% on Price to 
Distributor (PTD) level. Similarly, trade margin on Pulse Oximeter, Glucometer, 
Blood Pressure Monitor, Nebulizer and Digital Thermometer was capped. These  
have further been extended for Oxygen Concentrators and the five medical 
devices till 31 st May 2022 and 31 st July 2022 respectively. Expected savings to 
the consumers will be around Rs. 1000 crore per annum. 
5.2. MEDICAL OXYGEN : To ensure its continued availability for COVID and 
other emergencies, NPPA, in public interest, capped the price of Liq uid Medical 
Oxygen (LMO) and the Oxygen Inhalation (Medicinal gas).  NPPA has also 
extended ceiling price of Liquid Medical Oxygen (LMO) & Medical Oxygen Gas 
(in cylinders) up to 31.03.2022 respectively. It is to mention that Medical Oxyg en 
including LMO and Medical Oxygen Gas are not medical devices. 
  
  
6.    To improve access, the Government has made available 250 types of surgical 
supplies in over 8700 stores or Jan AushadhiKendras  at highly affordable prices 
under the Pradhan MantriBharatiya Jan AushadhiPariyojana. 
 
7.    Besides, the regular interaction with the industry representatives to redress the 
specific challenges, the following are the institutional mechanisms, adopted by the 
Department. 
7.1. Standing Forum of Medical Devices Associations : A Standing Forum of 
medical device Industry associations has been set up on 25 th August 2021 by 
the Department of Pharmaceuticals to provide a platform for discussion on 
various challenges being faced by the sector and arrive at well-round ed 
views The Department has constituted a Standing Forum of various Me dical 
Device associations which deliberate on various issues with all the stakeholders 
including regulators and then the forum comes up with workable solutions after 
the consensus is built between various associations. 
  
 Representatives from CII, AiMED, FICCI, USIBC, ADMI, AMTZ, MTAI, Advamed, 
PHDCCI, USISPF, AMCHAM, ASSOCHAM are part of this Standing Forum with 
DoP as facilitator 
 The main objective of the Standing Forum is to deliberate upon issues pertaining 
to the sector and arrive at inputs from Industry for Policy and Program 
formulation, by DoP 
 Tasks undertaken by the Standing Forum so far: 
 Drafting of Uniform Code for Medical Device Marketing Practices 
(UCMDMP), separate from the existing code for Drugs. The draft code is under 

48 
 
stakeholder consultation. 
 Consolidation of the views of the Industry on the "Streamlining of the 
Regulatory framework for Medical Devices”. The recommendations received 
pertain to different regulators and are being processed.   
 More tasks as and when identified will be assigned to the forum. 
7.2. Coordinating Regular interactions of the Industry with the 
Regulators: Medical Device sector has multiple regulators (CDSCO, NPPA, 
MoEF&CC, BIS, AERB etc) for different aspects of the medical devices. Hence, 
the Department is holding regular meetings of the industry with the regulators t o 
ascertain issues on short term and long-term basis for redressal.    
7.3. India Medical Device- Annual event : The Department convenes an 
annual event both for Pharmaceuticals as well as Medical Devices sector known 
as India Pharma and India Medical Devices Annual Event . In the India 
Pharma event, experts and regulators from the sector are invited for wide 
ranging discussions on innovations, regulatory issues, financing and investment, 
start-ups in medical technologies etc.  In the recently held India Pharm a and 
India Medical Devices 2022 event from 25-27 April 2022, CEOs of the Me dTech 
Sector participated and deliberated on the various issues related to the 
MedTech Sector ranging from developing a visionary approach for MedTech 
Sector in India @2047, to addressing the supply chain issues and deliberating 
on the efforts to be made in the Research and Innovation front as well. 
  
8.    Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) Order, 2017: The 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT), Ministry of 
Commerce & Industry issued the Order and designated the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals (DoP) as the Nodal Department for implementing the provisions 
related to medical devices. DoP issued its guidelines in May 2018 prescribing that 
domestically sourced components must contribute to 25-50 per cent of th e cost of 
medical devices to qualify for public tenders, which would be subsequently 
increased in a phased manner to 25-75% over a period of time [2 7]. Also, 
Department vide Order dated 16.02.2021 & 25.03.2021 has notified 13 5 in-vitro 
diagnostic medical devices and 19 medical devices where there is sufficient local 
capacity and local competition available in the country, under Para 3(a ) of PPO 
Order dated 16.09.2020 to enable procurement of the notified item s only from the 
“Class-I local suppliers ”  The exercise is being resorted on regular basis, to update 
the details of Indian Manufacturers of Medical Devices with the Central Procurement 
Agencies.  
  
  
  
  
 
 

1 
 
APPENDIX-I 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
  
            The Committee sat on Thursday, the 04 th August, 2022 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
                
PRESENT 
  
   Smt. Kanimozhi  Karunanidhi, Chairperson 
               Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ramakant Bhargarva   
3. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama   
4. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi   
5. Shri Kripanath Mallah   
6. Shri Satyadev Pachauri   
7. Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad   
8. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar   
9. Shri Indra Hang Subba   
  
  
10. 
  
Rajya Sabha 
Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
  
  11. Dr. Anil Jain 
  12. Shri Arun Singh 
  13. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
  14. Shri K. Vanlalvena 

2 
 
        
 SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Vinay Kumar Mohan       -           Joint Secretary  
2.  Shri  Nabin Kumar Jha           -           Director 
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh              -           Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Panna Lal                         -           Und er Secretary 
  
   XXX                   XXX                    XXX 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of  
the Committee, convened for consideration and adoption of the foll owing Draft 
Action Taken Reports: 
i. XXX                            XXX       XXX  
ii. XXX                            XXX       XXX  
iii. XXX                            XXX       XXX  
iv. Thirty-Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-Fourth Report (17 th Lok 
Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants 2022-23' of the Ministry of Chemica ls and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals).  
 
3. Giving an overview of the important Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/ 
suggestions of the Members. 
 
4. The Committee, then, took up the Draft Action Taken Reports one b y one for 
consideration and after some discussions adopted them. 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Action T aken Reports 
and present the same to the Parliament. 
  
XXX – Matter Not related  

3 
 
APPENDIX-V  
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY FOURTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2021- 22) ON DEMAND FOR GRANTS  
(2022-23) OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS).  
 
 
 Total No. of Recommendations 
 
 19 
I Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. (3, 4, 5, 8,9,11,12,15,16,17,18,19)   
 
  
 12 
Percentage of Total 64%   
II Observations/Recommendations that the Committee do not like to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
NIL 
  
00 
Percentage of Total      0% 
III Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
replies given by the Government  have not been accepted by 
the Committee: 
 (Vide Recommendation No.  1,2,6,7,10,13,14)   
 
 
07 
Percentage of Total 36%    
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited:  
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil ) 
 
 
0 
Percentage of Total  0%    

4 
 
 