i 
 
5 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2019-20) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
    
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
STUDY OF SYSTEM OF FERTILIZER SUBSIDY 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
     March, 2020/    Phalguna, 1941 (Saka) 
 
   
  


ii 
 
 
CC&F.No.05 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2019-20) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
STUDY OF SYSTEM OF FERTILIZER SUBSIDY 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17 March 2020 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17 March 2020 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
    March, 2020/    Phalguna, 1941 (Saka) 
 

iii 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20) iii 
INTRODUCTION v 
CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION TO DEVELOPMENT AND DISTRIBUTION OF 
FERTILIZERS IN INDIA 
1-5 
CHAPTER II FERTILIZER SUBSIDY POLICY OF GOVERNMENT 6-21 
CHAPTER III UREA SUBSIDY 22-34 
CHAPTER IV SUBSIDY FOR PHOSPHATIC & POTASSIC FERTILIZERS AND 
FOR CITY COMPOST 
35-43 
CHAPTER V EXPENDITURE ON FERTILIZER SUBSIDY & PAYMENT OF 
SUBSIDY 
44-55 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 56-74 
 APPENDICES  
ANNEXURE I MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2019-20) HELD ON 
13.11.2019 
 
75-76 
ANNEXURE II MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2019-20) HELD ON  
28.02.2020 
 
77-78 
 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2019-20) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
4 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
5 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
6 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
7 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
8 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
9 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
10 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
11 Shri M. Selvaraj 
12 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
13 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
14 Shri Nandigam Suresh 
15 Er. Bishweswar Tudu 
16 Shri H. Vasanthakumar 
17 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
18 Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
19 Shri Deepak Baij  
20 Dr. Manoj Rajoria 
21 Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri Ranjib Biswal 
23 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar  
24 Dr. Anil Jain 
25  Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
 
26 Shri Amar Singh 
27 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
28 Shri Arun Singh 
29 Vacant 
30 Vacant 
31 Vacant 
 
 SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora   - OSD  
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava   - Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram  - Additional Director 
4.           Shri  N. Amarathiagan                                 -              Under Secretary 
 
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2019-20) 
having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on their  behalf, present 
this  Fifth Report on the subject ‘Study of System of Fertilizer Subsidy ’ pertaining to the  
Department of Fertilizers of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
2. The subject ‘Study of System of Fertilizer Subsidy ’ was taken up by the Committee 
on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2019-20) for examination and report. The Committee t ook 
oral evidence of the representatives of Department of Fertilizers (Ministry of Chemicals and  
Fertilizers) on the subject at their sitting held on 13.11.2019 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
28.02.2020. 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) for their cooperation in furnishing the  
written replies and other information and for placing their views before the Committee. 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/ Recommendatio ns of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
  New Delhi;  
13  March, 2020                                                 Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
23 Phalguna, 1941 (Saka)                                                 Chairperson 
                    Standing Committee on  
                           Chemicals and Fertilizers 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
 
INTRODUCTION TO DEVELOPMENT AND DISTRIBUTION OF FERTILIZERS IN INDIA 
1.1  Growth of Fertilizer Sector –  The history of Indian fertilizer industry dates back 
to 1906when the first fertilizer factory was opened at Ranipet, (Ta mil Nadu).  Since then 
there have been major development in terms of both quantity and ty pes of fertilizer 
produced.  (Source – internet).   Prior to 1960-61, India produced only simple nitrogenous 
fertilizers such as Ammonium Sulphate (AS), Urea, Calcium Ammonium Nitrate (CAN), 
Ammonium Chloride and Single Superphosphate (SSP).  Production of NP compl ex 
fertilizers commenced in 1960-61.   Currently India produces a large number o f NP / NPK 
fertilizers.  In addition various grades of simple and granulated mixtures are also produced. 
 
 
1.2    The Indian Fertilizer Industry is regulated and monitored by the Minisrtry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  The main functions of the 
Department of Fertilizers include planning, promotion and development of the fertilizer 
industry, planning and monitoring of production, import and distribution of fe rtilizers, 
management of financial assistance by way of subsidy / concession for indige nous and 
imported fertilizers, Administration of the Fertilizers (Movement Control) Order, 1973, Policy 
and pricing matters relating to Urea and   matters concerned with supply a nd availability of 
Fertilizers, raw materials and marketing of fertilizers.  
 
 
1.3 Fertilizer Control Order  - 
Government of India passed Fertilizer Control Order 
(FCO) under the Essential Commodities Act (EC Act, 1955) in the year 1957  to regulate 
sale, pricing and quality of fertilizers.  Subsequently, movement control order was passed in 
1973 to regulate distribution of fertilizer. The State Governments have been adequately 
empowered to ensure selling of fertilizers at MRP and take appropriate action  to curb black 
marketing, smuggling and diversion of subsidized urea to industrial sector and to initiate 
action against persons who indulge in illegitimate activities.  State Governments are 
empowered to conduct search, make seizures and take punitive action aga inst any person 
violating provisions of FCO, 1985 and Essential Commodities Act 1955. 
 

2 
 
 1.4 In order to make available large variety of fertilizers to the farmers as p er their soil 
requirement, different grades of fertilizers are notified under FCO Schedule- I (Part-A).  At 
present 11 Straight Potassic Fertilizers, 2 Sulphur Fertilizers, 19 NPK Complex Fertilizers, 
6 Water Soluble Fertilizers and 22 Micronutrients are notified under FCO.   
 
 1.5 In order to encourage use of organic and bio-fertilizers namely, Rhizobium , 
Azotobacter, Azospirillum, Phosphate Solubilizing Bacteria, Potash mob ilizing Bacteria 
(KMB), Zinc Solubilizing Bacteria (AnSB), Mycorrhizae, Acetobacter and Consortia of b io-
fertilizers have been incorporated in FCO, 1985.  Generalized specificatio ns of organic 
manures and bio-enriched organic manure, namely City Compost, Vermi-Comp ost, 
Phosphate Rich Organic manure (PROM) and Organic Manure, Bone meal raw and  Bone 
meal steamed are notified under FCO Schedule-IV.   Besides this, De-Oiled  cake/Caster-
Oiled cake fertilizers is notified under FCO Schedule-V. 
 
1.6 Under the provisions of FCO (Clauses-38), the Government of India vide no tification 
SO No. dated 10-02-2016 constituted the Central Fertilizer Committee under Chairmanship 
of Additional Secretary (INM) and 10 other members to advice Central Governme nt on the 
following issues :- 
 Inclusion of a new fertilizer, under this order ;  
 Specifications of various fertilizers ; 
 Grades / formulation of physical / granulated mixtures of fertilizers that can be 
allowed to be prepared in a State ; 
 Requirements of laboratory facilities in a manufacturing unit, including a unit 
manufacturing physical / granulated mixtures of fertilizers ;  
  Method of drawl and analysis of samples. 
Central Fertilizer Committee advises Central Government on above technical 
related aspects of fertilizers, on basis of which, the new grades are notified from 
time to time. 
 
1.7 
The Government introduced fertilizer subsidy scheme [Retention Price Schem e 
(RPS)] in November, 1977 for indigenous nitrogenous fertilizer units and s ubsequently, it 
was extended to phosphatic and other complex fertilizers from February 1979 and to Single 
Super Phosphate from May 1982.  The Department of Fertilizers (Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers) administers the fertilizer subsidy schemes of the Government w.e.f. 0 1 
October, 2000.   

3 
 
 
1.8 Production, Movement and Distribution of Fertilizers  - The details regarding  
demand, production, supply, consumption & import of major fertilizers du ring the last three 
years, and the target set for 2019-20,  as per the data furnished by Department of 
Fertilizers, are as under :- 
(Figures in LMT) 
Year Fertilizer Demand Production Supply Consumption Import 
 
 
2016-17 
Urea 289.09 242.01 309.08 296.07 54.81 
DAP 100.57 43.65 93.79 88.23 43.85 
MOP 33.36 - 28.91 28.21 26.87 
NPK 102.58 84.57 92.49 86.58 5.21 
 
 
2017-18 
Urea 298.00 240.23 313.57 303.31 59.75 
DAP 98.77 46.50 91.94 89.85 42.17 
MOP 33.90 - 32.88 31.93 34.04 
NPK 98.19 88.13 98.64 90.75 4.99 
 
 
2018-19 
Urea 300.04 240.00 323.31 317.19 74.81 
DAP 98.40 38.99 104.15 94.95 66.02 
MOP 36.81 - 32.27 29.54 29.81 
NPK 97.68 95.15 109.43 96.21 5.46 
 
 
2019-20 
Urea - 271* - - - 
DAP - 47.28* - - - 
MOP - 104.28* - - - 
NPK - - - - 
  * Target set for production during 2019- 20 
 
1.9 The requirement of subsidized fertilizers is projected by the State Governm ents to 
the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare which in turn coordinates with  
Department of Fertilizers for finalizing the requirement of fertilizers in the coun try.    The 
Department of Fertilizers (Movement Wing) prepares agreed monthly supply p lan 
consultation with manufacturers and importers to meet the demand of fe rtilizers projected 
by DAC&FW.  State-wise availability of fertilizers as per supply plan is made  and monitored 
upto State level by the Department of Fertilizers, the concerned State Governments are 
responsible for monitoring the availability intra-state.    Dealers and retailers are appointed 
by companies and the license is provided by the respective State Governments.   
 
1.10 The Department of Fertilizers introduced the mobile Fertilizer Monitoring S ystem 
(mFMS) in the year 2012 to achieve more visibility and transparency in the  fertilizer chain 
from production to receipt at the last point sale (retail point).  It facilitate d the retailer to 
acknowledge the receipt of stock through mobile as well as web.  The mobile  Fertilizer 
Monitoring System (mFMS) covered all subsidized fertilizers in the country namely , Urea, 
and 21 grades of Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers. In June 2014, th e Department 

4 
 
developed iFMS (Integrated Fertilizer Management System) and the new softwa re has 
been on parallel run from June, 2016 and th is has become fully operational w.e.f. 01 st 
September, 2016.  Presently 173 fertilizer manufacturers, 24,965 wholesalers a nd 2,21,629 
retailers are registered in iFMS.   
 
1.11 On being asked about the total number of retail outlets in the country , the 
Department of Fertilizers informed that “total number of retail-outlets in the country at 
present is approximately 2.26 Lakh. ”  In response to a query relating to State-wise details 
of number of retail outlets that have been covered under the iFMS , the Department of 
Fertilizers stated that there are approximately 2.26 lakh retail-outlets, and furnished  the 
following details :- 
 
Sl. No. State /UT No of PoS Devices Deployed 
1 Andhra Pradesh 9311 
2 Telangana 7854 
3 Odisha 10556 
4 West Bengal 23269 
5 Delhi 58 
6 Himachal Pradesh 2050 
7 Chhattisgarh 3987 
8 Jammu and Kashmir 3421 
9 Punjab 8451 
10 Bihar 20274 
11 Madhya Pradesh 10265 
12 Uttarakhand 936 
13 Jharkhand 3554 
14 Uttar Pradesh 46759 
15 Karnataka 9830 
16 Rajasthan 11044 
17 Andaman &Nicobars 15 
18 Puducherry 94 
19 Tamil Nadu 11692 
20 Daman & Diu 1 
21 Dadar& Nagar Haveli 1 
22 Gujarat 8916 
23 Maharashtra 23774 
24 Kerala 2587 
25 Haryana 6170 
26 Assam 1067 
27 Manipur 35 
28 Mizoram 13 
29 Nagaland 4 
30 Tripura 155 

5 
 
31 Goa 46 
Total 226189 
 
1.12 Regarding average area covered by one retail outlet, the Department o f Fertilizers 
furnished reply that “No information regarding the average area covered by one retail outlet 
is available.   When asked about the average annual return (total) for each retail -outlet , the 
Department of Fertilizers informed that “No information regarding the annual return for each 
retail outlet is available”.   To a query seeking information regarding  average annual sale of 
urea by each retail-outlet, the Department of Fertilizers intimated that  “ For the Financial 
Year 2018-19 a total of 3,20,18,980.53 MT of Urea was sold. The  number of retailers in 
March 2019 were 2.21 Lakh.  Thus an average approximately 145 MT of Urea w as sold by 
each retail outlet.”   
 
1.13 Model Fertilizer Shops  - The Department of Fertilizers has informed that 2044 
Model Fertilizers Shops have been set up in 23 States.  On being aske d as to whether any 
feedback was obtained on the functioning of the Model Fertilizer Shops, the Department of 
Fertilizers replied that “the Department is in the process of obtaining the details regarding 
functioning of the Model Fertilizer Shops .”  To query regarding steps being taken to open 
Model Fertilizer Shops at block level, the Department of Fertilizers stated that “at present 
there is no such proposal to open Model Fertilizer Shops in every block of the country”  
 
  

6 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
FERTILIZER SUBSIDY POLICY OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Policy framework on Fertilizer subsidy  
Timely availability of fertilizers as input to the farmer at affordable p rices, is vital for 
growth of agriculture sector in the country.  Subsidy or concession schemes hav e been an 
integral part of Government policy to sustain agricultural productivity which in turn plays  
critical role in ensuring the food security in promoting rural livelihood and employment.  
 
2.2 The Government of India established the “Central Fertilizer Pool ” in 1944 to ensure 
equitable distribution of all fertilizers at fair prices all over the country.   No subsidy seems 
to have been paid on fertilizer before 1977 except subsidy on Pho sphate due to its high 
prices in the international market during 1977.     Based on the recommendations of the 
Fertilizer Prices Committee (Maratha Committee), set up under the Chairmanship of Shri 
S.S. Marathe, the then Chairman of the erstwhile Bureau of Industrial Costs a nd Prices 
(BICP), the Government introduced a unit-wise Retention Price Scheme (RPS) from 
01.11.1977 for indigenous nitrogenous fertilizer units.   Subsequently, this was extended to 
phosphatic and other complex fertilizers from February 1979 and to Single Super 
Phosphate from May 1982, which continued up to 1991.   Later on , subsidy was also 
extended to imported phosphatic and potassic fertilizers. 
 Till 30 th September, 2000, 
fertilizers subsidy was being administered by the Department of Agriculture and 
Cooperation (DAC) and thereafter it was continued by the Department of F ertilizers with 
changed parameters from time to time.  
 
 
2.3 As per the provision of the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), the fertilizers which meet 
the standard of quality laid down in the Order, should only be sold to the farmer.   The State 
Governments are supposed to check the quality of the fertilizers by the manufacturers  / 
importers of fertilizers as prescribed under the FCO and are fully empower ed to take action 
under EC Act 1955, if the fertilizers are found to be non/sub-standar d.   The penal provision 
under the EC Act, 1955 for violation of quality standards includes prosecution  of offenders 
and sentence if convicted up to seven years imprisonment besides cancell ation of 
authorization certificate and other administrative action.  The Department of Fertilizers does 
not pay any subsidy on sale of non-substandard fertilizers and in case it ha s been paid, a 

7 
 
recovery along with penal interest is made. In order to ensure this, Department of Fertilizers 
obtains quality certificate of all fertilizers on which subsidy is paid.   
 
2.4 The mandate of the Department of Fertilizers (DOF) is to make available fertilizers to 
the farmers at affordable prices.  The “affordable prices ” part of the mandate gets 
translated into subsidized fertilizers.  The subsidy portion of fertilizers which range s from 
30% to 70% of the cost of the fertilizers is given to the companies, s o as to make available 
fertilizers for the farmers at subsidized Maximum Retail Price (MRP). 
 
Broad Structure of Fertilizer Subsidy Schemes 
2.5 The Department of Fertilizers implements different fertilizer subsidy scheme s with 
different subsidy components from time to time to ensure timely and easy av ailability of 
different fertilizers at affordable prices.  At present, (i) Urea ; (ii) 21-grades of P&K-fertilizers 
& (iii) City Compost are covered under the subsidy schemes implemented b y the 
Department of Fertilizers.   
 
2.6 Urea Subsidy -
   The urea is sold at a Maximum Retail Price (MRP) statutorily fixed 
by the Government of India.  The difference between delivered cost of u rea at farm gate 
and net market realization by the urea units is given as subsidy to th e urea manufacturer / 
importer by the Government of India.   Details of Urea subsidy policy  are examined in 
Chapter-III.  
 
 2.7 Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) :  
The Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy for P&K 
fertilizers has been implemented w.e.f. 01-04- 2010 by the Department of Fertilizers.   
Under the NBS Policy, the Government provides a fixed rate of subsidy (in Rs. Per Kg 
basis) on each nutrient of subsidized P&K fertilizers.   MRP of P&K fertilizers has been left 
open and fertilizer manufacturers / marketers are allowed to fix the MRP at reasonable 
rates.    Details of NBS scheme  are examined in Chapter-IV. 
2.8 Promotion of City Compost -   The Department of Fertilizers notified the scheme 
for promotion of City Compost on 10.02.2016.  Under the scheme, Market Deve lopment 
Assistance (MDA) in the form of fixed amount of Rs.1500/-   per MT of City Compost will be 
provided for scaling up production and consumption of the product .   Details of the scheme 
for promotion of City Compost Urea subsidy policy  are examined in Chapter-V. 

8 
 
2.9 When asked to explain the process of formulation of the current  policy and the level 
at which the stakeholders consultation were undertaken to formulate this policy, the  
Department of Fertilizers furnished written reply as under :- 
“ P&K Fertilizers :  An IMG with Secretary (Fertilizers) as Chairman and 
Secretaries of Department of Expenditure, Agriculture and Planning Commission  as 
members, was constituted in November, 2008 to look into all aspects of fertiliz er 
subsidy regime. After considering all the issues relating to agriculture productivity, 
balanced fertilization and growth of indigenous fertilizer industry, and examinin g all 
options for rationalization of existing fertilizer subsidy regime, the IMG recommended 
to implement NBS regime, wherein the farm gate prices of fertilizers are decontrolled 
and subsidy is fixed for each fertilizer based on nutrient content therein.   The intent 
of the Government in fertilizer sector was announced by the Finance Minister in his 
Budget Speech 2009, which is as below:  
 ”In the context of the nation ’s food security, the declining response of 
agricultural productivity to increased fertilizer usage in the country is a matter 
of concern. To ensure balanced application of fertilizers, the Government 
intends to move towards a nutrient based subsidy regime instead of the 
current product pricing regime. It will lead to availability of innovative fertilizers 
products in the market at reasonable prices. This unshackling of the fertilizer 
manufacturing sector is expected to attract fresh investments in this sector. In 
due course it is also intended to move to a system of direct transfer of subsidy 
to the farmers.” 
 Further, the CCEA in its meeting held on 29.10.2009 directed to submit app ropriate 
proposals regarding reduction in fertilizer subsidy before the CCEA for its 
consideration.  A Group of Ministers (GOM) was constituted in July 2009 to look into 
the proposed NBS Policy and make appropriate recommendations to the  
Government. Accordingly, the GOM in its first meeting held on 20.1.2010 considered 
the proposed NBS Policy and made the recommendations for rationalization  of the 
current fertilizer subsidy regime.   Accordingly, a proposal for implementation of 
Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy w.e.f. 1.4.2010 was submitted to the Ca binet vide 
Note dated 15.2.2010. 
Urea : The aforesaid policies have been notified by the Department of Fertilizers 
with the approval of Cabinet/Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA).   
City Compost : Policy on promotion of City Compost was initiated under ‘Swachh 
Bharat Mission ’ of Ministry of Urban Development.  The stakeholder ’s consultation 
was undertaken at the level of Secretary to formulate this policy. Subsequ ently, with 
the approval of the Cabinet on 20.01.2016, the Department of Fertilize rs notified the 
policy on promotion of city compost on 10.02.2016.” 
 
2.10 The Department of Fertilizers, when asked to explain reasons for differen ce in the 
scheme vis-a-vis different fertilizers/nutrients, submitted written reply as under :- 

9 
 
  “ Since, MRP of Urea is controlled by the Government and P&K fertilizers are 
decontrolled and P&K fertilizer companies are free to fix MRP, these fertilizers are 
covered under different subsidy regime. 
An EGoM in its meeting on 20th January, 2010 decided to implement Nutrient 
Based Subsidy (NBS) regime for phosphatic and pottasic fertilizers.  With the 
approval of CCEA, NBS in P&K Sector was introduced w.e.f 01.04.2010. 
However, in the case of urea, it was decided not to implement Nutrient Base d 
Regime at that moment. At the time of extending NPS-III from 1.4.2010 t o 
31.03.2013, it was felt that decontrolling of entire urea sector is extremely se nsitive 
and NBS in urea is not feasible, due to following reasons:- 
• Heterogeneous nature of urea industry. 
• Non-connectivity of gas pipeline to Naphtha based urea units viz., SPIC, MFL a nd 
MCFL. 
• Without connection of gas pipeline, the Naphtha based units may be closed. 
• It will affect the supply of urea. 
• It may lead to substantial subsidy outgo. 
• It will give windfall gain to low cost urea units. 
• In urea sector, farmers cannot afford for any regime which may entitle com panies to 
choose any price of urea, as urea is sensitive fertilizer.” 
 
Subsidy for Imported Fertilizers 
2.11 The cost of imported urea is completely borne by Government of Ind ia and the  cost 
of imported urea is recovered at the statutory rate from Fertilizers Marketing E ntities / 
handling agencies after adjusting Port dues, customs duty etc.  Therefore, no subsidy is 
payable to fertilizer companies after sale of Imported Urea through PoS devices.   As 
regards details of imported fertilizers that are covered under subsidy scheme, the  
Department of Fertilizers intimated that 20 grades of imported P&K fertilizers , are covered 
under the NBS Scheme except Ammonium Sulphate.   Any company registered under NBS 
Scheme is eligible to get subsidy.   
 
2.12 When asked about the quantum of subsidy provided to different ty pes of imported 
fertilizers, the Department of Fertilizers intimated that  “ NBS rates are same for imported 
and indigenous P&K fertilizers.”   Responding to another specific query regarding restriction 
on the entities that can import fertilizers, the Department of Fertilizers informed that “ Since, 
P&K fertilizers are placed under Open General License (OGL), there is no restrictio n on the 
entities to import these fertilizers. “ 
 

10 
 
2.13 The Department of Fertilizers was asked whether it considers the exchan ge value of 
dollar at the time of reimbursement for imported fertilizers and in case of the same the 
Department was also asked to state about the mechanism followed to e nsure that fertilizer 
companies do not suffer loss due to variation of exchange value.  Respond ing to the same 
the Department of Fertilizers stated as under :- 
“ P&K Fertilizers:  IMC may among other factors, consider this factor of exchange 
value of US$ while fixing the Nutrient Based Subsidy rates annually.   Department of 
Fertilizer considers the exchange value of dollar at the time of reimbursement for 
imported urea. The Department receives time bound claims of 100% from  Oman, 
98% and 2% from M/s MMTC and 90% and 10% of Ocean Freight from  Fertilizer 
Monitoring Entity (FME) and Handing Agencies. Letter of Credit is opene d by the 
FME and Handling Agencies. The canalizing agency submits the claim for 
reimbursement. After receiving all the necessary documents with the claim, the 
Department process the claim on the basis of exchange rate applicable on the date 
of processing and send for Administrative and Financial approval.  At the tim e of 
making sanction, exchange rate for payment is considered lower of processing and  
of date of sanction.   However at the time of payment of final settlement, exchange 
rate is applied to Fertilizer Companies on which they have settled the accoun t with 
supplier and this Division made reimbursement accordingly. So Fertilizer Companies 
do not suffer loss due to variation of Exchange Value.” 
 
Evaluation of Urea Subsidy & Nutrient Based Subsidy Schemes 
2.14 The Department of Fertilizers carried out an evaluation of Nutrient Based  Subsidy 
Policy and Urea Subsidy through M/s Ernst & Young in the year 2014.   When asked about 
the outcomes of the study conducted by Ernst & Young, the Departmen t of Fertilizers 
submitted written reply as under :- 
Key recommendations of Ernst & Young are as under:- 
i. Enhancing effectiveness of NBS Policy 
 
o Mechanism to ascertain reasonability of MPR 
o Identification of additional mechanism under NBS Policy to make it more 
effective in achieving its objectives  
o Monitoring and regulation of MRP, imports and price discovery for fixation of 
rates of NBS on annual basis. 
 
ii. Securing supply of P&K fertilizers for India 
 Development of strategy for securing supplies of P&K fertilizers on long te rm 
basis 
 Protection against volatility in international prices 
 Acquisition of fertilizer assets abroad 

11 
 
 
 
2.15 On being asked about the steps taken based on the outcomes of the study, the 
Department replied as under :-  
* M/s Ernst & Young recommended a mechanism to ascertain ‘reasonability of MRP’ 
in the year 2014. However, it had already been decided by the Cabine t during the 
year 2013 only to check reasonableness of MRPs to be fixed by the P&K Fertilizer 
Companies. As a result, a notification dated 3.5.2013 was issued to recover 
unreasonable profit to convey the in principle decision of the Government.  The 
Department is finalizing guidelines for specifying the modalities to determine 
reasonable MRPs and to action therein. It is to be finalized soon.   
* In so far as second recommendation is concerned, it is stated that Govt. is already 
facilitating securing supplies of phosphatic and Potassic fertilizers and their raw 
materials and encouraging companies to set up joint ventures and long term supply 
agreements abroad to ensure continuous availability of finished fertilizers/r aw 
materials in the country. “ 
 
Long Term Vision for Progressive reduction of subsidy 
 
2.16 The Department of Fertilizers was asked whether any long term vision was 
formulated for progressive reduction of fertilizer subsidy burden on the Central Gove rnment  
and to furnish details thereto, in case of their positive reply.  In this rega rd, the Department 
of Fertilizers stated that “ the Government of India has notified the New Urea Policy (NUP) - 
2015 on 25 th May, 2015 for existing 25 gas based urea units with the objective of (i) 
maximizing indigenous urea production; (ii) promoting energy efficiency in urea produ ction; 
and (iii) rationalizing subsidy burden on the government.” 
 
2.17 During oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Fertilizers, w hen 
the committed asked them whether they are planning to continue with the policy or they are 
going to bring any changes to it, the Secretary of the Department in formed the committee 
as under:- 
 “
There is a Committee of Secretaries headed by the Cabinet Secretary and  they 
have suggested to study the existing subsidy regime and suggest any imp rovement 
or change in the policy.” 
 
2.18 To a query whether the Ministry undertook any analysis of the cost of  manufacturing 
of fertilizers in India vis-a-vis the manufacturing at other locations in the  world where 
feedstock price are much lower and whether the Ministry envisages a progressive shift of 

12 
 
manufacturing facilities in future to these locations, the Department of fertilizers replied that 
“No such analysis has been done.” 
 
2.19 The Department of Fertilizers was pointed out that the existing regulatory system 
could be considered as a cost based system.  Such a system does not p rovide sufficient 
incentives to the manufacturers to attain highest level of productivity and co st based 
efficacy.  This is evident from the huge variation in per metric tonne of sub sidy amounts 
given to different manufacturing units.  In this context, the Departm ent was asked whether 
the system of subsidy in other countries was studied and whether the possibility of 
introducing any alternative system of subsidy which is not based on the cost and which 
promotes highest level of manufacturing efficiency, was examined. In this regard, the 
Department of Fertilizers submitted  the following written reply:- 
 
“ As per NUP-2015, the 25 gas based urea units have been classif ied into three 
groups based on their pre-set energy norms viz., Group-I (with energy n orm between 
5.0 Gcal/MT to 6.0 Gcal/MT), Group-II (with energy norm between 6.0 Gcal/MT to  7.0 
Gcal/MT) and Group-Ill (with energy norm above 7.0 Gcal/MT). These units ha ve 
been given a target energy norm to be achieved in 2018-19. Group- I has been given 
the target energy consumption of 5.5 Gcal/MT, Group- II has been given the target 
energy consumption of 6.2 Gcal/MT and Group- Ill has been given the t arget energy 
consumption of 6.5 Gcal/MT. Vide notification dated 28 th March, 2018, the target 
energy consumption norms for 11 urea manufacturing units have com e into force 
w.e.f. 1 st April, 2018 while for remaining 14 urea manufacturing units, the e xisting 
norms under NUP-2015 have been extended for further period o f 2 years i.e. 31 st 
March, 2020 with certain penalties. It has been also decided that the targ et energy 
norms of NUP-2015 may be continued upto 31st March, 2025. 
 
  NUP-2015 has been implemented with effect from 1 st June, 2015 in - tandem 
with the Gas pooling policy notified by Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas. As  per 
gas pooling policy, the domestic gas is pooled with RLNG to provide natural gas at 
uniform delivered price to all Natural Gas Grid connected Urea manufa cturing plants 
for the purpose of manufacturing of Urea. After gas pooling, all u rea units gets gas at 
uniform rate irrespective of the gas allocation to the units which has  brought a 
uniformity in the cost of production of urea by these urea units. 
 
  Prior to implementation of NUP-2015, due to wide variation in the p rices of 
domestic-gas and RLNG, the cost of production of urea by the urea units w as in a 
wide range. However; the implementation of NUP-2015 along-with Gas Pooling policy 
has brought uniformity in the feedstock i.e. input cost and resultantly minimised the 
variation in the cost of production of urea. 
 
  Further, the energy level of these 25 urea units would also be brought d own 
to three levels by 2019-20 as against the present different energy levels for each urea 
unit.  

13 
 
 
The Government has implemented Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy  
w.e.f. 1.4.2010 for Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) Fertilizers. Under the NBS 
Policy, the Government announces a fixed rate of subsidy (in Rs. per Kg ba sis), on 
each nutrient of subsidized P&K fertilizers, namely Nitrogen (N), Phosphate (P), 
Potash (K) and Sulphur (S), on annual basis taking into account all relevant facto rs 
including international prices, exchange rate, inventory level and prevailing 
Maximum Retail Prices of P&K fertilizers. The per Kg subsidy rates on the  nutrients 
N, P, K, S is converted into per Tonne subsidy on the various subsidized P&K  
fertilizers covered under NBS Policy. Under the Policy, MRP of P&K fertilizers has  
been left open and fertilizer manufacturers/marketers are allowed to fix the MRP at 
reasonable rates as per market dynamics. At present 21 grades of P&K fertilizers 
namely DAP, MAP, TSP, MOP, Ammonium Sulphate (produced by M/s FACT and 
M/s GSFC), SSP and 15 grades of NPKS complex fertilizers are covered under the 
NBS Policy. “ 
   
2.20 Freight Subsidy  – Freight subsidy is provided for the movement of Urea and 
subsidized P&K-fertilizers. The Department of Fertilizers notified Uniform Freight Subsidy 
on 17- 07-2008.  The Department of Fertilizers had followed different freight subsidy 
policies for different fertilizers prior to implementation of the extant Uniform Fre ight 
Subsidy policy.  The rates of freight subsidy for indigenous urea, imported urea , 
indigenous P&K fertilizers  & imported DAP & MOP, etc were different.    The Department 
of Fertilizers announced the Uniform Freight Policy (UFP) with effect from Ap ril 1, 2008 
vide notification dated July 17, 2008 with an objective to ensure the availability of fertilizers 
in all parts of the country, especially distant/remote corners of the country. 
  
2.21 Under the Uniform Freight Subsidy policy, movement of fertilizers is classifi ed into 
two categories namely (i) Primary Movement & (ii) Secondary Movement.  Freight subsidy 
for each of the two categories of fertilizer movement is different.  Gist of salient features of 
the Uniform Freight Subsidy policy is given in appended table :- 
Type of   Movement,  Definition & coverage Subsidy Amount 
Primary Movement 
It refers to direct movement of 
subsidised fertilizers by rail 
and/or coastal shipping/inland 
water transportation  including 
road bridging upto final 
destination  or by any  or two or 
by all three modes of 
transportation from plant or port 
to various rake points of 
districts. 
By Rail - From 
plant/port to rake 
point (upto 1400 
Kms)]. 
Actual freight is paid on Railway Receipt (RR). 
 By Road -  From 
Plant/Port to Block-
HQ (upto 500 Kms). 
 
(Transportation 
through Coastal / 
Inland waterways is 
Freight amount calculated for the month based on 
PTPK slab rates  ; 
OR 
the actual expenditure incurred by the Company 
during the month,  duly certified by company ’s 
statutory auditors, whichever is lower. 

14 
 
 
Admissible for Urea and all 
subsidized P&K fertilizers 
excluding SSP.     
also permitted) 
 
PTPK Slab rates  are notified based on the recommendations of Tariff Commission.  Further, the freight on 
primary movement of all P&K fertilizers is on the basis of actual rail freight w.e.f. 01-04-2012. 
Secondary Movement 
It refers to movement from 
nearest rake point to District / 
Block-HQ.   
 
Admissible for Urea only. 
By Road 
[From nearest rail-
rake point to District / 
Block-HQ] 
Freight subsidy is calculated on the basis of lead 
distances (average of distances in the district) and 
normative Per Tonne Per Km (PTPK) rate* and paid 
on monthly basis (or) actual freight whichever is 
lesser. 
Note – (i) Special PTPK rate for primary road movement from NFL Nangal to Himachal Pradesh @ Rs.7.25/-  
                Per Tonne Per Kilometre is allowed.  
          (ii) Special compensation for freight for secondary movement to difficulty areas  is allowed 
               w.e.f. 01-04-2012.  [PTPK rates for A&N Islands-Rs.2.33/-, HP-Rs.7.25/-, Uttarakhand- Rs.6.31/-, 
              J&K-Rs.5.29/-,  Assam-Rs.4.81/-,   Arunachal Pradesh Rs.6.88/-, Manipur-Rs.9.08/-,  
             Meghlaya -Rs.9.40/-, Mizoram-Rs.9.64/-, Nagaland-Rs.5/- & Tripura Rs.7.95/-. 
* Normative PTPK rate for each district is notified based on the recommendations of Tariff Commission.    
 
2.22 Based on the recommendations of Tariff Commission, the slab-wise rates in respect 
of primary road movement upto 500 Kms were notified for the year 20 08-09 vide 
notification dated 17.6.2015. The said rates are escalated/de-escalated for each financial 
year and notified accordingly. Department of Fertilizers had issued Normative Per ton ne 
per Km Transportation Rates for the year 2007-08, 2008-09 and 20 09-10 based on 
recommendations made by Tariff Commission in the case of secondary move ment of 
fertilizers from unloading rake point to retail point vide Notification dated 1 st September, 
2011.  The escalated/de-escalated Per Tonne Per Kilometre (PTPK) for road transportation 
in the case of secondary movement of fertilizers are notified by Departme nt of Fertilizers 
annually. 
 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT)  
2.23 The Government has introduced Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) system in Fertilize rs 
w.e.f. October 2016. Under the fertilizer DBT system, 100% subsidy on various fertilize r 
grades is released to the fertilizer companies on the basis of actual sales made by t he 
retailers to the beneficiaries. Sale of all subsidized fertilizers to farmers/buyers is mad e 
through Point of Sale (PoS) devices installed at each retailer shop and th e beneficiaries 
are identified through Aadhaar Card, KCC, Voter Identity Card etc. Differen t States/U.T.s 

15 
 
have been put on Go-Live mode w.e.f. 01.09.2017 and the  Pan-India Roll out has been 
completed by March, 2018. 
 
2.24 Under DBT, the fertilizer sales are being done through the PoS dev ices installed at 
retail points across the country.   The cost of installation and maintenance PoS devices and 
other IT related equipment  is borne by the Fertilizer companies out of the incentive of Rs. 
50/MT allowed by the Govt. for acknowledging the receipt of Fertilizers through  Fertilizer 
Monitoring System (iFMS).
  Till now 18 versions of PoS software has been released in the 
process of improving the PoS operations. The Department of Fertilizers has recently 
developed the PoS software version 3.0. The features of DBT PoS software version 3.0 are 
as follows: 
 New system will provide Aadhaar virtual ID option during use to registration, lo gin 
and sale activity in DBT Software 
 It captures Sale to farmers, Mixture manufacturers, Planter association 
separately. 
 It has Multi-lingual facility 
 It has Provision for Soil Health Card (SHC) recommendation: area-specific, crop-
specific recommendations. 
 
2.25 The Department of Fertilizers when asked to state as to how this system is 
functioning in areas which have no or poor internet connectivity, submitted t hat “at initial 
stages, states were recommended to conduct study to identify telecom service provider 
with maximum penetration with best connectivity. All PoS devices have multiple 
connectivity options like SIM card, Wi-Fi, LAN, PSTN. Also, the PoS Devices are provide d 
with additional separate Antenna for coverage in remote areas with low con nectivity.  
Further, in States like Odisha, VLAN were put in use for retail points with no internet  
connectivity.” 
  
2.26 When asked to provide the details of Integrated Fertilizer Manageme nt System 
(iFMS) for monitoring the sale of fertilizers through point of sale machines, the Department 
of Fertilizers furnished written reply as under :- 
“ DOF has developed an IT enabled system viz., Integrated Fertilizer Manage ment 
System (iFMS), which captures end to end details of Fertilizer in terms of 
Production, Movement, availability, requirement, Sale, Subsidy Bill Gene ration to 
Subsidy payment to fertilizer companies. The  iFMS system can be accessed at 
http://mfms.nic.in/. Concerned stakeholders like DoF, State Agriculture Departments, 

16 
 
District Collectors, Fertilizer Companies are all provided with separate credentials for 
operating and monitoring purposes .Few features of iFMS  portal are as below: 
 Real time, online tracking of fertilizer movement, along the plant/port-rake p oint-
district-wholesaler-retailer chain. 
 Real time Fertilizer availability data at state, district, wholesaler & retailer level. 
 Real time tracking of sale of fertilizers at subsidized rates to farmers through PoS  
devices. 
 Provision of Soil Health Card (SHC) recommendations to farmers for balanced us e 
of fertilizers. 
 Process re-engineering to ensure “Just in Time ” release of subsidy to fertilizer 
companies. 
 A complete end to end transaction visibility of fertilizers starting from imp ort/ 
production till sales to farmers. 
 
In addition, separate modules have been developed for specific functions as below: 
 
 PoS Software: Designed to capture all retailer transactions online i.e., retailer  
registration, stock acknowledgement, fertilizer sales & buyer’s details. 
 Release Order (RO) Module: Tracks the real-time movement of fertilizers along 
Plant/Port-Rake Point - District - Wholesaler- Retailer chain. 
 Subsidy Payment Module: Online generation of subsidy claims by compa nies on 
weekly basis. Claims are processed & paid electronically. Integration of iFMS done 
with PFMS to enable complete end-to-end electronic payment. 
Department has also developed a dashboard which can be accessed at 
https://urvarak.nic.in. The dashboard is developed to facilitate easy monitoring by variou s 
Stake holders viz. State Agriculture Departments, District Collectors and State 
Marketing Federations. The Dashboards provide various reports viz., 
 Top 20 buyers (State wise, District wise) 
 Frequent buyers (State wise, District wise) 
 the retailers not selling fertilizer through PoS devices 
 Stock as on Today 
 Stock Availability: 
o Availability at Port 
o Availability at Plant 
o Availability in States 
o Product –wise Availability 
o Period-Wise availability (Month, Session and Year) . ” 
 
2.27 The Department of Fertilizers was asked about (i) percentage of farme rs having Soil 
Health Cards as per data recorded in POS-devices ; (ii) Analysis of fertilizer consump tion 
vis-a-vis Farm size & Soil-health, if any  ; and (iii) whether it is possible to formulate some 
norms on the intensity of  fertilizers required to be used (per acre) on  the basis of so il-
health.  In this regard, the Department of Fertilizers furnished written reply as under :-  
“ As of now, under DBT system, fertilizers are sold on a no-denial basis and it is not 
mandatory for the buyer to provide Soil Health Card details while pu rchasing fertilizers. 

17 
 
Further, there is a provision of generating Soil Health Card (SHC) recommendations to 
farmers for balanced use of fertilizers, which is only an optional facility.” 
2.28 Taking into account the advantages in the IT-enabled PoS system fo r verification of 
buyer identity, the Department of Fertilizers was asked to state about the ste ps taken to 
ensure that retailers do not sell fertilizers to those who do not require f ertilizers and indulge 
in malpractices.  In this regard, the Department of Fertilizers submitted as under :- 
  Subsidized Fertilizer is only allowed to be sold through DoF registered PoS devices 
only after Aadhaar Based Biometric Authentication/Presenting Kisaan Credi t 
Card/Voter ID at the time of purchase with Aadhaar enrolment number.  
The Details of all purchases are captured in the system and the captured Buyers 
information (Name, address, mobile no., ID type etc.) is made available in term s of 
Top 20 Buyers / Top 20 Frequent Buyers to State Agriculture Departmen ts and 
District Collectors for monitoring any malpractices in Fertilizer sale activity. 
In addition, all retailers are sensitized through regular training programs conducted 
for sensitizing new or old retailers on correct procedures to follow on sale throug h 
PoS devices.   As on date a total of 9000 (approx.) training programs have b een 
conducted for retailers. 
 
2.29 To a query seeking details of cases of excessive purchase of fertilize rs by 
individuals, noticed in the IT enabled system and action taken in such cases, th e 
Department of Fertilizers submitted as under :- 
 “ Under DBT in Fertilizers, subsidized fertilizer is sold through PoS devices on 
no-denial basis with no fixed purchase quantity limit. However, to keep track 
on highest purchasers/Frequent purchasers, DoF has provided reports to 
concerned State Agriculture Departments and District Collectors with details 
of Buyers (Demographic details as per Aadhaar – Address, mobile number 
etc.) for monitoring or keeping track on bulk purchases.  
 In addition, DoF on 10th July 2019 launched new version of PoS softwa re, 
which captures purchase by Mixture Manufacturers, Planter Associations 
(usually purchasing very large quantities) separately on basis on authorisation 
letter & GSTIN number.   
 
2.30 In this regard when the committee further asked about the system to prese nt misuse 
or diversion of fertilizers in such cases where one farmer has taken fertilizers o n behalf of 
others, the Secretary further clarified as follow:- 
 
 “we have the methodology of checking what that gentleman is d oing with that 
much of quantity of fertilizer because he has put his biometric and h e has put 
his authentication. I have written to the Chief Secretaries of all the States to 
please check if anybody is significantly taking higher quantity of fertiliser, what 

18 
 
he is doing with it. The Government of India cannot do that kind of a job at the 
grassroot level. Under the Fertilizer Control Order, powers have been given to 
all the District Magistrates, Magistrates, State Agriculture Department 
Functionaries. So, we expect that the State Governments will exercise their  
authority and they will also see that the fertilisers purchased by any individual 
is not misutilized or diverted for any other purpose than for agriculture. 
 
2.31 When the Committee pointed out during oral evidence that the retailers just feed 
Aadhaar numbers of farmers without taking their thumb impression and large q uantities of 
fertilizers is given to one farmer, the Secretary, Department of Fertilizers clarified as under:- 
 “Regarding your last point on retail sale, we have no denial policy. Whoe ver 
comes, whatever quantity he demands, we give it to him. The reason is that 
during the peak season, sometimes because of internet connectivity, all these 
issues come up; so there would be long lines. Farmers do not have time to 
wait. So, we allow this open policy. Sometimes, a group of farmers sen d only 
one representative; they send one tractor trolley and take their fertiliser. That 
is not denied. That is given. Like you pointed out, the retailers have A adhaar 
cards of all the farmers. Whoever comes, he takes his biometric and pu t 
entire fertiliser against this name. It is happening. But, at least, the fertilise r is 
sold at that point. It is not diverted en route from the plant or port to 
somewhere else.”  
 
2.32 To a post-evidence query seeking details of Number of instances where v ery large 
quantities have been reported to be purchased by a single farmer and action taken thereon, 
the reply of the Department of Fertilizers is as given below :- 
 “Department has developed a dashboard which can be accessed 
at https://urvarak.nic.in. The dashboard facilitates easy monitoring by State 
Agriculture Departments, District Collectors and State Marketing Federations 
by providing various reports like list of top 20 buyers (State wise, District 
wise), which is available for the State Agriculture Dept. The State 
Governments have been empowered to take appropriate action as per FCO 
after examining each case.” 
 
2.33 The Committee further enquired about the possible ways in which the fertilizers can 
be misused.  The Secretary, Department of Fertilizers informed the committee in this 
regard during oral evidence as below:- 
 
 “Suppose, somebody says that a significant quantity is diverted and leaked, then 
what are the probable uses? We did a little bit of exercise informally with the Council 
of Chemical Industries located at Chennai. I interacted with those people. They said 
that there are a couple of industries where urea is used as a chemical like  melamine 
industry, paint and varnishing, plywood industry, poultry feed like that. Then, I asked: 

19 
 
‘What is your likely use of urea in this kind of industry? ’ They said: “It is not more 
than 10 lakh tonnes. ” Even we assume that the entire 10 lakh tonnes is taken from 
our agricultural subsidised urea, it is an insignificant amount ….I am ta lking about the 
country as a whole. We are supplying 320 lakh metric tonnes urea. Supp ose, 10 
lakh tonnes, which is used by the chemical industries is diverted, that is an 
insignificant percentage, which is just around 3.5 per cent of the total fertilizers or the 
urea supplied in the system. But the DGFT data shows that the people also import 
technical grade urea from abroad. That is also used for those industrie s. So, it is not 
entirely what they are consuming in the country is being diverted from subsidise d 
urea. Yes, it is possible that some amount of urea may be diverted at tha t level but it 
is not a significant quantity which the people talk about.” 
 
 
2.34 Phase-II of DBT – The Department of Fertilizers was asked whether the Department 
of Fertilizers considered giving direct subsidy to farmers rather than giving it to th e 
manufacturing units.   The Department was also asked to furnish comments as to whether it 
is possible to switch over to Direct Subsidy Model and about the preparatory steps required 
to be completed for the same.  In this regard, the Department of Fertilizers w ritten reply as 
under :-  
“ NITI Aayog has constituted a Committee to analyze and suggest a mechanism to 
provide agriculture subsidy on area basis through DBT vide letter No. I-
22/2/21/2017-P&E dated 06.02.2018. The committee is examining the  feasibility of 
providing agriculture subsidy on area basis through DBT through wide consultations 
involving various stakeholders from D/o Fertilizers, M/o Power, DAC&FW and Sta te 
Governments. A draft report has been issued by the Committee to all stake holders. 
The final report of the Committee is yet to be received. “ 
  
2.35  In this context, the Department of Fertilizers was asked to state ab out the salient 
features of the suggestions contained in the draft report of NITI Ayog on the proposed 
system to provide agriculture subsidy on area basis through DBT along with comments of 
the Department with regard to feasibility of implementation of the suggestions.   The reply of 
the Department in this regard is reproduced below :- 
“ The salient features of the suggestions contained in the draft report of NITI Aayog 
appointed committee are as under: 
  
The committee has suggested three models for DBT in its draft report– 
1. Direct Benefit transfer (without area basis) 
2. Direct Benefit transfer based on areas 
3. Differential Cost of supply of Inputs. 
 Main features of these models are as below: 

20 
 
1. Direct Benefit Transfer (without area basis) - 
a. Requires a complete database of bonafide users with evidence of 
eligibility like land records.  
b. Eligibility criteria not based on land ownership but actual cultivator as 
per land holding (possession). 
c. DBT to be linked to purchase/use of inputs by beneficiaries. 
Limitations: 
a. Excludes informal tenant farmers and farmers without clear land titles. 
 
 2. Direct Benefit transfer based on areas – 
a. Per hectare transfer of subsidy to farmers 
b. Linked to average productivity taking district as a unit. 
c. Subsidies linked to productivity of irrigated / unirrigated Land. 
d. Farmers should be provided Kisan Input Cards (KIC) entitling them to 
use the given subsidy amount to buy wide range of inputs. 
  3. Differential Cost of supply of Inputs - 
a. Moving P&K based fertilizer to DBT per acre mode (which are on 
nutrient based subsidy policy and where subsidy is fixed, MRP is freed 
and not many variations in prices of different companies). 
b. For Urea, per hectare DBT Model may be implemented once all plants 
become gas based and after commissioning of Plants being revived. 
Limitations : 
a. Wide Variation in the Cost of Manufacturing fertilizer. 
 
2.36 When asked as to how the proposed new mechanism of direct  cash transfer of 
fertilizer subsidy to farmers ’ account, would affect the existing system of production, 
movement and distribution of subsidized fertilizers in the country, the Departme nt of 
Fertilizers stated that “No final model of Direct Cash transfer of fertilizer subsidy to farmer ’s 
account has been finalized yet. Therefore no impact study has been conducted.” 
 
2.37 In regard to a query on system of fertilizer subsidies in other countries, the 
Secretary, Dept. of Fertilizers stated during oral evidence as under:- 
 
 “Yes Madam. There is a study done by the International Food Policy 
Research Institute, Washington. They have done the study in Asian countries 
and six African countries. The study is quite lengthy. I was going thro ugh that 
report. In Indonesia, it is similar to India. They have a dual pricing system ; 
one is for subsidised fertilisers and another is for non-subsidised fertilisers 
and the study shows that it is quite inefficient as compared to our system 
because the dual pricing means that there is no control as to who is getting  
what. There is inter-changeability from subsidised fertiliser to non-subsidised 
fertiliser use.  In China, till recently, they had a similar kind of pricing policy. 
Still they have a pricing policy which is controlled.”    

21 
 
 They incentivise the fertiliser industry by giving various subsidies. For 
example, electricity is given at a concessional rate, rate of interest for the 
fertiliser industry from the banking sector is low compared to others. Then, 
their import of capital machinery is also subsidised. That is from the industry 
side. On the farmer side, the prices are a little flexible, but it is controlled by 
their Government. In Pakistan, it is just like our country. In Bangladesh also, 
they have the control system. Now, China is thinking of moving to a 
completely decontrolled system. In Europe and US, they have decoupled it. 
They call it ‘decoupling’ of individual input subsidy like fertiliser, they have 
given aggregate support to agriculture for environmental consideration, 
adopting better practices, conservation in agriculture, etc. But they have 
parameters to monitor that performance. It is a performance-base d aggregate 
support. This is the information which I have from what I have studied a bout 
cross-country experience of fertiliser subsidy. 
 
2.38  The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture in their 29 th Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) had inter-alia made the following observations :- 
 
 “There is imbalance in fertilizer use in terms of NPK as it is evidenced by their wider 
consumption ration or (6.7) : (2.4) : 1 in the country as against their desirable ration  
of 4:2:1.  The situation is more grim in agriculturally important States like  Punjkab 
and Haryana where NPK use ratio is as high as (31.4) : 8 : 1 and (27.7) :  (6.1) : 1 ,  
respectively.   According to the Secretary of Department of Agriculture, Coopera tion 
and Farmers ’ Welfare, skewed subsidy policy in favour of urea and high prices o f 
other fertilizer  are the real culprit behind the imbalanced use of fertilizer in the 
country.   Even the pattern of use of fertilizer varies widely among differen t crops.  
Fertilizer use in potato sugarcane, cotton, wheat and paddy are among  highest the 
level of 347.2, 192.6, 176.7 and 165.2 Kg/hectare respectively.  Eve n among these 
crops there is excessive use of nitrogenous fertilizer.”  
   
 

22 
 
CHAPTER – III 
UREA SUBSIDY 
 
Urea Subsidy - Urea is sold at a Maximum Retail Price (MRP) statutorily fixed by 
the Government of India. The difference between the delivered cost of  fertilizers at farm 
gate and net market realization by the urea units is given as subsidy to the  urea 
manufacturer/importer by the Government of India.   FICC (Fertilizer Industry Coo rdination 
Committee), an attached office under the Department of Fertilizers, calculates th e 
Concession rate for indigenous urea as per New Urea Policy for existing units and Ne w 
Investment Policy (NIP) for new unit. As on date FICC, determines the con cession rates for 
31 urea units (30 units under NUP and 1 unit under NIP).  
 
3.2 MRP of Urea  The MRP of urea is statutorily fixed by the Government of India and at 
present the Urea is being provided to the farmers at a statutorily notified M aximum Retail 
Price (MRP). The MRP of 45 kg bag of urea is Rs.242 per bag (exclusive of ch arges 
towards neem-coating and taxes as applicable) and the MRP of 50 kg bag of urea is 
Rs.268 per bag (exclusive of charges towards neem-coating and taxes as applicable).  
 
3.3 Role of Fertilizer Industry Coordination Committee (FICC)  –  FICC is responsible 
to evolve and review periodically, the group concession rates including freight rates for 
units manufacturing nitrogenous fertilizers, maintain accounts and make paym ent to / and 
recover amounts from fertilizer companies, undertake costing and other technical fun ctions, 
collect and analyze production  data, cost and other information etc.  
 
3.4 Urea Manufacturing Units  - At present, there are 32 urea manufacturing units with 
installed annual capacity of 220 LMT approx. Out of 32, 30 urea units are Gas Based/CBM 
based units & 2 are Naphtha Based Units. The details of urea units along with  their location, 
vintage and capacity are appended below :- 
(Quantum in MT) 
Sl. 
No. 
Urea Unit Location  / State Month / Year of 
Commissioning
Reassessed Capacity  
Gas Based Units – Under NUP-2015 (Target Energy Norms w.e.f. 01-04-2018) 
1. Yara Fertilizers India Private Limited (YFIPL)- Barbala Uttar Pradesh Dec 1994 864600 
2. National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) – Vijaipur - II Madhya Pradesh March 1997 864600 
3. Grasim Industries Limited – Jagdishpur (GIL / Indo-Gulf) Uttar Pradesh Nov 1988 864600 
4. Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (CFCL) -
Gadepan-I 
Rajasthan Jan 1994 864600 

23 
 
5. Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (CFCL)-
Gadepan-II 
Rajasthan Oct 1999 864600 
6. Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative (IFFCO)-Aonla-II Uttar Pradesh Nov 1996 864600 
7. Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF)- Thal Maharashtra Apr 1985 1706897 
8. Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative (IFFCO)-Kalol Gujarat Apr 1975 544500 
9. Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative (IFFCO)-Aonla-I Uttar Pradesh July 1988 864600 
10. Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative (IFFCO)-Phulpur-I Uttar Pradesh Mar 1981 551100 
11. Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative (IFFCO)-Phulpur-II Uttar Pradesh Dec 1997 864600 
 Gas Based Units – Under NUP-2015 (Target Energy Norms – Extended for 2 Years) 
12. National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) – Vijaipur - I Madhya Pradesh July 1988 864600 
13. KrishakBharati Cooperative (Kribhco)-Hazira Gujarat Mar 1986 1729200 
14. Kribhco Fertilizers Limited (KFL) -  Shahjahanpur Uttar Pradesh Dec 1995 864600 
15. Nagarjuna Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (NFCL) – 
Kakinada-I 
Hyderabad August 1992 597300 
16. Nagarjuna Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (NFCL) – 
Kakinada-II 
Hyderabad March 1988 597300 
17. Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertilizers Company Limited 
(GNVFC)-Bharuch 
Gujarat 1982 636900 
18. Gujarat State Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (GSFC)-
Vadodara 
Gujarat May 1967 370590 
 
19. National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) – Bhatinda Punjab Oct 1979 511500 
20. National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) – Nangal Punjab Nov 1978 478500 
21. National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) – Panipat Haryana Sep 1979 511500 
22. Shriram Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (SFC) – Kota Rajasthan Feb 1969 379500 
23. Kanpur Fertilizers & Cement Limited (KFCL), Kanpur Uttar Pradesh Dec 1969 722700 
24. Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF)-Trombay Maharashtra July 1985 330000 
25. Zuari Agro Chemicals Limied (ZACL) – Goa Goa May 1973 399300 
 Gas Based Units Under NPS-III 
26. Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizers Corporation Limited 
(BVFCL) – Namrup-II 
Assam Oct 1976 240000 
27. Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizers Corporation Limited 
(BVFCL) – Namrup-III 
Assam Oct 1987 269565 
 Gas Based Units Under New Investment Policy-2012 
28. Matix Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited, Panagarh West Bengal Oct 2017 127000 
29. Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited 
(CFCL)Gadepan–III 
Rajasthan Jan 2019 127000 
 Naptha Based Units already converted into Gas Based Unit 
30.. Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL)-Manali Tamil Nadu Nov 1971 486750 
 Naptha Based Units 
31. Mangalore Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (MCFL)- 
Mangalore 
Karnataka March 1976 379500 
32. Southern Petrochemicals Industries Limited (SPIC)-
Tuticorin 
Tamil Nadu June 1975 620400 
3.5 As per data furnished by the Department of Fertilizers, the details regarding 
demand, production, import, supply and consumption of urea in the country  during the last 
three years are as under :- 
                     (Figures in LMT) 
Year Demand Production Supply Consumption Import 
2016-17 289.09 242.01 309.08 296.07 54.81 
2017-18 298.00 240.23 313.57 303.31 59.75 
2018-19 300.04 240.00 323.31 317.19 74.81 
 The target set for production of Urea, during 2019-20 is 271.00 LMT.  

24 
 
Urea Subsidy Policy 
 
3.6 The current pricing policy of urea and the associated issues of concessi on rate / 
subsidy given to the Fertilizer Industry in respect of urea have its foundation  in the Retention 
Price Scheme (RPS),.   The retention prices were calculated on a cost plus approach and it 
was determined separately for each urea producing plant.  However, at present, the subsidy 
is paid to the urea manufacturing units through concession rates (Norm ative Cost of 
production under extant Urea Policies) comprising of two major components nam ely Fixed 
Cost and Variable Cost. The concession rates vary from unit to unit depend ing upon their 
vintage, energy norms, water norms, electricity, bag rates etc. The mode and me thodology of 
computation and disbursement has been laid down in various policies (approved  by CCEA) 
issued from time to time on the basis of which FICC calculates the concession rat e for 
indigenous urea.  
 
3.7 The cost of production of a unit comprises of two elements - Fixed cost and 
Variable cost. Fixed cost has component of Salaries & wages, contract labou r, chemicals 
& consumables, Repairs & maintenances, Non-plant power & water, overhead s, 
insurance, depreciation, selling expenses etc. Variable cost in turn has the com ponents 
like Bag cost, water, energy cost & electricity.  
      
3.8 New Pricing Scheme (NPS) New Pricing Scheme (NPS) for urea was introduced 
w.e.f. 1st April, 2003.   Details of different Stages of implementation of NPS and salient 
features are as given below :- 
(3.9.1) New Pricing Scheme (notified on 30th January, 2003). 
• NPS replaced erstwhile Retention Price Scheme (RPS). 
• NPS-I (1 st April, 2003 to 31st March, 2004). 
• Fundamental principles of RPS remained unchanged. 
• Fixed costs were based on weighted average of the group, further averaged for 
preceding three years.  
• Energy Norms based on 8 th Pricing period of RPS.  
• Operating units were classified into 6 groups on the basis of Vintage & feed stock.  
• No capping on production of Urea.  
 

25 
 
(3.9.2) NPS- II (1st April, 2004 to 30th September, 2006) 
• Stage II of NPS was for two years ’ duration. 
• Classification of units into six groups remained unchanged. 
• Energy Norms were revised based on Group energy norm as per Gokak Committe e 
recommendation. 
• Adjustment on account of Capital Related Charges (CRC) and Group Energy norms 
communicated to units for making necessary technological and structural adjustments.  
 
(3.9.3) New Pricing Scheme-III (notified on 8th March, 2007) 
• Effective from 1 st October,2006 to 31st March, 2010  
• Classification of various units among Six Groups continued as in NPS-I & NPS-II.  
• Costs to be updated as on 31.03.2003.  
• Group averaging to be done after updating the costs upto 31.03.2003.  
• Energy Norm: Lower of NPS-II norm or actual for 2002-03 to be paid.  
• Cost of bags recognized on the basis of moving average of 3 years preceding last Year.  
 
(3.9.4) Modified New Pricing Scheme-III  
• Notified on 2 nd April, 2014 to compensate the existing urea units. 
• The calculation of concession rates of urea units shall continue as per NPS-III an d its 
amendments subject to the following modifications: 
 
(i)  Additional Fixed cost   
(a) The maximum additional fixed cost (towards increase in the four components, viz., 
salaries & wages, contract labour, selling expenses and repair & maintenance) o f Rs. 
350/MT to existing urea units or actual increase in above four components o f fixed 
cost during the year 2012-13 compared to the year 2002-03, whiche ver is lower will 
be paid. This will be based on the certified cost data for above fo ur components for 
the year 2012-13 to be provided by all urea Units. 
 
(b) In respect of KFCL and BVFCL-II units, for which cost data of four compo nents is 
not available either for the year 2002-03 or 2012-13, the actu al increase in these four 
components as per the certified cost data for the latest year over and above Rs. 
521/MT (weighted industry average during 2002-03) subject to maximum o f Rs. 
350/MT  will be allowed.  
 
(ii) Minimum Fixed Cost   
 
The minimum fixed cost of Rs. 2300/MT or actual fixed cost prevailing duri ng 2012-
13, whichever is lower, after taking into account the compensation at 3.9. 4(i) above, 
will be paid. This will be based on certified fixed cost data for the  year 2012-13, to be 
provided by all urea units. 

26 
 
 
(iii) Special compensation to Urea Plants which have Completed 30 Years 
and Converted to Gas 
The special compensation of Rs. 150/MT will be paid to gas based urea plan ts which 
have converted to gas and are more than 30 years old. This is in add ition to para 
3.9.4(i)&(ii) above. 
 
The old and inefficient units to be phased out in due course of time af ter the addition 
of new capacity.” 
 
(iv)  Clarification on Modified NPS- III 
• Due to ambiguity in the notification, the notification could not be implemented.  
• Therefore, a need was felt to issue clarification to facilitate the implementations  of 
MNPS-III. Department of Fertilizers had forwarded the advance copy of a CCEA 
Note dated 3 rd October, 2019 to Cabinet Secretariat and PMO for removal of 
ambiguities in the Modified NPS-III for determination of fixed costs for urea units. 
However, the same has been withdrawn for modifications. 
 
3.9 New Investment Policy (NIP) – 2012 – The Government had announced New 
Investment Policy – 2012 on 2 nd January, 2013 to facilitate fresh investment in urea sector 
and to make India self-sufficient in the urea sector. The salient feat ures of NIP-2012 are as 
under:- 
i. Separate floor and ceiling price for calculating the concession rate of ure a 
produced from the Revamp, Expansion, Revival and Greenfield Urea Units set 
up under NIP-2012. 
ii. Floor and ceiling prices linked to the gas price and the corresponding cha nge 
with the revision in delivered gas price. 
iii. Floor prices have been determined at a Return on Equity (RoE) of 12 % and 
ceiling price has been determined at a RoE of 20%. 
 
• Amendment to NIP 2012 was notified on 7 th October 2014, the provisions of which are 
as under: 
i. Units whose production starts within 5 years of this amendment (i.e. upto 6 th 
October, 2019) will be covered under NIP 2012. 
ii. Subsidy only on domestic sale for 8 years from the date of production. 
iii. Project Proponents to submit Bank Guarantee of Rs.300 crores. 
iv. Release of Bank Guarantee linked with milestones of the project cycle. 
3.10 Under the provisions of NIP – 2012 and its amendment, Department of Fertilizers 
informed that Matix Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (Matix) has set up a Coal Bed Meth ane 

27 
 
(CBM) based Greenfield Ammonia-Urea complex at Panagarh, West Ben gal. The 
commercial production of Matix started on 1 st October, 2017. However, it is not operational 
due to non-availability of CBM/Natural Gas. MATIX had informed that they have signed Gas 
Sale & Purchase agreement with GAIL for supplying 1.5 MMSCMD RLNG to its Urea  Plant. 
The gas pipeline connectivity from GAIL was likely to be completed by Decembe r 2019. 
Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Limited (CFCL) has also set up a brownfield project at 
Gadepan, Rajasthan. The commercial production of   CFCL-III started on  1st January, 2019. 
Each unit is having the production capacity of 12.7 LMT. The production fro m CFCL-III is 
added to the production capacity of the country since January, 2019.  
   The Department also informed the Committee that Ramagundam, Talcher, S indri 
and Goakhpur units of FCIL and Barauni unit of HFCL are being revived  as per New 
Investment Policy 2012.  The details regarding these units are as under:- 
Sl.
No 
 Ramangun- 
dam 
Talcher Sindri Gorakhpur Baraunit 
1. State Telangana Odisha Jharkhand Uppar 
Pradesh 
Bihar 
2. District Karimnagar Angul Dhanbad Gorakphur Begusarai 
3. Capacity in (Million 
Metric Tons per 
annum) 
 
1.27 
 
1.27 
 
1.27 
 
1.27 
 
1.27 
4. Targeted Year of 
Commissioning 
 
2020 
 
2023 
 
2021 
 
2021 
 
2021 
 
3.11 The New Investment Policy (NIP categorized new plants as (i) Revamp projec ts, (ii) 
Expansion or Brownfield projects, (iii) Revival of closed urea units and (iv) Greenfield  
Projects.  Concession rate under NIP is calculated as detailed below: 
(a) NIP 2012 provides a structure of a floor price and ceiling price for the  amount 
payable to urea units based on categorization stated above, which will be calculated 
based on delivered price gas price (inclusive of charges & taxes) to resp ective urea 
units as follows:. 
Category Delivered Gas Price Floor Price Ceiling Price 
Greenfield/ Revival 
of closed unit  
USD 6.5 per 
MMBtu  
USD 305 per 
MT of Urea  
USD 335 per MT 
of Urea 
Expansion or 
Brownfield  
USD 6.5 per 
MMBtu  
USD 285 per 
MT of Urea 
USD 310 per MT 
of Urea  
Revamp  USD 7.5 per 
mmbtu 
USD 245 per 
MT of Urea  
USD 255 per MT 
of Urea  
 

28 
 
(b) Further, for each 0.1 USD per MMBtu revision in delivered gas price, it will 
correspondingly change the Floor and Ceiling price depending upon the 
categorization of the unit as mentioned in NIP 2012. 
 
3.12 New Urea Policy (NUP) – 2015   - The Government of India had notified the New 
Urea Policy (NUP) - 2015 on 25 th May, 2015 for existing gas based urea units with the 
objective of (i) maximizing indigenous urea production; (ii) promoting energy eff iciency in 
urea production; and (iii) rationalizing subsidy burden on the government. The  provisions of 
NUP-2015 were introduced from 1 st June, 2015.  Vide notification dated 14 th May, 2019, the 
duration of New Urea Policy-2015 has been extended from 1st April, 2019 till further orders. 
 
3.13 Under NUP-2015, the existing gas based urea units were classified into three  groups 
based on their preset energy norms. The energy norms of the 25 gas ba sed urea units were 
revised for a period of three years i.e. 2015-16 (w.e.f. 1 st June, 2015) to 2017- 18
 which was 
the simple average of pre-set energy norms of NPS-III and average actual  energy 
consumption achieved during the years 2011-12, 2012-13 and 2 013-14 or the pre-set set 
energy norms of NPS-III, whichever was lower . Each group was given target energy norms 
w.e.f. 1st April, 2018. 
 
3.14 As per para 3.2 of NUP-2015, each group was given a target energy norm f or the year 
2018-2019 as per the details given below:- 
Group  Energy 
level (I n 
Gcal/MT) 
Target Energy  
Norm (2018-
19)(In Gcal/MT) 
Name / No. of Companies 
Group-I 5.0 to 6.0 5.5* NFL- Vijaipur-I & II, Kribhcho-Hazira, 
Indo-Gulf, IFFCO-Aonla-I & II and 
Phulpur-II,  KSFL, CFCL-I & II, TCL, 
NFCL-I & II (Thirteen Units) 
Group-II 6.0 to 7.0 6.2 IFFCO-Kalol, GSFC, RCF-Thal, 
GNVFC (Four Units) 
Group-III More than 
7.0  
6.5 NFL-Nangal, NFL-Panipat, Bhatinda, 
ZACL, SFC, RCF-Trombay-V, IFFCO-
Phulpur-I, KFCL (Eight Units) 
         *(except Tata Chemicals Limited-Babrala for which existing pre-set energy 
consumption norm of NPS-III i.e. 5.417 G Cal/MT will continue). 
   
3.15 The compensation for other variable cost e.g. the cost of bag , water charges & 
electricity charges and fixed cost are determined in accordance with existing provisions o f 

29 
 
NPS-III (notified on 8 th March, 2007) and Modified NPS-III (2 nd April, 2014).    For production 
upto 100% re-assessed capacity (RAC), the 25 gas based urea units are entitled to get total 
cost of production of urea, which includes fixed cost and variable cost. For the production 
beyond Reassessed Capacity (RAC), the units are entitled for their respective vari able cost 
and a uniform per MT incentive equal to the lowest of the per MT fixed costs of all the 
indigenous urea units subject to import parity price (IPP) plus weighted average of  other 
incidental charges which the Government incurs on the imported urea.  The  Committee were 
further  informed by the Department of Fertilizers in a written reply that  Five units namely 
MFL-Manali, MCFL-Mangalore, SPIC-Tuticorin, BVFCL-Namrup-II and BVFCL-Namrup- III 
are not covered under this scheme because these units are not connected to gas pipeline 
network in the country at the time of introduction of the policy.  Further, Namrup- II and 
Namrup-III units of BVFCL are proposed to be closed and a new high efficiency  unit will be 
installed, which will be dealt separately under their restructuring proposal. Till then, these two 
units are functioning under the provisions of Modified NPS-III. 
 
3.16 Revision of Energy Norms under New Urea Policy (NUP) – 2015 - With the 
approval of the CCEA, Department of Fertilizers vide notification dated 28 th March, 2018, 
had conveyed the following decisions with regard to Target Energy Norms give n to all urea 
manufacturing units (except BVFCL): 
 
i. For 11 urea manufacturing units viz., YFIL, NFL-Vijaipur-II, GIL, CFCL-
Gadepan-I & II, IFFCO-Aonla-II, RCF-Thal, IFFCO-Kalol, IFFCO-Aonla- I, 
IFFCO-Phulpur-I & II, the target energy consumption norms as mentioned i n 
Para 3.2 of NUP – 2015, will come into force w.e.f. 1st April, 2018. 
 
ii. The existing norms under New Urea Policy- 2015 for remaining 14 urea 
manufacturing units viz., NFL Vijaipur-I, KRIBHCO-Hazira, KFL-
Shahjahanpur, NFCL- Kakinada-I, NFCL-Kakinada-II, GNFC-Bharuch, 
GSFC-Vadodara, NFL-Bathinda, NFL-Nangal, NFL-Panipat, SFC-Kota, 
KFCL–Kanpur, RCF Trombay-V, ZACL-Goa are hereby extended for further 
period of 2 years i.e. till 31stMarch, 2020 with the following penalties: 
 
a. Penalty equivalent to 2% energy of difference between NUP Energ y 
norms and Target Energy norms of NUP-2015, for the first year i.e. 
2018-19. 
 
b. Penalty equivalent to 5% energy of difference between NUP Energ y 
norms and Target Energy norms of NUP-2015, for the second year 
i.e. 2019-20. 
  

30 
 
c. Urea manufacturing units must achieve Target Energy Norms during 
the extended period of 2018-19 to 2019-20 failing which additional  
penalties may be imposed on defaulting units in consultation with the 
Department of Expenditure. 
 
3.17 The aforesaid target energy norms may be continued upto 31 st March, 2025. 
Meanwhile, an expert body under NITI Aayog would be engaged to recommend the energy 
norms to be achieved from 01st April, 2025. 
 
3.18 During oral evidence, the Committee enquired about the import of gas f or running 
gas based fertilizer and the manner in which the Government mange the expenditure in this 
regard, the Additional Secretary in the Department of Fertilizer informed the Com mittee as 
under:- 
 “Sir, Our plants function in two different ways.  One is Gas based.  Earlier, 2 5 
plants are fully converted to gas.  They were operating on gas.  Three plan ts 
which were mentioned during the presentation, they were on basically 
Naphtha, alternate feedstock.  As there was no gas connectivity there.  So the 
something could be done through Naphtha which is done through g as, 
basically extraction of Hydrogen from Naphtha instead of gas.  Our Madras 
based plant has got converted.  The remaining two will get converted by 
March 2020.  One will be converted in December and other in March 202 0.  
Then, all our plants will become gas based.  Naphtha which is a n expensive 
feedstock will be removed from our system then.  Everything will be  gas 
based.  Perhaps, you are inquiring about the pricing of New Investment  
Policy.  Total production of gas in the country is 71 MMSCMD or it is ca lled 
MMBTU.  Out of this, our requirement is 48 and out of 48 our allocation is  
31.5.  But we do not get 31.5, we get only 16 MMSCMD or MMB TU after 
allocation to city Gas and other power sectors and we import RLNG  to meet 
the gap between 16 and 48.  In most of the import, GAIL is our main player.  
GAIL supplies the gas to the unit after importing the same.  Domestic gas is 
cheap, RLNG is very costly.  Thereafter, we pool whole gas and then we get 
pool gas price.  After that concession rate is worked out for all the p lants.  
Presently there is a lot of deficit.  We do not get full 31.5 MMSCMD.  Eve n we 
do not get gas allocated by cabinet.  That leaves a gap, which we  meet 
through RLNG resulting on our increased subsidy bill.” 
 
3.19 Calculation of Subsidy  - 
 The calculation of concession rates of urea under NUP 
are as detailed below :- 
 
(a) The concession rate upto Reassessed Capacity (RAC) level includes Fixed 
Cost (calculated at 2002-03 level) and current variable cost of the unit. Fix ed Cost 

31 
 
calculated as on 2002-03 includes (i) Conversion cost viz. salaries & wages, 
contract labour cost, marketing cost, repair & maintenance, catalyst, administrative  
expenses etc. and (ii) Capital related cost viz. depreciation, interest on borro wed 
capital, return on equity. Variable Cost means actual cost incurred on energy  cost, 
water cost, bag cost and electricity duty wherever applicable. 
 
(b) The concession rates of urea beyond Reassessed Capacity (RAC) level 
includes Fixed Cost and Variable Cost calculated as below subject to Import Pa rity 
price which the Government incurs on the imported urea. Fixed Cost is the low est of 
the fixed cost calculated as on 2002-03 of all the indigenous urea  units. Variable 
Cost includes energy cost, water cost, bag cost and electricity duty wherever 
applicable. 
 
 
3.20 The amount of subsidy on urea for different plants varies from Rs. 5990 PMT (BVFC 
Namrup-III) to Rs. 26483 PMT (RCF - Trombay-5).  In this connection, the Department of 
Fertilizers was asked to explain the reasons for such a huge variation in the a mount of 
subsidy being given.  The Department was also asked whether any analysis w as done on 
economic-viability of closure of high subsidy unit or their complete overhaulin g so as to 
reduce subsidy amount and to furnish an assessment on each of such high subsidy units.    
In reply, the Department of Fertilizers submitted as under :- 
“ Since the concession rates (i.e. Cost of Production of Urea) are determined sep arately 
for each urea producing plant, the subsidy payable to different urea producing  plants 
varies from unit to unit. Components of Cost of Production of Urea are as under: 
 
 (i)         Variable cost which includes: 
(a) Cost of energy viz. Natural Gas, RLNG, Naphtha  
(b) Cost on non-plant use of power and water 
(c) Cost of bags  
(ii)        Conversion cost or fixed cost: 
(a) Salary and wages,  
(b) Cost of contract labour 
(c) Cost of consumables like catalyst, chemicals and other consumables 
(d) Administrative overheads. 
(e) Factory overheads, insurance etc.  
(iii)        Capital related charges:  
(a) Depreciation 
(b) Interest on long term loans   
(c) Interest on short term loans and cash credit 
(iv)       Selling expenses 
Energy norms of the urea manufacturing plants of the country vary from plant to plant 
along-with the cost of above components. Therefore, the amount of sub sidy on urea 

32 
 
also varies from plant to plant. So far as the concession rate of BVFCL units is  
concerned, being located in the north east region of the country, it enjoys special 
dispensation regarding pricing of gas due to which its concession rate is lower than 
the other urea manufacturing units of the country.  
Once the NUP-2015 target energy norms are fully achieved, the variation in the energy 
norms of the different units will be minimized which in turn will minimize the variation in 
the subsidy on urea for different plants.  
Under NUP-2015, the existing gas based urea units were classified into three grou ps 
based on their preset energy norms. The energy norms of the 25 gas b ased urea units 
were revised for a period of three years i.e. 2015-16 (w.e.f. 1 st June, 2015) to 2017-18. 
Each group was given target energy norms w.e.f. 1 st April, 2018. Vide notification dated 
28th March, 2018, the target energy consumption norms for 11 urea manufacturing units 
have come into force w.e.f. 1 st April, 2018 while for remaining 14 urea manufacturing 
units, the existing norms under NUP-2015 have been extended for furth er period of 2 
years i.e. 31st March, 2020 with certain penalties. 
 Due to the revision of energy norms under NUP-2015 and notification  dated 17 th 
June, 2015, there has been a saving of Rs. 638.90 Crore, Rs. 535.04 Crore and Rs. 
615.28 Crore during the year 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-1 8 respectively. 
Resultantly, there has been a total saving of around Rs. 1789 Crore in three years. “ 
 
3.21 The Committee sought to know about the details regarding total prod uction subsidy 
provided to 1 metric tonne of urea in different types of production process like  naptha 
based / gas based processes and justification for payment of differen t rate of producti on 
subsidy for different plants.    Responding to the same, Department of Fertilizers furnished 
inter-alia following details  :-  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Unit Capacity  
(MT) 
Total rate 
(Rs/MT) 
Consumer 
price (Rs/MT) 
Subsidy 
(Rs/MT) 
Feed-Stock: Gas Pool 
1 IFFCO- Aonla 864600 16408 5110 11298 
2 INDOGULF- Jagdishpur 864600 16018 5130 10888 
3 KRIBHCO-Hazira 1729200 16695 5110 11585 
4 NFL-V Pur 864600 16388 5130 11258 
5 NFCL-Kakinada 597300 17610 5130 12480 
6 CFCL-Kota 864600 16822 5130 11692 
7 YFIPL 864600 16643 5130 11513 
8 KFL  864600 16930 5130 11800 
9 NFCL-Kakinada exp. 597300 17627 5130 12497 
10 IFFCO-Aonla exp. 864600 16470 5110 11360 
11 NFL-V Pur Exp. 864600 16624 5130 11494 
12 IFFCO-P,PUR EXP. 864600 17832 5110 12722 
13 CFCL-II 864600 17441 5130 12311 
 
Sub Total 11569800 16837 5123 11714 
14 GNFC-Bharuch 636900 16787 5130 11657 
15 GSFC-Baroda 370590 20365 5130 15235 

33 
 
16 IFFCO-Kalol 544500 18388 5110 13278 
17 RCF-Thal 1706897 18298 5130 13168 
 
Sub Total 3258887 18253 5127 13126 
18 IFFCO-P,PUR 551100 19819 5110 14709 
19 KFCL-Kanpur 722700 23343 5130 18213 
20 SFC-Kota 379500 19500 5130 14370 
21 RCF -Trombay-V 330000 24571 5130 19441 
22 ZACL-Goa 399300 20976 5130 15846 
23 NFL-Nangal 478500 19634 5130 14504 
24 NFL-Bhatinda 511500 19938 5130 14808 
25 NFL-Panipat 511500 20185 5130 15055 
 
Sub Total 3884100 21007 5127 15880 
 
Gas pool units Total  18712787 17949 5124 12825 
Feed-Stock: other than Gas Pool 
26 BVFC- Namrup II 240000 13529 5130 8399 
27 BVFC- Namrup - III 315000 10874 5130 5744 
 
  555000 12022 5130 6892 
 
Feed-Stock: Naphtha         
28 MCFL-Mangalore 379500 25412 5130 20282 
29 MFL-Madras  486750 29947 5130 24817 
30 SPIC-Tuticorin 620400 28102 5130 22972 
 
Total -Naphtha 1486650 28019 5130 22889 
 
Grand Total 20754437 18512 5125 13387 
 
Under NIP-2012 Started in December 2018     
31 CFCL-III 1270500 30746 4974 25772 
The difference in concession rate mainly are due to the different policy applicable t o different 
units, energy norms feed stock (Gas or Naphtha based). 
 
3.22 Subsidy and Energy Norms for Naphtha based Urea Units - The three Naphtha 
based urea units viz., MFL, MCFL, SPIC are also allowed the existing energy n orms under 
Para (2) of policy notification dated 17th June, 2015 for another two years i.e. till 31 st March, 
2020 or till these units get the gas pipeline connectivity, whichever is ea rlier. There will be 
no mopping up of energy efficiency for a fix period of 5 years from date of gas pipeline 
connectivity as per Para 3 (viii) and 5 (ii) of NPS-III policy dated 8 th March, 2007.   Vide 
notification dated 14th May, 2019, the duration of New Urea Policy-2015 has been extended 
from 1 st April,2019 till further orders except the provisions as amended already  vide 
notification dated 28 th March, 2018.   Energy norms for these 3 units were also prescribed 
and a target energy norm of 6.5 Gcal/MT was given from 2018-19 which has been 
extended vide notification dated 28.03.2018.  It is pertinent to mention h ere that MFL has 
started production of Urea by using gas as a feedstock from 29thJuly, 2019.   
 
 
 

34 
 
Progressive Reduction of Subsidy 
 
3.23 The Department of Fertilizers, when asked inter-alia about the step s taken for the 
progressive reduction of subsidy, furnished reply as under :-  
“ Under NUP-2015, the existing gas based urea units have been classified into three 
groups based on their preset energy norms. The energy norms of the 25 gas based 
urea units were revised for a period of three years i.e. 2015-16 (w.e.f . 1 st June, 
2015) to 2017-18. Each group was given target energy norms w.e.f. 1st April, 2018. 
Vide notification dated 28 th March, 2018, the target energy consumption norms for 
11 urea manufacturing units have come into force w.e.f. 1 st April, 2018 while for 
remaining 14 urea manufacturing units, the existing norms under NUP-2015 have 
been extended for further period of 2 years i.e. 31 st March, 2020 with certain 
penalties. It has been also decided that the target energy norms of NUP- 2015 may 
be continued upto 31st March, 2025. 
          NUP-2015 has led to additional production of 20 LMT from the existing plan ts in 
2015-16 as compared to 2014-15. The total production of urea during the year 2015-
16 was 244.75 LMT, i.e. the highest ever urea production in the coun try. The total 
production of urea during 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 was 2 42.01 LMT, 240.23 
LMT and 240 LMT respectively, which are significantly higher than 2014-15.” 
 
3.24 During oral evidence, the Committee asked how did the government of India sa ved 
Rs. 10,000 crore in subsidy disbursement last year and also asked what is the  plan for 
further saving of subsidy. In this regard, the Secretary Department of Fertilizers informed as 
under:- 
 
 “Our objective of a subsidy regime is ensuring food security and ensuring a 
reasonable livelihood to the farmers. If reducing subsidy and reducing the 
quantum of subsidy for the Finance Ministry is a prime objective, Sir, what you  
are saying, can be worked out. So far, this thinking has not been accepted t hat 
we should limit the subsidy at the cost of the two other objectives. So, these are 
conflicting objectives. Yes, fiscal prudency is one lesser objective than the two 
other objectives.    Sir, as I presented by tweaking the energy norms and bringing 
little efficiency, the quantum of subsidy that goes to the fertilizer companies have 
been contained.”  
 
 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
SUBSIDY FOR PHOSPHATIC & POTASSIC FERTILIZERS AND FOR CITY COMPOST 
 
The country is fully dependent on imports in Potassic sector and to the  extent of 
90% in Phosphatic sector in the form of either finished products or its raw m aterial.  
Subsidy being fixed, and fluctuation in international prices has effect on the domestic prices 
of P&K fertilizers. 
Concession scheme for P&K fertilizers and its impact 
4.2 The Government introduced a new methodology for working out subsidy on complex 
fertilizers based on the recommendation of Tariff Commission w.e.f. 1.4.2002  upto 
31.3.2010 on monthly basis. The MRP of P&K fertilizers provided to farme rs were much 
lower than its delivered cost. This led to increase in consumption of fertilizers du ring the 
last three decades and consequently increase in food grain production within t he country. 
However, it was observed few years before 2010 that:  
 (i) The marginal response of agricultural productivity to additional fertilizer usage  in 
the country had fallen sharply, leading to near stagnation in agricultural prod uctivity 
and consequently agricultural production.  
  (ii) The disproportionate NPK application, rising multi-nutrient deficiency a nd lack of 
application of organic manures leading to reduction in carbon content of th e soil, 
was attributed to the stagnating agricultural productivity.  
  (iii) The innovation in fertilizer sector also suffered as very few new produ cts were 
introduced by fertilizer companies, since they got outpriced by subsidized fertilizers. 
  (iv) The subsidy outgo of Government had increased exponentially b y 500%   
during  the five years (2005-06 to 2009-10) under the Concession Scheme. 
 
 NBS Policy for P&K fertilizers w.e.f. 01-04-2010  
4.3 It was, thus, observed that over the years  the  product based subsidy regime 
(erstwhile concession scheme) had been proving to be a losing proposition for all the stake 
holders viz farmers, industry and the Government. Accordingly, considering all the  issues 
relating to agriculture productivity, balanced fertilization and growth of indigenous f ertilizer 
industry, competiveness amongst the fertilizer companies and to overcome the de ficiency 
of concession scheme, the Government introduced Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy for 
P&K fertilizers w.e.f 01-04-2010. 
 

36 
 
4.4 Broad  structure  of Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS)    -  Under the NBS Policy, the 
Government announces a fixed rate of subsidy (in Rs. per Kg basis), on e ach nutrient of 
subsidized P&K fertilizers, namely Nitrogen (N), Phosphate (P), Potash (K) and Sulphur 
(S), on annual basis taking into account all relevant factors including international prices, 
exchange rate, inventory level and prevailing Maximum Retail Prices of P&K fertilizers. The 
per Kg subsidy rates on the nutrients N, P, K, S is converted into per To nne subsidy on the 
various subsidized P&K fertilizers covered under NBS Policy. 
 
4.5 Fertilizers Covered under NBS  - At present 21 grades of P&K fertilizers namely 
DAP, MAP, TSP, MOP, Ammonium Sulphate (produced by M/s FACT), SSP and 15  
grades of NPKS complex fertilizers are covered under the NBS Policy with follo wing NPKS 
ratios: 
S. No Name of fertilizers NPKS ratio/Nutrient content 
1 DAP   18-46-0-0 
2 MOP   0-0-60-0 
3 SSP 0-16-0-11 
4 NPS  20–20–0-13 
5 NPK  10–26–26-0 
6 NP  20-20-0-0 
7 NPK  15–15–15 
8 NP  24-24-0-0 
9 AS  20.5-0-0-23 
10 NP  28–28–0-0 
11 NPK  17–17–17 
12 NPK  19–19–19 
13 NPK  16-16-16-0 
14 NPS  16-20-0-13 
15 NPK  14–35–14 
16 NPS  24-24-0-8 
17 MAP   11-52-0-0 
18 TSP   0-46-0-0 
19 NPK  12–32–16 
20 NPK  14–28–14 
21 NPKS  15-15-15-09 
 
4.6 Per Kg Nutrient Subsidy Rate  - An Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) has been 
constituted with Secretary (Fertilizers) as Chairperson and Joint Secretary level 
representatives of Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC), Department of 
Expenditure (DOE), Planning Commission and Department of Agricultural Research a nd 
Education (DARE). This Committee recommends per nutrient subsidy for ‘N’, ‘P’, ‘K’ and 

37 
 
‘S’ before the start of the financial year for decision by the Government (Dep artment of 
Fertilizers). The IMC recommends a per tonne additional subsidy on fortif ied subsidized 
fertilizers carrying secondary (other than ‘S’) and micro- nutrients. The Committee also 
recommends inclusion of new fertilizers under the subsidy regime based on a pplication of 
manufacturers/ importers and its need appraisal by the Indian Council for Ag ricultural 
Research (ICAR), for decision by the Government. 
 
4.7 Additional Subsidy for Micro-Nutrients Under NBS  - Under the policy, any 
variant of the subsidized P&K fertilizers with secondary and micronutrients (e xcept 
Sulphur ‘S’), as provided for under FCO, is also eligible for subsidy. There is separate 
additional subsidy for micronutrients namely Boron and Zinc. The seconda ry and micro-
nutrients (except ‘S’) in such fertilizers attracts a separate per tonne subsidy to encourage 
their application along with primary nutrients.  
 
4.8 On being asked, the details of Per Kilo Gram NBS rates for the Nutrient s of N, P, K 
and S for the years 2016-17 to 2018-19, as furnished by the Depar tment of Fertilizers, are 
as under :- 
a) Per Kg NBS rates (in Rs.) for nutrients N, P, K, S for the 2016-17 to 2018-19
     
Nutrients 2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
‘N’ (Nitrogen) 15.854 18.989 18.901 
‘P’ (Phosphate) 13.241 11.997 15.216 
‘K’ (Potash) 15.470 12.395 11.124 
‘S’ (Sulphur) 2.044 2.240 2.722 
b) Per MT subsidy on different P&K fertilizers during 2010-11 to 2018-19 : 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Fertilizer Grades(FG)  
(N P K S nutrient) 
2016-17 2017-18 2018-19 
1. DAP     (18-46-0-0) 8945 8937 10402 
2. MAP     (11-52-0-0)  8629 8327 9991 
3. TSP      (0-46-0-0)  6091 5519 6999 
4. MOP     (0-0-60-0) 9282 7437 6674 
5. SSP      (0-16-0-11) 2343 2166 2734 
6. 16-20-0-13 5451 5729 6421 
7. 20-20-0-13 6085 6488 7177 
8. 20-20-0-0 5819 6197 6823 
9. 28-28-0-0 8147 8676 9553 
10. 10-26-26-0 9050 8241 8739 
11. 12-32-16-0 8615 8101 8917 

38 
 
12. 14-28-14-0 8093 7753 8464 
13. 14-35-14-0 9020 8593 9529 
14. 15-15-15-0 6685 6507 6786 
15. 17-17-17-0 7576 7375 7691 
16. 19-19-19-0 8467 8242 8596 
17. Ammonium Sulphate  (20.6-0-0-23)  3736 4408 4501 
18. 16-16-16-0(w.e.f. 1.7.2010) 7130 6941 7239 
19. 15-15-15-9   (w.e.f. 1.10.2010) 6869 6709 7031 
20. 24-24-0-0(from 1.10.10 to29.5.12 
and w.e.f. 22.6.2012) 
6983 7437 8188 
21. 24-24-0-8 (wef 12.11.13 to 
14.2.15) without subsidy on S 
6983 7437 8188 
 
4.9   The rates of additional subsidy for micronutrients namely Boron an d Zinc from the 
years, 2010-11 to 2017-18 are as under: 
 
 Sl 
No. 
Nutrients for fortification as 
per FCO 
Additional subsidy per MT of fortified 
fertilizers (in Rs. PMT) 
1 Boron ‘B’ 300 
2 Zinc ‘C’ 500 
 
 
4.10  Import of subsidized P&K fertilizers  - Import of all the subsidized P&K fertilizers 
including complex fertilizers has been placed under Open General License (OGL). NBS is 
available for imported complex fertilizers also except Ammonium Sulphat e. However, in 
case of Ammonium Sulphate (AS) the NBS is applicable only to domestic pro duction by 
M/s FACT. 
4.11 Freight Subsidy for NBS Covered P&K Fertilizers  In addition to NBS, subsidy for 
primary freight movement of the decontrolled fertilizers(except SSP) by rail a nd road and 
coastal shipping / inland shipping is being provided to enable wider availab ility of 
fertilizers even in the remotest places in the country. 
 
 
4.12 MRP of NBS Covered P&K Fertilizers  - Under the Policy, MRP of P&K fertilizers 
has been left open and fertilizer manufacturers/marketers are allowed to fix the MRP at 
reasonable rates. In effect, the domestic prices are determined by demand supply 
mechanism. Companies are allowed to fix the MRP on their own.  The intention behind 
introduction of NBS was to increase competition among the fertilizer companies to facilitate 
availability of diversified products in the market at reasonable prices.  

39 
 
4.13 When asked about the extent to which this system of payment of subsidy is 
beneficial to the farmers , the Department of Fertilizers stated that “ As a result of payment 
of subsidy, farmers are paying less than MRP for P&K fertilizers compared to what it  would 
have been without subsidy. “  
4.14 Though the market price of subsidized fertilizers, except Urea, is determ ined based 
on demand-supply dynamics, the fertilizer companies are required to print Retail Price (RP) 
along with applicable subsidy on the fertilizer bags clearly. Any sale above the printed MRP 
is punishable under the EC Act. The Department of Fertilizers was asked to state whether 
the MRP in respect of 21 P&K fertilizers is same all over the country and whether the 
Government would take necessary steps for  ensuring uniform MRP for subsidize d P&K 
fertilizers(21) in case different MRPs in different part of the country.  In reply, Department  
of Fertilizers submitted as under :- 
 
“ Under the NBS policy, MRP is fixed by fertilizer companies as per market dynamics 
at reasonable level which is monitored by the Government. Since, P&K fertilizers 
are decontrolled and the MRP is fixed by fertilizer companies as per cost of 
production/import at reasonable level, it is not viable for the companies to f ix similar 
MRP for similar product all over the country.”  
 
4.15  The Department of Fertilizers was asked as to explain how the benef its of NBS 
reaches farmers under the scheme as Subsidy is provided to fertilize r companies and they 
are also permitted to fix MRP as per market dynamics.   In this regard, the Departme nt of 
Fertilizers stated as under :- 
“ Under the NBS policy, a fixed amount of subsidy, decided on annual basis, is 
provided on subsidised P&K fertilizers depending on their nutrient conten t. MRP is 
fixed by fertilizer companies excluding subsidy amount as per market dynamics at 
reasonable level which is monitored by the Government. Accordingly, any farm er 
who is buying these fertilizers is getting benefits of subsidy.” 
4.16 On being asked to explain as to how the Department has ensure d that the NBS 
subsidy is transferred to farmers in a free market economy, where the M RP for 21 P&K 
fertilizers are fixed by producer companies, and to state whether any study  has been 
conducted in this regard, the Department of Fertilizers furnished written reply as under :- 
 
“The Government has implemented Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy w.e.f. 1.4 .2010 
for Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) Fertilizers.  Under the policy, a fixed amoun t of 
subsidy, decided on annual basis, is provided on subsidised P&K fertilizers 
depending on their nutrient content. Under this policy, MRP is fixed by fertilizer 
companies as per market dynamics at reasonable level which is monitored by th e 
Government. As the MRP fixed by the P&K fertilizer companies are exclusive o f 
subsidy, any farmer who is buying these fertilizers is getting benefits of su bsidy. 

40 
 
Study on the mechanism for fixing MRP by the companies has not be en conducted 
by the Department.  
 
 However, guidelines for ensuring reasonable MRP have been issued by the 
Department with the approval of competent authority  w.e.f. 01.04.2012.” 
 
4.17  
Calculation and Payment of Subsidy   - The distribution and movement of 
fertilizers along with import of finished fertilizers, fertilizer inputs and production by 
indigenous units is monitored through the online web based “Fertilizer Monitoring System 
(FMS)”.  The payment of subsidy to the manufacturers/importers of P&K fertiliz ers is 
released as per the procedure notified by the Department vide OM dated 17.3.2017.   
4.18 When the Committee asked about the mechanism followed for calculation of subsi dy 
amount for different nutrients, the Department in a written reply stated as under :- 
 “The basic principle adopted in fixation of subsidy rates for different nutrients , is the 
identification of benchmark international prices of major consuming fertilizers viz.  
Urea, DAP and MOP. Based on these benchmark prices, the delivered price s of 
these fertilizers are determined taking into account the prevailing exchange rate. The 
IMC also takes into account other relevant factors like requirement of nutrien ts in the 
country, balanced use of fertilizers, subsidy burden, MRP of fertilizers etc.” 
 
4.19 To a query of the Committee, whether the Department had ever undertaken any 
external or forensic audit of the calculations provided by fertilizers companies to asse ss the 
reasonableness of the subsidy claimed, the Department in a written reply stated that “it has 
not undertaken any external audit or forensic audit of the calculations provide d by fertilizer 
companies. However, FICC as technical expert examines the reasonableness of MRPs 
fixed by the P&K fertilizer companies. “  
4.20  To a query as to whether the Government considered any alte rnative models to 
calculate the admissible subsidy, the Department of Fertilizers replied in negative. 
Monitoring MRP of P&K fertilizers under NBS regime 
4.21 As per the Annual Report, 2018-19 of the Department of Fertilizer s, the prices  of 
P&K fertilizers had gone up substantially and doubts had been raised about 
reasonableness of the pries fixed by the companies.  The prices had gon e up substantially 
on the account of increase in prices of raw materials/finished fertilizers in internatio nal 
market, depreciation of Indian rupee w.r.t US Dollar and also due perhaps to larger prof it 
margins by the companies.  This lead to lot of hue and cry from the various quarters and 
has also lead to imbalance in use of fertilizers.  Accordingly, in order to check the prices 

41 
 
fixed by P&K companies, the government vide notification dated 8.7 .2011 directed the 
fertilizers companies to fix the prices of P&K fertilizes at reasonable leve l under the NBS 
regime. In order to ensure reasonableness of prices fixed by the NBS Policy a nd rates for 
the year 2013-14, the following clauses have been incorporated in NBS Po licy applicable 
with effect from 1.4.2012:-  
 (i) It shall be mandatory for all the fertilizer companies to submit, along with their 
claims of subsidy, certified cost data in the prescribed format and as per the 
requirement for the purpose of monitoring of MRPs of P & K fertilize r  fixed by the 
fertilizer companies.  
(ii) In cases, where after scrutiny, unreasonableness of MRP is established or  
where ther is ;no correlation between the cost of production or acquisition a nd the 
MRP printed on the bags, the subsidy may be restricted or denied even i f the 
product is otherwise eligible for subsidy under NBS.  In proved case of abuse of 
subsidy mechanism, DOF, on the recommendation of IMC may exclude any 
grade/grades of fertilizers of a particular company or the fertilizers company itself 
from the NBS scheme.  
(iii) The reasonableness of MRP will be determined with reference to the  MRP 
printed on the bags.  
4.22 In regard to a query on action taken on companies which fixe s MRP in a 
unreasonable manner, the Department of Fertilizers further stated that it  is finalizing the 
guidelines for recovery of profit earned over and above 12% of companies. Action would be 
taken after finalization of these guidelines against the defaulter e rring companies.  The 
Committee were further informed that these guidelines would be finalized lat est by the end 
of the current financial year.” 
Subsidy Scheme For Promotion of City Compost 
 
4.23 Policy on promotion of City Compost was approved by the Cabinet on 2 0.01.2016 
which has been notified by the Department of Fertilizers on 10.2.2016.    As per the policy 
on promotion of city compost, Market Development Assistance (MDA) in the form of  fixed 
amount of Rs. 1500 per tonne City Compost is provided on the sale of city c ompost to 
Fertilizer Marketing Companies as well as to City Compost manufacturers. Initially, existing 
Fertilizer Marketing Companies were permitted for marketing and promotion of City 
Compost. Operational guidelines for release of MDA to marketing companies  have be en 
issued on 3.6.2016 & 10.10.2016. Subsequently, the compost manufactu rers have been 

42 
 
allowed for bulk sale of city compost directly to farmers on 28.09.2 016.  Guidelines for 
direct sale of city compost by compost manufacturers were issued on 9 th January, 2017. 
Vide letters dated 7 th September, 2017, the Fertilizers Marketing Companies are allowed 
for Bulk Sale of  City Compost and compost Manufacturing Companies for  Bagged Sale of 
City Compost.  The MDA is disbursed to the Marketing Companies on sale of City Compost 
through FMS and Mobile Fertilizer Management System (mFMS) on similar m ethod of 
release of subsidy on chemical fertilizers. Presently, under the Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT) which has been rolled out Pan India on 1st March, 2018, the  MDA on City Compost 
is being provided to fertilizer companies marketing city compost.  
  
 
4.24 A Committee of Joint Secretaries of Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Urban  
Development and Department of Agriculture has been set up for coordination .  During 
2019-20, a provision of Rs. 32.00 crore has been made for payment of MDA on sale of City 
Compost.  The year-wise sales by fertilizer marketing companies and comp ost 
manufacturers and MDA released during the years from 2016-17 to 2019-20 is as follows :-                  
Year  Sale by 
marketing   
 companies (in 
MT)  
     Bulk Sale   by  
 manufacturing 
companies (in 
MT) 
Total sale 
(in MT) 
% increase in 
total sale from 
previous yr 
Budget 
allocation 
(Rs. in 
crore) 
MDA  
Releas
ed  
(In Cr.) 
2016-17 96584.00 - 96584.00 - 15 0.55 
2017-18 123569.87 75492.04 199061.91 106.1 15 7.26 
2018-19 195551.48 111078.99 306630.47 54.03 10 10.00 
2019-20 
(Apr to 
Oct 2019 
118585.48 70454.75 189040.23 - 32 21.66 
   
4.25  The Committee observed that in 2018- 19 total budget allocation for the Market 
Development Assistance (MDA) under the scheme for promotion of city compost was 
Rs.10 crore and the total sale of city compost was 3 Lac tonn es.    In this context, the 
Department of Fertilizers was asked whether any study was conducted to a nalyze the 
efficacy of using the compost vis-a-vis the chemical fertilizers in terms of crop yields and to 
provide details of the same.  Further, the Department of Fertilizers was also aske d to give 
an assessment whether the productivity and usage of compost can be signif icantly 
enhanced and whether city compost  could be provided the same level of  subsidy as urea.   
In this regard, the written reply of the Department is appended below :-   
 

43 
 
 “ With the approval of the Cabinet the Department of Fertilizers has noti fied the 
policy on promotion of City Compost on 10.02.2016 wherein Market Developm ent 
Assistance (MDA) of Rs. 1500/- M.T. in the form of subsidy has been provided for 
scaling up production and consumption of city compost.  As the funds o f Rs, 15.00 
crore   allocated during the year  2016-17 and 2017-18 for p ayment of Market 
Development Assistance (MDA) on the sale of city compost was not fully utilized,  
the Budget for the 2018-19  was kept at  Rs. 10.00 crore.  However, kee ping in view 
the pace of expenditure during 2018-19, it has been increased to Rs. 32.00 crore 
during 2019-20. As the scheme is relatively new and has been rolled out recently the 
Department of Fertilizers has not yet conducted any study to analyze the efficacy of 
using the compost.  As on date there has been no assessment done by the 
Department regarding enhancement of productivity and usage of compost, if 
compost provide the same level of subsidy as Urea.  
 
  

44 
 
CHAPTER – V 
EXPENDITURE ON FERTILIZER SUBSIDY & PAYMENT OF SUBSIDY  
  
5.1 Under the extant fertilizer DBT system, 100% subsidy o n various fertilizer grades is 
released to the fertilizer companies on the basis of actual  sales made by the retailers to the 
beneficiaries.  The Department of Fertilizers is entrusted with the responsibility of disbursal of 
subsidy on Urea, Phosphatic & Potassic (P&K) complex fertilizers and C ity Compost.   
Consumption of subsidized fertilizers in the country and sub sidy expenditure of Government 
has shown an increasing trend over the last 15 years.  
 
Pattern of Consumption of Major Fertilizers 
5.2   The data furnished by the Department of Fertilizers regarding consumption of major 
fertilizers  from 2000-01 to 2018-19 are as under :- 
( In ‘000 tonnes) 
Year UREA DAP MOP COMPLEX SSP TOTAL 
2000-01 19160.00 5884.00 1790.00 4780.00 2860.00 34474.00 
2001-02 19917.00 6181.00 1993.00 4964.00 2605.00 35660.00 
2002-03 18493.00 5473.00 1912.00 4810.00 2499.00 33187.00 
2003-04 19579.00 5624.00 1841.00 4757.00 2544.00 34345.00 
2004-05 20655.19 6255.78 2406.20 5507.96 2549.35 37384.48 
2005-06 22297.51 6763.92 2731.26 6694.02 2755.95 41242.66 
2006-07 24337.66 7378.24 2585.61 6799.39 2910.48 44011.38 
2007-08 25963.15 7496.61 2880.69 6570.72 2287.76 45198.93 
2008-09 26649.21 9231.21 4077.33 6804.83 2616.61 43379.19 
2009-10 26673.44 10491.83 4634.06 8024.83 2651.10 52475.26 
2010-11 28112.53 10869.90 3931.62 9764.13 3825.20 56503.38 
2011-12 29565.32 10191.19 3028.93 10394.70 4746.01 57926.15 
2012-13 30002.20 9154.08 2211.02 7527.18 4030.36 52924.84 
2013-14 30600.48 7357.42 2280.41 7263.52 3879.32 51381.15 
2014-15 30609.97 7625.56 2853.35 8277.51 3989.30 53355.69 
2015-16 30634.77 9107.22 2466.93 8821.05 4252.74 55282.71 
2016-17 29613.58 8963.51 2863.20 8414.31 3756.81 53611.41 
2017-18 29894.44 9294.11 3158.18 8596.43 3439.38 54382.54 
2018-19 31398.18 9208.30 2952.49 9088.23 3561.44 56208.64 
Source: State Governments                 

45 
 
 
5.3 To a query seeking details regarding pattern of consumption of fertilizers b y farmers 
vis-à-vis cost of fertilizers , Department of Fertilizers stated inter-alia that “No study has 
been conducted regarding the consumption of fertilizers by the fa rmers vis-à-vis cost of 
fertilizers.    
 
5.4 To a post evidence query seeking whether any study been undertaken  regarding the 
conformity of the fertilizer  subsidy scheme with WTO norms and details o f such study, the 
Department of Fertilizers furnished written reply that “No such study has been undertaken 
of the fertilizer subsidy scheme by Department.” 
  
Expenditure on Fertilizer Subsidy Schemes 
5.5 The estimated budgetary allocation for Urea Subsidy (MH-2852 ) and Nutrient Based 
Subsidy (MH-2401) during 2019-20 is Rs.83476.00 crore out of the BE of Rs.83515.00/- 
crore allocated for the Department of Fertilizer for the year.   Detailed break up of subsidy 
expenditure proposed by the Department of Fertilizers during 2019-20 is as under :-  
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Head of Account  Revised  2019-20 
 
1. Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy  (MH 2401) 26367.00 
(a). Payment for Indigenous P&K Fertilizers 15906.00 
(b). Payment for Imported P&K Fertilizers 10429.00 
(c). Payment for City Compost 32.00 
3. Urea Subsidy  (MH 2852) 57109.00 
(a). Payment for Indigenous Urea 43050.00 
(b). Payment for Urea Freight Subsidy 0.00 
(c). Payment for Import of Urea --.--  
Gross 14049.00 
Recovery (-) 3480.00 
Net 10569.00 
(d). Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) in fertilizers Subsidy Office Expenses 1.00  
 Professional Expenses 9.00 
Waiver of Loan and interest in r/o Fertilizer PSUs write off/loses 0.00 
Total Subsidy (Gross) 83476.00 
Total Subsidy (Net) 79996.00 
 
5.6 Details of expenditure incurred on Urea subsidy and Nutrient Based Subsidy during 
2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19, as furnished by Department of Fertilizers are as under :- 

46 
 
                                                                                                                         (Rs. in Crore) 
Year Scheme Expenditure Physical Outcomes (in LMT)*  
*  The financial 
outlays and the 
physical outcomes 
include the 
indigenous 
production as well 
as import. 
2016-17 Urea Subsidy  51256.59 296.82 
NBS Subsidy 18843.42 259.78 
2017-18 Urea Subsidy  46980.00 299.98 
NBS Subsidy 22244.26 269.15 
2018-19 Urea Subsidy  49351.83 314.81 
NBS Subsidy 24090.35 290.44 
 
  
5.7 According to Department of Fertilizers actual consumption of fertilizers and subsidy 
outgo thereto during the last three years are as given below :-  
Year Total Consumption of 
subsidized Fertilizers(in LMT) 
   Subsidy incurred 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Average per MT rate of 
subsidy (Rs in thousand) 
2016-17 499.09 70100.01 14045.56 
2017-18 515.84 69224.26 13419.72 
2018-19 537.89 73442.18 13653.75 
2019-20(up to 
August,2019) 
204.41 47960.36  
 
Note: Above figures are approximate only as the subsidy incurred includes the carry over liability cleared 
during the year. In the year 2019-20 mostly, the expenditure on subsidy outgo i nvolves payment of carry over 
liabilities, hence, the average subsidy would not depict correct approximation.  Freight subsidy on primary 
movement of all P&K fertilizers (except SSP) under NBS and Urea is being  provided. Freight subsidy is not 
provided on Single Super Phosphate (SSP). Currently, the freight subsidy in respect of urea is being paid as 
per the provisions of notification dated 17th July, 2008. 
5.8 When asked to furnish fertilizer-wise details of annual quantum of consumption of 
subsidized fertilizers and  subsidy expenditure since 2000-01 onwards , Department of 
Fertilizers furnished the same from financial year 2001-02 onwards, which are as under  :-   
(Amt. in Cr.) 
Year Imported 
P&K 
Indigenous 
P&K 
City 
Compost 
Imported 
Urea 
Indigenous 
Urea 
Total 
Subsidy 
2001-02 744.00 3759.52  ---- 147.50 8257.00 12908.02 
2002-03 736.58 2487.94   1.16 8078.35 11304.03 
2003-04 720.00 2606.00   0.82 8521.00 11847.82 
2004-05 1165.18 3977.00   742.37 10243.15 16127.7 
2005-06 2097.00 4499.20   2140.88 10460.17 19197.25 
2006-07 3649.95 6648.16   5071.06 12650.37 28019.54 
2007-08 6600.00 10333.80   9934.99 16450.37 43319.16 
2008-09 32597.69 32957.10   12971.18 20914.76 99440.73 
2009-10 23452.06 16000.00  - 6999.98 17580.25 64032.29 
2010-11 20850.00 20650.00   9255.95 15080.73 65836.68 
2011-12 16571.92 20237.49   17475.00 20285.42 74569.83 
2012-13 14576.10 16000.00   20016.00 20000.00 70592.1 
2013-14 13926.86 15500.00   15353.30 26500.00 71280.16 
2014-15 8667.30 12000.00   16200.00 38200.01 75067.31 

47 
 
2015-16 9968.56 11969.00   16400.00 38200.00 76537.56 
2016-17 6999.99 11842.88 0.55 11256.59 40000.00 70100.01 
2017-18 7900.00 14337.00 7.26 9980.00 36973.70 69197.96 
2018-19 9260.00 14820.35 10.00 17155.36 32189.50 73435.21 
 
 
5.9 The Department of Fertilizers, on being was asked details regarding study , if any, 
conducted on consumption of pattern vis-à-vis cost of fertilizers .  In this regard, the 
Department of Fertilizers submitted inter-alia  that “No study has been conducted regarding 
the consumption of fertilizers by the farmers vis-à-vis cost of fertilizers.”   
 
SYSTEM OF PAYMENT OF SUBSIDY 
5.10   Under DBT payment system, subsidy in r/o Indigenous and Imported P& K 
fertilizers, Indigenous Urea and City Compost is distributed to fertilizers companies o n the 
basis of PoS sales at retail points.  Freight subsidy is being paid as per the pa yment 
system prevailing prior to implementation of DBT.  Freight is reimbursed after verifica tion of 
Railway Receipts (RRs) lead distances, applicable slab rates as per the notified NBS 
policy.     DBT payment system does not cover Imported Urea as the cost of imported urea 
is completely borne by Government of India.  Subsequently, cost of im ported urea is 
recovered at the statutory rate from Fertilizers Marketing Entities / handling agencies a fter 
adjusting Port dues, customs duty etc.  Therefore, no subsidy is payable to fertilize r 
companies after sale of Imported Urea through PoS devices.  However, q uantity of 
Imported Urea sold by retailers through PoS devices and beneficiary details are captured in 
iFMS.” 
5.11 According to Department of Fertilizers, submission, procession and disbursement of 
subsidy claim by companies is online and done through IT based system namely Integrated 
Fertilizer Management System (iFMS) developed by NIC . Fertilizers companies, after sale, 
submit their claims online on weekly basis through iFMS.  The claims are processed online 
by fertilizer subsidy division and after obtaining the approval of compet ent authority; 
sanctions are generated, digitally signed and submitted to Pay and Accounts Office through 
PFMS portal along with hard copies of the bill and sanctions.  Pay & Accounts Office 
releases the subsidy to the company ’s bank account online.   During the initial stage of 
implementation of DBT system, there were teething problems such as valida tion of e-
signature on subsidy claims, stock issues, integration of iFMS portal with PFMS portal of 
O/o CGA etc.  However, the payment module is now streamlined and the su bsidy payment 

48 
 
is being done regularly subject to availability of funds.  In iFMS, bills tracking mode is 
available at all levels for day to day monitoring of the DBT claims.  In addition, status of 
payments is reviewed regularly in the Senior Officers Meetings.” 
 
5.12 When asked to explain in detail the structure of the current subsidy scheme 
framework with reference to fertilizer/nutrient-wise details and methodology  fo r calculation 
and disbursement of subsidy, the Department of Fertilizers intimated about the fo llowing 
procedure notified by the Department vide O.M dated 17.3.2017 :- 
I. Month-wise Budget provision on the basis of supply plan/actual sales:  
The Programme Division will prepare an estimate of the monthly expenditu re for the 
disbursement of subsidy on the basis of information provided by the Moveme nt 
Division, Supply Plan for previous month and/or supply plan for correspond ing 
month of previous year or actual sales with a variation of +/- 10%.  The provision of 
budget will be under the following heads of account :- 
 
a. Indigenous P&K (including SSP) 
b. Indigenous Urea 
c. Imported P&K 
d. City compost 
 
II. Approval/ Sanction of the Competent Authority : Sanction of Competent 
Authority would be obtained by the Programme Division with the concurr ence of IFD 
for the estimated monthly expenditure.  This is an advance sanction (Master 
Sanction/ Mother sanction) for the release of subsidy payments during the month. 
 
III. DBT System:  The DBT system entails 100% payment of subsidy to the 
fertilizer manufacturing/ importing companies o the basis of actual sa les by the 
retailer to the beneficiary.  The farmers or buyers identity is verified through  Aadhar 
based biometric authentication/ Voter ID card/ Kisan Credit Card (KCC).  The 
buyers’ details will be captured in the Point of Sale (Pos) machines installed at the 
retailer’s end, having online connectivity with central server.  All the Fertilizer sale 
transactions will be tracked online (Company wise, Plant wise, Product wise etc.) in 
the Integrated Fertilizer Management System (iFMS). 
 
IV. After the sale of fertilizers, each company will submit an online claim thro ugh 
iFMS duly signed digitally by the authorized signatory on weekly basis fo r the 
quantity sold during the week.  The online claims will be submitted on 8 th, 16 th 24th 
and the last working day of the month.  In case of public holi day, the claim would be 
submitted on the next working day.  The weekly claims submitted by the c ompanies 
for a particular month should be verified and certified by the Chartered A ccountant/ 
Statutory Auditor on monthly basis.  Weekly claims submitted to DOF will be 
processed on the basis of certification by the Chartered Accountant/ Statutory 

49 
 
Auditor of the company for the claims of previous month.  The existing Pa yment 
procedure and the Payment procedure under DNT is given at Annexure -I of the OM 
dated 17.03.2017. 
 
V. After receipt of the online claims from the companies, the Programme 
Division processes the same on the next working day.  The approval of the Head of 
Programme Division will be obtained before issue of weekly digital financial san ction 
by DDO to PAO along with digital bill.  The PAO would process the payment throu gh 
Public Financial Management System (PFMS) and credits the subsidy amount to the 
company’s bank account.  The iFMS will generate Weekly/Monthly expenditure 
statements for the companies and concerned divisions of DOF.  The list of 
beneficiaries will be made available on the iFMS web portal for all the users.   The 
release of 100% subsidy to the companies shall be made within a period no t 
exceeding 7 working days from the date of submission of claims. 
 
VI. Mode of reconciliation:  On 20 th of every month (or the next working day if 
20th happens to be a holiday), the DDO of respective programme division will  
generate the statement of bills paid during the preceding month and also submit the 
budget estimate for next month and seek concurrence of IFD as per th e laid down 
procedure.  This needs to be completed by 25th of every month. 
 
VII. Installation of Point of Sale (Pos) Device:   The retailer is an important 
stakeholder in the DNT system.  He is the front line agency having interface with th e 
farmer/ beneficiary.  The 100% payment of subsidy is triggered by the re tailer sales 
at the field level.  Therefore, it is essential that the retailers are provided with  
necessary infrastructure and are well trained to handle the PoS machines, the 
responsibility for which rests with both fertilizer companies and retailers. 
 
VIII. As per notification No. F.D(FA)/CCEA/2011 dated 12 th October, 2012 an 
incentive of Rs.50/- was provided to the retailers for installation of IT related 
equipment for acknowledging the receipt of fertilizers in the m-FMS w.e.f. 1 st 
November, 2012.  The incentive shall also be applicable for installation of PoS 
machines at the retailers’ end. 
IX. State certification for Quantity:  States would continue to send certificate 
w.r.t. the quantity (proforma-B1), with the proviso that quantity will be certified o nline 
within 30 days on the iFMS.  Short and sub-standard quantity as reported by the 
State(s) will not be eligible for subsidy and the subsidy paid, if any, wi ll be recovered 
from the companies.  A 30 day window will be made available for th e states on the 
transparency portal to report any discrepancies in the quantity of fertilizers reported.  
In case state certification for quantity is not submitted within 30 days, it shall be 
deemed as no discrepancies on quantity reported by State agencies.  How ever, if 
any discrepancy w.r.t. quantity is reported by State(s) or any other Agency a t any 
later stage, recoveries will be made from the pending claims of the company. 

50 
 
 
X. State certification for Quality:  Currently Proforma-B2 is required for P& K 
Fertilizers, urea and SSP for quality certification from states.  The existing provision 
of availability of 180 day window continues for the states to report any  discrepancies 
in the quality of fertilizers reported.  If the quality certificate (Proforma B2) is n ot 
submitted within 180 days, it shall also be deemed as no discrepancies w.r.t. quality 
reported by State agencies.  However, if any discrepancy w.r.t. quality is repo rted by 
State(s) or any other Agency at any stage, recoveries will be made  from the pending 
claims of the company. 
 
5.13 On being asked to provide the details of arrears of subsidy as on 31 March for last 
10 financial years, the Department of Fertilizers furnished the under mentioned  details of 
arrears of subsidy bills as on 31st March for last 10 financial years:- 
(Rupees in crores) 
 
Year P&K Fertilizers City Compost Total 
2009-10 7111.48 0.00 7111.48 
2010-11 7172.00 0.00 7172.00 
2011-12 17660.42 0.00 17660.42 
2012-13 15317.88 0.00 15317.88 
2013-14 12106.34 0.00 12106.34 
2014-15 12295.09 0.00 12295.09 
2015-16 16518.36 0.00 16518.36 
2016-17 19153.82 3.58 19157.40 
2017-18 16021.93 12.18 16034.11 
2018-19 12232.02 29.61 12261.63 
 
5.14 When asked to furnish company-wise details of pending subsidy bills  (carry-over 
liabilities 2018-19), the Department of Fertilizers furnished the following details in respect of 
indigenous urea as on 31-03-2019, which are as under :-  
(Rs. In Crores) 
Sl 
No. 
Name of company Amt. of carry-
over liabilities 
Sl 
No. 
Name of company Amt. of carry-
over liabilities 
1 BVFCL-Namrup II  14.02 16 NFCL-II   135.07 
2 BVFCL-Namrup III  36.20 17 NFL (P)     466.64 
3 CFCL-I    823.22 18 NFL (V-I) 846.13 
4 CFCL-II  892.01 19 NFL (V-II)  934.80 
5 GNVFC  609.39 20 NFL(B)    466.19 
6 GSFC 373.81 21 NFL(N)     437.40 
7 IFFCO (KALOL)    567.40 22 KFL   738.64 
8 IFFCO (A-I)   788.38 23 RCF-THAL  2014.52 
9 IFFCO (A-II)        807.51 24 RCF-TROMBAY 633.34 
10 IFFCO (P-I)       585.90 25 SFC, KOTA 339.68 

51 
 
11 IFFCO (P-II)       865.80 26 TATA / YARA 499.21 
12 Grasim 941.21 27 ZACL  520.39 
13 KRIBHCO    1725.81 28 MFL 439.52 
14 MCFL   585.64 29 SPIC 754.89 
15 NFCL-I  254.02 30 KFCL  490.22 
TOTAL 19586.96 
Total Carried Over and Committed Liabilities  (DBT and Non-DBT & Freight)     19586.96 
 
5.15 Regarding company-wise details of pending subsidy bills (carry-over liabilities 2018-
19), pertaining to imported urea as on 31- 03-2019, the Department of Fertilizers furnished 
the following details :-   
Sl. No. Company Amount in Crores 
1. Arcadia 1.95 
2. CIL 17.83 
3. GESCO 0.27 
4. GNFC 0.56 
5. Grasim 2.08 
6. GSFC 5.77 
7. IFFCO 300.73 
8. INTEROCEAN 0.73 
9. IPL 85.92 
10. KRIBHCO 107.15 
11. MCFL 10.27 
12. MMTC 25.83 
13. NFCL 40.36 
14. NFL 24.56 
15. OMIFCO 1.34 
16. RCF 11.52 
17. SCI 1.06 
18. SPIC 2.02 
Total 639.95 
 
5.16 Regarding details of unpaid subsidy bills (carry-over liabilities 2018- 19) on 31- 03-
2019 as per claims submitted by P&K Fertilizer companies,  the Department of Fertilizers 
furnished details as per which an amount of Rs.4,976.82 crore remained as unpaid  against 
bills already submitted by 15 companies and certain SSP units and that as per subsidy 
claims-in-hand from 21 companies pertaining to imported P&K fertilizers, an amount  of 
Rs.5,019.42/ crore was pending unpaid as on 31-03-2019. [ Reply to LOP - 5(a)]     When asked 
about the company-wise details of pendency status of subsidy bills as  on 31- 03-2019, the 
Department of Fertilizers furnished the following details :-   
S. 
No. 
Sector Company Name Amount in 
Crores 
1. Public Fertilizer & Chemicals Travancore Ltd. 316.632 
2. Public Gujarat State Fertilizers & Chemicals Ltd. 601.97 
3. Public Madras Fertilizers Ltd. 35.32 

52 
 
4. Public National Fertilizer Ltd. 368.12 
5. Public Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd. 289.79 
6. Coop Indian Farmers Fertilizers Coperative Ltd. 1,943.36 
7. Coop Krshak Bharti Cooperative Ltd. 471.22 
8. Pvt. Chambal Fertilizers and Chemical Ltd. 621.75 
9. Pvt. Coromandel International Ltd. 893.31 
10. Pvt. Green Star Fertilizers Ltd. 159.70 
11 Pvt. Gujrat Narmada Valley Fertilizers’ Co. Ltd. 84.55 
12. Pvt. Hindalco Industries Ltd. 158.32 
13. Pvt. Indian Potash Ltd. 1,410.34 
14. Pvt. RC Agrochemicals Pvt. Ltd. 607.63 
15. Pvt. Khaitan Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd. (Import) 2.71 
16. Pvt. KPR Agrochem Ltd. 0.32 
17. Pvt. Manglore Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd. 130.82 
18. Pvt. MOSAIC INDIA PVT. LTD. 440.50 
19. Pvt. Nagarjuna Fertilizers & Chemicals Ltd. 2.39 
20. Pvt. Paradeep Phosphate Ltd. 418.12 
21. Pvt. Shri  Ram Fertilizers & Chemicals 0.22 
22. Pvt. Smachem Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 214.48 
23. Pvt. Transworld Fourtichem Pvt. Ltd. 11.32 
24. Pvt. Zuari Agro Chemicals Ltd. 383.22 
25. Pvt. SSP Units 430.10 
26. - Claims to be received 2,235.78 
Total 12,232.02 
 
5.17 As regards details of unpaid subsidy bills (carry-over liabilities 2018-19) on  31-03-
2019 against claims submitted companies in respect of City Compost, the Depart ment of 
Fertilizers furnished details as per which an amount of Rs.20.78 crore remained pending as 
unpaid  against bills from 22 companies. [Reply to LOP - 5(a) ].   When asked about the 
company-wise details of pendency status of subsidy bills as on 31- 03-2019, the 
Department of Fertilizers furnished the following details :-   
(Rupees in Crore) 
S. 
No. 
Sector Company Name Amount in 
Crores 
1. Public Fertilizer & Chemicals Travancore Ltd. 1.00 
2. Public Gujarat State Fertilizers & Chemicals Ltd. 0.54 
3. Public Madras Fertilizers Ltd. 1.58 
4 Public National Fertilizers Ltd. 1.62 
5. Public Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd. 3.06 
6. Coop. Krishak Bharti Co-operative Ltd. 3.48 

53 
 
7. Pvt. Chambal Fertilizers & Chemicals Ltd. 0.39 
8. Pvt. Grasim Industries Ltd. 0.53 
9. Pvt. Green Star Fertilizers Ltd. 0.25 
10. Pvt. Gujrat Narmada Valley Fertilizers Co. Ltd. 1.62 
11. Pvt. IRC Agrchemicals Pvt. Ltd. 0.66 
12. Pvt. Kanpur Fertilizers & Cement Ltd. 0.12 
13. Pvt. Manglore Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd. 0.81 
14. Pvt.  Nagarjuna Fertilizers & Chemicals Ltd. 0.42 
15. Pvt. Pradeep Phosphate Ltd. 0.00 
16. Pvt. Smartchem Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 0.02 
17. Pvt. Sriram Fertilizers and Chemicals 0.05 
18. Pvt. Bharuch Enviro Infrastructure Ltd. 0.64 
19. Pvt. Bhumi Green Energy 0.42 
20. Pvt. Coimbatore Integrated Waste Management Co. Pvt. Ltd. 0.34 
21. Pvt. IL&FS Environmental Infrastructure & Service Ltd. 1.73 
22. Pvt. MD Biocoals 0.01 
23. Pvt. MSGP Infra Tech Pvt Ltd. 0.36 
24. Pvt. Nashik Management Pvt Ltd. 0.21 
25. Pvt. Rohini Fire Safety Pvt. Ltd. 0.92 
26.  Claims to be received 8.83 
Total 29.61 
 
 
5.18 On being asked to furnish consolidated details regarding subsidy claims settled 
during 2018-19 and pending subsidy claims during as on 31- 03-2019, the Department of 
Fertilizers furnished the following data :-                  
   (Rs. In Crore) 
Scheme Subsidy claims 
pending on 
31.03.2018 
Subsidy claims 
received during 
1.4.2018 & 31.03.2019 
Subsidy claims settled 
during 1.4.2018 & 
31.03.2019 
Subsidy claims 
pending on 
31.03.2019 
No. of 
Bills 
Amount No. of 
Bills 
Amount No. of 
Bills 
Amount No. of 
Bills 
Amount 
Indigenous 
P&K 
1383 4864.64 9987 14932.53 7778 14820.35 3592 4,976.82 
City 43 1.10 1098 29.68 458 10 683 20.78 

54 
 
Compost 
Imported 
P&K 
351 4348.11 2237 9931.31 1682 9260.00 906 5,019.42 
Imported 
Urea 
294 354.69 1412 17440.62 1314 17155.36 392 639.95 
Indigenous 
Urea 
617 9794.00 5178 41982.46 2155 32189.50 3640 19586.96 
Grand 
TOTAL 
2688 19362.54 19912 81316.60 13387 73435.21 9223 30243.93 
 
 
5.19 The Department of Fertilizers was asked about the stipulated time-p eriod in which 
they are required to dispose of subsidy claims and whether any provision f or payment of 
interest in case of delay in settlement of subsidy claims within the prescribed period .   In 
this regard, the Department of Fertilizers furnished reply as under :-   
“ As per policy guidelines, DBT claims are to be settled within 7 working days from 
the date of submission of the claims. However, there is no time limit prescribed for 
settlement of non DBT claims.  There is no provision for payment of interest in case 
of delay in settlement of subsidy claims.”                                                                            
 
5.20 During oral evidence, when the Committee specifically asked about the reasons for 
pending of huge amount of subsidy bills and the manner in which the companies are going 
to sustain in such a situation, the Secretary of the Department replied as under:- 
 
 “Sir, our effort is to provide subsidy.  Under the new DBT system, we promised tha t 
within a week ’s time, we will clear the subsidy bills. But that is subject to the 
budgetary allocations.  As you have rightly pointed out, every ye ar, we get arrears of 
subsidy bills pending at the end of the financial year.  Those figures you quoted are 
correct.  On 31 st March, 2019, we had around Rs. 32,000 crores of outstanding 
subsidy bills to be paid to the fertilizer companies.  But this year, we made couple of 
efforts.   I will enumerate them.  We impressed upon the Department o f Finance to 
enhance our budgetary allocations.  This year, it has been significantly e nhanced.  
Earlier, it was Rs. 73,000 crores and now, it has been raised to Rs. 84,000 cro res. 
Within one year, there has been a significant increase.  Secondly, we are trying to 
get some other ways to compensating or getting the bills paid to the fe rtilizer 
companies.  We allow them to take loans against the receivables of subsidies from 
the banks and we bear some interest cost on that.  In that case, cash flow becomes 
little bit improved. Then, we are also trying to allow the public sector fertilizer 
companies to borrow from the National Small Savings Fund as a temporary measure 
in which case we will also bear the cost of interest.  This proposal has gone to  the 
Finance Department. Now, we take the credit that in the Department this year, w e 
have cleared all outstanding bills of those Rs. 32,000 crores by the month  of August 
or September.”  
 
 

55 
 
5.21 To a post evidence query seeking reasons for delay in settlement o f the arrears in 
cases where the amount has been assessed but funds are not available and the cases 
where amount of subsidy itself has not been assessed, the Department o f Fertilizers 
furnished written reply as under :- 
“ The reasons for delay in settlement of arrears pertaining to P&K Fertilizers and 
City Compost attributes to non receipts of Performa B1/B2 from the concerned State, 
non submission of requisite documents/data by fertilizers companies as per policy 
guidelines and paucity of funds.” 
5.22   The Department of Fertilizers was asked whether any legal case(s), pertain ing to 
method of calculati on of amounts admissible or amounts denied, is / are pending in High 
Courts and Supreme Court and it was also asked to furnish details thereof in case  of 
positive reply.  In response, the Department of Fertilizers stated that “No legal case  is 
pending which pertain to the method of calculating of amounts admissible or amounts 
denied in any of the High Courts and Supreme Court.” 
 
 
  

56 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
1. Fertilizer Subsidy Policy  
  The Committee note that chemical fertilizer is an essential component of 
modern agriculture.  Timely availability of fertilizer at affordable price to farmers is 
vital for the growth of agriculture sector in the country.  Fertilizer subsidy schemes 
have been an integral part of the Government policy to sustain agricultural 
productivity which in turn plays critical role in ensuring the food security in the 
country and in promoting rural livelihood and employment.  Presently the 
government is implementing separate subsidy schemes for urea, P&K fertilizers and 
city compost.  The Government is also providing freight subsidy for the movement 
of urea and P&K fertilizers. As far as urea is concerned, the government is fixing 
maximum Retail price and it has been left to fertilizer companies to fix the MRP of 
P&K fertilizers. The difference in concession rate/import price and net market 
realization is given as subsidy by the government to the fertilizer industry.  Farmers 
are the actual beneficiaries of the Subsidy schemes as they are getting the fertil izers 
at affordable prices.   Implementation of fertilizer subsidy schemes has resulted in 
tremendous growth of agricultural productivity which was necessary to meet the 
food security of the huge population of the country.  However, there are some 
negative effects of use of Chemical fertilizes viz over-use of fertilizers, imbalanced 
use of fertilizers and the resultant soil degradation etc.  In this regard, the Committee 
note that a committee of Secretaries headed by Cabinet Secretary has suggested to 
study the existing subsidy regime and to suggest any improvement or change in the 
policy.  NITI Ayog has also constituted a Committee to examine the feasibility of 
providing agriculture subsidy on area basis through Direct Benefit Transfer system. 

57 
 
Draft Report of this committee has been circulated to various stake holders.   Since 
any drastic change in the extant fertilizer subsidy policy would have huge bearing on 
the food security of the country, the committee would like to make the follo wing 
recommendations:- 
i. Fertilizers subsidy policy of the Government helped the country 
in ensuring food security to the people of the country and any 
drastic change in the policy must be effected only after wider 
consultations and in depth study and no hasty decision should be 
taken in this regard.  
ii. Both the Department of Fertilizers and NITI Ayog should consult 
all the stake holders viz concerned Departments of the Unio n 
government, state Governments, fertilizer industry, farmers ’ 
Associations, individual farmers, etc. before making any decision 
on change in the existing fertilizer subsidy policy.  
iii. Interests   of small and marginal farmers should be firmly kept in 
mind while bringing in any change in the extant policy.  
iv.  Education and awareness of farmers about the over use of any 
particular fertilizer and balanced use of fertilizers should be an 
integral part of fertilizer subsidy policy.  
v. Best practices in other countries should also be carefully studied 
while considering any change in the extant fertilizers subsidy 
policy. 
  

58 
 
2. Direct transfer of Subsidy to Farmers 
The current system of providing subsidy to the manufacturer, which is based 
on complex parameters of technologies and inputs used by the manufacturers, is 
economically and technologically lopsided.   This is apparent from the variation in 
per metric tonne subsidy being given to different plants which ranges from Rs 5744 
per metric tonne to Rs 25772 per metric tonne.  The Committee note that a number of 
plants have been operating with very old technology and systems and the subsidy 
based on the technology used has not encouraged these plants to shift to modern 
methods.  As a result, we continue to manufacture the fertilizers not necessaril y with 
highest efficiency and the Government continues to bear the cost of this inefficiency 
in terms of higher subsidy.  While the Committee strongly feel that there is a need to 
continue subsidizing the fertilizers as they constitute the most critical input for the 
farmers, the Committee  also believe that in an ideal situation, the farmers should get 
this subsidy directly in their accounts while the fertilizer manufacturers  should be 
set free to manufacture, supply and sell the fertilizers as per their own system.  The 
farmer should have a choice of buying from various brands of fertilizers while 
getting a subsidy amount credited to his bank account directly on producing the  
purchasing vouchers, which as the Committee understands, are now linked through 
the PoS machines. The Committee are of the view that such a system will push the 
manufacturers to produce and sell the fertilizers in the most cost effective manner 
and it will also push the inefficient manufacturers/importers out of the system.   
The Committee observe that the system of direct subsidy to the beneficiary 
has been incorporated into a number of schemes by the Government under various 
Ministries.  This has been possible due to an efficient expansion of the unique 

59 
 
identifier, AADHAR, as well as an aggressive expansion of the reach of banking 
system to the farthest corners of the country.  The Committee feel that time has 
come for the Government to set out a clear and firm roadmap to switch over from the 
current system of subsiding fertilizers to a system where the subsidy amounts get 
credited directly to the account of the farmers and the manufacturing/importing of 
fertilizers is set free to the market forces. 
3. Innovative Methods to contain expenditure on Subsidy 
 The Committee note that the quantum of consumption of fertilizer in the 
country and the corresponding expenditure on fertilizers subsidy has been 
increasing over the years.  During the last two financial years subsidy was given to 
the tune of Rs. 69198 crore and Rs. 73435 crore respectively and the estimated 
expenditure for 2019-20 is Rs. 83476 crore.  However, the Committee are satisfied t o 
note that the government was able to contain the quantum of expenditure on 
subsidy that goes to the fertilizer  industry by  rationalizing the energy norms for 
urea manufacturing companies under New Pricing schemes and  New Urea policy, 
2015 without any adverse impact on fertilizers prices in the country.  In this regard, 
the Committee are of the firm view that it is necessary to make available fertilizer to 
farmers at affordable prices so as to safeguard the food security of the country a nd 
it is the responsibility of the government to contain this expenditure by adopting 
innovative ways without increasing the price of fertilizers. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government should take all possible steps to reduce the 
expenditure on fertilizer subsidy by adopting best manufacturing practices,  strict 
energy norms, modernization of fertilizers manufacturing plants and a strong 
research and development base for  continuously upgrading the manufacturing 

60 
 
technology so as to reduce the manufacturing cost of fertilizers thereby reducing the 
fertilizer subsidy expenditure to the Government.  
4. Delay in Settlement of Subsidy Claims and Carry-forward Liabilities 
 The Committee are concerned to note the huge carry-over liabilities of the 
Department of Fertilizers on subsidy expenditure at the end of each financial year 
due to non payment of subsidy bills received from companies. As on 31.03.2018, 
2688 subsidy bills amounting to Rs. 19362.54 crore were pending for settlement and 
as on 31.03.2019, 9223 subsidy bills amounting to Rs. 30,243.93 crore were  pending 
for payment.  As per policy guidelines, DBT claims are to be settled within 7 working 
days from the date of submission of the claims and there is no time limit prescribed 
for settlement of non-DBT claims.  There is no provision for payment of interest in 
case of delay in settlement of subsidy claims.  According to Department of 
Fertilizers,  non-receipt of Proforma B1/B2 from the concerned State, non 
submission of requisite documents/data by fertilizers companies as per policy 
guidelines and paucity of funds are the reasons for delay in settlement of arrears of 
subsidy claims.  In Committee ’s view, the paucity of funds due to inadequate 
budgetary allocation is the major reason for delay in settlement of subsidy arrears.  
To avert the financial difficulties of fertilizer manufacturing companies, the 
Government allows the fertilizer companies to take loans against the receivables of 
subsidies from the banks and the government to bear the cost of interest.  There is 
also a proposal to allow public sector fertilizer companies to borrow from National 
Small Saving Fund as a temporary measure with the bearing of interest by the 
Government.   The Committee has taken note of the delays in settlement of subsidy 
claims.  The Committee have strongly taken note of the specific cases brought out 

61 
 
by some of the Members where the delay in payment of subsidy to the manufa cturer 
is unusually long.  The Committee have also taken note of the fact that very often the 
amount held up due to such delays is fairly high while the amount that is disputed in 
the individual claim may be a small proportion of the total amount of subsidy claim 
by manufacturer.  Since the present situation is not conducive for the smooth 
functioning of fertilizer subsidy system, the Committee recommend the following:- 
(i) The Committee strongly recommend that the Department should 
develop a system by which a certain proportion of the amount of 
claim is paid to the manufacturer automatically within a period of 
seven working days.  This amount could be  75% of the total claim 
of subsidy.  The remaining amount should also be paid off in a 
fixed period of time subject to the completion of all 
documentation and clarifications by the manufacturer/importer.  It 
is to be noted that the automatic payment should be really 
automatic and not subject to any scrutiny beyond a basic 
calculation checking.  Such a system will eliminate financial 
stress on the manufacturers which is often caused due to delay in 
payment of subsidy amounts.  This will also bring in transparency 
and accountability on the Department and improvement in the 
governance standards. 
(ii) The Department should impress upon the Ministry of Finance at 
the highest level to make adequate amount of funds in the form of 
budgetary allocation for subsidy schemes and it is the 
responsibility of the Department of Fertilizers to place before that 
Ministry of Finance the exact requirement of funds for meeting 

62 
 
the expenditure on fertilizers subsidies in a financial year.  
Sentiments expressed by this committee for the allocation of 
adequate amount of funds for subsidy schemes should be 
conveyed to the Ministry of Finance.  
(iii)  One time Additional supplementary budgetary allocation to 
completely dismantle the recurring carry over liabilities may be 
sought from the Ministry of Finance particularly to avoid 
unnecessary expenditure on interest on loans borrowed by 
fertilizer companies to manage the situation arising out of delays 
in payment of subsidies by the Government. 
(iv) Department should initiate strong steps to settle the subsidy 
claims under DBT within 7 working days as stipulated under the 
policy guidelines.  Definite time limit should also be fixed for non-
DBT subsidy claims and the progress made in this regard should 
be intimated to the Committee.  
(v) Before settlement of subsidy claims submitted by fertilizer 
companies, 30 days are presently given for B-1 proforma 
certification by the concerned state regarding short and 
substandard quantity of fertilizer  supplied by fertilizer companies 
and 180 days are allowed for state certification for quality under 
B-2 proforma.  This may be examined by the Department whether 
these many days are necessary for certification as this may be 
one of the reasons for carry-over liabilities and appropriate action 
may be taken for reducing the number of days required for these 
certifications by the concerned states.  

63 
 
5. New Investment Policy 
 The Government announced ‘New Investment Policy (NIP) – 2012 ’ on 02- 01-
2013 to facilitate fresh investment in urea.  Under NIP-2012, new plants are 
categorized as (i) Revamp projects, (ii) Expansion or Brownfield projects, (iii) Revival 
of closed urea units and (iv) Greenfield Projects.  Separate floor and ceiling price 
(variable cost) is allowed for calculating the concession rate of urea produced from 
the new urea units.   An amendment to NIP 2012 notified on 7 th October 2014 
provides inter-alia that subsidy is permissible only on domestic sale for 8 years from 
the date of production.   Setting up of seven urea projects were approved under NIP-
2012.  Out of these seven projects, two are  in private sector and rest of th e five are 
in public sector.   In this regard, the Committee are concerned to note that NIP, 2012  
could attract private investments for only two projects.  Out of these two projects, 
the Matix Fertilizers and Chemicals Limited at Panagarh which started commercial 
production in on 01.10.2017 is presently non-functional due to non-availability of 
Coal Bed Methane / Natural gas.  As such the success of NIP-2012 cannot be rated 
highly.  In this regard, the Committee would recommend that provisi ons made in NIP 
2012 should be revisited for suitable amendments so as to attract private 
investments in this crucial sector.  The committee also note that five projects for 
setting up of fertilizer manufacturing units under public sector are under progress 
which are Ramagundam, Talcher, Sindri and Gorakhpur units of FCIL and Barauni 
units of HFCL.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that concrete steps should 
be taken to complete these projects within the stipulated time period so as to meet 
the country ’s requirements of urea domestically without resorting to imports. The 
Committee are of the view that self sufficiency in urea products would help in 
reducing subsidy burden. 

64 
 
6. Frequent changes in Urea Subsidy Policies  
 
 The Committee note that  Urea Subsidy for indigenous urea is paid to urea 
manufacturing units through concession rates (Normative Cost of production under 
extant Urea Policies) comprising of two major components namely Fixed Cost and 
Variable Cost, which includes the cost of feedstock (Gas/Naphtha).  The concession 
rates vary from unit to unit depending upon their vintage, energy norms, water 
norms, electricity, bag rates etc.   The mode and methodology of computation and 
disbursement has been laid down in various policies (approved by CCEA) issued 
from time to time.  Retention Price Scheme was implemented till 31 st March, 2003.  It 
was replaced by the New Pricing Scheme-I (NPS-I) implemented from 01- 04-2003 to 
31-03-2004,  New Pricing Scheme-II (NPS-II), was implemented from 01- 04-2004 to 
30-09-2006,  Subsequently, New Pricing Scheme-III (NPS-III) which was made 
effective from 01-10-2006 to 31- 03-2010 was notified on 08 th March 2007.    
Thereafter, the Modified NPS-III notified on 02- 04-2014 to compensate the existing 
urea units, could not be implemented due to ambiguities in the notification.   In the 
meantime, New Urea Policy (NUP) – 2015 was introduced for 25 existing gas based 
urea units from 1 st June, 2015 with the objective of (i) maximizing indigenous urea 
production; (ii) promoting energy efficiency  and (iii) rationalizing subsidy burden.   
The duration of NUP-2015 has been extended from 01-04-2019 till further orders.   
Under NUP-2015, 25 existing Gas based urea units were initially classified into three  
groups based on their preset energy norms and for attaining target energy norms in 
the range of  5.5 G Cal/MT to 6.5 G Cal/MT   w.e.f. 1 st April, 2018.   Further the 
aforesaid Target Energy Norms have been revised vide notification dated 28- 03-
2018 under which 11 units are to attain the Target Energy Norms w.e.f.  01- 04-2018.  

65 
 
For the remaining 14 units the existing energy norms are extended for further period 
of 2 years i.e, till 2020 with penalty provisions of 2% energy of difference betwe en 
NUP Energy norms and Target Energy norms of NUP-2015, for the first year i.e. 
2018-19 and 5% for the second year.  The aforesaid target energy norms may be 
continued upto 31 st March, 2025 and an expert body under NITI Aayog would be 
engaged to recommend the energy norms to be achieved from 01 st April, 2025.    
The Committee have been informed that  since the concession rates are determined 
separately for each urea producing plant, the subsidy payable to different urea 
producing plants varies from unit to unit.   The variation in subsidy will be 
minimized once the plants attain the Target Energy Norms.   However, the 
Committee observe that at present, the subsidy rate is the highest for Chambal 
fertilizers and chemicals Ltd.- Gadepan (CFCL-III) which has been set up under New 
Investment Policy-2012.  Further, the issue of compensation for 25 gas based urea 
units proposed under Modified NPS-III remains pending due to ambiguities.  Under 
such circumstances, the Committee are of the view that frequent changes in pricin g 
schemes may create difficulties for urea manufacturing companies in scrupulously 
adhering to the norms set under each pricing scheme.   Moreover, frequent changes 
in urea subsidy schemes may be also be a hindrance for attracting private 
investment in urea sector.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the frequent 
changes in the fertilizer subsidy Policies may be avoided and that the fertilizer 
subsidy polices should be amended only after in depth study in consultation with all 
the stakeholders including fertilizer industry and the representatives of farmers for 
implementing simplified, streamlined and effective fertilizer subsidy policies. 
  

66 
 
7. Quantum of allocation of gas for fertilizer industry 
The Committee note that out of 32 urea manufacturing plants, 30 were converted into 
gas based plants and the remaining two which are presently using Naphtha as feed 
stock, are in the process of conversion.  Since Naphtha is an expensive feed stock, 
the Government took initiative and converted the plants into gas based  Plants.  
Total production of gas in the country is 71 MMBTU.  Out of this, the requirement for 
gas based fertilizer manufacturing units is 48 MMBTU.  Out of this requirement, 
although the Government makes allocation of 31.5 MMBTU, only 16 MMBTU is being 
actually provided to fertilizer industry after meeting the requirements of city gas, 
power sector etc.  Since the fertilizer industry is not getting the allocated quantum of 
gas, the gap between the demand and supply is met by the import of RLNG which is 
costlier than domestically produced gas resulting in increased subsidy bill due to 
increase in cost of production.  Since this is an important sector concerning 
agricultural productivity, the Committee recommend that the entire quantum of gas 
allocated for fertilizer manufacturing industry should be provided for use by fertilizer 
industry to ward off import of RNLG.  The Department of fertilizer should take up 
issue with the concerned Ministry at the highest level in this regard and the 
recommendation made by this Committee should also be conveyed to it for 
compliance.  
8. Freight Subsidy 
 The Committee note that Government of India provides freight subsidy for all 
subsidized fertilizers to facilitate timely and easy availability of fertilizers in all parts 
of the country especially distant/remote corners of the country.  The Department of 
Fertilizers implemented Uniform Freight Policy (UFP) with effect from April 1, 2008. 

67 
 
Under the Uniform Freight Subsidy policy, movement of fertilizers is categorized into 
two categories namely Primary Movement and  Secondary Movement.   Primary 
movement by road is allowed upto maximum distance of 500 Kms and by rail upto a 
maximum distance of 1400 Kms.   Secondary movement is by road from Railway-
rake-point to District / Block Headquarters.  Freight subsidy on primary movement is 
provided for Urea and NBS covered P&K fertilizers excluding SSP.  Freight subsidy 
on secondary movement is provided for urea only.   In case of road journey, the 
Department of Fertilizers annually notifies the Per Tonne Per Kilometre (PTPK) slab 
rates for primary movement and PTPK rates for secondary movement.   The said 
rates are escalated/de-escalated based on Tariff Committee recommendations for 
the same.  Since it is very much necessary to eliminate carry –forward liabilities of 
subsidy payment, the Committee recommend that the annual PTPK slab-rates for 
primary movement for a year may be notified before the start of the financial year so 
that arrear calculation exercises are avoided and subsidy claims and payments  are 
completed within the financial year and not carried forwarded to next financial year 
for want revised rates.   Further, steps may be taken to ensure that the retail-sale 
facility is also available at all Rail-rake-points by opening new retail-outlets / Model 
Fertilizer Shops, wherever necessary.   
 
9. System of sale of fertilizers to farmers 
 The Committee note that presently the government is implementing 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) system.  Under this system 100% subsidy on various 
fertilizer grades is released to the fertilizer companies on the basis of actual s ales 
made by retailers to the beneficiaries.  Sale of all subsidized fertilizers to the 
farmers/buyers is made through Point of Sale (POS) devices installed at each retailer 

68 
 
shop and the beneficiaries are identified through Aadhaar Card, Kishan Credit Card, 
voter Identity Card etc.  Under this DBT system, subsidized fertilizer is sold through 
POS devices on  no denial basis with no fixed purchase quantity limit.  One farmer is 
permitted to purchase fertilizers on behalf of many farmers after biometric 
verification.  Presently there is no system to verify that the fertilizer purchased on 
behalf of other farmers actually reaches them or diverted elsewhere.  In this regard it  
is pertinent to note here that there is possibility of subsidized urea diverted for use 
by chemical industries which may be around 10 lakh tones or 3.5 percent of total 
urea supplied in the system throughout the country.  The Committee are of the view 
that the current system of fertilizer subsidy is inherently inefficient to administer.  
Although a fairly elaborate IT system has been put in place to monitor the movement 
of fertilizers from the point of manufacture/import to the farmer, there is no system in 
place to prevent its diversion and misuse.  The Committee do not agree with the 
views of the Ministry that the quantity reported to be diverted/misused is only a 
small proportion of the total quantity manufactured.   Since the present system is 
prone to misuse by miscreants, the Committee recommend that the Department may 
issue instructions that the retailer may obtain the list of farmers alongwith their 
signature/thumb impression and the quantum of fertilizers required by each of them 
for verification purposes.  State Governments may also be requested to keep a vigil 
on diversion/misuse of subsidized fertilizer and for the purpose Integrated Fertilizer 
Management System may be used by the authorities concerned.  The Department of 
Fertilizers may also undertake random scrutiny of activities in this regard to find out 
any possible misuse of subsidized fertilizers. 
 

69 
 
10. Monitoring of Maximum Retail Price (MRP) of Phosphatic & Potassic Fertilizers 
 The Committee note that Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy is being implemented 
by Government of India for P&K fertilizers w.e.f. 01.04.2010.  Presently 21 grades  of 
P&K fertilizers are covered under this policy.  Government provides a fixed rate of 
subsidy (in Rupees per Kg basis) on each nutrient of subsidized P&K fertilizers.  
Unlike Urea, MRP of P&K fertilizers has been left open and fertilizer manufacturers/ 
marketers are allowed to fix the MRP at reasonable rates.  The country is fully 
dependent on imports in Potassic sector and to the extent of 90% in Phosphatic 
sector.  As such, prices of P&K fertilizers are fluctuating on the basis of international 
market prices. The Committee are concerned to note the submission of the 
Department of Fertilizers that the prices of P&K fertilizers had gone up substantially 
on account of increase in prices of raw materials/ finished fertilizers in international 
market, depreciation of Indian Rupee w.r.t. US Dollar and also due to larger profit 
margins by the companies.  In this regard, the Committee note that it has been made 
mandatory for all the fertilizer companies to submit cost data along with their claims 
of subsidy so as to monitor the MRPs of P&K fertilizers.   In Committee ’s view it is 
very much necessary to monitor the MRP fixed by fertilizer companies on P&K 
fertilizers so as to protect the interests of farmers.  The Committee, therefore , 
recommend the following:-  
(i) Cost data of all P&K fertilizer companies should be scrupulously 
examined at the time of submission of their subsidy claim and 
necessary action should be taken against those companies which 
indulge in over pricing of P&K fertilizers. 

70 
 
(ii) Department of Fertilizers quickly finalize the guidelines for recovery of 
profit earned over and above 12% of companies above MRP on 
fertilizers and found to be unreasonable and implement the provisions 
of the guidelines in a time bound manner. 
(iii) Department of Fertilizers should take all possible steps to encourage 
indigenous production of Potassic and Phosphatic fertilizers including 
strengthening of Research and Development in the field of these 
fertilizers. 
11. Nutrient based subsidy for imported P&K fertilizers 
  The Committee note that under the Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) 
scheme, an Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) chaired by Secretary (Fertilizers) 
recommends per nutrient subsidy for ‘N’, ‘P’, ‘K’ and ‘S’ before the start of the 
financial year for decision by the Government (Department of Fertilizers). The IMC 
also recommends a per tonne additional subsidy on fortified subsidized fertilizers 
carrying secondary (other than ‘S’) and micro- nutrients.  According to Department 
of Fertilizers, the basic principle adopted in fixation of subsidy rates for different 
nutrients, is the identification of benchmark international prices of major consuming 
fertilizers viz. Urea, DAP and MOP.  Based on these benchmark prices, the delivered 
prices of these fertilizers are determined taking into account the prevailing exchange 
rate. NBS rates are same for imported and indigenous P&K fertilizers.  Any company 
registered under NBS Scheme is eligible to get subsidy.  There is no restriction on 
the entities to import P&K fertilizers as these fertilizers are placed under Open 
General License (OGL).  However, the Committee feel that the NBS rates are notified 
annually but the price of NBS fertilizers may fluctuate on weekly and monthly basis.  

71 
 
Taking these factors into account, the Committee have apprehensions that in case of 
lower cost at international market for imported P&K fertilizers as compared to cost 
price of domestically produced P&K fertilizers, private agencies which get import 
licence for P&K fertilizers, are better placed to make profits as they will be getting 
NBS subsidy in addition to profit margin due to lower prices in international market.   
Further, such eventuality will also make domestic production of P&K fertilizers 
economically unviable.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department 
of Fertilizers shall take steps for continued monitoring the cost price of P&K 
fertilizers in the international market and in case of long-prevailing cheaper cost-
price for P&K fertilizers in the international market, necessary steps  be taken to 
protect the interests of existing domestic companies.   
 
12. Scheme for promotion of City compost 
The Committee are happy to note that a policy on promotion of city compost 
was notified by the Department of Fertilizers on 10.02.2016 under which market 
Development Assistance (MDA) in the form of fixed amount of Rs. 1500/- per tonne of 
city Compost is provided on the sale of city compost to fertilizer Marketing 
companies as well as to city compost manufactures.  This policy aims at conversion 
of city wastes into compost manure for use by farmers in place of chemical 
fertilizers.  Since city compost is a unique Bio organic soil enricher and its use 
reduces the use of chemicals fertilizers, the Committee recommend that that the 
Department of fertilizers should take necessary steps for increasing the production 
and use of city compost on a large scale so as to reduce the use of chemical  
fertilizers in the country.   The Committee also recommend that the Department of 
Fertilizers should examine the feasibility of involving all fertilizer companies in the 

72 
 
production and distribution of city compost alongwith chemicals fertilizers.  Freight 
subsidy may also be considered for city compost 
The Committee has taken note of the problems associated with the use of 
excessive quantities of fertilizers by the farmers.  The Committee has analysed the 
literature available on long-term environmental consequences of such excessive use 
of chemical fertilizers.  While the Department has a scheme for providing financial 
assistance for city composting units, the Committee feels that the effort is too little 
to make a significant positive environmental impact.  The Committee observe that 
the flagship programme of the Government Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, is having a 
deeper penetration and is leading to significant changes in the manner in which 
urban solid waste is handled.  The Committee note that there are a large number of 
good opportunities available for dove-tailing  the city composting scheme by the 
Department with the urban waste management projects so that the dependence on 
chemical fertilizers gets reduced and as a society we are able to utilize the urban 
waste properly.  The Committee recommend that the Department should constitute 
an inter-Ministerial body comprising of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare, Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation as well as the Department of Fertilizers to set a clear roadmap for vastly 
expanding the city composting systems and taking the farmers to shift from using 
chemical fertilizers to using compost for their agriculture.  The Committee advise the 
Department to take up this issue in the national interest immediately and set out a 
time frame of not more than six months for this inter-Ministerial Committee to submit 
its recommendations. 
 

73 
 
13.   Education to Farmers for use of Soil Specific Fertilizers 
 
 The Committee feel that the nutrients based system (NBS) for fertilizer subsidy 
is far too complicated.  Simultaneously, the Committee observes that there is very 
little knowledge and understanding available with the farmers on the use of 
appropriate nutrients in view of the soil conditions as well as the cropping patterns.  
The Committee have come to know of situations where the farmers are being 
encouraged to use a particular group of nutrients even when their soil or cropping 
pattern does not warrant so.   It is suspected that this may be happening due to 
inappropriate promotion of use of fertilizers by some of the manufacturers who keep 
in view the amount of subsidy available on the basis of the nutrients contained in the 
fertilizers produced by them.  The Committee observe that the Government has 
successfully expanded the use of soil health cards across the country and therefore  
it should be possible to educate the farmers on the appropriate combination of 
nutrients which may be required to administer in their farms.  The Committee 
therefore, recommend that the Department should take up this subject with the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and come up with a  firm plan of action 
so that the use of nutrients by individual farmers gets rationalised on the basis of 
scientific analysis.  The Committee also recommend that steps be taken to identify 
States/UTs where fertilizers especially urea is used by farmers in a very high 
distorted ratio against the desirable NPK ratio of 4:2:1.  Further, suitable preventive 
mechanism be evolved by the Movement Division of Department of Fertilizers to 
preclude supply of very high quantity of subsidized fertilizers to States/UTs based 
on their projection of annual demand for fertilizers.  The Kisan Call Centres (KCC) 

74 
 
may also be involved for tendering appropriate advice to the farmers regarding 
judicious use of soil specific fertilizers.   
14. Discrepancies in figures on consumption of fertilizers 
The Committee find some discrepancies in the figures provided by the 
Department of Fertilizers about the quantum of consumption of fertilizers in the 
country.  As per figures given to show  the pattern of consumption of fertilizers from 
2000 to 2019, it has been stated that 526.46 Lakh metric tonnes (LMTs) of fertilizers 
have been consumed during 2018-19.  At some other place, it has been mentioned 
that 537.09 LMTs of fertilizers were consumed during 2018-19.  Since it is very 
important to maintain correct figures of consumption of fertilizers for effective 
implementation of fertilizer subsidy schemes, the Committee recommend that the 
Department should develop a foolproof method of collection of exact data on 
production and consumption of various fertilizer in the country. 
 
 
 
                              KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
New Delhi;                                             Chairperson   
13 March, 2020              Standing Committee on  
23 Phalguna, 1941 (Saka)                         Chemicals and Fertilizers 
  

75 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2019-20) 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 13 th   November, 2019 from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in 
Committee Room no. 2, Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi-  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
3 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
4 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
5 Dr. Manoj Rajoria 
RAJYA SABHA 
6 Shri  G.C. Chandrashekhar 
7 Dr. Anil Jain 
8 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
9 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
SECRETARIAT 
               1. Shri Manoj Kumar Arora   -               Officer on Special Duty(LSS)  
               2. Shri A. K. Srivastava -               Director 
  3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
1 Shri Chhabilendra Roul   Secretary (Fert.) 
2 Shri  Dharam Pal      Addl. Secretary  
3 Shri  Partha Sarthi Sen Sharma   Joint Secretary 
4   Shri Vinay Kumar Pandey Director (P&K) 
5 Shri Parbhas Kumar Director (UPP) 
6 Sh. B. Venkatesh Director (CE) 

76 
 
      2. At the outset, Hon ’ble Chairperson welcomed the members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fert ilizers) and other 
officials.  Chairperson also introduced Dr. Manoj Rajoria, the newly nomina ted Member to the 
Committee. 
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, Secretary, Department of Fertilizers m ade a 
power point presentation to the Committee regarding ‘Study of system of Fertilizer Subsidy ’ of the 
Department of Fertilizers.  
4. Power Point presentation was followed by discussion on several aspects of Fertilizers 
subsidy.  During the discussion, the Hon'ble Chairperson and Members of the Commit tee raised 
queries on several issues such as:- 
i. Progress made in conversion of Naphtha based urea plants into gas based 
plants;  
ii. Benefits  accrue to farmers as a result of fertilizer subsidy policy; 
iii. Fertilizers subsidy system in other countries; 
iv. Demand and availability of fertilizers in the country; 
v. Delays in release of fertilizer subsidy to Fertilizer companies;  
vi. Diversion and leakage of urea for non agricultural purposes and 
vii. Relative price of urea vis-à-vis other fertilizers. 
 
5.  The Secretary and other officers of Department of Fertilizers responded to  the aforesaid 
issues raised by the Committee.  
6. The Secretary and the other representatives of the Department also made a presen tation of 
a Dashboard from the web pages of the Department about the supply, demand and av ailability of 
fertilizes in different parts of the country.  
7. The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committ ee as well as for 
furnishing valuable information to the Committee. They were also asked to pr ovide required 
information in writing at the earliest which was not readily available.    
8. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
9. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the draft A ction Taken 
Report on subject ‘Pricing of Drugs with Special Reference to Drugs (Prices Control ) Order, 2013 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals).  After deliberations, the Committee adop ted the draft report 
unanimously without any changes/amendments. The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to 
finalize and present the report to the Parliament. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned.  
 
  

77 
 
MINUTES OF THE  EIGHT SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2019-20) 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 28 th February, 2020 from 1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Smt.  Kanimozhi Karunanidhi-  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
3 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
4 Shri M. Selvaraj  
5 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
6  Shri Deepak Baij 
7 Dr. Manoj Rajoria 
RAJYA SABHA 
8 Shri  G.C. Chandrashekhar 
9 Shri Anil Jain 
10 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
SECRETARIAT 
            1. Shri Manoj Kumar Arora   - Officer on Special Duty(LSS) 
            2. Shri A. K. Srivastava - Director 
            3. Shri N. Amarthiagan - Under Secretary 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
S.No Name of the Officer/Officials Designation 
1. Dr. P. D. Vaghela Secretary  
2. Ms. Alka Tiwari AS&FA 
3. Sh. Navdeep Rinwa Joint Secretary 
4. Sh. Rajneesh Tingal Joint Secretary 
5. Sh. H. K. Hajong Economic Adviser 
6. Smt. Deepika Jain CCA 
7. Shri Pawan Kumar Director (NIPER) 
 
 

78 
 
II. REPRESENTATIVES OF NPPA 
1.         Smt. Shubra Singh  Chairperson, National Pharmaceuticals 
Pricing Authority (NPPA)  
 
III REPRESENTATIVES OF NIPER 
 2. Dr. Kiran Kalia Director (NIPER Ahmedabad) 
3 Dr. Shashi  Bala Singh Director ( NIPER- Hyderabad) 
4 Dr. V. Ravichandiran Director (NIPER-Kolkata and NIPER -Hajipur) 
5 Dr. U S N Murty  Director (NIPER-Guwahati) 
6 Dr. S J S Flora Director (NIPER-Rai Bareli and NIPER -Mohali) 
IV. REPRESENTATIVES OF  PSUS 
1 Ms. Nirja Saraf Managing Director, Hindustan Antibiotics 
Limited (HAL) and RDPL 
2 Mr. Sunil Kumar Kaimal Managing Director, Karnataka Antibiotics & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited, (KAPL) 
3 Sh. P. M. Chandraiah Managing Director, Bengal Chemicals and 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) 
4 Sh. Sachin Kumar Singh CEO, Bureau of Pharma Public Sector 
Undertakings of India (BPPI) 
 
 2. At the outset, Hon ’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of P harmaceuticals) and 
other officials to the sitting. Their attention was invited to the prov isions contained in Direction 55(1) 
of the Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of the Committee's proceedings.  
3. After the witnesses introduced themselves, Secretary of the Department of  Pharmaceuticals 
made power point presentation to the Committee regarding Demands for Grants 2020-21 of the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals. 
4. xxxx                xxxx                   xxxx            xxxx  
5. xxxx                xxxx                   xxxx            xxxx  
6. xxxx                xxxx                   xxxx            xxxx 
   7 The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the draf t Report on the 
subject 'The Study of System of Fertilizer Subsidy' pertaining to Department of Fertilizers.  After 
deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft report unanimously without any 
changes/amendments. The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to finalize and present the 
report to the Parliament. 
8. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
 The Committee then adjourned. 