1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
 
(2021-22) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
                    MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
                              (DEPARTMENT OF  CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in the ir  Sixteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demand and Availability of Petrochemicals including Imports and Exports ’ of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of  Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals)] 
 
 TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT    
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  DECEMBER 2021 /  AGRAHAYANA, 1943 (SAKA) 
27 

2 
 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in the  Sixteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
“Demand and Availability of Petrochemicals including Import and Exports ” of the  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals)] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.12.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02.12.2021 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
            DECEMBER, 2021 /  AGRAHAYANA 1943 (SAKA) 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) 4 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22) 5 
INTRODUCTION 6 
Chapter I Report  1 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
10 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
17 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the committee  
18 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
24 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2021-22) held on 16 November, 2021. 
26 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (17 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers on 
‘Demand and Availability of Petrochemicals including Import and 
Exports’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
28 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Deepak Baij 
4 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
5 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
6 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
7 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8 Shri Pakauri Lal 
9 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
11 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
12 Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
13 Shri Atul Kumar Singh alias Atul Rai 
14 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15 Shri M. Selvaraj 
16 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
17 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
18 Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
19 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
20 Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari# 
21 Vacant* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26 Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27 
28 
Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
Shri Arun Singh$ 
29 Shri A.D. Singh 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Manoj Kumar Arora  - Officer on Special Duty(LSS) 
2. Shri Nabin Kumar Jha - Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary 
 
____________________________________________________________________________ 
$Re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.12.2020. 
#Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 28.12.2020 vice Shri Nandigam Suresh. 
*Vacant vice Shri Er. Bishweswar Tudu nominated MoS on 07.07.2021. 

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri Deepak Baij 
5. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
6. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
7. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
8. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
10. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
11. Shri Vasava Prabhubhai Nagarbhai  
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt Aparupa Poddar (Afrin Ali) 
14. Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
15. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
16. Shri M. Selvaraj 
17. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
18. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
19. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
21. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
24. Dr. Anil Jain 
25. Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27. Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Arun Singh 
29. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
30. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
31. 
 
Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Nabin Kumar Jha - Director  
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
  

6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2021-22 ) 
having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this Twenty 
Seventh Report on Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Sixteenth Report (Se venteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Demand and Availability of Petrochemicals including Import and Exports’, 
pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals an d 
Petrochemicals).  
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sa bha 
on 17th March, 2021. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals) furnished their replies on 17th June, 2021 indicating action taken on 
the recommendations contained in that Report. The Committee at their sitting held on 
16th November 2021 considered and adopted the Draft Report. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
4. For the facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/  
Observations/further comments of the Committee have been printed in bo ld letters in the 
body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; KANIMOZHI  KARUNANIDHI 
16 November, 2021 
25 Kartika, 1943 (Saka) 
                                        Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
1.1 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on 'Demand and Availability of Petrochemicals including Import and 
Exports’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
1. 2 The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya  Sabha on 
17.03.2021.  It contains 12   Observations / Recommendations.  Replies of Government 
in respect of all the recommendations have been received are categorized as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/ Observations that have been accepted by the 
Government :- 
 Sl.  Nos.  2, 4, 7, 9, 10 and 12.    Total = 06                                    
                          (Percentage: 50%) 
 These are included in Chapter II of the Report. 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply :- 
  Nil        Total = 00 
                             (Percentage: 00) 
 These are included in Chapter-III of the Report 
 
 (iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration :- 
 Sl. Nos . 3, 6, 8 and 11     Total = 04 
                               (Percentage: 33%) 
 These are included in Chapter IV of the Report. 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are interim in nature:- 
 
     Sl. Nos. 1 and 5      Total= 02 
                          (Percentage:16%) 
 These are included in Chapter V of the Report. 
1.3 The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report should be 
furnished expeditiously and not later than three months from the date of presentation of 
this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on  the 
Recommendations/Observations which still require reiteration or merit further comments. 

2 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 3 
 
DEMAND AND AVAILABILITY OF PETROCHEMICALS 
   
 
1.5 In regard to the demand and availability of petrochemicals, the Committee h ad 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the demand and supply forecast for 2025 is a lmost 
balanced in respect of Polypropylene (PP) and Purified Terephthalic Acid (PT A). 
However, the demand and supply forecast   for 2025 is in deficit in respect o f host 
of other petrochemicals viz. Polyethylene(PE), Poly Vinyl Chloride(PVC), Mono 
Ethylene Glycol (MEG), elastomers etc. Moreover, Styrene and Polycarbonates 
are being entirely imported as there is no domestic production capacity for these  
two petrochemicals in the country. Petrochemicals, whose production capacity is 
less than the demand, are imported to meet the domestic demand. Since it is 
necessary that various petrochemicals are produced in the country in requisite  
quantity so as to meet the domestic demand, the Committee recommend t hat the 
Demand and availability of each of the petrochemicals should be studied  
separately and appropriate steps should be taken to augment their prod uction in 
the country so as to meet the demand domestically. Wherever necessary, 
augmentation of customs duty should be considered to safeguard the in terests of 
domestic producers and to discourage the tendency of imports of petrochemical s 
which are produced in the country. As far as Styrene and Polycarbonates are  
concerned, domestic producers are exploring options of setting-up of Styrene and 
Polycarbonate plants in the country. In this regard, the Department should rend er 
the necessary assistance as a facilitator to set up industries to manufacture such 
petrochemicals which are presently imported wholly or substantially”. 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.6 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under: 
“In order to curb imports, for creation of new capacity and to promote investmen t; 
DCPC has recommended for change in custom duty on various petrochemicals. 
 Import duty on PVC was recommended to be raised from 10% to 11% du ring 
budget recommendation year 2021-22 along with other recommenda tions. 
The Major highlights of the budget 2021-22 are as under: 
 Custom duty on Naphtha Duty has been reduced from 4% to 
2.5%. The decreased custom duty on naphtha is likely to further improve the 
utilization of crackers resulting in availability of cost competitive olefins and 
aromatics. Low cost naphtha will also pave a way into the availability of  ethylene 
and propylene for petrochemical intermediates in value chain.” 
 Custom duty on Polycarbonates Duty has been increased from 5 to 
7.5%; to attract new investment in the technology intensive polycarbonate market. 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.7 The Committee note that the action taken reply furnished by the Dep artment has 
not addressed to the specific recommendation of the Committee regarding a separate 

3 
 
study of demand and availability of each of the petrochemicals, a ppropriate steps to be 
taken to augment their domestic production and to render necessary assistance as a 
facilitator to set up industries to manufacture such petrochemicals which are presently 
imported wholly or substantially.  The Department in its   action taken reply has 
provided information only on steps taken for the rationalization of customs  duty 
structure in respect of certain petrochemicals.   The Committee are of the view that a 
strong petrochemicals industry offers immense possibilities and cater to the need  of  
the economy including textiles, agriculture, packaging, infrastructure, healthcare, 
furniture, automobiles, information technology, power, electronics and 
telecommunication, irrigation, drinking water etc .  Hence, it is very much essential to 
develop a strong base of petrochemical industry in the country to meet  the huge 
domestic requirements without resorting to import.    The Committee, therefore, while 
reiterating original recommendation, strongly recommend that the Ministry 
should come out with concrete measures to create a strong base for the holistic 
development of petrochemicals industry in the country.  Specific replies should 
be given to the above recommendation of the Committee within three months.  
Recommendation Sl. No. 6  
VISION 2024 PLAN 
  
1.8 In regard to achieving the objectives of Vision 2024 Plan, the Committee had 
recommended the following:- 
“The Committee are concerned to note that the overall Petrochemicals imports 
during 2018-19 stands at around Rs. 1,28,000 crore approximately, which was 
3.56% of the total national imports. The overall Petrochemicals exports durin g 
2018-19 were to the tune of around Rs. 78,000 crore approximately which was 
3.73% of the total National Exports. Although percentage of share of impo rt of 
petrochemicals is less than the export of petrochemicals, there is a trade 
imbalance in actual value terms which is to the tune of Rs. 50,236 crore for the 
year 2018-19. In this regard, the Committee note the reply given by th e 
Department   that there is free trade of Petrochemicals which includes build ing 
blocks, intermediates and final products due to open global econom y unless 
and until specifically mentioned trade barriers for individual products. In orde r 
to meet the domestic demand, investment in the sector for new capacity 
creation, import substitution and to promote exports with employment 
generation, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has prepared a 
Vision 2024 Plan. To achieve the objectives of this plan, certain initiatives are 
being taken by the Department viz. strengthening of PCPIRs, incentives for 
mega investment, Ensuring quality by formulating new standards and making 
those standards mandatory, Skilling & Employment generation, technology 
support services to SMEs, better trade intelligence (new HS codes) and 
Advisory Forum as a permanent platform for interaction with industry. In this 
regard, the Committee are of the view that the lofty goals of Vision 2024p lan 

4 
 
can be achieved only if the above mentioned initiatives are continued with  full 
vigour and continuous monitoring. Hence, the Committee recommend that 
yearly targets should be set and concrete steps should be taken to achie ve 
those targets. The progress made should be reviewed at the end of every year 
so that the objectives of the Vision 2024 plan be achieved within the  stipulated 
period. 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.9 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department o f 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under: 
 
 “Under Vision 2024 yearly targets have been set up. The details of the 
progress made yearly may be seen as under:- 
Scheme Parameter 
For the year 2019-20 For the year 2020-21 
Target 
2019-20 
Outcome up to 
March 2020 
Target 
2020-21 
Outcome up 
to March 
2021 
Empower 
PCPIRs with full 
time experts 
Empowered 
management 
boards 
0 
1 
(The sub- 
committee 
constituted for 
suggesting 
amendments in 
PCPIR policy to 
make it more 
effective. The 
committee has 
requested for time 
extension due to 
COVID-19 for 
submitting its 
report.) 
1 
0 
(Comments 
on draft 
CCEA note 
have been 
received from 
Ministries and 
Departments 
which are 
being 
examined) 
Fiscal 
incentives for 
mega 
investments 
Mega projects 
approved / 
announced 
0 
1 
(The sub- 
committee 
constituted for 
suggesting 
amendments in 
PCPIR policy to 
make it more 
effective. The 
Committee has 
requested for time 
extension due to 
COVID-19 for 
submitting its 
report.) 
1 
0 
(The proposal 
pertaining to 
providing 
fiscal 
incentives for 
mega 
investment is 
under 
consideration) 
Advisory 
Forum, 
Development 
Committee and 
Industry 
Meetings 6 6 6 1 

5 
 
 
Source: Dashboard DCPC- http://dashboard.chemicals.gov.in/index.php 
  
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.10 The Committee note that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals had  
fixed yearly targets for various schemes under vision 2024.    However, perusal of t he 
progress made by the Department in achieving these targets reveals that eith er the 
targets were not fixed or the fixed targets were not achieved .  For instance, under the 
Scheme “Empower PCPIRs with full time experts ” the target for the year 2019-20 was 
not fixed and the one target fixed for 2020-21 remained inconclusi ve by the end of the 
financial year.  Under the other initiative “Fiscal incentives for mega investments ”, the 
target was not fixed for 2019-20 and eventhough one target w as fixed for 2020- 21 the 
proposal for the same remained under consideration till the end of the year.   Further, the 
target fixed for notifying 35 Mandatory standards during 2020- 21 was not achieved . 
Similarly the targets fixed for “Skilling and Employment Generation ” were not achieved 
during both the years 2019-20 and 2020- 21.  Target for providing technology support 
services to 90,000 units was not achieved during both the years of 20 19-20 and 2020-21  
Furthermore, very less progress has been made to recommend new HS codes durin g 
2019-20 and 2020- 21.  Particularly nil progress was made to recommend 50 HS Codes 
for the financial year 2020-21.   Having perturbed to note such shortfalls/failures in 
achieving the yearly targets, the Committee are of the view that such 
shortfalls/failures cast serious doubts in the ability of the Department to achieve 
the lofty goals of V ision 2024 plan.  In this regard, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the yearly targets under various schemes be invariably fixed and 
once the target is fixed it must be vigorously pursued and achieved during the 
year. 
Interaction 
Notify 
mandatory 
standards 
Chemicals / 
Petrochemicals 9 7 35 0 
Skilling and 
Employment 
Generation 
Long Term and 
Short Term 
Courses 
80,000 63,162 65,000 42,762 
Technology 
support service 
to plastic and 
allied industry 
 
Services provided 90,000 6,221 90,000 16,082 
Recommend 
new HS Codes New Codes 75 8 50 0 

6 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 8 
 
 HARMONIZED SYSTEM (HS) CODES 
 
 
1.12 The Committee made the following recommendation in regard to creation o f 
new Harmonised System ( HS) codes chemicals and petrochemicals falling under 
other category:-  
“The Committee note tha t the chemicals and petrochemicals appearing in 
“others” category ” need identification to facilitate and monitor international 
trade, as the non-availability of specified codes in the customs tariff has 
resulted in huge undesirable EXIM trade under “others‟ category.  In this 
regard, the Committee were informed that the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals has proposed new Harmonized System (HS) codes for 
products falling under "other" category. Based on the recommendations of th e 
Department, 53 HS codes have been notified by Department of Revenue 
during 2018-19. Further, during 2019-20, new HS codes for 80 che micals and 
petrochemicals were proposed by the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals. Out of this, the Department of Revenue notified new  HS 
Codes of 49 chemicals and 4 petrochemicals. Since the classification of 
petrochemicals are of prime importance from the point    of health, s afety & 
environment including national security along with prevention of unfair trad e 
practices, the Committee recommend that the Department may continue this 
exercise of assigning HS codes for chemicals and petrochemicals which are 
falling under other category and ensure that all such chemicals and 
petrochemical products are duly classified to prevent unfair trade practices, 
etc. 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.13 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Departmen t of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under: 
 
 “Creation of new HS code is an on-going exercise. DCPC in consultation with 
Department of Commerce has continued this process.” 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.14 The Committee note the above reply given by the Department o f Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals that creation of new HS code is an on-going exercise.  Howev er, 
performance of the Department during the last two years in this reg ard is not 
appreciable.  A target of 75 new HS codes was fixed for 2019-20 bu t only 8 new HS 
codes were created.  Against the target of 50 new HS codes, not even a single code was 
created during 2020-21.  Merely giving assurance is not adequate. Concrete steps 
should also be taken by the Department to create new HS codes for the chemicals an d 
petrochemicals falling under the “other” category so as to ensure that all such Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals products are duly classified to prevent unfair trade practices etc.   In 

7 
 
view of the above, the Committee recommend that the Department should chalk out 
a definite time frame for creating/assigning   new HS Codes for chemicals and 
petrochemicals falling under the “other” category and   initiate concrete measures 
in consultation with other concerned Departments for creating new HS codes well 
within the time frame.   
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 11 
 
PETROLEUM, CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS INVESTMENT REGIONS 
 
  
1.15    Regarding Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions 
(PCPIRs), the Committee had recommended the following:- 
 
“The Committee note that t he Government of India had formulated PCPIR 
Policy in April 2007 and the four PCPIRs viz. in the States of Andhra 
Pradesh, Gujarat, Odisha and Tamil Nadu are being established since then 
in a cluster approach for promotion of Petroleum, Chemical & Petrochemical 
Sectors in an integrated & environment friendly manner on a large scale. 
Once fully established, these four PCPIRs are expected to attract investment 
of around Rs. 7.63 lakh crore. As per data available from State 
Governments, investments worth Rs. 2.12 lakh crore approximately have 
been made / committed in these regions. The four PCPIRs are expected to 
generate employment for around 33.83 lakh persons. Around 3.50 lakh 
persons have been employed in direct and indirect activities related to 
PCPIRs. However, in Committees ’ view, the progress made so far in 
establishing these PCPIRs is not upto the mark because thirteen years ha ve 
already passed but not a single PCPIR has been fully established so far. 
Anchor Tenents have been appointed and anchor projects have b een 
commissioned for Gujarat and Odhisha PCPIRs but the same are yet to 
done in respect of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu PCPIRs. Environment 
clearance has been obtained only in respect of Gujarat PCPIR. Since such 
inordinate delays will defeat the very purpose for which these PCPIRs are 
being established, the Committee strongly recommend that the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should monitor the progress made in 
establishment of these PCPIRs on monthly basis and the matter should be 
pursued at the highest level with the concerned State Government 
particularly with the Governments of Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh where 
the progress is very slow. The Department should provide the necessary 
monetary and technical assistance to the State Governments so as to 
achieve the goal in a time bound manner. Moreover, the Department has se t 
a target to strengthen these PCPIRs under Vision 2024 Plan and the 
Committee hope that the Department would initiate concrete measures to 
fully establish all the four PCPIRs in a time bound manner. The progress 
made in this regard may be intimated to the Committee”. 
                    Reply of the Government 
1.16 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department o f 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under:- 
 

8 
 
 Department has noted the suggestions of Hon'ble Committee and the 
Department has been taking up the matter with State Governments to speed  up 
the process of establishing PCPIRs in a time bound manner. For this purp ose, 
this Department reviews the implementation of PCPIRs from time to time.  
 To overcome the challenges being faced by the Government in effectiv e 
implementation of PCPIR Policy such as non-availability of building 
blocks/intermediate feedstock for downstream industry, inadequate funding for 
common utility infrastructure, delay in master planning etc, the Government has 
also initiated process to amend the existing PCPIR Policy with an objective to 
attract more investments and faster implementation.  
 A Sub-committee was constituted in November, 2019 under the chairmanship o f 
Principal Secretary (Industries) Govt. of Andhra Pradesh with the members of 
Govt. of Odisha, Govt. of Gujarat, Govt. of Tamil Nadu and representatives from 
FICCI, CII, ICC, AIPMA and CIPET to recommend the amendments in PCPIR 
Policy, 2007 to make it more effective. A review meeting was also held on 
27.05.2020 under the chairmanship of the then Secretary, DCPC to discuss the  
report submitted by the committee of State Secretaries of Industries for 
recommending amendments to the PCPIR Policy. 
 With the approval of Minister (C&F), a CoS note was circulated on 26.06 .2020 
for inter-ministerial consultation for proposed amendments in existing PCPIR 
Policy of 2007 which, inter alia, included corporate tax incentives to parti ally 
offset the higher cost of production and match incentives given by com peting 
countries. Approval of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) was sought to 
amend the provisions of PCPIR Policy, 2007.  
 Further detailed discussions were held by Secretary (C&PC) with CEO NIT I 
Aayog on 30th July 2020 and also with Secretary DEA, Secretary Revenue.  
Based on their comments and discussions, it was decided to replace fiscal 
incentives with Production Linked Incentives (PLI), include a Phased 
Manufacturing Plan and directly move a CCEA Note for approval of  the 
amended PCPIR Policy. Accordingly, Draft CCEA note has been circulated on  
24.08.2020 for inter-ministerial consultation after obtaining approval of H on'ble 
Minister (C&F).  
 Subsequently, the draft CoS note on PCPIR was sent to Cabinet Secretariat on  
17/12/2020 with a request to conduct the meeting to discuss issues pertaining to 
proposed amendments in PCPIR Policy. The proposed meeting is yet to be  
convened and the future course of the action in this regard will be taken o n the 
basis of the decisions taken by the Committee of Secretaries. 
 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.17  The Committee note with concern the above action taken reply furnished by the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals.  The Committee specifically 
recommended that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should monitor 
the progress made in establishment of these PCPIRs on monthly basis. In t his regard, 
the Department has replied that it reviews the implementation of PCPIRs from tim e to 
time.   Steps taken during the last one year to Implement PCPIR Policy clearly shows 
that  continuous monitoring is  necessary for realizing the goals for which PCPIRs were 
envisaged to be set up way back in 2007.  A draft Cabinet Committee on Eco nomic 

9 
 
Affairs(CCEA) Note for approval of the amended PCPIR Policy was circulated o n 
24.08.2020 for inter-ministerial consultation and thereafter its fate is n ot clear from the 
Action Taken Reply.  Moreover,  draft Committee of Secretaries(CoS) note on PCPI R 
was sent to Cabinet Secretariat on 17/12/2020 with the request to conduct  meeting to 
discuss issues pertaining to proposed amendments in PCPIR Policy. As per the a ction 
taken reply, the proposed meeting is yet to be convened.   The Committee deplore the 
way in which the Department has handled the PCPIR policy as well as th e 
establishment of four PCPIRs in the States of  Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Odisha a nd 
Tamil Nadu. Even after the lapse of 14 years, these PCPIRs have not yet realized their 
full potential.  Since it is very much necessary to review regularly the progress m ade in 
implementation of PCPIR Policy,  the Committee reiterate the earlier  
recommendation  that Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should 
monitor the progress made in establishment of these PCPIRs on monthly basis 
with all stake holders including the concerned State Governments.  In case of 
difficulties in holding meetings in person, video conferencing method should be 
adopted to monitor and review the progress.  Immediate steps should also be 
taken for the approval of amended PCPIR Policy.  A copy of this 
recommendation should also be sent to Cabinet Secretariat for swift action for 
the approval of the amended policy.  
 
 
 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No. 2 
 
 
SETTING UP OF ETHYLENE CRACKERS 
 
 
2.1 The Committee note that there are eleven Ethylene crackers presently in the 
country with the combined capacity of 7277 Kilo Tonnes Per Annum  (KTPA) and two 
more Ethylene Crackers are under construction with the capacity of 2200 K TPA.   As 
per the projection made by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemic als, by the 
year 2025, four more Crackers are required each with Ethylene capacity of 1500 
KTPA at an approximate investment of Rs.1,60,000 Crore. Ethylene is an importan t 
building block for producing various intermediary petrochemicals and their 
derivatives. So, it is very much   necessary to have requisite number of Ethylene 
crackers in the country. In this regard, the Committee recommend that the 
Department should monitor the two under construction joint venture projects by 
HPCL-Mittal Energy Limited (HMEL) at Bathinda, Punjab and HPCL-Rajasthan 
Refinery Limited (HRRL) at Barmer, Rajasthan and render all possible assistance for 
timely completion and commissioning of these projects. The Committee also n ote 
that three more mega projects with the combined Ethylene capacity of ab out 9600 
KTPA at the combined investment of about Rs.3,50,000 Crore are in the pipelin e 
stage. These crackers are proposed to be set at Raigad in Maharashtra, Vadina r in 
Gujarat and at Balasore in Odisha. In this regard, the Committee expect that the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should play the role of facilitator in 
getting environmental, legal and other clearances in coordination with the State 
Governments concerned so as to set up these crackers in a time bound man ner. The 
Committee may be apprised of the progress made in regard to the undergoing an d 
proposed projects for setting up Ethylene Crackers. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department o f 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under:- 
“ HPCL-Mittal Energy Limited (HMEL) at Bathinda, Punjab is likely to start their 
commercial production from November 2021. HPCL-Rajasthan Refinery Limited (HRRL ) 
at Barmer, Rajasthan has been progressing well, however due to COVID19 pand emic, 
the work has been delayed. The project is to come in stream during 2024-25. 
In so far as three more mega projects of Raigad in Maharashtra, Vadinar in 
Gujarat and at Balasore in Odisha are concerned; the proposed project at Raigad in 
Maharashtra is in the process of making decision about its location.  The project of 
Vadinar in Gujarat is being erected and under project stage. Currently the work of 
Propylene Recovery Unit (PRU) and setting up of the new Polypropylene Plant is going 
on. The decision on the Ethylene Cracker Project proposal for Balasore in O disha needs 
to be taken by the Board of Directors.” 
 
 
 

11 
 
 
  
Recommendation no. 4 
  
CAPACITY UTILIZATION 
  
2.3 The Committee note that the percentage of capacity utilization in the prod uction of 
Basic Major Petrochemicals rose from 79.9% to 87% during the period from 201 5-16 to 
2018-19. However, none of the Basic Major Petrochemicals has achieved 100% capacity 
utilization except Synthetic Detergent Intermediates. Capacity utilization for  production of 
Performance Plastics and Synthetic Rubber are particularly less when compared to other 
petrochemicals. As per the reasons quoted by the Department, factors such as cost of 
feed stock, scale of production etc. encourage the cheaper imports of petrochemicals. In 
order to improve capacity utilization of polymers, synthetic rubbers and perf ormance 
plastics, and to make them globally cost competitive, the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals had recommended to Department of Revenue to increase import d uty on 
these products. Some of these recommendations were accepted by the Departm ent of 
Revenue and some were not. Since it is very much necessary to fully utili ze the capacity 
for the production of various petrochemicals so as to reduce the dependenc e on imports, 
the Committee recommend that apart from increasing import duty which the Departm ent 
may take up again with the Department of Revenue with the fresh pro posals, the 
Department should conduct a study in coordination with the industry association s to find 
out the exact reasons for non-achieving 100% capacity utilization in production of various 
petrochemicals and appropriate steps should be taken to assist the ma nufacturers in 
attaining 100% capacity utilization. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilisers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under:- 
 “DCPC annually makes budget recommendation to Department of Revenue aft er 
consultation with chemical and petrochemical sector stakeholders. One of the 
major announcements during the budget year 2021-22 is as under: 
  Chemical and Petrochemical industry has been demanding since long back for  
reduction in import duty on feedstock such as ‘Naphtha’ to become globally cost 
competitive for production of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. This long standing 
demand has been taken care of by the Government in the budget 2021-
22.  Custom duty on Naphtha Duty has been reduced from 4% to 2.5%. T he 
decreased custom duty on naphtha is likely to further improve the utiliz ation of 
crackers resulting in availability of cost competitive olefins and aromatics. Low 
cost naphtha will also make a way into the availability of ethylene a nd propylene 
for petrochemical intermediates in value chain. Further boost to the production  of 
major basic petrochemicals. 
 The proposal of conducting study in coordination with the industry associations to  
find out the exact reasons for non-achieving 100% capacity utilization in 
production of various petrochemicals to attain 100% capacity utilization will be 
considered once the normalcy restores in the industry which has been hit hard by  
COVID-19 pandemic. However, the any capacity utilisation above 85% is 
considered in the industry to be an optimum level.” 
 
 

12 
 
 
 
Recommendation no. 7  
 
                      RATIONALISATION OF CUSTOMS DUTY STUCTURE 
2.5 The Committee note that the Department of Chemicals and Petroche micals 
has recommended reduction of customs duty on imported feedstock and incre ase in 
customs tariff on products, as a long term planning for new capacity creation and to 
provide adequate protection to the domestic manufacturers where there is suffici ent 
domestic capacity and also the gap between capacity and demand is high. The 
Department informed the Committee that the increase in custom duty will he lp to 
reduce imports and encourage establishing domestic capacities and sparing for 
production of downstream chemicals other than polymers. The Committee no te that 
the Department has proposed reduction of Customs Duty on Naphtha from th e 
present 4% to zero and on Natural Gases from the present 2.5% to zero based on 
the consultations with the industry associations. The Department also recommended 
to the Department of Revenue to increase the import duty on finished  goods (Plastics 
and articles thereof) from 10% and 15% to 20% to promote Make in Ind ia initiative. 
The Department had also made a presentation to the Department of Revenue  on 
rationalization of customs duty structure. While the Department of Revenue has 
notified increase of import duty to 25% for some of the finished pr oducts like plastic 
furniture etc., it has not decreased the customs duty on feed stocks stating the  
reason that the proposals   were examined in detail including stakeholders ’ 
consultation and action as appropriate has been taken on all such re ferences. They 
further requested the Department to send fresh proposal with latest inform ation and 
data if it wishes to pursue any proposal further. In this regard, the Committee are of 
the view that the manufacturing of end products should be promoted  in the country 
instead of importing them so that it can create downstream employm ent in the 
country. Moreover, the reduction of customs duty on import of feed stocks and 
increase in custom duty on end-products will help in expanding domestic capacity 
creation as the Petrochemical industry has huge value addition potential. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals should prepare and submit a fresh proposal for reduction of cus toms 
duty on import of Naphtha and Natural Gas to zero alongwith the other pro posals for 
rationalization of Customs Duty Structure of petrochemicals for the consideration of 
the Department of Revenue at the earliest. This recommendation of the Committee 
may also be sent to that Department for its compliance. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department o f 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under: 
 
 “Chemical and Petrochemical industry has been demanding since long back for 
reduction in import duty on feedstock such as ‘Naphtha’ to become globally cost 
competitive for production of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. This long standing 
demand has been taken care of by the Government in the budget 2021-
22.  Custom duty on Naphtha Duty has been reduced from 4% to 2.5%. T he 
decreased custom duty on naphtha is likely to further improve the utiliz ation of 
crackers resulting in availability of cost competitive olefins and aromatics. Low 
cost naphtha will also make a way into the availability of ethylene a nd propylene 
for petrochemical intermediates in value chain. Further boost to the production  of 
major basic petrochemicals. 

13 
 
 Various other recommendations were made for following groups of 
petrochemicals: 
i. Precursor to Intermediate 
ii. Polymers and Polyols 
iii. Finished Plastic Articles 
 of the above recommendation import duty on Polycarbonates Duty h as 
been increased from 5 to 7.5%. 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
                 
FREE TRADE AGREEMENTS 
 
 
2.7 The Committee are concerned to note that the Imports from Free Trade 
Agreement partners into India increased at a higher rate than India's expo rts to 
partner countries and also observe that trade deficit in chemical and petro chemical 
sector with FTA countries seems to worsen post signing of trade agreements. The se 
Free Trade Agreements were signed with ASEAN, Japan, Korea and Malaysia during 
the period 2009-11. The Committee note from the submissions mad e by the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals that India's international trade route d 
through the preferential route/ FTAs is small with not much growth in exports to FTA  
nations indicating low utilization rate of trade agreements by India. Complex rules of 
origin criteria, lack of information on FTAs, higher compliance costs and 
administrative delays dissuade exporters from using preferential routes. Given higher  
margin of preference (MFN- preferential duty) offered by India under the FT As, the 
surge in imports is much higher compared to surge in exports for India.   Since these 
Free Trade Agreements have caused adverse impact on the petrochem ical sector in 
the country, the Committee recommend that the Government may carry out a study 
on impact of FTAs signed with various countries on the trade of chemicals a nd 
petrochemicals with those countries and should take appropriate steps to safegu ard 
the interests of domestic chemical and petrochemical industry. The Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals should also take up this matter with the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry for the resolution of the same. If necessary, the Gov ernment 
may consider renegotiation of these agreements and due care should be ta ken while 
negotiating such Free Trade Agreements in future to protect the domestic industry. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under:- 
“The Department has conducted a study on Impact of Free Trade Agreem ents 
(FTAs) on Chemical and Petrochemicals Sector. The main objective of the 
study was to understand the impact of FTAs on import and export of chemicals 
and measures to increase competitiveness of the Indian chemical industry. 
            The report submitted by IIFT has concluded that India is a ne t exporter 
and net importer of certain chemicals & petrochemicals. As far as imports of 

14 
 
both chemicals and petrochemicals are concerned, it has increased 
substantially for several products, Imports from both FTA and Non-FTA 
partners increased in many cases and it is not yet conclusive that imports  have 
increased due to duty reduction only. India ’s rising demand and lack of 
competitiveness of domestic products may have also contributed for huge 
imports. The prominent competitor that India faced throughout major chemicals 
and petrochemicals has been China.  
            IIFT has recommended in the study report that imports n eed to be managed 
both from Free Trade Agreement (FTA) and non-FTA partners of the  country. 
Further, effective trade protection for the sector needs to be increased in line 
with WTO guidelines. Non-Tariff Barriers need to be erected and make BIS 
Standards mandatory to reduce imports and protect the chemical sector. 
Department of Commerce seek comments of DCPC on on-going various trade 
agreements from time to time. DCPC will take further due care while 
recommending for negotiation with such Free Trade Agreements in future to 
protect the domestic industry.” 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
ANTI-DUMPING DUTY 
  
2.9 The Committee are concerned to note the reply furnished by the Depa rtment to 
the query of the Committee whether any demands/requests for imposing anti-dumping 
duty were made by the Department to Directorate General of Trade Remedies (DG TR) 
and the present position of those demands/ requests. In this regard, the Department 
neither provided the details of recommendations made by it nor the present p osition of 
those demands/requests except the submission that it does not intervene after making 
recommendations as the safeguard duty and anti-dumping duty is being d ealt by DGTR 
which is an independent quasi-judicial body. The Committee would not like to d ispute the 
judicial status of DGTR but expect that the genuine anti-dumping cases shou ld be 
disposed of in a time bound manner so as to protect the domestic ind ustry from the 
undue advantage being enjoyed by foreign players through dumping o f goods in the 
country in the garb of cheap imports. In this regard, the Committee recommend that the  
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals would pursue vigorously all cases fil ed by 
it before DGTR for imposition of anti- dumping duties in a time bound manner. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department o f 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under:- 
 
 “DCPC have not directly recommended for ADD to DGTR. However, this 
department receives representations from industry on which it makes its 
recommendations. Details in this regard may be seen as under:  
 The matter with respect to Association of Synthetic Fiber Industry was taken up 
for review on 4th December 2020; about non-issue of notifications for  lev y of 

15 
 
antidumping duty on Nylon Filament Yarn and on Nylon Tyre Cord Fabric was 
discussed as recommended by the Director General of Trade Remedies (DGTR) 
after its, investigations.  
 A review meeting was taken by Secretary on 7th October 2020, to disc uss trade 
remedial measures and promotion of manufacturing of intermediates/bulk  
chemicals for specialty chemicals and specialty polymers.” 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT IN PETROCHEMICAL SECTOR 
 
2.11 The Committee note that the closely guarded technology for sp ecialty 
Petrochemical Products is one of the challenges being faced by Indian  Petrochemical 
Industry. The Committee were informed that spending on Research and Develop ment 
(R&D) in the country is very low. In order to encourage R&D activities in the country, 
consultations with industry associations are being conducted from time to time in th e 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals.   In this regard, the Committee are of 
the firm view that 
Research and Development is critical and of paramount importance 
for the growth and development of Petrochemicals sector and the same is po ssible 
only through the wholehearted and combined initiatives of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals, research institutions, industry associations and the 
individual industries. R&D efforts in the field of petrochemicals should aim at imp roving 
quality standards, obtaining higher yields resulting in reduction in cost of production  
and to earn competitive edge in the International Market. India has a  number of 
scientific institutions and the country ’s strength lies in its large pool of highly trained 
scientific manpower. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals should motivate and coordinate the efforts of the 
Research Institutions, Industry Associations and individual industries in creation of 
cutting edge technologies and specialty products in the field of petrochemicals so as to  
make the country competitive with the leading countries in the world.
 
2.12 The Committee note that the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals has a 
scheme for setting up of Centres of Excellence (CoE) for Research and Developm ent 
in the field of plastics, engineering polymers and specialty plastics. Under this Scheme, 
grant-in-aid up to Rs 5 crore each, is being provided to educational and research 
institutes to improve the existing Petrochemical technology and to promote 
development of new applications of polymers & plastics. The focus of the sc heme 
involves modernization and up-gradation of the existing 
manufacturing processes, 
improved quality of existing products and makes it safe for environment an d human 
health along with the research and development in the field of Bio-degrada ble Plastics. 
The Department has established five CoEs so far and three CoEs are under progress. 
Three new CoEs are also planned to be set up. Since this Government ’s initiative to 
promote research in the field of petrochemicals has to be strengthened furth er, the 
Committee recommend that the Department should examine whether the  Grant-in-Aid 
of Rs.5 crore is adequate to carry out research in the fields of modernization and 
upgradation of existing manufacturing processes and improving the quality  of existing 
products If the amount is inadequate the same should be enhanced suit ably. The 
Committee further recommend 
that R&D activities in the field should also be promoted 
in collaboration with premium educational and research institutions of the country such 
as IITs, CIPET and other Institutes of national importance so that tra nsformative 
technology and products can be developed which would give the domestic  industries a 
competitive edge in global market. 
 

16 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.13 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department o f 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under:- 
 
“The Department ensures coordination and collaboration between the Ind ustry, 
Academia, associations and various other stakeholders in the scheme for 
setting up of Centres of Excellence. It put in its best efforts in enhanced  
cooperation among the Institute and the Industry for creation of cutting edge 
technologies and specialty products in the field of petrochemicals so as to make 
the country competitive with the leading countries in the world. 
The Grant-in-aid of Rs. 5 crore is adequate to carry out research in the fields of 
modernization and up gradation of existing manufacturing processes and 
improving the quality of existing products as total cost of the project is shared by 
DCPC, Institute and their Industry partners in some cases. 
The R&D activities in the field are already being promoted in collaboration with 
premium educational and research institutions of the country such as IITs, 
CIPET and other Institutes of national importance. The Department has 
approved setting up of Centres of Excellence in institutes such as IITs, CIPE T, 
CSIR institutes so that transformative technology and products can be 
developed which would give the domestic industries a competitive edge in  
global market.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
Nil 
  

18 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
 
DEMAND AND AVAILABILITY OF PETROCHEMICALS 
 
  
4.1 The Committee note that the demand and supply forecast for 20 25 is almost 
balanced in respect of Polypropylene (PP) and Purified Terephthalic Acid (PTA). 
However, the demand and supply forecast   for 2025 is in deficit in respec t of host of 
other petrochemicals viz. Polyethylene(PE), Poly Vinyl Chloride(PVC), Mono Ethy lene 
Glycol (MEG), elastomers etc. Moreover, Styrene and Polycarbonates are being entirely 
imported as there is no domestic production capacity for these two petroch emicals in the 
country. Petrochemicals, whose production capacity is less than the demand, are 
imported to meet the domestic demand. Since it is necessary that various  
petrochemicals are produced in the country in requisite quantity so as to meet th e 
domestic demand, the Committee recommend that the Demand and availab ility of each 
of the petrochemicals should be studied separately and appropriate steps sh ould be 
taken to augment their production in the country so as to meet the dem and domestically. 
Wherever necessary, augmentation of customs duty should be considered to sa feguard 
the interests of domestic producers and to discourage the tendency of imports of  
petrochemicals which are produced in the country. As far as Styrene and Polycarbonates 
are concerned, domestic producers are exploring options of setting-up of Styrene  and 
Polycarbonate plants in the country. In this regard, the Department should ren der the 
necessary assistance as a facilitator to set up industries to manufacture such 
petrochemicals which are presently imported wholly or substantially. 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilisers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under:- 
 
 “In order to curb imports, for creation of new capacity and to promote investmen t; 
DCPC has recommended for change in custom duty on various petrochemicals. 
 Import duty on PVC was recommended to be raised from 10% to 11% du ring 
budget recommendation year 2021-22 along with other recommend ations. 
The Major highlights of the budget 2021-22 are as under: 
 Custom duty on Naphtha Duty has been reduced from 4% to 
2.5%. The decreased custom duty on naphtha is likely to further improve the 
utilization of crackers resulting in availability of cost competitive olefins and 
aromatics. Low cost naphtha will also pave a way into the availability of  ethylene 
and propylene for petrochemical intermediates in value chain. 
 Custom duty on Polycarbonates Duty has been increased from 5 to 
7.5%; to attract new investment in the technology intensive polycarbonate 
market.” 

19 
 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation no. 6 
 
VISION 2024 PLAN 
 
  
4.3 The Committee are concerned to note that the overall Petrochemicals imports  
during 2018-19 stands at around Rs. 1,28,000 crore approximately, which was 3.56% 
of the total national imports. The overall Petrochemicals exports during 201 8-19 were 
to the tune of around Rs. 78,000 crore approximately which was 3.73% of the total 
National Exports. Although percentage of share of import of petrochemicals is less  
than the export of petrochemicals, there is a trade imbalance in actual value te rms 
which is to the tune of Rs. 50,236 crore for the year 2018-19. In this rega rd, the 
Committee note the reply given by the Department   that there is free trade of 
Petrochemicals which includes building blocks, intermediates and final products due 
to open global economy unless and until specifically mentioned trade barriers f or 
individual products. In order to meet the domestic demand, investment in the s ector 
for new capacity creation, import substitution and to promote exports with 
employment generation, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has prep ared 
a Vision 2024 Plan. To achieve the objectives of this plan, certain initiatives are being 
taken by the Department viz. strengthening of PCPIRs, incentives for mega 
investment, Ensuring quality by formulating new standards and making tho se 
standards mandatory, Skilling & Employment generation, technology supp ort 
services to SMEs, better trade intelligence (new HS codes) and Advisory Forum as a 
permanent platform for interaction with industry. In this regard, the Committee are of 
the view that the lofty goals of Vision 2024plan can be achieved only  if the above 
mentioned initiatives are continued with full vigour and continuous monitoring. Hence, 
the Committee recommend that yearly targets should be set and concrete  steps 
should be taken to achieve those targets. The progress made should be  reviewed at 
the end of every year so that the objectives of the Vision 2024 plan be achieved 
within the stipulated period. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under:- 
Under Vision 2024 yearly targets have been set up. The details of the progress made 
yearly may be seen as under: 
Scheme Parameter 
For the year 2019-20 For the year 2020-21 
Target 
2019-20 
Outcome up to 
March 2020 
Target 
2020-21 
Outcome up 
to March 
2021 
Empower 
PCPIRs with full 
time experts 
Empowered 
management 
boards 
0 
1 
 
(The sub- 
committee 
constituted for 
1 
0 
(Comments 
on draft 
CCEA note 
have been 

20 
 
Scheme Parameter 
For the year 2019-20 For the year 2020-21 
Target 
2019-20 
Outcome up to 
March 2020 
Target 
2020-21 
Outcome up 
to March 
2021 
suggesting 
amendments in 
PCPIR policy to 
make it more 
effective. The 
committee has 
requested for time 
extension due to 
COVID-19 for 
submitting its 
report.) 
received from 
Ministries and 
Departments 
which are 
being 
examined) 
Fiscal 
incentives for 
mega 
investments 
Mega projects 
approved / 
announced 
0 
1 
 
(The sub- 
committee 
constituted for 
suggesting 
amendments in 
PCPIR policy to 
make it more 
effective. The 
committeehas 
requested for time 
extension due to 
COVID-19 for 
submitting its 
report.) 
1 
0 
(The proposal 
pertaining to 
providing 
fiscal 
incentives for 
mega 
investment is 
under 
consideration) 
Advisory 
Forum, 
Development 
Committee and 
Industry 
Interaction 
Meetings 6 6 6 1 
Notify 
mandatory 
standards 
Chemicals / 
Petrochemicals 9 7 35 0 
Skilling and 
Employment 
Generation 
Long Term and 
Short Term 
Courses 
80,000 63,162 65,000 42,762 
Technology 
support service 
to plastic and 
allied industry 
 
Services provided 90,000 6,221 90,000 16,082 
Recommend 
new HS Codes New Codes 75 8 50 0 
Source: Dashboard DCPC- http://dashboard.chemicals.gov.in/index.php 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 

21 
 
Recommendation no. 8  
 
HARMONIZED SYSTEM (HS) CODES 
 
4.5 The Committee note tha t the chemicals and petrochemicals appearing in 
“others” category need identification to facilitate and monitor international trade, as 
the non-availability of specified codes in the customs tariff has resulted in huge 
undesirable EXIM trade under “others‟ category. In this regard, the Committee were 
informed that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has proposed 
new Harmonized System (HS) codes for products falling under "other" category. 
Based on the recommendations of the Department, 53 HS codes have  been notified 
by Department of Revenue during 2018-19. Further, during 2019-20, n ew HS codes 
for 80 chemicals and petrochemicals were proposed by the Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals. Out of this, the Department of Revenue notified ne w HS Codes 
of 49 chemicals and 4 petrochemicals. Since the classification of petrochemicals are 
of prime importance from the point    of health, safety & environ ment including 
national security along with prevention of unfair trade practices, the Committee  
recommend that the Department may continue this exercise of assigning HS code s 
for chemicals and petrochemicals which are falling under other category and ensure 
that all such chemicals and petrochemical products are duly classified to preven t 
unfair trade practices, etc. 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.6 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under:- 
 
 
 Creation of new HS code is an on-going exercise. DCPC in consultation with  
Department of Commerce has continued this process. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
 
PETROLEUM, CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS INVESTMENT REGIONS 
 
  
4.7 The Committee note that t he Government of India had formulated PCPIR 
Policy in April 2007 and the four PCPIRs viz. in the States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Odisha and Tamil Nadu are being established since then in a cluster 
approach for promotion of Petroleum, Chemical & Petrochemical Sectors in an 
integrated & environment friendly manner on a large scale. Once fully e stablished, 
these four PCPIRs are expected to attract investment of around Rs. 7.63 lakh crore. 
As per data available from State Governments, investments worth Rs. 2.12 l akh 
crore approximately have been made / committed in these regions. The four 
PCPIRs are expected to generate employment for around 33.83 lakh persons . 

22 
 
Around 3.50 lakh persons have been employed in direct and indirect activ ities 
related to PCPIRs. However, in Committees ’ view, the progress made so far in 
establishing these PCPIRs is not upto the mark because thirteen years have  
already passed but not a single PCPIR has been fully established so far. A nchor 
Tenents have been appointed and anchor projects have been com missioned for 
Gujarat and Odhisha PCPIRs but the same are yet to done in respect of Andh ra 
Pradesh and Tamil Nadu PCPIRs. Environment clearance has been obta ined only 
in respect of Gujarat PCPIR. Since such inordinate delays will defeat the very 
purpose for which these PCPIRs are being established, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals should monitor 
the progress made in establishment of these PCPIRs on monthly basis and  the 
matter should be pursued at the highest level with the concerned State Government 
particularly with the Governments of Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh where t he 
progress is very slow. The Department should provide the necessary monetary and  
technical assistance to the State Governments so as to achieve the goal in a time 
bound manner. Moreover, the Department has set a target to strengthen  these 
PCPIRs under Vision 2024 Plan and the Committee hope that the Department  
would initiate concrete measures to fully establish all the four PCPIRs in a time  
bound manner. The progress made in this regard may be intimated to the  
Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.8 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilisers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under:- 
 
 Department has noted the suggestions of Hon'ble Committee and the 
Department has been taking up the matter with State Governments to speed  up 
the process of establishing PCPIRs in a time bound manner. For this purp ose, 
this Department reviews the implementation of PCPIRs from time to time.  
 To overcome the challenges being faced by the Government in effectiv e 
implementation of PCPIR Policy such as non-availability of building 
blocks/intermediate feedstock for downstream industry, inadequate funding for 
common utility infrastructure, delay in master planning etc, the Government has 
also initiated process to amend the existing PCPIR Policy with an objective to 
attract more investments and faster implementation.  
 A Sub-committee was constituted in November, 2019 under the chairmansh ip of 
Principal Secretary (Industries) Govt. of Andhra Pradesh with the members of 
Govt. of Odisha, Govt. of Gujarat, Govt. of Tamil Nadu and representatives from 
FICCI, CII, ICC, AIPMA and CIPET to recommend the amendments in PCPIR 
Policy, 2007 to make it more effective. A review meeting was also held on 
27.05.2020 under the chairmanship of the then Secretary, DCPC to discuss the  
report submitted by the committee of State Secretaries of Industries for 
recommending amendments to the PCPIR Policy. 
 With the approval of Minister (C&F), a CoS note was circulated on 26.06 .2020 
for inter-ministerial consultation for proposed amendments in existing PCPIR 
Policy of 2007 which, inter alia, included corporate tax incentives to parti ally 
offset the higher cost of production and match incentives given by com peting 
countries. Approval of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) was sought to 
amend the provisions of PCPIR Policy, 2007.  
 Further detailed discussions were held by Secretary (C&PC) with CEO NITI 
Aayog on 30th July 2020 and also with Secretary DEA, Secretary Revenue.  
Based on their comments and discussions, it was decided to replace fiscal 

23 
 
incentives with Production Linked Incentives (PLI), include a Phased 
Manufacturing Plan and directly move a CCEA Note for approval of  the 
amended PCPIR Policy. Accordingly, Draft CCEA note has been circulated on  
24.08.2020 for inter-ministerial consultation after obtaining approval of H on'ble 
Minister (C&F).  
 Subsequently, the draft CoS note on PCPIR was sent to Cabinet Secretariat o n 
17/12/2020 with a request to conduct the meeting to discuss issues pertaining to 
proposed amendments in PCPIR Policy. The proposed meeting is yet to be  
convened and the future course of the action in this regard will be taken o n the 
basis of the decisions taken by the Committee of Secretaries. 
  
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
 
JOINT COMMITTEE FOR EXAMINING ALL ASPECTS RELATING TO DEMAND AND 
SUPPLY OF PETROCHEMICALS IN THE COUNTY. 
 
  
5.1 The Committee note that the gap between demand and capacity to  produce 
major petrochemicals in the country will increase from 1124 Kilo Tonnes pe r Annum 
(KTPA) in 2018-19 to 7112 KTPA by 2025. So it is very much esse ntial to look into 
the Demand and Supply Position of petrochemicals in a holistic manner in th e 
country particularly in view of the prevailing Covid 19 situation and to initiate 
appropriate measure to meet the growing petrochemicals need of this hu ge 
country.    In this regard, the Committee note that a few steps have been taken by the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals in coordination with the other stake 
holders in the field. Firstly, a Committee has been constituted jointly by the Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoP&NG) and the Department of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals (DCPC) with expert members from PSUs and others to examine 
petrochemicals demand and supply scenario. Secondly, a draft Petrochemicals 
Perspective plan has been prepared by DCPC in consultation with MoP&NG, 
Engineers India Limited (EIL), Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) and other stakeholders 
and thirdly, DCPC has asked EIL to prepare a perspective plan based on the 
projected Supply & Demand of Petrochemicals with possible Refinery & 
Petrochemicals complex configurations involving various feed-stock routes and 
expected investment & return in each configuration. The Committee further note tha t 
the Joint Committee ’s Report and the draft Reports on Perspective Plan are being 
revisited in view of the global pandemic due to COVID19 which has change d and 
disrupted the scenario of world economy. The Committee also note that in view of the 
recent developments in US-China trade relations, the opportunities got further 
enhanced and many multinational companies are looking towards India to set up their 
production facilities. Moreover, Pandemic Covid19 created a situation where the 
entire world is aiming to reduce their dependence on China for supply of essential 
raw materials and key products. This gives an opportunity to India to become a global 
supplier, particularly of Petrochemicals. In this regard, the Committee feel that there 
should be synergetic approach in handling this very crucial matter of atta ining self- 
sufficiency in meeting the domestic demand for petrochemicals and to beco me a 
global leader in the field. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the J oint 
Committee comprising senior representatives of MoP&NG, DCPC, EIL, Petroleum 
PSUs and the private sector and the experts in the field should be declare d as the 
nodal entity for examining all aspects relating to ‘Demand and Supply of 
Petrochemicals in the country and to make the country a global supplier of 
petrochemicals by grabbing the opportunities created due to the present situation i n 
the world. The perspective plans which have already prepared for the sector should 
be studied by this Committee in the light of the prevailing world economic sce nario 
and a concrete road map for achieving complete self-reliance in the field  of 
petrochemicals and to make the country a major hub for production of petrochemicals 
should be chalked out along with a definite time schedule. Based on th e road map, 
necessary steps should be taken to achieve the goal in a time bound manner. The 

25 
 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken on the above recommend ation within 
three months. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilisers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under:- 
 “The recommendation of constituting a Joint Committee comprising senior 
representatives of MoP&NG, DCPC, EIL, Petroleum PSUs and the private 
sector and the experts in the field for examining all aspects relating  to 
‘Demand and Supply of Petrochemicals in the country ’ and to make the 
country a global supplier of petrochemicals has been discussed with MoP&NG 
and framework is being prepared for the same.” 
 
Recommendation no. 5 
SETTING UP OF WORLD SCALE PLANTS 
 
5.3 The Committee note that the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has 
recommended to increase import duty to make petrochemical products globally co st 
competitive and economically viable so as to promote investment for building world scale 
petrochemical plants. In Committee ’s view, increasing import duty may be one of the 
factors which may help setting up of World Scale Plants in the country but the re are 
many other factors which are equally essential to attract entrepreneurs to s et up world 
scale plants in the country for the production of Petrochemicals viz. faster an d hassle 
free clearances, lowering of capital cost, incentives for setting up of world scale p lants, 
tax holidays etc. The countries like China, Vietnam, etc. are the competitors in this field 
and it is necessary to study the incentives being offered by them to attract F oreign Direct 
Investment in the field of petrochemicals. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals to study the incentives and the e ase of 
doing business methods viz. grant of faster environmental clearances, single windo w 
clearance for statutory/ legal requirements, provision of export incentives, lower cost of 
capital, tax holidays, etc. being adopted by leading countries to attract en trepreneurs to 
set up large scale petrochemical plants in their countries and to take concrete ste ps to 
attract Foreign Direct Investment for setting up World Scale Petrochemical Complex es in 
the country based on the outcome of that study. 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 In its action taken reply, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) have stated as under:- 
 “The Committee suggested for undertaking Study on Petrochemicals for providing  
incentives to industry and also the ease of doing business methods to attract 
investment. 
 The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals is exploring the possibilities. ” 
 
 
 
 New Delhi;                                  Kanimozhi Karunanidhi 
16 November, 2021                                       Chairperson, 
   25 Kartika 1943 (Saka)                                             Standing Committee on 
                                 Chemicals and Fertilizers 

26 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2021-22) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 16 th November, 2021 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1700.hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
K. KANIMOZHI -    CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
4. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
5. Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
6. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
7. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
8. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
9. 
 
 
 
       10  
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
 
Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
11 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
12 Dr. Anil Jain 
13 Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
14 Shri Arun Singh 
 
 SECRETARIAT  
1.  Shri  N. K. Jha  -  Director 
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director   
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Panna Lal   - Under Secretary 
  
  2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the newly constituted 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consider Memorandum No.1 
regarding selection of subjects for examination during the year (2021-22) and also to discuss the 
future course of action of the Committee during the tenure.  
 
3. The Committee then considered Memorandum No. 1 and after discussion 
selected the following subjects pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Ferti lizers for 
detailed examination during 2021-22:- 
 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
1. Nano-fertilizers for sustainable crop production and maintaining soil    health.   
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
 

27 
 
2. Tax structure on fertilizers sector in terms of GST and import duties – 
analysis of the tax structure of raw material and final products and its impa ct 
on self-sufficiency and use of fertilizers. 
3. Prices, Availability and distribution of fertilizers.  
 
 
II. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
4.  Vision 2024 - To establish India as a leading manufacturer of chem icals and 
petrochemicals. 
5.  Insecticides – promotion and development including safe usage -   licensing 
regime for insecticides. 
6.  Disposal of toxic waste from Bhopal Gas Leak site. 
7. Environmental Impact of Petrochemical products. 
 
III. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
8.    Promotion of Medical Device Industry.  
9.    Availability of Medicines and Medical devices for COVID Management.  
10.  Self sufficiency of key starting Material and intermediates. 
 
4. The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft A ction Taken 
Reports unanimously without any amendment/change:- 
 
i.     XXX    XXX     XXX  
 
ii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
iii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
iv. ATR on the recommendations/observations of the Committee containe d in the 
Sixteenth Report on ‘Demand and Availability of Petrochemicals including Imports 
and Exports’ (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
 
v.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
vi.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
vii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
5  The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to finalize and present the  Action 
Taken Reports to the Parliament in the ensuing session. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

28 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para-3 of Introduction to Report) 
 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS ON THE SUBJECT 'DEMAND AND 
AVAILABILITY OF PETROCHEMICALS INCLUDING IMPORT AND EXPORTS ' 
OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF 
CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 12 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos.  2, 4, 7, 9, 10 and 12)   
6 
 
Percentage of Total 50% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
(Vide Recommendation No.  Nil)   
 
0 
 
Percentage of Total    0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:-   
 (Vide Recommendation No. 3, 6, 8 and 11)                                                     
4 
Percentage of Total 33.3% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
(Vide Recommendation No. 1 and 5 )     
2 
Percentage of Total 16.7% 
 