i 
 
 
46 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
                  CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 
(2023-24) 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
     
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND 
PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
 
INSECTICIDES & PESTICIDES – PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT 
INCLUDING SAFE USAGE -  LICENSING REGIME FOR INSECTICIDES 
 
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December, 2023/  Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 


ii 
 
CC&F.No. 174 
 
                              FORTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2023-24) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
INSECTICIDES & PESTICIDES – PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT 
INCLUDING SAFE USAGE -  LICENSING REGIME FOR INSECTICIDES 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 December  2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 December 2023 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) (iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24) (v) 
INTRODUCTION (vi) 
Acronyms/Abbreviations of the terms used in the Report (vii) 
REPORT  
PART- I          NARRATION  
I  Introductory  1 
 Promotion and Development of Insecticides and Pesticides  1 
 Declining use of DDT 6 
 Long Lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLINs) Project 8 
 Issues/concerns of agrochemicals industry 9 
 Indian Chemicals Industry 11 
 Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) 12 
 Non PoPs Alternative to DDT 17 
 Agrochemicals 20 
 HIL  (India Ltd.) 22 
 PART - II  
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
28 
 ANNEXURES  
I User & Environment Friendly Pesticide Formulation Technologies 
Developed by IPFT 
 
II Plant Wise Production for last three years  
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2022-23) held on 8th February, 2023 
 
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2022-23) held on 20th July, 2023. 
 
III. *Minutes of the sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (2023-24) held on 14th December, 2023. 
 
 
*To be appended  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (2022-23) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
5. Shri Deepak Baij 
6. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
7. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhalikar 
8. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
10. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
11. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt. Aparupa Poddar  
14. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15. Shri Muniyan Selvaraj 
16. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
17. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
18. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
19. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
20. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
21 Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar  
23. Dr. Anil Jain  
24. Shri Arun Singh  
25. Shri Ram Nath Thakur* 
26. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
27. Vacant 
28. Vacant 
29. Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1.     Smt. Geeta Parmar              -           Additional Director 
 2.    Shri Kulvinder Singh   -  Deputy Secretary 
 
*Nominated w.e.f. 13.02.2023 vide Lok Sabha Bulletin- Part-II Para No. 6251 dated 14.02.2023. 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (2023-24) 
  
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
5. Shri Deepak Baij 
6. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
7. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhalikar 
8. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
10. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
11. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt. Aparupa Poddar  
14. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15. Shri Muniyan Selvaraj 
16. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
17. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
18. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
19. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
20. Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
21. Vacant* 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar  
23. Dr. Anil Jain  
24. Shri Arun Singh  
25. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
26. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
27. Vacant 
28. Vacant 
29. Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
  
     1.   Shri Chander Mohan        -                   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Geeta Parmar                 -    Director 
3.   Shri Kulvinder Singh                -    Deputy Secretary 
 
* Vacant vice Shri Uday Pratap  Singh, MP(LS) who has resigned his seat in LS w.e.f. 06.12.2023. 
[vide Lok Sabha Secretariat Notification No.21/1(1)/2023/T(B) dated 6th December, 2023] 

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 (2023-24) having been authorized by the Committee d o present on their behalf, this  
Forty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Insecticides & pesticides – 
promotion and development including safe usage -  licensing regime for insecticides’ 
pertaining to the Department o f  Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers.  
2. The Committee  had a briefing by the representatives of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals on 08 th February, 2023 and took oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers; Ministry of Env ironment, Forest s and Climate Change;  
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare  and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
on 20th July, 2023. 
3.  The Committee (202 3-24) considered and adopted the  Report at their sitting 
held on 14th December, 2023.  
 4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the o fficers of the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers; Ministry of 
Environment Forests and Climate Change; Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  for tendering their evidence and 
placing before them all the requisite information sought for in connection with the 
examination of the subject.  
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to 
the Committee.  
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations/ recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters at the end of the Report.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                 DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
 14 December, 2023                                                                        CHAIRPERSON, 
23 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)                                  STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
       `                                 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
  

vii 
 
ACRONYMS/ABBREVIATIONS OF THE TERMS USED IN THE REPORT 
ARC Advanced Research Centres 
BTI Bacillus Thuringiensis Israelensis 
CIBRC Central Insecticides Board and Registration Committee  
CIL Central Insecticide Laboratory 
CIPET Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering & 
Technology 
CPCB Central Pollution Control Board 
CPDS Chemicals Promotion Development Scheme 
CSIR Council of Scientific & Industrial Research 
DA&FW Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
DCPC Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals  
DDT Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane 
DIPAMS Department of Investment and Public Asset Management 
DPE Department of Public Enterprises 
DPPQS Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine and Storage  
EA Executive Agency  
FARM Financing Agrochemical Reduction and Management 
F&AC Finance & Administrative Committee  
F&AC Finance and Administrative Committee 
F.Y Financial Year 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GEF Global Environment Facility 
HHPs Highly hazardous Pesticide 
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research  
ICAR-NBAIM National Bureau of Agriculturally Important Microorganisms  
IGR Insect Growth regulators   
IPFT Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology 
IVPM Integrated Vector and Pest Management  
KVKs Krishi Vigyan Kendras  
LLIN Long Lasting Insecticidal Nets  
M.O.U Memorandum of Understanding 
MoC&F Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change  
MoHFW Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
NEERI National Environment Engineering Research Institute  
NITI Aayog National Institution for Transforming India Aayog 
PLI Production Linked Incentive  
POPs Persistent organic pollutants  
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
R&D Research and Development 
RC Registration Committee 
SC Stockholm Convention  
UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
USD United State Dollar 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
PART- I 
NARRATION 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 Pesticides are used to kill or repel the pests.  The y can broadly be classified 
in the following categories:- 
 
i. Insecticides: The chemicals that are used to protect plants from 
 insects and pests are known as Insecticides. 
ii. Fungicides: This class of crop protection chemicals is used to control 
the spread of fungal diseases in plants.  
iii. Herbicides: Herbicides are chemicals that kill or control the growth of 
 weeds in the cultivation area.  
Iv Bio-Pesticides: They are Pesticides of biological origin , i.e., derived 
 from animals, plants, bacteria etc.  
v. Others: This includes plant growth regulators,  nermaticides, 
 rodenticides and fumigants.  
 
  
Promotion and Development of Insecticides and Pesticides 
2. The Committee desired to know how the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals (DCPC) functions for promotion and development of Insecticides & 
Pesticides – including their safe usage , how the Department’s role is restricted on 
the issue and also the role of the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(DA&FW)  in this regard. The Department in their written reply has submitted that 
Pesticides are regulated through a comprehensive legislation  – the Insecticides Act, 
1968 and the Insecticides Rules, l97l  framed thereunder, which are administered by 
the DA&FW. This Act regulates the import, manufacture, sale, transport, distribution 
and use of Insecticides to prevent risk to human beings or animals and for matters 
connected therewith. Further, for effective implementation of the provisions of the 
Insecticides Act, the DA&FW through its attached office, the Directorate of Plant 
Protection, Quarantine and Storage  (DPPQS), administers   various statutory 
functions  under the Insecticide Act, 1968 . These include the registration of 
Insecticides, inclusion of chemical/Insecticides in the schedule to the Act, notification 
of Insecticides Inspectors, amendments in Insecticides Rules etc . 
3. Elaborating on the issue, a representative of the Department, during 
evidence, apprised the Committee regarding Insecticides Act as under:- 
 
“Sir, the Insecticides Act regulates the import, manufacture, transport, 
distribution, stocking, sale and use. So, from manufacturing and import till 
used by the farmers, it contains everything, having the safety and efficacy 
issues in mind. Under the Inse cticides Act, there are well defined 
responsibilities of the Central Government and the State Governments. The 
Central Government’s primary responsibility is to grant registration and 
quality control. After getting registration from the Central Government through 
the regulatory body, then manufacturing, sale, transport, distribution and use 

2 
 
lies with the State Government. The State Government has major component 
of quality control through State Pesticides Testing Laboratories. Here, the 
State Governments, i f they find any safety issue and efficacy issue, can 
prohibit the sale, distribution and use of Pesticides for two months which can 
be extended further. There are powers for appeal and revision under the 
Act.” 
 
4. When asked to elaborate on the role of the Department in promotion and 
development of Pesticides, the Department has informed as under:- 
 
▪ DCPC plays the role of promoter for the growth of the Industry. 
▪ DCPC takes up inter-ministerial coordination to sort out the problems of 
the chemicals and petrochemicals sector.  
▪ DCPC extends financial support under  the Chemicals Promotion 
Development Scheme (CPDS) for organizing seminars, conferences 
and training prog rams to create awareness among the farmers about 
judicious use of agrochemicals and fertilizers.  
5. During evidence, a representative  of the Department explained about 
Pesticides as under:- 
 “I will just move on to the exact introduction of the Pesticides as such. But 
before going into that, let me explain that pesticide is broadly classified into 
insecticide, fungicide and others. The major contribution of Pesticides is in 
the respective order as herbicide, fungicide and inse cticide. Now, it helps 
prevent the loss of agricultural products from attack of pests and diseases. 
We have been able to grow from 52 million tonnes of foodgrains in 1951 -52  
to almost about 300 billion tonnes in 2021-22. Apart from this, there are many 
other things, which are contributing to increased production. Pesticides have 
played a vital role in enhancing the agriculture production in India. Sir, so far 
as the size is concerned, we are about 50,000 crore in terms of Pesticides 
industry. I would like to inform the hon. Committee that worldwide the generic 
Pesticides are in demand which is about 75 per cent. So, we can use that 
potential which is existing and we can grow ourselves. We also need to see 
the last bullet point that we are consuming very, ve ry small quantities of 
Pesticides in our country. Our annual consumption is indicated here which 
shows that it is 0.5 kg per hectare whereas China is having almost 17 kg per 
hectare even though India is the second largest producer of agriculture -
product.” 
6.  The Committee have observed that administration of Insecticides Act, 1968 is 
kept outside the purview of the DCPC. When asked how has it affected the 
Department, it has been replied that the Department  takes up the matter s raised by 
agrochemical industry with DA&FW from time to time for resolution of the same.  
7. As regards the classification of Pesticides, the Committee have been informed 
as under:- 

3 
 
Category Market Share Use 
Herbicides 44% Kills/controls the growth of weeds in 
the cultivation area 
Fungicides 27% Controls the spread of fungal 
diseases in plants 
Insecticides 22% Protects plants from insects and 
pests 
Others(Nematicides, 
rodenticides, fumigants Bio-
Pesticides, Plant growth 
regulators, etc.) 
7% For control parasitic worms, rodents 
etc. 
 
8. The Committee have further been informed that the whole world is planning to 
phase out hazardous Insecticide s and Pesticides as well as develop  new molecules 
which are least toxic, minimizing economical injury level and introduc ing organic and 
neem-based Pesticides.  
9. Asked to state the manner in which the Department has planned to phase out 
hazardous Insecticides and Pesticides , develop least toxic molecules and minimize 
economical injury level, the Department has informed as under:- 
  
● HIL (India) Ltd. , a CPSE under D/o Chemicals and Petrochemicals with 
UNIDO,is taking up a project titled “Promoting eco -friendly crop protection 
solutions for persistent organic pollutant and highly hazardous pesticide 
reduction in Asia" under  the Financing Agrochemical Reduction and 
Management (FARM) programme of the Global Environment Facil ity (GEF). 
The main objective of this project is to minimize the use of highly hazardous 
Pesticides (HHPs) and persistent organic pollutants (POPs) in agricultur al 
use. 
● The main aim of the FARM Programme is to catalyse investment in  
agriculture, eliminate the use of most harmful Pesticides,  influence 
sustainable agriculture programmes , catalyse the expansion of  compliance 
with global agricultural sustainability standards, accelerate the adoption of low 
chemical alternative s, and decreas e the use of agrochemicals and agro 
plastics.  
● The Pesticides are regulated by D/o Agriculture & Farmers Welfare under 
Central Insecticide Act, 1968 and rules framed there under. D/oChemicals 
and Pe trochemicals plays the role of promoter for the agrochemicals. 
Ministry/DA & FW, keeps reviewing, from time to time, the continued use or 
otherwise of those Pesticides which are banned/severely restricted in other 
countries due to their toxic concerns or h ave been reported to pose harm to 
human health or environment in our country or other countries. These reviews 
are undertaken by constituting special committees or through the Registration 
Committee (RC). Based on the recommendations of such expert committ ees 
and after due consultation with RC, the Ministry/DA & FW has so far banned 
or phased out 46 Pesticides and 4 pesticide formulations for import, 

4 
 
manufacture or use in the country. In addition, 8 Pesticide  registrations have 
been withdrawn and 9 Pesticides have been placed under restricted use. 
10. Asked to enumerate the hazardous effects of the conventional Insecticides 
and Pesticides for agricultural produce, fields, farmers and the environment, the 
Department in its reply has informed as under:- 
(i) Conventional Insecticides and Pesticides are synthetic chemical  
Pesticides. They leave a certain amount of residue in the soil after application. 
Therefore, its application dosage is fixed by keeping negligible amount of 
residue in the soil after application. 
(ii) Indiscriminate and excess use of conventional Pesticides can 
contaminate soil, water, turf, and other vegetation. In addition to killing insects 
or weeds, Pesticides can be toxic to a host of other organisms including bi rds, 
fish, beneficial insects, and non-target plants.  
(iii) The Registration Committee (RC) constituted under section (5) of the 
Insecticides Act, 1968 registers the Pesticides for use in the country after 
evaluation of their safety and efficacy. RC, whil e registering the Pesticides, 
provides the details of doses, crops, precautionary measures, antidotes etc on 
Label and Leaflets. The registered Pesticides, if used as per Label and 
Leaflets, do not pose any harm to human beings, animals,  and living 
organisms other than pest. However, the adverse impact of Pesticides on 
farmers’ health or environment may arise if the Pesticides are not used with 
adequate safety precautions as given in Label and Leaflet approved under the 
Insecticides Act, 1968 and Rules, 1971.  
11. The Committee enquired about the ‘organic’ and ‘neem based’ Pesticides and 
in what respects these Pesticides are better than the conventional Pesticides. In 
reply, the Department stated as under:- 
  
● Organic Pesticides are the Pesticides derived from things in nature that can 
be used to control pests. This includes substances derived from plants, 
minerals, and micro-organisms.  
● Neem based Pesticides  are the pest control agents manufactured from 
Neem extracts. They are u sed in agriculture for pests , disease management 
and to supply nutrients to plants. Neem is safe for farmers & can be used 
during the entire crop cycle, environmentally safe, and compatible with the 
different Integrated Pest Management strategies. Nee m is also safe to non -
target organism and beneficial to insects such as honey bee, silk worm, etc. 
● Both organic and neem based Pesticides do not leave any synthetic residue 
in the crop produce and soil, whereas synthetic chemical  Pesticides leave a 
certain amount of pesticide residue after application.  
● Under Insecticides Act,  1968, there is no usage of the term “Organic 
Pesticides”. However, the term  “Bio-Pesticides” may be used   to refer to 
products containing biocontrol agents, natural entities or chemicals produced 
from natural materials (such as animals, plants, bacteria, or specific minerals). 
Bio-Pesticides may include natural plant -derived products, which include 
alkaloids, terpenoids, phenolics and other secondary chemicals.  

5 
 
● ‘Neem based’ Pesticides-means any pesticide or formulation containing neem 
based ingredients or active ingredient s derived from  the neem tree 
(Azadirachtaindica). Azadirachtin is a tetranortri -terpenoid (limonoid) found in 
the seeds of the neem tree. This compo und has been shown to be an anti -
feedant and disrupt insect growth by blocking the release of the morphogenic 
peptide hormone.  
● Further, Bio -Pesticides and neem based Pesticides are better than 
conventional chemical Pesticides as Bio-Pesticides are usually inherently less 
toxic than conventional Pesticides and they generally affect only the target 
pest and closely related organisms, in contrast to broad spectrum, 
conventional Pesticides that may affect organisms as different as birds, 
insects and mammals.  
12. The Committee wanted to know the status with regard to the production of 
‘organic’ & ‘neem based’ Pesticides in the country. In reply, it has been informed that 
neem based Pesticides are currently manufactured by a few organizations in the 
country. HIL, a CPSE under the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, is in 
the process of setting up of neem based Pesticides with the  support of UNIDO. 
These are initially targeting mosquito control with the purpose of vector born disease 
management, including malaria.  The production of bio -Pesticides and neem based 
Pesticides ha s already started in the country. The Government of India has taken 
various steps to promote the use of bio -Pesticides. Simplified guidelines have been 
formulated by Registration Committee (RC) for the registration of bio -Pesticides. For 
bio-Pesticides, provisional registrations are being granted under Section 9(3B) of the 
Insecticides Act, 1968 along -with the permission for commercialization during the 
provisional registration period of two years based on the confirmation of molecular 
identity of the strain from ICAR -National Bureau of Agriculturally Important 
Microorganisms (ICAR -NBAIM) and quality verification of the product from Central 
Insecticide Laboratory (CIL).  
13. Asked to state whether the DCPC has ever reviewed the demand of ‘organic’ 
and ‘neem based’ Pesticides in the country vis-a-vis their production, the Department 
has stated that n eem based Pesticides support their contribution to org anic 
agricultural production systems that are more sustainable and do not leave chemical 
residues. This method also helps to maintain soil productivity, ensuring longer 
production times. Organic agriculture can be a viable alternative production method 
for farmers, but there are challenges to be overcome. The growing concerns about 
conventional agriculture and the demand for products that do not generate waste is 
the reason for increased adoption of the use of bio -Pesticides by farmers, which 
contributes to  the growth of organic agriculture.  The bio-Pesticides represent only 
4.2% of the overall pesticide market in the country now and they are forecasted to 
have an annual growth rate of around 10% in the coming years due to the promotion 
of use of bio and botanical based crop protection methods by the Government.  
14. On being asked about the details of companies  producing or planning to 
produce the ‘organic’ and ‘neem based’ Pesticides in the country and the number of 
companies in the private Sector and public Sector, the Department in its written reply 
submitted that neem based Pesticides are currently being manufactured by a few 
organizations in the country and HIL (India) Limited, with the support of UNIDO. 

6 
 
However, specific information with respect to companies in private sector planning to 
produce bio-Pesticides is not available.  
15. On being asked as to how the DCPC propose to promote development of 
Pesticides, the Department has stated that DCPC organizes international conference 
and seminars to promote investments in chemicals sector including agrochemicals 
sector. The Department is also exploring the possibilities of establishing segment 
specific (e.g. Agrochemicals) chemical parks across the Country which will be base d 
on plug-n-play approach. 
Declining use of DDT 
16. Asked about the harmful effects of DDT and brief particulars of the UNIDO 
project to phase out DDT and various proposals covered under the project, the 
Department has replied that the global use of DDT for disease vector control 
continued to decline, new insecticide products with long residual activity periods for 
indoor residual spraying and next generation bed nets had become available to 
protect communities against malaria infection.  HIL (India) Ltd. is the sole 
manufacturer of DDT in India. 
● DDT is slightly to moderately acutely toxic to mammals, including human 
being. DDT persists in the environment, accumulates in fatty tissues, and is 
known to cause adverse health effects on human beings and wildlife. In 
addition, resistance occurs in some insects (like the house fly) who develop 
the ability to quickly metabolize the DDT. DDT is highly persistent in soil with 
half-life period upto 15 years. 
● DDT is regulated as a Persistent Organic Pollutant (POP), which is regulated 
under the Stockholm Convention which has been ratified by India. The 
Stockholm Convention mandates the elimination of DDT. India currently 
remains the only country permitted to ma nufacture DDT for the sole purpose 
to control vector borne diseases. 
● To phase out the DDT as per the Stockholm Convention on POPs, UNIDO is 
supporting HIL under the project “Development and Promotion of non -POP 
alternative to DDT” in setting up  of commercial manufacturing facilities for 
Long Lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLIN), Bti based bio -larvicides and Neem 
based botanical insecticide, larvicide, repellent, deterrent and Insect Growth 
regulators (IGR).  
● The Harmful effects of DDT due to its chemical toxicity and persistent nature it 
causes endocrine disruption, carcinogenicity, reproductive toxicity etc. in 
humans and causes thinning of birds’ eggshells and hence death of embryo, 
hormone problems, liver lesion and liver tumour(in animals). 
17. When asked how the Department/ HIL strategise to complete the UNIDO 
project within the fixed timelines, it has been informed that HIL is the commercial 
manufacturing partner for the UNIDO project on “Development and Promotion of 
non-POPs alternatives to DDT”. HIL has commercialized LLIN manufacturing and is 
committed to complete both the neem project and Bti project before December 2024. 
18. Asked about the present status with regard to the Governme nt commitment to 
phase out DDT from the country by the year 2024 and whether the Department 
would be able to fulfil its commitment, the Department has informed as under:- 

7 
 
● HIL a CPSE under DCPC, is the sole manufacturer of DDT. DCPC is 
committed to phase out the DDT as per the timelines. However, Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare is the end user of DDT, and HIL manufactures and 
supplies DDT to Ministry of Health only as per their requirement.  
● The Government of India signed the Stockholm Convention (SC) on persistent 
organic pollutants (POPs) in May 2002 and ratified it on 13 th January 2006. 
UN Environment conceptualized the project “Development and promotion of 
non-POPs alternatives to DDT” and identified CPCB as the Executive agency 
(EA) for execution of the project. CPCB, the executing agency (EA) has 
awarded the sub -contract to CSIR -NEERI. CSIR -NEERI has developed 4 
training modules [1. DDT and Vector Borne Diseases, 2. Vector Morphology 
and Bionomics, 3. Alternatives to DDT in vector control management, 4. 
Integrated Vector and Pest Management (IVPM)] on Integrated Vector Pest 
Management (IVPM) under the project. These modules were  approved by 
National Centre for Vector Borne Disease Control (formerly NVBDCP) on 
January 22,2021. CSIR -NEERI is promoting the non -POPs alternatives to 
DDT being developed by UNIDO/HIL through trainings, workshops, 
awareness programs, IEC activities to State public health departments.  
● The total budget of the project was USD 9,12,425 and time limit of the project 
was up to December 31, 2022.  
● The project has been extended to December 2024 to facilities and regulatory 
processes for the newly indigenously de veloped alternatives to DDT such as 
LLINs, Neem based Pesticides, Bt. based Pesticides etc. in order to 
completely phase out DDT.  
● Considering the rational e of using DDT for vector disease control, India had 
registered with the Basel, Rotterdam an d Stockholm conventions  (BRS) 
Secretariat for allowing production and use of DDT for ‘acceptable purpose’. 
The registration allowed India to manufacture and use DDT domestically and 
export it to other Parties for disease vector control, till 2024. The NVBC DC, 
MoHFW coordinates the implementation of the country -wide vector control 
programme and regulate the usage of DDT for the purpose. As per the 
NVBDCP, the reliance on DDT for vector control has been decreasing and the 
same is visible from that fact that t he DDT production has decreased from 
8481 MT in 2005-06 to 1110 MT in 2020-21. For the year 2022-23, 675 MT of 
DDT (including 118.7 MT of additional buffer) is approved for usage. 
19. As regards the status of the UNIDO projects, viz. Bi o-pesticide (BTI) and 
Neem based formulations, it has been informed that the DPR for BTI project is being 
prepared and shall be completed within Dec, 2023. The project is expected to be 
commercialized in 2024 itself. 
Long Lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLINs) project. 
20. When asked to elaborate on the specific role of M/o Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change (MoEF&CC), M/o Chemicals and Fertilizers (MoCF) and M/o Health 
& Family Welfare (MoH&FW) in the implementation of the LLIN pro ject, the 
Department has informed the Committee as under:-       
● MoEFCC is the nodal agency for the Stockholm Convention and thereunder 
the phase out of DDT and implementation of safe alternatives to DDT, 
including LLIN. 

8 
 
● MoCF is the implementation agency for the DDT alternative project, where the 
LLIN manufacturing project is implemented at HIL, CPSE under MoCF. 
● MoHFW is the end user of LLIN for the Vector Borne Disease Control 
program.  
● The Government of India brought together relevant Government instituti ons 
on a common platform to discuss development and promotion of DDT 
alternatives. These include MoEFCC, MoHFW and State Governments in 
charge of Integrated Vector Pest Management  (IVPM). Led by MoEFCC, the 
National Environment Engineering Research Institute (NEERI) developed four 
training modules to adopt alternatives to replace DDT in the IVPM 
programme. Also, NEERI consulted with State Governments and the National 
Vector-Borne Disease Control Programme under the MoHFW. Development 
of low-cost local tech nology using local resources identified by local research 
institutions has enabled the country to produce safe and environmentally 
friendly alternatives to combat mosquitoes. To phase out DDT production, 
IVPM strategy encourages use of LLINs and bio -Pesticides in high-risk areas. 
To meet the LLINs requirement M/s HIL has established infrastructure and 
facility to scale up the commercial production. 
 
21. When asked about the financial support being provided by UNIDO for plant 
and machiner y for production of LLINs, it has been informed that UNIDO is 
supporting HIL for setting up of manufacturing facility for alternative to DDT project to 
the tune of USD 6.2 million. This covers manufacturing facility for LLIN, BTI bio -
Pesticides and neem based formulations.  
22. On being asked to furnish figures of the demand and supply of LLINs in the 
country, it has been informed that expected technical demand of LLINs has been 
estimated at 60 million nets. Under the project, HIL would be having a capacity of 10 
million nets per annum. Since the life of LLIN is 3 years, the demand would always 
be there to replenish end of life. 
23. When asked about percentage of LLINs being imported to meet its 
requirement in the country and steps being taken/proposed to reduce the import 
dependency gradually, it has been informed that   import of LLIN has not taken place 
since la st 3 years. Indigenous technology has been developed for the 
commercialization of the LLIN at HIL under the project. This step will help the country 
in reducing import dependency.   
 
Issues/concerns of agrochemical industry 
24. The Committee have been informed that an Advisory Forum for Chemicals & 
Petrochemical sector was constituted on 10.07.2019 to identify the impediments 
affecting the growth of the chemical and petrochemical sector in the country and to 
facilitate the growth  of the industry through policy interventions. The first meeting of 
the Advisory Forum was held on 27.08.2019, the second meeting on 25.06.2020 and 
the third meeting on 20.09.2022.  The role of Advisory Forum is stated to be as 
under:- 
(i) To provide a pla tform to the industry associations for raising their grievances 
and problems which will have to be resolved through the ‘Development 

9 
 
Committee’ in coordination with other Ministries and present them before the 
'Advisory Forum' with policy measure recommendations. 
(ii) To boost ‘Make in India’ initiative by promotion of investments in Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals sector to meet growing domestic demand and promote exports. 
25.    When asked to brief on the issues of agrochemical industry tha t surfaced 
during the last three years and the action taken on them, the details have been given 
as under :- 
S.No Discussion Points Decision Action Points 
1 Issues regarding data 
requirements ‘Export 
Registration’ for Pesticides, 
e.g., 
  
● Exhaustive information on 
Toxicology/Chemistry is sought 
by CIB & RC which leads to 
unnecessary wastage of time 
for scrutiny/irrelevant 
deficiencies/administrative 
processes etc. 
  
● Requirement of seeking 
copy of registration from 
importing country should be 
done away with as it creates 
supply chain hurdles. 
  
● Application in Form 1 
should suffice. 
  
● Review of Exports 
Registration Certificates issued 
by CIB&RC. 
  
● ‘Star Export House 
Applications’ and ‘Fast Track 
Applications’ need to process 
on top priority with minimum 
information (Only Form-I) and 
certificate of registration should 
be issued in 5 working days to 
manufacture. 
  
● All other applications for 
export shall be processed and 
Certificate of registration shall 
be issued within 15 working 
days (Post facto approval of 
RC). 
  
It was observed that there are 
7 categories in the existing 
Guidelines for Export 
Applications, such as A -I, A -II, 
A-III, B-I, B-II, B-III, B-IV. 
 As per existing guidelines, no 
data is required for chemis try, 
Bio efficacy and Packaging for 
A-I, A -II, AIII, B -I, B -II, B -III & 
B-IV categories.   Only basic 
published information is 
required under B -I, B -II, B -III 
and B -IV categories in 
toxicology.  
No data is required for 
registered botanical and bio -
Pesticides.  
These categories do  not need 
any extra data other than 
information required in Form-I. 
For unregistered bio-Pesticides 
strain, basic information such 
as strain no. & Accession No. 
is needed. No data on 
chemistry is required. 
No data in any category is 
required under toxicology if 
published information is 
available. If such information is 
not available then single 
exposure six battery pack 
studies are required under 
toxicity in B -II, B -III, B -IV 
Categories only. 
Only under t he “Import for 
Export category” copy of 
registration status for the said 
pesticide in the importing 
country is required to ensure 
the export of such 
unregistered, untested product 
for safety purposes.  
Further, only one application is 
pending with CIB&RC as on 
5.11.2022. They asked the 
industry association to file the 
application on the portal. 
The industry 
representative 
agreed that the 
existing guidelines 
of export are very 
simple and 
supportive to obtain 
the registration in 
minimum time to 
boost the export of 
Pesticides. It was 
also decided that an 
Online integrated 
Pesticides 
management 
system will be 
developed asan 
Artificial Intelligence 
based system by the 
DA & FW, which 
shall address future 
concerns, if any.  

10 
 
  
2 Issues regarding imports 
registration for Technical 
Grade Pesticides. 
As per the provisions of 
Insecticides Act, there is no 
clause that restricts the 
imports registration for 
Technical Grade Pesticides of 
any applicant. 
Manufacturing units 
importing the 
Technical Grade 
Pesticides which are 
being further used 
for trading. This is a 
policy issue and it is 
proposed that strict 
review/inspection of 
manufacturing 
facilities to be done 
regularly and 
sometime 
surprisingly (Without 
prior information). 
3 Label and Leaflet notification  
  
Reference to the meeting held 
on 26.07.2022 with DCPC 
and DA&FW; DA&FW and 
CIB&RC discussed the matter 
with Industry Associations in 
many rounds of meetings, 
based on which a Gazette 
Notification has been issued 
on 07.11.2022. The same  is 
open for 30 days for 
seeking comments of the 
stakeholders. 
  
  
Industry will be 
submitting the 
comments on draft 
notification. 
4 Quantity exempted from 
imports permission as 2 kgs. 
only for research purpose for 
technical grade Pesticides  
  
CIB&RC submitted that there 
are two ways for importing the 
Pesticides.  
1. Import of pesticide 
formulation to the tune up 
to 10 Kgs in a calendar 
year and Technical Grade 
Pesticide to the tune of 02 
Kgs in a calendar year 
and 500g of PGRs by the 
GLP and NABL accredited 
laboratories. 
2. Such imports can also be 
applied through the 
ongoing Research Test 
and Trial (RTT) permits 
wherein there is no 
capping on the quantity of 
Pesticides to be imported.  
  
However, it has been decided 
that an internal committee at 
Sectt. Of CIB&RC level will 
review the imports of 
Technical grade Pesticides for 
research purposes. The 
matter will also be discussed 
  
  
  
  
It was decided that 
the 
recommendations of 
the committee  on 
the issue  are still 
awaited. A final 
decision shall be 
taken once 
recommendations of 
the committee is 
received.  

11 
 
with the Technical 
representative from DCPC.  
5 Streamline market sampling 
and their analysis.  
  
Dte PPQ&S is in process for 
developing seamless coding 
system to have an unbiased 
and fair system.  
DA&FW shall make 
a National 
Pesticide/Pest 
Surveillance System 
which will have the 
Rule Based 
Advisory.  It will 
have the Information 
regarding the chain 
of supply from 
manufacturers to 
retailers (with the 
quantity 
of Pesticide). 
   
6 Traceability and Digitization 
of database at CIB&RC  
  
New crop portal has been 
developed in which the 
Industry can update their data 
with KYC. 
A Faceless and 
Traceless system is 
being deviced. 
 
 
Indian Chemicals Industry  
26.  When asked to give an overview of the Chemical Industry in the country and 
how this industry is contributing to the GDP as well as gross value addition 
manufacturing,  it has been stated that Indian Chemical industry stands 6th globally 
in sales values. The present market size is around 212 Bn USD and expected to 
reach 300 Bn USD by 2025. The Chemicals sector is segmented as Agrochemicals, 
Dyes & Pigments, Specialty chemicals, Bulk Chemicals etc. In Agrochemicals sector, 
India is the 4th largest producer and exporter globally. Similarly, in dyes -stuffs, India 
is the 2nd largest producer and exporter globally. This sector contributes 9.40% of 
Manufacturing GVA and 1.69% of National GVA. The sector employees around 4 
million people directly and indirectly. 
27. During oral evidence, a representative elaborated on the issues as under:- 
 
 "......In the year 2022, it was US $ 212 billion and the sector is expected to 
grow at 9.3 per cent. The people's aspirations are growing and the purchase 
power has increased. As a result, the demand in the chemical sector is 
increasing. If we are growing at 9.3 per cent by 2047, it will be around 2 trillion. 
At that time, the Indian market is expected to be 40 trillion. ..... The chemical 
sector is about to touch 2 trillion if it goes at 9.3 per cent. If we consider a 
conservative growth of 6 per cent, then also our chemical sector will be about 
one trillion which will be 2-3 per cent of the total market size”. 
28. On being asked to state whether India in the Chemical Sector is a net importer 
but in the agrochemicals India is a net exporter, it was submitted that Indian 
Chemical industry is the net importer and trade deficit stands at Rs.1.75 lakh crores 
in F.Y.-2020-21. The main reason for net imports is non-availability of feedstocks and 
mining agents. In agrochemicals sector, India is 4th largest producer and exporter 
globally. 

12 
 
 
29. The Committee have been informed that in 2003 -04, the  net import was 
almost NIL. By 2013 -14, the net import rose to 8 billion and by 2022, it rose to 22 
billions which amounts to Rs. 1,75,000 crore. The export had increased by 2.1 times 
whereas the import increased by 2.26 times only which indicates that the Department 
is not able to catch up with the import and there is an emergent need for increasing 
the domestic capacity or else, the net import will keep on increasing. 
 
30.  When asked about the steps, if any, taken or proposed to be taken to reduce 
dependency on imports in the Chemical sector, it has been stated that it is working 
on introducing the PLI Scheme in the chemicals sector for those chemicals which are 
majorly imported from single source and are having multiple uses. 
Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
 
31.  The Committee desired to know the details with regard to the constitution of 
IPFT, its composition and powers. In reply, it has been stated that the Institute of 
Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) was incorporated under the Societies 
Registration Act-1860 on 31.05.1991 under the D/oChemicals & Petrochemicals, 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers with the following objectives: 
● Development and production of state-of-the-art user and environment friendly 
new generation pesticide formulation technology. 
● Promotion of efficient application technologies suiting the existing 
requirements of newer formulations. 
● Information dissemination of safe manufacturing practices, quality 
assurances, raw material specification and sources. 
● Analytical and consultancy services. 
● Fostering improvement in the qualification and usefulness of pesticide 
scientists working in the agrochemical area. 
● Continuing education through specialized training for pesticide personnel. 
  
32. Further, IPFT is the only Institute of its kind devoted to the development of 
state-of-the-art user and environment friendly new generation pesticide formulation 
technology. The Institute has established a healthy rapport with the Indian 
agrochemical industries and has been able to  successfully transfer technologies for 
safer, efficient and environment friendly formulations. IPFT is also helping the 
industries in data generation as per CIB/RC guidelines for bioefficacy, phytotoxicity 
and pesticide residue analysis for both agricultu re and household formulations. IPFT 
undertakes both in-house and externally funded R & D projects. 
 
33. It has been added that IPFT has a well-defined Organizational Structure 
comprising of a Governing Body which is the supreme decision taking body. 
Governing Body meets annually and takes critical policy decisions related to the 
Projects, Budget, Manpower and General Management of the Lab.   For day-to-day 
financial and administrative control, the Institute has a Finance & Administrative 
Committee (F&AC).  The Committee meets as and when required to clear the issues 
related to Finance & Administration of the Institute. 
 
34. When asked to state the number of field trials conducted by IPFT during the 
last three years for the development of safer, efficient, cost effective and 
environment friendly pesticide formulations, it has been replied that the field trials for 

13 
 
bio-efficacy and phytotoxicity evaluation and safety to natural enemies, sponsored by 
pesticide industries, were conducted by Bio Science Division of IPFT on different 
agricultural crops. The trials conducted during the year 2020 -21, 2021-22 and 2022-
23 were 14, 15 and 18, respectively, the details of which are given as under :-  
 
Crop No. of trials conducted 
2020-21 
Cotton 3 
Chilli 3 
Cabbage 1 
Okra 2 
Tomato 2 
Cucumber 1 
Potato 1 
Groundnut 1 
Total 14 
2021-22 
Potato 2 
Cucumber 1 
Paddy 3 
Cabbage 1 
Chilli 4 
Cotton 2 
Tomato 1 
Okra 1 
Total 15 
2022-23 
Maize 3 
Tomato 2 
Cotton 3 
Cauliflower 1 
Chilli 6 
Brinjal 1 
Wheat 2 
Total 18 
  
 Out of the trials conducted, three trials were for plant growth promoters in chilli 
crop and four trials for bio stimulants on maize and tomato crops during 2022 -23. In 
addition to it, three In -house field trials were conducted for newer 
formulations/products developed by IPFT on wheat, chilli and okra crops. 
 
35. When asked about the States/UTs where field trials have so far been 
conducted along with the outcome thereof ,the States/UTs where such field trials are 
proposed to be conducted and also the criteria for conducting field trials by IPFT, it 
has been informed that  the field trials were conducted in Haryana State (IPFT) only. 
So far, there is no proposal for conducting field trials in other States/UTs. The IPFT 
is approved for data generation on Bio -efficacy and phytotoxicity of Pesticides on 

14 
 
agricultural crops and also against house  hold insect pests by Central Insecticides 
Board and Registration Committee (CIBRC), Faridabad. So, IPFT has been 
conducting field trials sponsored by pesticide industries and also in -house trials for 
newer/ advanced formulations of Pesticides developed by IPFT.  
 
36. As regards the sanctioned strength vis -a-vis actual strength of various 
categories of staff working in IPFT, the reasons for vacancies, if any, and from when 
the respective posts are lying vacant, the Committee has been apprised asunder:- 
  
Category of 
Post 
Group Total 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Working 
Strength 
No. of 
post 
vacant 
No. of 
Post for 
revival 
A B C       
Scientific 10 11 08 29 11 04 07 
Technical 01 - 01 02 - - 02 
Admin/Allied 05* 03 02 10 08 06 03 
Total 16 14 11 41 19 10* 12 
 
*       Including 01 Supernumerary Post for Establishment Officer. 07 vacant 
posts have been advertised & 02 posts have caused vacant due to retirement 
of incumbents of Group C in December 2022 and 01 post of Specialist 
(Bioscience) is under litigation. 
 
37. When asked to give brief particulars of about 80 technologies developed and 
transferred by IPFT so far to various agrochemicals industries ,future plans to 
develop and transfer of technologies and  target, if any, fixed, the information 
furnished has been given at Annexure-I. Further, the year -wise target is fixed under 
M.O.U. with DCPC to develop new technologies. 
  
38 When asked how much revenue is being accrued to IPFT by transferring 
technologies in the market as commercial pesticide products, the information with 
regard to revenue generated by transfer of technologies during last three years is as 
under:- 
  
            F.Y.  2020-21 : Rs. 200000.00+ USD 120072.00 
            F.Y.  2021-22 :Rs. 2839600.00+ USD 60036.00 
            F.Y.  2022-23 :Rs. 4704400.00 
 
39. On being asked about the feedback of farmers/users of commercial 
Pesticides and products of IPFT, the Department in their written reply has stated that 
the technologies user & environment friendly formulations have been transferred to 
industries for commer cialization. Some technologies have been demonstrated to 
farmers during different workshops for farmers.   As per discussion with technology 
recipients, feedback is good.  
  

15 
 
40. The Committee asked about the R&D Projects being undertaken  or proposed 
to be undertaken by IPFT,the budget allocation for R&D projects during the last three 
years vis -à-vis the amount proposed by IPFT and whether the budgetary funds 
allocated to IPFT for R&D Projects was found to be adequate. In response,the 
details of the R&D projects funded by different funding agencies and   executed 
during last three years is given as under :- 
  
a. Development and Promotion of Non -POPs alternatives to DDT (Sponsored by 
UNIDO) 
b. Development and Production of Hand Sanitizers using less Hazardous 
Chemicals and botanical antimicrobial based formulations (Sponsored by 
UNIDO) 
c. Monitoring of Pesticide Residues at National Level (Sponsored by Department 
of Agriculture & Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India) 
d. Monitoring of Pesticide Residues at various districts of Rajasthan (Sponsored 
by Govt. of Rajasthan) 
e. Monitoring of Pesticide Residues in various fruits, vegetables and 
environmental matrices.” (Sponsored by Directorate of Horticulture, Govt. of 
Haryana) 
  
The b udgetary funds allocated to IPFT for above mentioned R&D Projects 
was stated to be adequate. 
  
41. On being asked how many workshops for judicious use of Pesticides through 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) have been organised during the last three years and 
the average attendance of farmers in such workshops, the Department has informed 
that no workshop has been organised through KVK. 
 
42.   On being asked about the  criteria for organising Krishi Melas, Conferences 
etc. and whether due care is taken to ensure that the Krishi Melas, Conferences etc. 
are held uniformly in all States/UTs, the Department has submitted that  IPFT is 
making efforts to organise the workshop s in different States. So far the Workshops 
have been organised in the states of Rajasthan, Haryana, Maharashtra, U.P, 
Karnataka, Assam, Orissa. 
 
43. Asked to state the steps taken by IPFT to ensure development of safer 
Pesticides Formulations apart from development and transferring of technologies, it 
has been informed asunder:- 
● IPFT has been providing training on various aspects of formulations including 
safer formulations, Quality Assurance, Instrumental Analysis to technical 
personnel from pesticide industries, Scientists, Students , different bio-botanical 
formulations for controlling insects in Seed spice crops in coll aboration with ICAR-
National Institute of Seed Spices, Ajmer. 
● The Orobanche weed causes huge losses in the yield of rapeseed and mustard 
crops. This is a serious problem being faced by farmers in northern & western part 
of India. In collaboration with ICAR - directorate of rapeseed mustard research, 
Bharatpur, Rajasthan, IPFT Developed two formulations for management of 
Orobanche weed. The bio -efficacy studies results indicate good control of target 
weed. IPFT has well equipped NABL Accredited and GLP certified analytical 
laboratories. IPFT has been assisting the industries in sample analysis and quality 

16 
 
assurance. Various projects on Residue analysis, b io-efficacy data generation 
have been executed by IPFT. 
●  During last three years, 28 research papers on formulations, Analytical chemistry 
and persistence studies have been published in reputed national & international 
journals. 
 
44. On being asked about details of the efforts made by IPFT to maximize the use 
of bio -Pesticides for controlling different agricultural insects and development of 
different bio-botanical pesticide formulations, it has been replied that IPFT is making 
continuous efforts for promoting bio -botanical pesticide. Various technologies of 
these formulations have been developed, trainings are being given to farmers for 
promoting the use of botanical based crop protection products. The technologies of  
eight bio -botanical based products is being commercialized for mosquito control in 
public health sector. IPFT has successfully developed different bio -botanical 
formulation for crop protection. The bio -botanical products are slowly gaining 
popularity. Continuous efforts are required to develop new bio -botanical Pesticides 
as safer alternatives to commercial chemicalPesticides.  
 
45. The Committee desired to know the time by  when the four Advanced 
Research Centres (ARCs) of IPFT in the states of Assam, Karnataka, UP and 
Gujarat are likely to be set up. In reply, it has been informed that after obtaining in -
principal approval from the respective states, a concept note for open ing of 04 
Advanced Research Centre (ARC) of IPFT in the state of ASSAM, Karnataka, UP 
and Gujarat has been submitted to DCPC for the approval of Govt. of India.  After 
approval of Govt. of India, action for opening of 04 new ARC will be taken 
immediately.  
46. When the Committee desired to know the role of IPFT for Chemicals 
promotion and development, a representative of the Department stated as under:- 
 
“We have a specific scheme with respect to chemicals promotion and 
development. We provide assistance to various organisations with respect to 
seminars, conferences, training programmes, etc. We have a specific institute 
as I have mentioned - IPFT. This institute has done very good work with respect 
to coming out with the  new age formulations. They have been able to come out 
with formulations which are very user friendly, and they were efficient. Here are 
some of these formulations which they have developed. They have developed 
about 82 technologies. They have developed wa ter disposable granules, 
controlled-release formulations, concentrated emulsions, micro emulsions, and 
they have provided these technologies to the industry also. The industry is 
using them. This is a very good work which has happened in the country. They 
have  the best of accreditations with them. NABL and GLP compliance they 
have done recently”. 
 
Non PoPs alternative to DDT 
 
47. When asked to explain the term ‘Non -POPs’ alternative to DDT, the 
Department replied as under:- 
  
●  Persistent organic pollutants (POP) are organic compounds that 
are resistant to degradation through chemical, biological, and photolytic 
processes. They are toxic chemicals that adversely affect human 

17 
 
health and the environment. DDT is a POP, which is used for the 
control of vector borne disease. 
●  Non-POPs alternatives to DDT refer to alternatives to DDT that 
do not contain any of recognized POPs under the Stockholm 
Convention. The Non -POPs alternative to DDT project has been 
undertaken to eliminate the dependency on DDT for mosquitoes 
control through developing and promoting locally appropriate, cost 
effective and sustainable alternatives which are not persistent in nature 
and biodegrade in shorter time. UNIDO project non-POP alternatives to 
DDT focuses on LLIN, Bti based bio -larvicides, neem based repellents 
and larvicides.  
●  DDT was one of the chemicals listed under the Stockholm 
Convention on persistent organic pollutants (POPs) under Annex B 
(Restriction) in 2001. Chemicals listed under Annex B are allowed for 
production and use for specific purposes only i.e. disease vector 
control in case of DDT.  
●  Subsequently, WHO (2001) published a document titled “Action 
plan for the reduction of reliance on DDT in disease vector control”, 
which defines alternatives to DDT as:- 
i.  Alternative products for chemical and biological control. 
ii.  Alternative methods of vector control such as environmental 
management and personal protection 
iii.  Alternative strategies that are based on scientifically sound 
criteria, cost-effectiveness analysis, and a delivery system compatible 
with current trends in health sector reform, including decentralization of 
health services, inter- sectoral Action at the local level and subsidiarity 
in decision-making. 
iv.  The term Non-POPs’ alternative means the pesticide/ insecticide 
that does not belonging to persistent organic pollutant group as 
classified under the Stockholm convention and can be used in place of 
DDT which is one of the persistent organic pollutant. 
v. POPs stand for  "Persistent Organic Pollutants" and refer to a group 
of synthetic chemicals   that are persistent in the environment and can 
last for long in the environment before degrading. These are Aldrin, 
chlordane, DDT, dieldrin, endrin, heptachlor, hexachlorobenzen, m irex, 
polychlorinated biphenyls, polychlorinated dibenzo -p-dioxins, 
polychlorinated dibenzo -difurans, and toxaphen comprised the  "Dirty 
Dozen" of persistent and toxic pollutants. 
vi. In contrast to POPs, NoN -POPs include Pesticides that are non -
persistent, readily biodegradable, and, therefore, environmentally safer 
than POPs. The NON -POPs are derived from plants and other natural 
sources and the active ingredient is from biological origin. 
  
48. Asked as to how far it is better than DDT for the farmers, for the agricultural 
produce and environment, the Department informed that DDT is intended for use 
only in controlling malaria and other vector borne disease. It is not used for 
agricultural purpose. DDT is not used as pesticide in agriculture but used as a vector 

18 
 
control. Non -POPs alternatives are far better than DDT for the farmers as per the 
report, for the agricultural produce and environment by the following factors:- 
i. Non persistence 
ii. Biodegradable 
iii. Safe to human being 
iv. Safe to non-target fauna including beneficial insects  
v. No residue  
vi. Cost effective: affordable 
  
● Non-POPs’ alternative of DDT may be beneficial to the farmers in terms of 
ecological and environmental aspect as they will be easily biodegradable and 
will not be persisting in the environment and will be safer for non-targets.  
● NoN-POPs are better alternatives for mosquito control and agricultural insects 
control because these are cost effective, user -friendly, and environmental ly 
benign. The specific mode of action, Non -Persistent, environment sustainable 
without residual effect and are not associated with the harmful toxic effects 
and, therefore, safe for the environment. 
49. When asked whether NoN -POPs will totally replace the harmful effects of 
DDT while having same effectiveness as DDT, the Department submitted as under:-  
  
● Non-POPs are safe non persistent alternatives to DDT to control the mosquito 
without any serious impact to the environment. 
● They are not persistent and also safe to non target organisms, whereas, 
highly efficient in controlling mosquito.  
● As per report of IPFT, Non POPs will totally replace the harmful effects of 
DDT while having same effectiveness as DDT due to non -persistence, 
biodegradability, safe ty to human being s as well as fauna, absence of  
residue, local  appropriateness and  cost-effectiveness. These alternatives 
include:  
 Bt based Pesticides - suspension concentrate; wettable powder and 
spreading oil. 
Neem based bioPesticides: : Larvicide: (i) spreading neem oil; (ii) floating 
tablets from neem kernel powder/oil;  
  
Adulticide: (i) mosquito coil from neem kernel; (ii) repellant cream from neem 
oil; (iii) Suspension concentrate. 
  
Long Lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLINs) 
  
       Through the Global Environment Facility (GEF) investment, India has taken the 
first step to eliminate dependency on the insecticide DDT by promoting locally 
appropriate, cost -effective, and sustainable alternatives, including the Long -Lasting 
Insecticidal Net (LLIN) and Neem -based and bacteria -based bio -Pesticides. HIL 
(India) Limited (HIL), a public sector enterprise, is the only manufacturer of DDT in 
the country.  
● NoN-POPs are proposed as alternatives to the synthetic Pesticides like which 
are effective as DDT. These are non -persistent, readily biodegradable, and 

19 
 
safer for the environment compared to POPs, which are capable of reducing 
the deleterious effects of POPs like DDT. 
 50. As regards, the present status of production/Commercialization of Non -POPs 
and steps taken by HIL India Limited for commercialization of Non -PoPs, it was 
informed that HIL has commercialized LLIN plant. HIL is also in the process of 
setting up of manufactu ring facility for Neem based Pesticides as larvicides and 
repellents and also Bti based bio -larvicides as non -POP alternative to DDT for the 
control of mosquitoes. HIL is committed to commercialize these projects by mid-
2024.  The technology of Eig ht NoN-POPs alternative to DDT has been transferred 
to HIL Ltd., and HIL is in the process of commercialization of these technologies. 
AGROCHEMICALS 
51. The Committee wanted to know about agrochemicals and how they are 
different from insecticides/pesticides and their added benefits. In response, the 
Department has informed that Agrochemicals are chemicals that are used to control 
pests, pathogens, and supp ly nutrients to the soil . Insecticides /Pesticides are 
broadly termed as Agrochemicals. Agrochemicals play  a vital role in increasing 
agricultural productivity by protecting crops from insects, pests, fungi, weed etc.  
Agrochemicals is a broader/umbrella terminology used for all the chemicals 
especially as input in the Agriculture either at pre or post-harvest stage. It includes 
the insecticides/pesticides also under its ambit. Agrochemicals especially pesti cides 
play an important role in sustaining agricultural production by protecting crops from 
pests. Availability of safe and efficacious pesticides and their judicious use by the 
farming community is critical to long -term sustainability of agricultural production and 
productivity. Agrochemicals (insecticides/Pesticides) are used in totality along with all 
other agricultural inputs. 
 
52. In this regard, the representative of the Department added as follows:- 
 “….thatglobally, we are the fourth largest producer of agrochemicals. This is 
important for us today. I will not go into the other things. Otherwise, it is a very 
important sector contributing in a big way to the GDP as well as to gross value 
addition manufacturing. We are the second  largest manufacturer and exporter of 
dyes, etc. I will not go into that. But in terms of the agrochemicals in which we are 
dealing, the global market is about Rs.4,50,000 crore, and the Indian size of the 
market is about Rs.50,000 crore. So, even though i n the chemical sector, overall, we 
are net importer but in agrochemicals, we are net exporters. That is the big 
advantage of agrochemicals which we are dealing today”.  
53. On being asked about the future pote ntial of agrochemicals, the Department, 
during evidence have submitted as follows:- 
 Sir, if we look at the share of the agro -chemicals, which we are discussing 
now, it is about 4 per cent. Out of this, let us say if we have to see what is the 
kind of grow th potential which the agro -chemicals alone are having. At a 
conservative estimate of 1150 billion dollars, we will be touching almost 40 
billion dollars in terms of agro -chemicals. In a situation of best -case scenario 
which is about 2000 billion dollars, we will be touching about 80 billion. So, 
this is a kind of potential which is there in agro-chemicals. 

20 
 
 
54. As regards country -wise consumption of Agrochemicals the Committee were 
informed as follows:- 
Country-wise Consumption of Agrochemicals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55. The Committee then pointed out that China consumes 1,763 Kilo tonnes of 
agrochemicals and whereas India consumes just 58 Kilo tonnes of agrochemicals 
and desired to be apprised of the reasons for such  a huge difference in consumption 
of agrochemicals, the representative of the Department replied as under:- 
 
 “Sir, the usage done by China and countries like Japan is manifold than India. 
They have intensive agriculture - greenhouse agriculture and polyhouse 
agriculture – where the pests are there because they take a number of crops 
in those protective farming activities. Due to the intensification of agriculture, 
the kind of use and the spring technology they have, they have a lead over us 
and that is why, they are using more. Their management of that is relatively 
better. That is why, they are using more. They have more of commercial 
farming and more of protective farming. So, they use more of it”. 
 
HIL (India) Ltd. 
 
56. When asked to give details of three plants of HIL (India) Ltd. located at Cochin 
(Kerala), Rasayani (Maharashtra) and Bhatinda (Punjab) and producing 
agrochemicals and their production of agrochemicals during the last three years, the 
Committee were apprised as follows:- 
● Bathinda Unit was established in the year 2002.Bathinda Units has a state–of-
the-art multipurpose formulation facility for Liquid, Solid and Granular 
Formulation of capacity 1000 KL/MT. 
● Rasayani Unit was put up in the year 1980 for the manufacture of Malathion 
Tech & its Formulation. Subsequently, DDT plant was put up in the year 1983. 
Country  Consumption  (in Kilo-
tonnes) 
World Share (in %)  
CHINA 1,763 43% 
USA 407 10% 
BRAZIL 377 9% 
ARGENTINA 172 4% 
CANADA 90 2% 
FRANCE 85 2% 
RUSSIA 76 2% 
AUSTRALIA 63 2% 
SPAIN 61 2% 
ECUADOR 60 1% 
TURKEY 60 1% 
INDIA 58 1% 
ITALY 54 1% 
OTHERS 796 20% 
TOTAL 4,122 100% 
   

21 
 
Butachlor, Monocrotophos Tech and their Formulation plants were put up in 
the year 1987 -88. Monocrotophos plant was converted to a multi -purpose 
plant for the manufacture of Monocrotophos and DD VP Technical. Future 
plans are in hand to manufacture Glyphosate Tech and Imidachlorprid 
Technical by retrofitting the existing plants. 
● Udyogamandal unit was put up in the year 1957 for the manufacture of DDT 
Technical and Formulation. Subsequently, Endosu lfan Technical and Dicofol 
Technical plants were put up in the year 1980 and 1995 respectively. 
Mancozeb Production Facility was put up in the year 2001. 
● This unit has ISO 9001 -2000, ISO 14001 -2004 & OHSAS - 18001 
certification. 
Plant Wise Production for last three years is attached as Annexure-II 
 
57. The Committee during their study visit to Kochi during May, 2023 heard inter -
alia the Grievances of employees of Udhyogmandal Unit of HIL. It was learnt that the 
Udyogamandal Unit of HIL (India) Limited had been closed down. The company has 
stopped payment of salaries to its employees for the last 6 months and had even cut 
the electricity and water supply at the complex. Offer of voluntary retirement by the 
management was not viable as many of the employees are very young. There are 64 
employees and many of them are very young.  Moreover, the option given to shift the 
employees to the Rasayani (Maharashtra) unit of the company is not feasible due to 
low salary and wages as the employees may not be able to sus tain with added 
expenses for rented accommodation, besides Mumbai being a costly city, etc.  
 
58. Responding to the grievances of the employees of the plant, a representative 
of the company stated that due to paucity of funds, the company was not able to give 
salary and other amenities to their employees. Even the retired employees are not 
given gratuity and pension.The Udyogamandal Unit ofHIL (India) Limited had to be 
closed due to operational losses because of the increase in production cost at the 
plant as raw materials come from far off places.This made its products unviable.  
59. During the deliberations, a representative of the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals (DCPC) submitted that the employees of all the units of HIL (India) 
Limited including those at its headquarters were not receiving their salary.  A reason 
for the same was the closing down of Udyogamandal Unit of HIL due to its 
operational losses. HIL could not e ven raise any loan from the Government as the 
unit has been closed.  To circumvent the situation, offer of VRS has been given to 
the employees while the younger staff may be absorbed at its Rasayani unit. It was, 
however, assured that serious efforts wouldbe made to get the dues of HIL of Rs. 96 
crore pending with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare cleared, which will 
facilitate payment of salary and other dues to its employees.  
60. The Committee then called the representatives of the DCPC, D/o H & FW to 
get their response on the issue. At the outset, the Committee were briefed on HIL 
(India) Ltd. as under:- 
  

22 
 
“HIL has been incorporated in 1954 solely for the manufacture of DDT with 
100 per cent shareholding by the Government of India. Various other 
manufacturing facilities such as Udyog Mandal, Kochi, was set up in 1957, 
Rasayani, Raigad in 1977, and Formulation Plan at Bhatinda in 2004. Some 
other diversification was also done for the production of agrochemicals, seeds, 
and fertilizers.......During 1920, when there was locust attack during COVID 
time, the staff was alert and rose up to the occasion and produced 600 KL of 
Malathion and helped the Department of Agriculture in controlling locus. HIL 
has three units. The Rasayani unit is in Maharashtra. If you see the profit and 
loss for the last five years, out of the three units only Rasayani unit is making 
profit, and Udyog Mandal, and Bhatinda unit are doing losses to the tune of 
Rs.50 crore per year because of various reasons. The Udyog Mandal unit w as 
basically set up for production of DDT. Later on, Sir, benzene hexachloride, 
endosulfan, and dicofol plants were also set up. Subsequently, for various 
reasons one-by-one those plants were stopped either under the directions of 
the hon. Supreme Court, S tate Government or Stockholm Conventions. As a 
result of that, the overrate cost of production of products from the Udyog 
mandal was becoming unviable economically. Secondly, the raw materials 
were also being sourced from North India, and because of that t he 
transportation cost was also becoming more. Similarly, for Bhatinda Unit which 
was primarily the formulation making unit, the raw materials were getting 
transported from Udyog Mandal and Rasayani, and the formulation was made 
there. This formulation was  again transported to various parts of the country. 
So, the logistic cost was becoming high. For Bhatinda, there was a DDT Plant 
at Delhi which was closed as per the direction of Hon. Supreme Court. Their 
staff was deputed at Bhatinda which led to overstaf fing, and as a result the 
cost of production at Bhatinda unit was quite high. These are the reasons why 
Udyog Mandal and Bhatinda units were running into losses. As per the 
Government of India’s policy in 2021, all the strategic and non -strategic 
sectors, PSUs, are to be either privatised, merged or closed. So, only a bare 
minimum CPSE in the strategic sector, has to be maintained. It is because of 
that policy and because both the units were not making profit, in April, the 
Committee of Group of Officers, u nder the Chairmanship of the Chairman, 
NITI Aayog, decided that the two units should be closed, and the Rasayani 
Unit should be disinvested. Accordingly, the Department has proposed for the 
closure of the two units -Udyogamandal and Bhatinda. At present, on ly the 
Rasayani Unit will be run as the single manufacturing unit and it will be made 
viable for making it eligible for disinvestment. For that purpose, in order to take 
care of the interests of the employees of Udyogamandal and Bhatinda, all the 
employees have been given an option to get transferred to Rasayani Unit. 
Those employees who will not be interested for a transfer, will be offered VRS 
and VSS as per the DPE guidelines. We have taken options from the 
employees of Udyogamandal and Bhatinda. There a re 147 employees in both 
the units, and out of that, twenty -nine have opted for a transfer, and the rest of 
them, are interested in taking VRS or VSS. Hon. Chairperson, Sir, we have 
proposed for the closure of two units, and we have circulated the said proposal 

23 
 
to all the Ministries for their opinions. We have got their opinions also. Now, 
the proposal will be sent to DPE for final approval of the administrative 
mechanism. We have asked for Rs. 401 crore. Out of the said amount, Rs. 56 
crore will be for mee ting the expenditure arising on account of VRS/VSS and 
also, for payment of pending salary dues, and this is expected to be finalised 
very shortly. The remaining amount is for making payments to the vendors and 
also for the loans. All these things will be taken care of from the said funds”. 
 
61. On being pointed out by the Committee that the employees of HIL (India) Ltd. 
are starving and not even a month or two months ’ advance against the arrears could 
be disbursed to them, a representative of the Department submitted as under:- 
 
 “As per the availability of the fund, we have given them some advances to take 
care of their day -to-day needs. This PSU is suffering from a financial crunch. 
We have taken some steps. We have met with the vendors and asked them to 
supply raw materials. Then, we have started closely monitoring the 
performances also. We are generating some amount from the Rasayani unit, 
and from that amount, we are paying some advances to take care of their 
emergent needs. But once this proposal is approved and we get fund from the 
Government, all the dues will be paid. Twenty -nine employees have opted for a 
transfer and they have already been transferred to Rasayani Unit”. 
 
62. The Committee then drew the attention of the representatives to the fact that 
118 employees have not agreed to be transferred and are waiting for their salaries. 
To this, the representatives submitted that they will get the funds from the 
Government very soon.  
 
63. When the Committee referred to the same assurance given to the Committee 
during their study visit to Kochi in the month of May, 2023, a representative of the 
Department admitted that, actually, it is a very difficult situation.  
 
64. The Committee then desired to know whether the Department has requested 
the Ministry of Finance for separate allocation of funds in this regard. The 
representatives replied in the affirmative. 
 
65. The representatives further submitted as under:- 
 
 “DIPAM will be dealing with this matter, and within a week or so, we will be 
sending the proposal to DIPAM, and then, they will take the approval of the 
administrative mechanism which may be finalized”. 
 
66. Expressing their concern over the fact that the employees of HIL have not 
been paid their salary for six months, the Committee viewed that HIL being owned by 
the Government of India, the Government should ensure payment of salaries and 
arrears to its employees. The representatives in reply submitted as under:- 

24 
 
 “We are paying the current salary......... the arrear will be paid through the fund 
that we will get from the Government once this proposal is approved. We have 
improved the operation. We are currently paying the salary. We are not paying 
full salary but we are paying some advance..  Sir, once we get the fund from 
the Government, then only we can pay for which we have already approached 
and we hope we will get some sort of relief... Sir, out of the t otal support which 
we are seeking in the form of budgetary support through the mechanism which 
has been elaborated ............., Sir, the total amount is on the higher side, about 
Rs. 402 crore but for VRS, VSS and other payment of arrears etc. there is a  
separately earmarked fund of about Rs. 56 crore or so. So, we should be 
focusing on this. Definitely, Sir, within this, overall budgetary requirement 
which we are projecting, we will focus especially on the Rs. 56 crore so that 
we can take care of the req uirement of the employees. We are very sorry 
about the whole situation but it is a business kind of organization and we are 
not getting any support even from our bankers also. In fact, they wanted to 
rate this organization as one sort of NPA and they wante d to close our 
accounts also. With great persuasion, we have been able to operate even our 
bank accounts. So, this is the situation in which we are and for that, we have 
to take a harsh decision of closing down two units where nothing was 
happening and jus t to make sure that at least something happens in one 
place. Let us say Bhatinda. Only formulation was happening which could have 
been done in one place itself where the technical was being produced and in 
other place also, it is because of the logistics r easons. These are the historical 
reasons which have made them financially unviable and we hope that once we 
close down them, and with the VRS of remaining people and the people who 
are stuck there in Udyog Mandal, they will move to Rasayini. Probably, the 
whole operation becomes viable and we will be able  to do much better”. 
 
67. The details of the training programmes for farmers organized under CPDS 
during the last 3 years were stated to be as given below:- 
 Sl. No. Name of the 
Organization 
Name of the programme 
2022-23  
1 HIL (India) Ltd. Conducting 35 one day Training Programme under 
CPDS during   the Financial year 2022 -23 at 
different locations in the country  
  
2 IPFT Conducting 6 one -day training program for 
promotion of use of botanical pesticide 
  
3 IPFT 6 one -day training programs for promotion of safe 
and judicious use of Pesticides and application of 
New Generation Formulations for crop protection 
under CPDS during FY 2022 -23 at different 
locations in the country 
  
4 FICCI 11th National Agrochemicals Conference held on 

25 
 
23rd June, 2022 in New Delhi 
  
2021-22  
5 HIL (India) Ltd. Conducting 22 one day Training Programme during 
the Financial year 2021-2022 
  
6 FICCI 10th National Agrochemicals Conference held on 
23rd September, 2021 in New Delhi 
  
2020-21  
7 HIL (India) Ltd. Conducting 23 one day Training Programme 
during the Financial year 2021-2022 
  
8 FICCI 9th National Agrochemicals Conference held on 
1st December, 2020 in New Delhi 
  
  
68. It has been added that the objective of the training programmes conducted by 
HIL (India) Ltd. is to enhance the awareness for the judicial use of Pesticides. These 
trainings help the farmers in addressing the problem related to soil degrada tion, 
damage to the underground water bodies, human life and environment, which are 
because of the adverse effect of residual Pesticides. The farmers are also sensitized 
through video clips and PPE kits are also given to the farmers. 
 
69. The Committee were informed through a written reply that the Rasayani unit 
of HIL (India) Ltd. suffered a massive loss of Rs. 30 crores and when asked about 
the reasons for the loss, the Department submitted that The DDT plant of HIL(India) 
Ltd at Rasayani was primarily operated to cater the demand of DDT by Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare. However, the reasons for losses during 2021 -22 are 
summarized below:- 
 
 i. Order of DDT -50% was Rs.79.41 crore in the year 2020 -21 and in the 
 year  2021-22 order of DDT -50% has been reduced to Rs.43.91, 
 thereby there is reduction of sales by Rs.35.50 crore in the year  
 2021-22.  
 ii. Further, export order of DDT -75% was Rs. 24.70 crore in the year 
 2020-21 and in the year 2021 -22 order of DDT-50% has been reduced 
 to Rs. 6.48 crore; thereby there is reduction of sales by Rs.18.22 crore 
 in the year 2021-22.  
 iii.  Total reduction in sale of DDT was Rs.53.72 crore due to which 
 Rasayani has reported a loss of Rs.30.71 crore in the year 2021-22 
  iv.  Due to paucity of funds/ financial crises, supplies of raw materials got 
 affected as vendors were not willing to supply the same due to non -
 clearance of dues. 

26 
 
 
70. Asked about the precautionary steps taken to stop the recurrence o f such 
unfortunate events, the Department submitted that to overcome the loss generated 
in the year 2021-22 in Rasayani Unit, HIL is focusing on utilization of idle production 
capacity of agrochemicals plants , increase in the production of LLIN etc. and during 
March, 2023, a meeting was held with major vendors who were persuaded to supply 
the raw materials to streamline the production. With these efforts, HIL (India) ltd. has 
improved production since March, 2023 and as per DPE guidelines, Department has 
initiated efforts for closure of two loss making units i.e. Udyogmandal and Bathinda 
units.  
 

27 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Administration of  Insecticides Act, 1968  
1. The Committee note that Pesticides are regulated in the country through 
the Insecticides Act, 1968 and the Insecticides Rules, 1971 framed thereunder. 
The Act is a comprehensive legislation as it regulates the import, manufacture, 
sale, transport, distr ibution and use of Insecticides with an objective to 
prevent risk to human beings or animals.  Further, the administration of the 
Insecticides Act, 1968 is with the Department of Agriculture and Family 
Welfare (DA & FW) and kept outside the purview of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC). The DA & FW uses its attached offices 
like Directorate of Plant Protection, Quarantine and Storage (DPPQS) for 
registration of Insecticides, inclusion of Chemicals/Insecticides etc. under the 
Act.   
 Keeping in view the significance of the role of DCPC in regulation of the 
Insecticides and Pesticides, the Committee apprehend that keeping 
administration of the Insecticides Act, 1968 outside the purview of the DCPC 
may act as a deterrent for regulation of the  Insecticides and Pesticides. Also, 
DCPC is to take up matters of agrochemicals Industry with the DA & FW from 
time to time.  It is, therefore, warranted that there is a requirement of close 
coordination between DCPC and DA & FW for the expeditious resolution of all 
the issues of  the agrochemicals industry. The D/o Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals needs to take up the matter at the appropriate forum, to get  
allocated the administration of at least  those provisions of the Insecticides 
Act, 1968, which ar e directly linked to the agrochemical industry. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the decision taken in this regard.  
Development of Pesticides 
2. The Committee note that Pesticides prevent the loss of agricultural 
products from diseases and attac k of pests. The locusts attack in the year 
2019-20 and 2020 -2021 was controlled successfully when HIL (India) Ltd 
supplied approximately 600 KC of Malathion Technical to the Ministry of 
Agriculture for locust control programme.  The Committee have been inf ormed 
that the foodgrain production has increased from 52 million tonnes in the year 
1951-52 to 300 billion tonnes in 2021-22 and among various factors which have 

28 
 
helped in increasing the agriculture production in the country, pesticides have 
played a vita l role. The Committee appreciate that the Department has been 
taking various measures for promotion and development of pesticides like (i) 
playing the role of promoters for growth of the Industry  (ii) taking up inter -
ministerial coordination to sort out t he problems of chemicals and 
petrochemicals sector (iii) extending financial support under Chemicals 
Promotion Development Scheme(CPDS) for organizing seminars, conferences 
and training programmes to create awareness among the farmers about the 
judicious use of agrochemicals and fertilizers.  
The Committee take note of the fact that while pesticides play a vital role 
in increasing the agricultural production, their extensive use can, directly or 
indirectly, pollute air, water, soil and overall ecosystem the reby causing 
serious health hazards for living being s.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that measures being taken by the Department for the promotion 
and development of pesticides should be stringently implemented for the 
balanced growth of pesticides in the country.  
Less consumption of Pesticides 
3. The Committee note that the Pesticide Industry in India has a size of 
50,000 crore and generic Pesticides are in demand worldwide. There is 
tremendous potential in the Pesticides industry, which needs to be tapped. 
The Committee, however, regret to note that consumption of the pesticides in 
the country is 0.5 kg per hectare whereas the consumption in some other 
countries is as high as 17 Kg per hectare, even though India  is the second 
largest producer of agricultural products. The Department has clarified that 
countries like China and Japan have intensive agriculture —green house as 
well as poly house agriculture in which a number of crops are grown in and 
due to intensifi cation of agricult ure and the ‘spring technology’ .  These 
countries have a lead over India.  Besides, the management of intensive 
agriculture in these countries is relatively better.  Therefore, these countries 
use more pesticides. The Committee feel that significantly lower penetration 
levels of pesticides in India as compared to other countries like China clearly 
suggest that the market for pesticides is s till largely unpenetrated with  huge 
room for future growth in the country. Furthermore, with rising population, 
food demand is expected to continue to increase in the coming years and 

29 
 
pesticides will play a key role in increasing the average crop yields per 
hectare.  
In view of the foregoing, t he Committee feel that it is high time that the 
Department acts promptly to enhance the use of agrochemicals/pesticides in 
the country. The Committee recommend that the Department should study the 
agricultural practices of countries like Japan and China for suitably adopting 
the same in India.  There is an urgent ne ed for the Government to take 
initiatives to give a boost to the Pesticides industry. Increasing availability of 
pesticides and low interest rates of farm loans would encourage farmers to 
use more pesticides in order to improve crop yields. Initiatives sho uld be 
taken to increase awareness of Pesticides among farmers. Farmers should be 
educated on the right usage of Pesticides in terms of quantity, the right 
application methodology and appropriate chemicals to be used for identified 
pest problems, etc. 
Phasing out of hazardous insecticides and Pesticides 
4. The Committee are aware that Pesticides are inherently hazardous, and 
among them, a relatively small number of Highly Hazardous Pesticides (HHPs) 
cause disproportionate harm to environment and human health with acute and 
chronic toxicity. The Committee are happy to learn that HIL (India) Ltd along 
with  UNIDO is currently taking up the project titled “Promoting eco-friendly 
crop protection solution for persistent organic pollutant and highly hazardous 
Pesticides reduction in Asia” under a programme named as Financing 
Agrochemicals Reduction and Management (FARM) programme of the Global 
environment Facility with the objective s (i) to minimize the use of highly 
hazardous Pesticides and persistent organic pollutants in agriculture (ii) to 
catalyse investment in the agriculture sector etc.  
 The Committee hope that HIL(India) Ltd. will take all advance measures 
to execute the afo resaid project under FARM programme with all seriousness 
so that its objectives are achieved . The Committee would also like the 
Department to extend its full support to HIL (India) Ltd. in this regard.  
  

30 
 
Regulation of Pesticides by t he Department of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare 
5. The Committee note that Pesticides are being regulated by the 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) under the 
Insecticides Act, 1968 and the Insecticides Rules, 1971 framed thereunder.  
The DA & FW also reviews the use as well as banning of  pesticides, which are 
reported to pose harm to human health and environment, through its 
Registration committee  and has so far banned or phased out as many as 46 
pesticides and 04 pesticides formulation besides withdrawal of registr ation of 
08 pesticides and placing 09 pesticides under restricted use. Further, D/o 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) plays the role of promoter for the 
agrochemicals. The Committee are of the strong conviction that DCPC and DA 
& FW need to work in close  coordination to avoid instances where the former 
promotes the pesticides and the later ban/discontinue their use depending 
upon their toxicity and harmful effects.  The Committee recommend that 
adequate safeguards should be exercised by both the Departments engaged in 
regulation and promotion of pesticides and would like to be  kept informed on 
this aspect.   
Organic pesticides 
6. Organic pesticides are the pesticides derived from things in nature , 
which can be used to control pests. Neem based pesticides a re the pest 
control agents manufactured from Neem extracts. The Committee note that 
organic and Neem based pesticides do not leave any synthetic residue in the 
crop produce and soil whereas the synthetic chemical pesticides leave  a 
certain amount of pestic ide residue after their application. Besides, these 
pesticides are usually inherently less toxic and affect only the target pest as 
compared to the conventional pesticides which are more toxic and may affect 
organisms, birds, insects and mammals as well. The Committee are deeply 
concerned to note that Neem based pesticides are currently manufactured by 
only a few organizations in the country and specific information with respect 
to companies in private sector planning to produce bio - pesticides is not even 
available with the Department.  However, the Committee find some relief to 
learn that HIL (India) Ltd. is in the process of setting up neem based pesticides 
with the support of UNIDO, though initially HIL (India) Ltd. is targeting 

31 
 
mosquito control with th e purpose of vector borne diseases management 
including malaria. While observing the promising properties of organic and 
neem based  pesticides, the Committee strongly desire that the Department 
should realize the need of the hour and explore ways and means to overcome 
the limitations and impediments for effective large -scale use of these 
pesticides so that their full potential can be realised and they are put to use by 
the farming community. The process of setting up of neem based pesticides 
by HIL (India) Ltd should be expedited and the Company with time should 
endeavor to diversify development of all types of organic and neem based 
pesticides.   
Declining  use  of  DDT 
7. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the global use of 
DDT for vector -borne diseases has declined due to availability of new 
insecticide products with long residual activity periods for indoor residual 
spraying and next generation bed nets etc. Presently, HIL(India) Ltd. is the sole 
manufacturer of DDT and supplies it to the M/o Health and Family Welfare as 
per their requirement.  Further, DDT is regulated as a Persistent Organic 
Pollutant (PoP)  under the Stockholm Convention which has been ratified by 
India. This Convention has mandated the elimination of DDT from our country 
by December, 2024.  In order to phase out DDT, UNIDO is supporting HIL 
(India) Ltd.  in setting up of commercial manufact uring facilities for long 
lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLINs), Bti based bio -larvicides as well as Neem 
based botanical insecticide, larvicide, repellent and insect growth regulation 
(IGR).  HIL (India) Ltd. is also the commercial manufacturing partner for t he 
UNIDO project on “Development and Promotion of Non -PoPs” as an 
alternative to DDT and committed to complete the neem project and Bti Project 
before December, 2024.  Moreover, DPR for Bti project is being prepared and 
would be completed by December, 2023 itself and expected to be 
commercialized in 2024.   
 The Committee trust that the De partment/ HIL(India) Ltd. will give their 
utmost attention for elimination of DDT as well as preparation and 
commercialization of Bti project within the prescribed timelines. Further, 
commercial manufacturing facilities for long lasting Insecticidal Nets ( LLINs), 
Bti based bio-larvicides as well as Neem based botanical insecticide, larvicide, 

32 
 
repellent, insect growth regulation (IGR) and development of other alternatives 
to DDT would be expedited so that their benefits reach society in a given 
timeframe. 
Resolving the issues of Agrochemicals industry 
8. The Committee note that the Department has constituted an Advisory 
Forum in July, 2019 to identify the issues of agrochemicals industry that 
hinder its growth and development through policy interventio ns. The Advisory 
Forum provides a platform to the industry associations for raising their 
grievances and problems and also to boost the 'Make-in-India’ initiative by 
promotion of investments in chemicals and petrochemicals sector to meet the 
growing domest ic demand and promote export. Though the role of the 
Advisory Forum thus constituted is laudable, the Committee are dissatisfied to 
note that only a single meeting of the Advisory forum is being held in a 
calendar year. The first, second and third meetings of the Advisory forum were 
held on 27 August, 2019, 25 June, 2020 and 20 September, 2022, respectively.  
 The Committee are of the view that the frequency of meetings of the 
Advisory forum should be increased to enable the industry associations to put 
forth their grievances related to agrochemicals industry.  This will be of great 
help in identifying the impediments affecting the growth of the Industry, 
finding the solutions to such impediments and achieving the objective  of 
constituting the Advisory Forum in a true sense.  
Indian Chemicals Industry 
9. The Committee note that the Indian Chemical Industry stands 6 th 
globally in sales values,its present market size is around US $ 220 billion and it 
is expected to reach US $ 300 billion by the year 2025.  Further, in the 
agrochemicals sector, India is the 4 th largest producer and exporter and in 
dyes-stuffs India is 2nd largest producer and exporter.  Moreover, it contributes 
9.40% of manufacturing gross value added and 1.69 % of National Gross value 
added. Also, it employs around four million people directly and indirectly.  
However, it is worrisome that Indian Chemical Industry is the net importer and 
in financial year 2020 -21, the trade deficit stood at Rs. 1.75 lakh crore. The 
main reason was the non-availability of feedstocks and mining agents.  

33 
 
 In view of the foregoing, the Committee believe that Indian Chemical 
Industry has a potential to grow further and therefore would earnestly desire 
that the Government should extend all pos sible help and assistance to resolve 
the issues being faced by the Indian Chemical Industry.  Though  the 
Department, in order to reduce dependence on imports, is working on 
introducing the PLI scheme in the chemicals sector for those chemicals which 
are m ajorly imported from a single source and have multiple uses, the 
Committee recommend that the Government act with urgency to minimize the 
trade deficit in the near future. 
Development of new generation pesticides formulation technology by IPFT 
10. The Committee have been informed that IPFT is the only Institute of its 
kind devoted for the development of state -of-the-art user and environment 
friendly new generation pesticides formulation technology and has 
established a healthy support with the agrochemical industry and transfer 
technologies for safer, efficient and environment friendly formulations etc.  
Further, IPFT has also conducted field trials for bio -efficacy and phytotoxicity 
evaluation etc.  However, it conducted 14, 15 and 18 such trials during the year 
2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022 -23, respectively in the State of Haryana only. The 
Committee are, however, disappointed to note that IPFT has no further plans 
to conduct field trials in other States/UTs.  The Committee are of the opinion 
that field trials at different places may show different results and would be 
useful for development of new generation pesticides formulation technology.  
Hence, the Committee recommend to the Department/IPFT to conduct field 
trials accordingly. 
Consumption of Agrochemicals in the country 
11. The Committee note that Agrochemicals are chemicals that are used to 
control pests, pathogens, etc. and supply nutrients to the soil . Further, 
Insecticides/Pesticides are broadly termed as Agrochemicals and play a vital 
role in increasing agricultural productivity by protecting crops from insects, 
pests, fungi, weed etc.  Agrochemical sector is also contributing in a big way 
to the GDP as well as  to gross value addition manufacturing.  The global 
market of agrochemicals is 4,50,000 crore. However, the Indian size of the 
agrochemicals market is about Rs. 50,000 crore.   India is a net exporter of 

34 
 
agrochemicals. A perusal of the country -wise consumption of Agrochemicals 
inter-alia reveals that the consumption of Agrochemicals in Kilo tonnes by 
China is 1763, USA 407, Brazil 377, Argentina 172, Canada 90, France 85, 
Russia 76 and their world share are 43 percent, 10 percent, 9 percent, 4 
percent, 2 percent, 2 percent, 2 percent respectively, whereas the consumption 
of Agrochemicals in India in Kilo tonnes is just 58 and its world share is just 1 
percent. The Committee desire to know the reasons for this huge difference in 
consumption of Agrochemicals b etween India and other countries .  The 
Committee would further like to be apprised of the concrete steps being taken 
to increase the consumption of agrochemicals in India and to increase its 
world share.  
Development of safer pesticides formulation by IPFT 
12. The Committee are pleased to note that IPFT has developed 80,  
user and environment friendly pesticides  formulation technologies. They have 
developed water disposable granules, controlled -release formulations, 
concentrated emulsions and micro emulsions which are being used by the 
industry. Apart from that, IPFT provides training on various aspects of 
formulation to technical person nel from pesticides industry, scientist s, 
students, etc.  Further, in collaboration with ICAR, IPFT has developed two 
formulations of management of orbanche weed and during the last three 
years, 28 research papers on formulations , analytical , chemistry and 
persistence studies have been published in reputed national and international 
journals.  While appreciating the efforts of the IPFT, the Committee would 
earnestly desire that IPFT should make consistent efforts to develop n ew 
pesticide formulations for the benefits of farmers, registering  a bumper crop 
production in the country and keep the committee informed in this regard.   
Promoting the use of Bio-Pesticides 
13. The Committee note that IPFT is making continuous efforts for 
promoting bio -botanical bacterial pesticides. Besides developing various 
technologies of different bio -botanical pesticides bacterial formulations, IPFT 
is also conducting training programmes fo r farmers to promote the use of 
botanical based crop protection products. The Committee feel that there is a 
considerable need to promote  the use of bio-pesticides/bio botanical 

35 
 
pesticides to address the serious concern posed to human life and 
environment by the use of non-target toxicity , residual consequences and 
challenging biodegradability of the synthetic pesticides. The Committee 
therefore, impress upon the Department/I PFT to vigorously take up training 
programmes for the farmers to educate them in this regard accordingly. 
Setting up of four Advanced Research Centres (ARC) of IPFT 
14. The Committee note that IPFT propose s to set up four advanced 
research centres (ARCs) in the state of Assam, Karn ataka, Uttar Pradesh and 
Gujarat. A concept note in this connection, for obtaining in -principle-approval 
from the respective states, has been submitted to the Department.  Only after 
the approval of the Government, ARCs can be set up and further action wou ld 
be taken accordingly in the matter. The Committee recommend to the 
Department to expedite the examination and processing of the proposal 
received from IPFT and take up the matter at highest level with Government of 
India, for its approval. 
Sanctioned and Actual Strength of IPFT 
15. The Committee note that out of the total sanctioned strength of 40, the 
working staff strength of IPFT is just 19 which is less than 50% of the total 
sanctioned strength. The post s are lying vacant for various reasons, one 
superannuary post of establishment officer is lying vacant, 07 vacant posts 
have been advertised, 02 post became vacant due to retirement of incumbents 
of Group ‘C' officers in Dec ember, 2022 and 01 post of specialist (Bioscience) 
is under litigation. The C ommittee urge the Department to take immediate 
steps to fill all the vacant posts in IPFT on priority basis so as to enable IPFT 
to discharge its function in an efficient and time bound manner.  
 
Loss of Rs. 30 crore to Rasayani Unit of HIL (India) Ltd. during 2021-22. 
16. The Committee are concerned to note that the Rasayani unit of HIL 
(India) Ltd. suffered a massive loss of Rs. 30 crore during 2021 -22.  The 
Committee are, however, not convinced with the reply of the Government to 
justify the loss of Rs. 30 crore. It has been informed that order of DDT which 
was, Rs. 79.41 crore in the year 2020 -21 declined to Rs. 43.91 crore , that is, by 
50% of order value in 2020 -21 resulting in reduction of sales by Rs. 35.50 

36 
 
crore.  Similarly, the export order of DDT during 2020 -21 which was Rs. 24.70 
crore too declined to Rs. 6.48 crore resulting in reduction of sales by Rs 18.22 
crore.  As such the total reduction in sale of DDT was Rs. 53.72 crore. The 
Committee are unable to understand how Rasayani unit incurred a loss of Rs. 
30 crore during 2021 -22 when there was a  reduction in sale of DDT by Rs. 
53.72 crore in 2020-21. The Committee would expect factual information in this 
regard. 
17.   The Committee further take note of the steps taken by HIL(India) Ltd. to 
overcome the loss generated in the year  2021 -22 in Rasayani unit. The 
company is focusing on utilization of idle production capacity of 
agrochemicals plants besides increasing the pr oduction of LLINs and also 
persuading the major vendors to supply new materials to streamline the 
production.  The Committee would like to be assured that the Department/HIL 
(India) Ltd. would take all corrective measures to avoid recurrence of such a 
huge loss in future. 
Non-Payment of salaries/arrears to employees of HIL (India) Ltd. 
 
18. The Committee, during their study visit to Kochi in May, 2023 learnt that 
the Udyogamandal Unit of HIL (India) Limited had been closed down due to 
operational losses because of increase in production cost at the plant as raw 
materials were brought from far -off places, which made its products unviable. 
The Committee regret to note that due to paucity of funds, salary and other 
dues could not be provided to their employ ees for the past several months. 
Even the retired employees are not given gratuity and pension. Further, 
Voluntary Retirement Scheme  (VRS)/ Voluntary Separation Scheme (VSS)  has 
been offered to the employees of the unit. Though the Committee were 
assured during the study visit in May, 2023 that utmost efforts would be made 
by the Department to get the dues of HIL of Rs. 96 crore pending with the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, which will facilitate payment of salary 
and other dues to its employees, the position as is learnt remains the same 
even after considerable lapse of time with no resolution to the crisis.  The 
representatives of the Department  during evidence on 28 July, 2023 submitted 
that  the employees are being given some advances to take care of their day -
to-day needs. Further, a proposal for the closure of two units will soon be sent 
to DPE for final approval of the administrative mechanism. Out of Rs. 401 crore 

37 
 
that has been sought, Rs. 56 crore will be for meeting the expenditure arising 
on account of VRS/VSS and also, for payment of pending salary dues. The 
remaining amount will be used for making payments to the vendors and also 
for the loans.  
 The Commi ttee would like to be assured that the Department would 
vigorously pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance and get the required 
amount of Rs. 402 crore for expending the same on account of VRS/VSS, for 
payment of pending salary dues to the employees , etc. The Committee hope 
that the matter will get a favorable response from the Ministry of Finance. The 
Committee would like to be kept updated on the matter. 
 
Training programmes for farmers for judicious use of Fertilizers 
 
19. The Committee note that the D/o Chemicals and Petrochemicals(DCPC) 
extends financial support under Chemicals Promotion Development Scheme 
(CPDS) for organizing seminars, conferences and training programs to create 
awareness among the farmers about judiciou s use of agrochemicals and 
fertilizers. The Committee also note with satisfaction that HIL (India) Ltd. as 
well as IPFT organize training programmes under CPDS to enhance awareness 
among the farmers to judicially use pesticides and for helping them in 
addressing the problems such as soil degradation, damage to the 
underground water bodies, human life and environment due to the adverse 
effect of residual pesticides, etc. Farmers are also sensitized through video 
clips and PPE kits are also given to the farmers.  
 Taking cognizance of  the fact that the increased use of chemical 
fertilizers in the country would consequently translate into enhanced crop 
production, the Committee feel that training to the farmers is the need of the 
hour to educate  them about the judicious use of fertilizers to reduce their 
harmful effects on the environment and other forms of life.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that pan -India training programmes should 
be organized at frequent intervals of time with wide publ icity so as to engage 
more and more farmers. 
  

38 
 
Nil import of Long Lasting Insecticidal Nets (LLINs) 
20. The Committee are happy to learn that the LLINs have not been 
imported even once during the last three years as indigenous technology has 
been developed for the commercialization of the LLINs at HIL (India) Ltd.  The 
Committee are aware that this will not only reduce the dependency of the 
country on imports but also save precious foreign reserves/exchange.  The 
Committee would desire the Department to keep up the good work with regard 
to attaining self-reliance in the manufacture of LLINs in the future as well.  
*** 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                  DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
14 December, 2023                                                                         CHAIRPERSON, 
23 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)                                 STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
                                         CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
  

39 
 
APPENDIX-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(2022-23) 
Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 08 February, 2023 from 1720 hrs. to 
1845 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – CHAIRPERSON 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Deepak Baij 
3. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
4. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhalikar 
5. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
6. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
7. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
8. Smt. Aparupa Poddar  
        
     RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Dr. Anil Jain 
10. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1.  Shri Vinay Kumar Mohan            - Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri  N. K. Jha             - Director 
3.  Smt. Geeta Parmar  - Additional Director 
4.  Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
5.  Shri Panna Lal   - Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Ferti lizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
1. Shri Arun Baroka Secretary (C&PC) 
2. Sh. Susanta Kumar Purohit Joint Secretary 
3. Ms. Divya Parmar Economic Adviser 
4. Shri K. K. Srivastava Director 

40 
 
5. Shri Ram Sajeevan Director 
Representatives from Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
 
1. Shri A. K. Shrivastava Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sanjay Aarya Sec. CJB & RC 
3. Dr. Archana Sinha J. D. (DA&FW) 
4. Dr. Ranjit Singh Director (Plant Protection)  
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM OTHER PSUs/ORGANIZATIONS 
1. Dr. Jitender Kumar Director- IPFT 
2. Shri Shashank Chaturvedi Director (Marketing) HIL 
3. Dr. Vishal Choudhury Dy. Ind. Adviser 
4. Dr. J. P. Singh Plant Protection Adviser  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals(DCPC), its PSUs/Organizations and 
Ministry of Agriculture to the sitting of the Committee convened to have briefing on 
the subject ‘ insecticides &  pesticides – promotion and development including safe 
usage -  licensing regime for insecticides’. Their attention was also drawn to the 
Direction 58 of ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ about the confidentiality of the 
proceedings of the Committee. 
  
3. Thereafter, the  Secretary, DCPC briefed the Committee through a Power 
Point Presentation inter-alia highlighting Chemical Industry: An overview, Indian 
Chemical Industry, Projected Market Size of Sector, Chemical industry market by 
segment (FY20), Int roduction of Pesticides, Classification of Pes ticides, Pesticides 
Sector Scena rio, Top ten Export Destinations for Indian Pesticides, Country -wise 
Major Imports of Pesticides, Country -wise Consumption of Agrochemicals,  The 
Insecticides Act, 1968, Insectici des Act, 1968, Implementation of Insecticide Act, 
1968, Insecticides Rules, 1971, Key provisions, Central Insecticides Board, 
Registration Committee, Types of Registrations under the Act, Registered pesticides 
in India, Quality Control of Pesticides, Locus t Control efforts 2019 -2020, Integrated 
Pest management IPM, Efforts made to promote IPM, Safe & Judicious use of 
Pesticides, IPM efforts during last five years, etc. 
  

41 
 
4. The Members, then, raised certain queries on the subject like country -wise 
consumption of agro -chemicals, use of pesticides, misuse and abuse of pesticides 
including its ill -effects, phasing out of the hazardous pesticides, introduction of 
organic pesticides, safe usage of pesticides etc. T he representatives of the Ministry 
responded to the same.  
5. The Chairperson thanked the Secretary and other representatives of the 
Ministry for furnishing the available information on the subject matter and responding 
to queries of the Members. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A copy of the audio-recorded verbatim proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

42 
 
APPENDIX-II 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2022-23) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 20 th July, 2023 from 1600 hrs.  
to 1800 hrs. in Committee Room ‘’D’, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
DR. SHASHI THAROOR-    CHAIRPERSON 
 
           MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
4. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
5. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
6. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
7. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
8. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
                     
           RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Dr. Anil Jain 
10. Shri Arun Singh 
11. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
12. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
                      
     SECRETARIAT 
6.   Shri  Vinay Kumar Mohan  -     Joint Secretary 
7.   Smt Geeta Parmar                  -            Additional Director 
8. Shri  Kulvinder Singh   -    Deputy Secretary  
9. Shri Panna Lal    -    Under Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
1. Shri Arun Baroka -  Secretary (C&PC) 
2. Shri Susanta Kumar Purohit - Joint Secretary (Chemicals) and CMD  
HIL (India) Ltd. 
3. Shri Deepak Mishra -  Joint Secretary (PC) and Director, IPFT 

43 
 
4. Shri Ganga Kumar -  DDG 
5. Smt. Divya Parmar - Economic Adviser 
6. Shri K. K. Srivastava - Director 
7. Shri Awijit Rakshit - Director 
8. Dr. Sanjay Kumar 
Chattopadhyay 
-  Convener, Advisory Forum, DCPC 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change  
 
1. Dr. Satyendra Kumar - Director (HSMD),  
2. Shri Dinabandhu Gouda - Scientist, CPCB 
 
Representatives of The Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
 
1. Dr. Ashish Kumar Srivastava - Joint Secretary, (Plant Protection) 
2. Dr. Sanjay Arya - Secretary (CIB&RC) DPPQ&S 
3. Dr. Archana Sinha - Joint Director (Chemistry), DPPQ&S 
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
19. Dr. Rajiv Manjhi - Joint Secretary 
 
Representatives of other PSUS/Organizations 
1. Shri Shashank Chaturvedi - Director (Marketing) HIL (India) Ltd. 
2. Shri D. N. V. Srinivasa Raju - Director (Finance), HIL (India) Ltd. 
3. Shri B. Sajeeb - CMD, HOCL 
4. Dr. Mohana Krishna Reddy Mudiam - Director, IPFT 
5. Sh. Varun Singh Punia - DIA (VSP) 
6. Ms. Himanshi Trivedi - Asst Director 
  
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to take oral evidence on the subject ‘Insecticides & Pesticides -Promotion 
and development includi ng safe usage -licensing regime' for insecticides. Their 
attention was drawn to the Direction ‘58’ of the ‘Direction by the Speaker’ regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee. 
3. The Secretary, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals then made a 
Power Point presentation highlighting various aspects of the subject viz. overview of 
the Chemical Industry, projected market size of the Chemicals Sector, Introduction of 

44 
 
Pesticides and their classification, scenario of pesticides sector, coun try-wise 
consumption of agrochemicals, top ten export destination for Indian Pesticides, 
country wise major imports of Pesticides, Promotion and Development of 
Insecticides including their safe and judicious use, role and responsibilities under the 
insecticides Act, 1968, Constitution of Central Insecticides Board, and Registration 
Committee under section 4 and 5 of the Insecticides Act, 1968, Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM), Quality and production of the state of the art user and 
environment friendly new generation pesticides formulation technology by Institute of 
Pesticide Formulation Technology  (IPFT), functioning of HIL (India) Limited, closure 
of its two units and also its role in controlling locust attack, Farmers training 
programme conducted under Ch emicals Promotion Development scheme (CPDS) 
by HIL (India) Ltd. and ensuring quality of chemicals. 
4. The Members then raised several queries related to the subject and the 
representatives of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemical and Department 
of Health and Family Welfare responded. Further, certain clarifications were sought 
on points viz. the reasons for not conducting not even a single farmers training 
programme during the year 2019 -2020 under chemical promotion development 
scheme by HIL (India)  Ltd.,  whether conducting only 134 farmers training 
programmes covering just 46,561 farmers would be adequate for practicing judicious 
and safe use of Pesticides countrywide, how to stop the availability of banned 
insecticides/pesticides in the market and  how HIL (India) Ltd. would function and 
discharge its responsibilities with just a single function unit, etc.  
5. The Secretary, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals assured the 
Committee to furnish written replies to the queries which remained unanswered 
within two weeks time.  
6.    The Chairperson thanked the Secretary and other representatives of the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemical and Department of Health and Family  
for furnishing the required information on the subject and responding to the Members 
of the Committee.  
 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
[A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record] 
The Committee then adjourned. 