1 
 
11 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF  PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the  
Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha)  on "Demands for Grants” of the Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers (Department of  
Pharmaceuticals)] 
   
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
   FEBRUARY, 2021 /MAGHA, 1942 (SAKA) 


2 
 
 
REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT  PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the  
Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  
on "Demands for Grants”  (2019-20)” of the Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers (Department of  
Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.02.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.02.2021 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2021/MAGHA, 1942 (SAKA) 


3 
 
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20) and 2020-21 (iv) 
INTRODUCTION (v) 
Chapter I Report   
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government' s  
replies 
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee  
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of  Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2019-20) held on 11.08.2020 and 
12.10.2020 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (17 th 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers on   Demands for Grants 2019 -20 pertaining to 
the Ministry  of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2019-20) 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
4 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
5 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
6 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
7 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
8 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
9 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
10 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
11 Shri M. Selvaraj 
12 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
13 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
14 Shri Nandigam Suresh 
15 Er. Bishweswar Tudu 
16 Shri H. Vasanthakumar 
17 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
18 Dr. M.K Vishnu Prasad. 
19 Shri Deepak Baij  
20 Dr. Manoj Rajoria 
21 Shri Shriniwas Dadasaheb Patil  
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
26 Shri Arun Singh 
27 Shri P. Selvarasu^ 
28 Shri A.D. Singh^ 
29 Shri K. Vanlalvena^ 
30 Vacant* 
31 Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora    -  Officer on Special Duty 
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava    -  Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram   -  Additional Director 
4.         Ms  Sonia Sankhla                              -          Assistant Committee Officer 
 
^Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 22.07.2020. 
*Shri Amar Singh expired on 01.08.2020. 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 

5 
 
(2020-21) 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Deepak Baij 
4 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
5 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
6 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
7 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8 Shri Pakauri Lal 
9 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
11 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
12 Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
13 Shri Atul Kumar Singh alias Atul Rai 
14 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15 Shri M. Selvaraj 
16 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
17 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
18 Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
19 Shri Er. Bishweswar Tudu 
20 
21 
Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari# 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26 Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27 
28 
Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
Shri Arun Singh$ 
29 Shri A.D. Singh 
30 
31 
Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
Shri K. Vanlalvena 
  
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora    -  Officer on Special Duty 
2. Shri A.K. Srivastava    -  Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram   -  Additional Director 
4.         Ms  Sonia Sankhla                              -          Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
$Re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.12.2020. 
#Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 28.12.2020 vice Shri Nandigam Suresh 
 
 
 

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 (2019-2020) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report 
on their behalf, present this Eleventh Report (S eventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2019-20) on Demand for Grants 
(2019-20) pertaining to the Department of Pharmaceuticals. 
 
2. The Fourth Report (Seventeenth  Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Chemicals and Fertilizers was presented to  Lok Sabha on   12.12.2019 and 
laid in Rajya Sabha on 12.12.2019.  The Action Taken replies of Government to 
all observations / recommendations contained in the Report were received on 
18.05.2020.  The Standing Committee on  Chemicals and Fertilizers (2019 -20) 
considered and adopted this Report  at their sitting held on 11.08.2020  and 
12.10.2020 respectively. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the further Comments of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                 KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
 8 February, 2021                                                                               Chairperson 
19 Magha, 1942 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on 
        Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 

7 
 
 
INTRODUCTORY  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2019-
20) deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the fourth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2019 -20)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) which was presented to Lok Sabha on 
12.12.2019. In all, the Committee made 14 Observations / Recommendations in 
the Report. 
1.2 The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
were requested to furnish repl ies to the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Fourth Report within three months from the date of presentation 
of the Report, i.e. by 12.03.2020. The Action Taken Replies of the Government in 
respect of all the 14 Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report 
have been received from  the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers) vide their O.M No. 23003/3/2019  dated 18 .05.2020.  These Replies 
have been examined and categorized as follows:-  
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
             Rec. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,11,13 & 14             (Total =10) 
 Included in Chapter-II of the Report 
    
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 
Rec. Nos.    Nil                                                                              (Total=Nil) 
 
   Included in Chapter-III of the Report      
     
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which reply of the      
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration-  
 
  Reco. Nos. Nil                                                                               (Total=Nil) 
                             
  Included in Chapter IV of the Report  
  
                                                                                        

8 
 
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited- 
 
Reco Nos. 8,9,10 &12                                                                (Total =4)                                                                                                                           
  Included in Chapter V of the Report      
     
1.3 The Committee desire  that the Action Taken Notes on  Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and the Final 
Replies in respect of Observations / Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-V f or which final replies are still awaited should be furnished 
expeditiously.  
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their Observations / Recommendations which still requir e reiteration or merit 
comments as enumerated in Chapter I. 
  

9 
 
  CHAPTER 1  
(Recommendations on which comments have been made by the Committee) 
Recommendation No.1 
1.5 The Committee had made the following observations / recommendations 
with regard to inadequate budget allocations for the Department for 2019-20 :- 
“The Committee are constrained to note that only Rs. 235.51 crore could be 
allocated by the Ministry of Finance out of Rs. 398.05 crore proposed by the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals for the current financial year 2019 -20. The 
proposed amount of Rs. 398.05 crore included Rs. 366.05 crore for Central 
Sector Schemes. In view of the curtailed allocation, the Department had to 
spread thinner allocation amongst its Central Sector Schemes totaling to 
Rs. 204.30 crore. In this regard, the Committee note the views expressed 
by the Department that the reduction in outlay would have an adverse 
impact on the implementation of various Schemes and will not be sufficient 
to achieve the targets fixed by the Department for its major Central Sector 
Schemes. As per the details given by the Department, development of 
National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), 
implementation of Umbrella Scheme of Development of Pharmaceutical 
Industry and also the Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaush adi Pariyojana 
(PMBJP) are likely to be affected due to reduced allocation of funds. Since 
it is a vital sector concerning health upkeep of the entire population of the 
country, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of Finance 
should consider the proposals of the Department for allocation of funds to 
the various Central Sector Schemes of the Department and allocate 
requisite amount of funds for the Schemes of the Department at RE stage 
during 2019 -20. The Department should also take up this mat ter at the 
highest level with the Ministry of Finance and this recommendation made by 
the Committee should be conveyed to that Ministry for necessary action at 
its level.”  
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
1.6 The Department of Pharmaceuticals, in their Action T aken Reply with 
regard to the above mentioned observations / recommendations of the Committee, 
has stated as  under:-   
“Department of Pharmaceuticals has proposed total budget estimates 
amounting to Rs. 398.05 crore for FY 2019 -20. But it was curtailed to   

10 
 
Rs. 235.51 crore. Out of the proposed budget estimates by DoP an amount 
of Rs. 366.05 crore was kept for Central Sector Schemes. Curtailed 
allocation resulted in thin allocation among the Central Sector Schemes. 
Due to this fact implementation of Jan Ausha dhi Scheme (PMBJP), NIPER, 
Development of Pharmaceuticals, and Consumer Awareness Publicity and 
Price Monitoring (CAPPM) was adversely affected.   
  The matter has been taken up at the highest level and the Hon’ble Minister 
of Chemicals & Fertilizers reque sted the Union Finance Minister for 
allocating the funds sought by Department at RE 2019 -20 (Rs. 1635.58 
crore) stage and BE 2020-21 (Rs. 694.05 crore).  However, the Department 
has been allocated Rs. 562.33 crore for RE 2019 -20 and Rs. 333.58 crore 
for BE 2020-21.  The Department was able to utilize 99.63% of its RE (i.e 
Rs. 560.25 crore) as on 31.3.2020.However, the recommendation of the 
committee has been noted for better utilization of funds in future.” 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.7  The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry of Finance has 
raised the budgetary allocation for the Department from Rs. 235.51 crore at 
BE stage  to Rs 526.33 crore at RE stage during 2019 -20 and that a higher 
budgetary allocation of Rs. 333.58 core has  been made  at BE  stage  for  the 
year 2020 -21. Since the Department has received the desired push on 
financial front, the Committee are hopeful that the same will be resulted in 
effective and efficient implementation of schemes under the Department.  It 
is expected that the Department would focus on timely utilization of funds by 
expediting its decision making process and planning for effective 
implementation of schemes and programmes of the Department. Further, 
considering the current COVID-19 pandemic related health emergency in the 
country, the Committee recommend that the budgetary support to the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals should be further  increased  for effective 
implementation of Schemes under the Department and  particularly 

11 
 
emphasis  should be l aid on the Umbrella Scheme of Development of 
Pharmaceutical Industry which is aimed at overall development of 
pharmaceutical industry in the country.  
Recommendation No.2 
1.8 The Committee had made the following observations / recommendations 
with regard to budgetary support of Department to BPPI :- 
“The Committee appreciate that the guiding Principle of Bureau of Pharma 
Public Sector Undertakings of India (BPPI) which implements the important 
scheme of PMBJP to continuously str ive to increase its revenue and 
decrease its operating cost so that it 35 sustain its operations through 
internal resources. During 2019 -20, BPPI will approximately need Rs. 245 
crore for running its operations. Out of this, it is in a position to generate  Rs. 
202.50 crore from its operations and only Rs. 42.50 crore is required by it 
as grant from the Government. The Committee while appreciating the 
efforts of BPPI to be completely self sustainable in the implementation of 
PMBJP, are of the firm view that the objective of the PMBJP to provide 
generic medicines at affordable prices to the people should not in any way 
diluted and therefore recommend that the Government should provide 
grants to BPPI till it completely attains its self -sustainability. Departmen t 
should place its demand for additional fund requirements for 
implementation of PMBJP during 2019 -20 with the Ministry of Finance for 
allocation of funds at RE stage and convey the views expressed by this 
Committee in this regard.” 
Reply of the Government 
1.9 The Department of Pharmaceuticals, in their Action Taken Reply has stated 
as under :-   
“The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for further 
compliance.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.10   The Committee note that Bureau of Pharma Public Sector 
Undertakings of India (BPPI) is continuously striving for complete self 
sufficiency in implementation of PMBJP. During 2019 -20, out of Rs. 245 

12 
 
crore required by BPPI for implementation of the Sc heme, Rs. 202.50 crore 
was generated by it from its operation and only Rs. 42.50 crore was sought 
as grant from the Department /Government.   In view of the mandate of 
PMBJP to provide quality generic medicines at affordable prices to the 
people particularly the poor and needy,   the Committee had recommended 
that the Government should provide grants to BPPI till it completely attaints 
self – sustainability. The committee are happy to note that the same has 
been noted by the Department for further compliance.  The Committee hope 
that utmost importance would be given by the Department for the large scale 
implementation of this important Scheme and the gap between the fund 
requirement and fund generation would  be  fully met by the Department till 
BPPI attains self sustainability. 
 
Recommendation  No.4 
 
1.11 The observations/ recommendations of the Committee regarding opening 
PMBJP Kendras in Primary Health Centers were as under :- 
 
“The Committee note that the Department has requested the State 
Governments to allot space in Primary Health Centers with free electricity 
for opening PMBJP kendras in rural and remote areas including 
mountainous, hilly and tribal areas. The Committee recommend that sincere 
efforts should be made by the Department to c onvince the State 36 
Governments to provide space in PHCs to open PMBJP kendras in rural, 
remote, hilly and tribal areas. Progress made in this regard should also be 
conveyed to the Committee.”  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.12 Action Taken Reply of the Depa rtment of Pharmaceuticals in this regard is 
as under :- 

13 
 
“Department of Pharmaceuticals and the Bureau of Pharma PSUs of India 
(BPPI) had written letters to Principal Secretaries (Health and Family 
Welfare) of all States/UTs requesting to provide rent free space in 
Government Hospital for opening Jan Aushadhi Kendras. The Department 
has written request letters to Hon’ble Chief Ministers and Chief Secretaries 
of these states to open Jan Aushadhi Kendras in maximum number of 
Government Hospital to make availab le quality generic medicines at 
affordable prices. Secretary, Department of Pharmaceuticals has also 
written request letters to Chief Secretaries of all   States/UTs on 
26.12.2019.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.13 The Committee note that the Department has written to all the State 
Governments/Union Territories to provide rent free space in Government 
hospitals for opening Jan Aushadhi Kendras. However, the thrust of the 
earlier recommendation was providing rent  free space in Primary Health 
Centres with free electricity for opening PMBJP Kendras in rural and remote 
areas including mountai nous, hilly and tribal areas. Since the poor and 
needy people v isit PHCs often particularly in  rural and remote areas 
including mountainous, hilly and tribal areas, the Committee recommend 
again that  the Department and BPPI  would impress upon the State 
Governments to  provide  rent free space and free electricity in PHCs for 
opening PMBJP Kendras in rural and remote areas includi ng mountainous, 
hilly and tribal areas.   
 Recommendation  No.5 
1.14 The Committee had made the following observations / recommendations 
regarding coverage of PMBJP Kendra in a district :- 
“The Committee note that presently on an average 8 PMBJP Kendras are 
functioning in a district and this may be increased to 9 kendras in a district 
by the end of the year. In Committee's view, this number of PMBJP kendras 
may not be sufficient to meet the lofty ideal of the Scheme to provide quality 
generic medicines at affordable prices to the people as it would be difficult 

14 
 
to people to travel long distances in search of a PMBJP kendra particularly 
when they are in urgent need of medicines. The Committee,  therefore, 
recommend to open more PMBJP kendras in every district in the country so 
as to benefit more number of people.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.15 The Department of Pharmaceuticals, in their Action Taken Reply has stated 
as under :-   
“The Department is committed to increase the outreach of Jan Aushadhi 
Kendras to more people particularly in aspirational districts in the country. 
As on 30.04.2020, 6321 Jan Aushadhi Kendras are functional in 726 
districts of the country. The Department is tak ing proactive steps to open 
more Kendras and cover the remaining districts of the country in this 
Financial Year i.e. 2020-2021.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.16 The Committee are pleased to note that 6321 Jan Aushadhi Kendras 
are functional in 726 districts of the country. This works out to be an average 
of  about 8.7 BMBJP kendras  in a district.  Even though the Department is 
taking proactive steps to open more Kendras and  proposes to cover the 
remaining districts of the country in this Financial Year i .e. 2020-2021,  the 
Committee feel that the present number of PMBJP kendras in a  particular 
district is not sufficient to meet the needs of people for quality generic 
medicines at affordable prices and therefore recommend again to open more 
PMBJP kendras in every district in the country so as to make it easily 
accessible for the masses. 
Recommendation  No.6 
 
1.17 With regard to implementation of the Umbrella Scheme of the Department  
"Scheme for Development of Pharmaceutical Industry" the Committee  had 
observed / recommended as under :- 

15 
 
“The Committee are concerned to note that the Umbrella Scheme of the 
Department namely "Scheme for Development of Pharmaceutical Industry" 
largely remains non -starter due to various issues involving implementation 
of the Scheme. This is a Central Sector Scheme with a total outlay of Rs. 
480 crore for a three year period from 2017 -18 to 2019-20. About Rs. 4.64 
crore has only been spent during the period from 2017 -18 to 2018 -19 and 
an allocation of Rs. 8.29 crore has only been made for 2019 - 20. This 
Scheme includes five sub -schemes viz. Assistance to Pharmaceutical 
Industry for Common Facilities (APICF); Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry 
for Common Facility Centre; Assistance to Medical Device Industry f or 
Common Facility Centre ; Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation 
Assistance Scheme (PTUAS); and Pharmaceutical Promotion and 
Development Scheme (PPDS). The Committee find that only token 
allocation of Rs. 1 lakh has been made for the sub -schemes of 
Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme, Assistance 
to Bulk Drug 37 Industry for Common Facility Centre and Assistance to 
Medical Device Industry for Common Facility Centre during 2019 -20. These 
schemes are running into third year of their impl ementation and still only 
token allocation has been made for 2019-20. Since it is the flagship scheme 
of the Department aimed at overall development of the Pharmaceutical 
industry, the Committee recommend the following: - (i) Immediate and 
effective steps s hould be taken by the Department for actual 
implementation of these schemes from the current financial year onwards. 
The progress made in this regard should be conveyed to the Committee on 
each of the sub -scheme. (ii) Third Party evaluation of all sub -schemes 
should be conducted and corrective steps should be taken based on the 
evaluation for flawless implementation of the Schemes. Similarities in the 
sub-schemes may also be studied for suitable action. (iii) Fresh proposals 
have come under the sub -schemes. All these proposals should be 
scrutinized as per scheme guidelines and timely approvals should be 
accorded on these proposals. Since budgetary allocation of only Rs. 8.30 
crore has been made for the entire umbrella scheme, funds required for 
implementation of the sub -schemes should be obtained at RE stage during 
2019-20. Scheme -wise details of action taken in this regard should be 
furnished to the Committee within three months. (iv) Immediate steps 
should be taken for implementation of the important Sub - scheme 
"Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme. The 
process of selection of a Public Sector Financial Institution to implement the 
Scheme should be expedited and the progress made in this regard should 
be conveyed to the Committee in the Action Taken Replies.”  
 

16 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.18 The Department of Pharmaceuticals, in their Action Taken Reply with 
regard to the above mentioned observations / recommendations of the Committee, 
has stated as under :-   
 
 “Status of implementation of Umbrella scheme for Development of 
Pharmaceutical Industry: 
 
Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common facility Centre: 
 
The existing sub -scheme of Department of Pharmaceuticals termed as 
“Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common facility Centre” under the 
umbrella scheme for Development of Pharmaceutical Industry proposed to 
provide a one -time grant-in-aid to the tune of Rs.100 crore per Bulk Drug 
Park CFC or 70% of the project cost, whichever is less, for creation of 
common facilities in the upcoming Bulk Drug Park promoted by State 
Government/State Corporations. 
 
Bulk drug manufacturing industry is highly capital intensive and to develop 
one Bulk Drug Park of world class facilities, it is felt that an investment of 
around  Rs.1000 Crore per park would be required. Since the present 
financial assistance of Rs 100 Crore per Bulk Drug Park is quite inadequate 
for the effective implementation of the scheme, it was decided to revise the 
existing sub-scheme. The revised scheme has been approved by the Union 
Cabinet on 20.03.20 and is now termed as “Promotion of Bulk Drug  Parks”. 
The total size of the Scheme is Rs.3000 Crore and tenure of the Scheme 
will be five years (2020-21 – 2024-25). 
 
The scheme will provide grant -in-aid to 3 Bulk Drug Parks with a maximum 
limit of Rs.1000 Crore per park or 70 % of the project cost of Common 
Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is less. In case of hilly states and North 
East Region, the grant -in-aid would be Rs.1000 Crore per park or 90% of 
the project cost of Common Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is less. The 
Common Facilities at the Park would provide easy access to standard 
testing and infrastructure facilities and reduce the manufacturing cost 
significantly. The scheme would be implemented through a State 
Implementing Agency (SIA). The guidelines of the s ub-scheme are under 
preparation. 

17 
 
 
Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility Centre: 
 
The existing sub -scheme of Department of Pharmaceuticals termed as 
“Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility Centre ” under 
the umbrella scheme for Development of Pharmaceutical Industry proposed 
to provide a one -time grant-in-aid to the tune of Rs.25 Crore or 70% of the 
project cost, whichever is less, for creation of common facilities in the 
upcoming medical device parks.   
 
Since the common facilities creation requires a large investment and the 
grant provided under the existing scheme was very less, it was decided to 
revise the existing sub -scheme so as to provide adequate funds to 
upcoming medical device parks for cr eation of common facilities. The 
revised scheme has been approved by the Cabinet on 20.03.20 and is now 
termed as “Promotion of Medical Device Parks”.  The total size of the 
Scheme is Rs.400 Crore and tenure of the Scheme will be five years (2020 -
21 – 2024-25).  
 
The scheme will provide grant-in-aid to four (4) Medical Device Parks with a 
maximum limit of Rs.100 Crore per park or 70% of the project cost of 
Common Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is less. In case of hilly states 
and North East Region, the grant -in-aid would be Rs.100 Crore per park or 
90% of the project cost of Common Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is 
less.This would reduce the manufacturing cost significantly and create a 
robust ecosystem for medical device manufacturing in the country. The 
scheme would be implemented through a State Implementing Agency 
(SIA).The guidelines of the sub-scheme are under preparation. 
 
Assistance to Pharmaceutical Industry for Common Facilities: 
 
Assistance under the sub -scheme is admissible for creation of Com mon 
Facilities by Government as well as Private Entrepreneurs in pharma 
sector. Under this sub -scheme grant -in-aid for creation of identified 
infrastructure and common facilities will be granted to a Special Purpose 
Vehicle (SPV) set up for the purpose. Ma ximum limit for the grant -in-aid 
under this sub -scheme would be Rs. 20 Crore per Cluster or 70% of the 
project cost of Common Facilities, whichever is less. It is proposed to 
promote pharma units in existing 10 pharma clusters by 2024 -25. To 
implement this  sub-scheme for 2020 -2025, a total sum of Rs. 200 Crore 
would be required. An EFC note for the same is under preparation.  
 

18 
 
Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme 
(PTUAS): 
In the change scenario, some amendments in the PTUAS have been 
proposed and included in the Umbrella scheme as one of the Sub-Schemes 
for which an EFC Memorandum has already been moved by the 
Department.  Third Party evaluation for all the sub -schemes incl uding 
PTUAS has been initiated and report is under finalisation.  
One of the major reasons for delay in operationalisation of the sub -scheme 
was due to non -boarding of any Public Sector Financial Institution (PSFI) 
through open competitive bidding.  In the revised guidelines, both options of 
the appointing PSFI through open competitive bidding or by nominations 
are included.  In case, no PSFI comes on board through open competitive 
bidding, then the Department will appoint one eligible PSFI by nomination to 
implement the sub-scheme.  
New Schemes under the Umbrella Scheme: 
 
In addition, the Cabinet has approved on 20.03.2020 two Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) Schemes for Bulk Drugs and Medical devices industry to 
promote their domestic manufacturing and to  address their high import 
dependence. These schemes are to be included under the umbrella 
scheme for development of Pharmaceutical Industry. The detailed Scheme 
Guidelines are under preparation. The highlights of the two schemes are as 
follows:  
 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for promotion of domestic 
manufacturing of critical Key Starting Materials (KSMS)/ drug 
intermediates and Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIS) in India. 
 
Under the scheme, financial incentive is given to eligible manufacturers of 
critical KSMs/Drug Intermediates and APIs on their incremental sales over 
the base year (FY 2019-20) for a period of 7 years. The rate of incentive will 
be 20 % (of incremental sales value) for fe rmentation based bulk drugs and 
10% for chemical synthesis based bulk drugs. A total outlay of Rs. 6,940 
Crore has been approved for the scheme for a period of 07 years 
subsequent to the base year. The scheme would be implemented through a 
Project Management Agency (PMA) to be nominated by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals. With the successful implementation of this Scheme it is 
expected that India would be well positioned as a global hub for 
manufacturing of critical KSMs/Drug Intermediates and APIs along with the 
final drug formulations.  

19 
 
 
  Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for promoting domestic 
manufacturing of Medical Devices. 
 
Under the scheme, financial incentive of 5% is given on the incremental 
production / sales of targeted medical device segments over the base year 
(FY 2019 -20) for a period of 6 years. The target for PLI Scheme is to 
provide assistance to about 25 -30 manufa cturers under the following 
categories of medical devices:-  
a. Cancer care/Radiotherapy medical devices,  
b. Radiology & Imaging medical devices (both ionizing & non-ionizing radiation 
products) and Nuclear Imaging Devices, 
c.          Anesthetics & Cardio-Respiratory medical devices including Catheters 
of Cardio Respiratory Category & Renal Care Medical Devices and  
d. All Implants including implantable electronic devices like Cochlear Implants 
and Pacemakers. 
 
A total outlay of Rs. 3,420 Crore has been approved for the scheme for a 
period of 06 years . The scheme would be implemented through a Project 
Management Agency (PMA) to be nominated by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals. The PLI Scheme is expected to boost domestic 
manufacturing, attract large investments and lead to substantial reduction in 
import in the medical device sector, particularly in the identified target 
segments. 
 
  Status of third party evaluation of the umbrella scheme for 
Development of Pharmaceutical Industry: 
 
The work of Third Party Evaluation of the Scheme "Development of 
Pharmaceutical Industry" was awarded to Centre for Global Development 
Research Private Ltd. (CGDR). As per the terms, it was directed to submit 
the report before 18.03.2020. However, on the request of CGDR vide thei r 
email dated 16.03.2020, an extension upto 31.03.2020 was given. 
However, due to present COVID pandemic, CGDR could not submit the 
report. The CGDR vide its email dated 27.04.2020 has informed the 
Department that they would submit the report within a week.” 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.19  The Committee note that specific steps have been taken by the 
Department to implement the sub schemes of the Umbrella Scheme for 

20 
 
Development of Pharmaceutical Industry viz.  Assistance to Pharmaceutical 
Industry for Common Facilities (APICF), Assistance to Bulk Drug Indu stry 
for Common Facility Centre, Assistance to Medical devices Industry for 
Common Facility Centre; Pharmaceutical Technology Up -gradation 
Assistance Scheme (PTUAS) and Pharmaceutical Promotion and 
Development Scheme.  The revised scheme on ‘Assistance to Bulk Drug 
Industry for Common Facility Centre’ has been approved by Union Cabinet 
on 20.03.2020 and  has been renamed as ‘Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks’.   
The total size of the scheme is Rs. 3000 crore for next 5 years (2020 -21 to 
2024-25).   It has revise d the one time grant - in-aid for setting up one Bulk 
Drug Park Common Facility Centre from Rs. 100 crore or 70% of the project 
cost to around Rs. 1000 crore per park or 70% of the project cost.  Similarly, 
the scheme on ‘Assistance to Medical Device Indust ry for Common Facili ty 
Centre’ has been renamed as  ‘Promotion of Medical Device Park’. This 
scheme will now provide grant - in- aid to four Medical Device Park with 
maximum limit of Rs. 100 crore per park or 70% of the project cost of CFC. 
Earlier it was on ly Rs. 25 crore or 70% of the project cost of CFC.   Further, 
the Department proposes to promote pharma units in existing 10 pharma 
clusters by 2024 -25 under Assistance to Pharmaceutical Industry for 
Common Facilities Sc heme. But for implementation of  this Scheme,  the 
Department requires a financial outlay of Rs. 200 crore for the period 2020 to 
2025 for which Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) note is under process.  
To kick start Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistant (PTUAS), 
the Department ha s revised its guidelines, now Public Sector Financial 
Institution (PSFI) can be appointed by open competitive bidding as well as 

21 
 
by nomination. The Department has also conducted   third Party evaluation 
of all sub-schemes and its report is under finalizati on stage. In addition, the 
Cabinet has also approved on 20.3.2020 two new Production Linked 
Incentive schemes for Bulk Drugs and Medical Devices  industries with the 
objective to promote domestic manufacturing and to contain import 
dependence. The Committee feel that the  launching of these   two new 
schemes with the  outlay of Rs. 6940 crore for next 7 years and Rs. 3420 
crore for  next 6 years respectively is a  step in the right direction. These are 
the initial steps taken by the Department for t he holistic development of 
pharmaceutical industry in the country and concrete and effective steps are 
necessary for successful implementation of these revised a nd new 
schemes. The Committee would therefore like to be apprised of the progress 
made in regar d to implementation  of each of the above Schemes. The 
Committee should also be informed about the outcome of third party 
evaluation and action taken thereon. 
 
Recommendations  No.10 and 11 
 
1.20 With regard to regular campus facility in all NIPERs the Comm ittee  had 
observed / recommended as under :- 
“The Committee also note that only NIPER at Mohali is functioning from its 
own premises and all other NIPERs have been allotted land for construction 
of their regular campus. As of now, about 90% construction o f campus of 
NIPER Guwahati has been completed. NIPER Ahmedabad has finalized 
the design of campus and recently issued tender. The construction of 
campus would commence by January, 2020, subject to provision of 
additional funds by Ministry of Finance. In ca se of other NIPERs, though 
Expenditure Finance Committee has decided to defer construction till 
March, 2020, the individual Institutes have been advised to take steps to 
finalize drawings of their campus so that the construction of campuses can 

22 
 
commence im mediately on approval of Expenditure Finance Committee. 
The Committee are concerned to note that out of seven NIPERs, only 
NIPER, Mohali is having its own campus. Since NIPERs are institutions of 
national importance which imparts post graduate and doctorat e education 
and conduct research in various streams of Pharmaceuticals, it is very 
much necessary that they have state of the art infrastructure and laboratory 
facilities. The Committee, therefore, recommend that immediate necessary 
steps should be taken b y the Department for the construction of regular 
campuses for all the six NIPERs within a definite period of time.” 
 
1.21 The Committee had made the following observations / recommendations 
with regard to additional fund allocation required for NIPERs :- 
“The Committee are further concerned to note that the Department had 
sought Rs. 250.00 crore for seven NIPERs in BE 2019 -20. However, 
Ministry of Finance has allocated only Rs 150.00 crore to NIPERs. This 
financial allocation is not adequate to achieve the targets. The Committee 
also note that Expenditure Finance Committee in its meeting held on 
26.03.2018 approved Rs. 959.53 crore for the period 2017 -18 to 2019 -20. 
However, only Rs. 465.77 crore has been allocated for the period. Recently, 
the Department ha s sent a request to Ministry of Finance to allocate 
additional Rs 300.00 crore including Rs 25.00 crore to urgently fill up the 
regular posts of faculty and non -faculty in six NIPERs and Rs 275.00 crore 
for the purchase of equipments and machineries for si x NIPERs and 
completion of the construction of NIPER Guwahati campus and starting of 
construction of NIPER Ahmedabad campus and the proposal is pending 
with the Ministry of Finance. Since the fund allocation is very much 
necessary for full -fledged function ing of these NIPERs, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should take up this matter of additional 
requirement of Rs. 300 crore during 2019 -20 for NIPERs at highest level 
with the Ministry of Finance for allocation of the funds at RE stage. This 
recommendation of the Committee may also be sent to that Ministry for its 
compliance.” 
Reply of the Government 
1.22 The Department of Pharmaceuticals, in their Action Taken Reply with regard 
to the above mentioned observations / recommendations of the Committee, has 
stated as under :-    
“NIPER-Guwahati has already started functioning from its new regular 
campus. A pro vision of Rs. 22.00 crore have been made in the BE 2020 -
2021 to complete the remaining construction work of the campus of the 

23 
 
Institute. An amount of Rs. 20.00 crore has been allocated in BE 2020-21 to 
NIPER- Ahmedabad to start construction work of the cam pus. As regard 
construction of campus of NIPER -Raebareli, Kolkata, Hajipur and 
Hyderabad, the Department will take up the matter with the Department of 
Expenditure in the fresh Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Proposal. 
 
A Proposal for seeking additiona l funds of Rs. 300.00 crore for NIPERs 
from the fund allocated in EFC was sent to the Department of Expenditure, 
but only additional Rs. 10.00 crore were approved in RE 2019 -20. An 
amount of Rs. 202.45 crore has been allocated to NIPERs for BE 2020-21.”  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.23 Since NIPERs are being set up with the objective to run them as 
institutes of national importance in the field of pharmaceutical education 
and research, the Committee recommended that immediate necessary steps 
should be taken by the Department for construction of regular campuses for 
all six NIPERs with in a definite period of time.  As of now, only NIPER 
Guwahati has started functioning from its new regular campus and an 
amount of Rs. 20 crore has been allocated in BE 20 20-21 to NIPER 
Ahmedabad for construction of its  campus. As regards other four NIPERs 
viz. Raebarelli, Kolkata, Hajipur and Hyderabad, the Department will take up 
the matter with Department of Expenditure in the fresh Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) proposal. The Committee are sanguine that the Department 
would be successful in g etting the requisite amount of funds from EFC and 
would complete the construction of campus of other five NIPERs in a time 
bound manner. The requirement of funds for the constru ction of campuses 
for the above mentioned NIPERS should be clearly stated in the EFC 
proposal and the Department should pursue the matter vigorously with the 

24 
 
Ministry of Finance for early clearance of EFC proposal.  The Committee may 
be informed about the progress made in this regard. 
 
Recommendation  No. 12 
1.24 The Committee had made the following observations / recommendations 
with regard to setting up of four new NIPERs:- 
“The Committee note that the setting up of four new NIPERs at Madurai, 
Tamil Nadu and in the states of Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra 
has been deferred by Expenditure Finance Committee till March, 2020 so 
as to consolidate the present NIPERs first. In this regard, the Committee 
recommend that process of starting of these NIPERs  should begin at the 
right earnest so that these States would also be benefitted of this institution 
of national importance.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.25 The Department of Pharmaceuticals, in their Action Taken Reply with 
regard to the above mentioned observations / recommendations of the Committee, 
has stated as under :-   
“EFC in its meeting held on 26.03.2018 had deferred setting up of the 
proposed four new NIPERs at Madurai, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh and 
Rajasthan. It was also suggested that the same may be reviewed in the 
year 2020 by the Department during the Fifteenth Finance Commission 
period (2020 -2025). Accordingly, the matter will be taken up with the 
Department of Expenditure through EFC, after third party evaluation of the 
Scheme, which is under progress.” 
Comments of the Committee 
1.26 The Committee note that  the matter regarding setting up of four new 
NIPERs at Madurai, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan  will be taken 
up with the Department of Expenditure through EFC, after third party 
evaluation of the Scheme, which is under progress.   Since Fifteenth Finance 

25 
 
Commission (2020-2025) period has already commenced, the Committee feel 
that it is expedient that Department  prepare the EFC proposal and place  the 
same  before EFC at the earliest for   setting up of these four NIPERS in a 
time bound manner. 
Recommendation  No. 14 
1.27 The Committee had made the following observations / recommendations 
with regard to Assistance to Price Monitoring Resource Units (PMRUs)  :- 
“The Committee note that ‘Assistance to Price Monitoring Resource Units 
(PMRUs)’ is one of the component of Consumer Awareness Publicity and 
Price Monitoring (CAPPM) scheme under which Government of India has 
initiated setting up of Price Monitoring and Resource Units (PMRU) at the 
States/Union Territories that would provide all necessary support to the 
State drug Controllers and National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) to trickle down benefits of the Drugs Prices Control Order (DPCO), 
2013 at the grass root level. This Scheme is being implemented by NPPA. 
PMRUs are societies registered under Societies Registration Act having 
their own Memorandum of Association/ Bye Laws. The Committee note that 
10 PMRUs have been established in the states of Kerala, Gujarat, Odisha, 
Rajasthan, Haryana, Nagaland, 43 Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and 
Andhra Pradesh. The Department has fixed target for setting up two more 
PMRUs during 2019 -20 and t o cover all states/ Union Territories by 2023 -
24. In this regard, the Committee note that the process of setting up of 
PMRUs largely depends upon the preparedness and cooperation of the 
respective State Government and their respective State Drug Controller s/ 
Food and Drug Administrators. Since PMRUs will be helpful in monitoring 
prices of drugs at grass root level, the Committee recommend that concrete 
steps should be taken by the Department for the setting up of PMRUs in all 
the states/ UTs by 2023 -24. In case of non-cooperation by any states/UTs, 
this matter may be taken at Chief Minister level by stating the benefits of the 
Scheme.” 
Reply of the Government 
1.28 The Department of Pharmaceuticals, in their Action Taken Reply with 
regard to the above mentioned observations / recommendations of the Committee, 
has stated as under :-   

26 
 
“ As per the revised target for the year 2019 -20, PMRUs have been set up 
in total 12 States/ UTs, viz., Kerala, Gujarat, Odisha, Rajasthan, Haryana, 
Nagaland, Tripura, Uttar Prade sh, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Mizoram and 
Jammu & Kashmir. 
 The suggestion of the Committee to take the concrete steps for 
setting up of PMRUs in all the States/ UTs by F.Y. 2023. -24 and in case of 
non-cooperation by any States/ UTs, matter may be taken at C hief Minister 
level by stating the benefits of the Scheme, is noted for action, if required in 
due course.  
  In the BE 2020-21, a total budget provision of Rs.4.50 crore is made 
for Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring (CAPPM), this 
scheme h as 2 components, namely i) Assistance to Project Monitoring 
Resource Units(PMRUs)(Rs.2.50 crore) and ii) Advertising and Publicity of 
CAPPM (Rs.2.00 crore).” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.29 The Committee note that Price Monitoring Resource Units (PMRUs) 
have been set up in 12 States  viz., Kerala, Gujarat, Odisha, Rajasthan, 
Haryana, Nagaland, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, 
Mizoram and Jammu & Kashmir and that the Department is committed to set 
up PMRUs all States/UTs by 2023 -24. H owever, the Committee  are 
concerned to note  that  only Rs.2.50 crore  has been allocated in the BE of 
2020-21  for Assistance to PMRUs  which appears to be grossly inadequate 
for opening new PMRUs in other States and Union territories which are yet 
to be  covered. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the additional 
funds required for setting up of PMRUs should be  sought from the Ministry 
of Finance at RE stage of 2020 -21  and  the Budget Estimates  for 2021 -22 
and 2022-23 should  also  be finalized on  the basis of fund requirement for 
setting up of PMRUs in all states/UTs  The Committee may be informed 
about the action taken in this regard.  

27 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation  No.1 
 
2.1 The Committee are constrained to note that only Rs. 235.51 crore 
could be allocated by the Ministry of Finance out of Rs. 398.05 crore 
proposed by the Department of Pharmaceuticals for the current financial 
year 2019-20.  The proposed amount of Rs. 398.05 crore included Rs. 366.05 
crore for Central Sector Schemes.  In view of the curtailed allocation, the 
Department had to spread thinner allocation amongst its Central Sector 
Schemes totaling to Rs. 204.30 crore. In this regard, the  Committee note the 
views expressed by the Department that the reduction in outlay would have 
an adverse impact on the implementation of various Schemes and will not 
be sufficient to achieve the targets fixed by the Department for its major 
Central Sector Schemes.  As per the details given by the Department, 
development of National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research (NIPER), implementation of Umbrella Scheme of Development of 
Pharmaceutical Industry and also the Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janau shadhi 
Pariyojana (PMBJP) are likely to be affected due to reduced allocation of 
funds.  Since it is a vital sector concerning health upkeep of the entire 
population of the country, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry of Finance should consi der the proposals of the Department for 
allocation of funds to the various Central Sector Schemes of the Department 
and allocate requisite amount of funds for the Schemes of the Department at 
RE stage during 2019-20.  The Department should also take up thi s matter at 
the highest level with the Ministry of Finance and this recommendation 
made by the Committee should be conveyed to that Ministry for necessary 
action at its level. 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 Department of Pharmaceuticals has proposed total budget estimates 
amounting to Rs. 398.05 crore for FY 2019 -20. But it was curtailed to Rs. 235.51 
crore. Out of the proposed budget estimates by DoP an amount of Rs. 366.05 
crore was kept for Central Sector Schemes. Curtailed allocation resulted in thin 
allocation among the Central Sector Schemes. Due to this fact implementation of 
Jan Aushadhi Scheme (PMBJP), NIPER, Development of Pharmaceuticals, and 
Consumer Awareness Publicity and Price Monitoring (CAPPM)  was adversely 
affected.   

28 
 
 The matter has been taken up at the highest level and the Hon’ble Minister 
of Chemicals & Fertilizers requested the Union Finance Minister for allocating the 
funds sought by Department at RE 2019 -20 (Rs. 1635.58 crore) stage and  BE 
2020-21 (Rs. 694.05 crore).  However, the Department has been allocated Rs. 
562.33 crore for RE 2019 -20 and Rs. 333.58 crore for BE 2020 -21.  The 
Department was able to utilize 99.63% of its RE (i.e Rs. 560.25 crore) as on 
31.3.2020.However, the recomm endation of the committee has been noted for 
better utilization of funds in future.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation  No.2 
 
2.3 The Committee appreciate that the guiding Principle of Bureau of 
Pharma Public Sector Undertakings of India (BPPI) which implements the 
important scheme of PMBJP to continuously strive to increase its revenue 
and decrease its operating cost so that it sustains its operations through 
internal resources. During 2019-20, BPPI will approximately need Rs. 245 
crore for running its operations.  Out of this, it is in a position to generate 
Rs. 202.50 crore from its operations and only Rs. 42.50 crore is required by it 
as grant from the Government.  The Committee while appreciating the efforts 
of BPPI to be completely self -sustainable in the implementation of PMBJP, 
are of the firm view that the objective of the PMBJP to provide generic 
medicines at affordable prices to the people should not in any way diluted 
and there fore recommend that the Government should provide grants to 
BPPI till it completely attains its self -sustainability.  Department should 
place its demand for additional fund requirements for implementation of 
PMBJP during 2019-20 with the Ministry of Financ e for allocation of funds at 
RE stage and convey the views expressed by this Committee in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for further 
compliance.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 

29 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
2.5 The Committee are happy to note that 1200 PMBJP Kendras are 
proposed to be opened during 2019 -20.  Presently there are 5300 Kendras in 
675 districts and target has been fixed for increasing the number of Kendras 
to 6200 in 723 districts during 2019 -20.  Likewise product basket of 
medicines is also proposed to be increased from 900 to 1200 during the 
year.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that concrete steps should 
be taken to achieve the targets fixed for opening of PMBJP Kendras and to 
expand the product basket during the year as more Kendras with 
considerable product basket would benefit more people to get generic 
medicines at affordable prices.  The progress made in this regard may be 
apprised to the Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The Department has already opened 6321 PMBJP Kendras as on 
30.04.2020. Out of these 1166 Kendras have been opened in Financial Year 
2019-20.  The Scheme has covered 726 districts out of 728 districts of the country.  
The Department is taking proactive steps to open more Kendras and cover the 
remaining 2 districts of the country in this Financial Year i.e. 2020 -21. As on 
30.04.2020, there are 1250 medicines and 204 surgicals in the product  basket of 
Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP). 
 
 Recommendation No. 4 
2.7 The Committee note that the Department has requested the State 
Governments to allot space in Primary Health Centres with free electricity for 
opening PMBJP Kendra s in rural and remote areas including mountainous, 
hilly and tribal areas.  The Committee recommend that sincere efforts should 
be made by the Department to convince the State Governments to provide 
space in PHCs to open PMBJP Kendras in rural, remote, hil ly and tribal 
areas.  Progress made in this regard should also be conveyed to the 
Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 Department of Pharmaceuticals and the Bureau of Pharma PSUs of India 
(BPPI) had written letters to Principal Secretaries (Health and Fa mily Welfare) of 
all States/UTs requesting to provide rent free space in Government Hospital for 
opening Jan Aushadhi Kendras.  The Department has written request letters to 
Hon’ble Chief Ministers and Chief Secretaries of these states to open Jan 
Aushadhi Kendras in maximum number of Government Hospital to make available 
quality generic medicines at affordable prices. Secretary, Department of 

30 
 
Pharmaceuticals has also written request letters to Chief Secretaries of all 
States/UTs on 26.12.2019.   
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.13  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 Recommendation No. 5 
2.9 The Committee note that presently on an average 8 PMBJP Kendras 
are functioning in a district and this may be increased to 9 kendras in a 
district by the end of the year.  In Committee's view, this number of PMBJP 
kendras may not be sufficient to meet the lofty ideal of the Scheme to 
provide quality generic medicines at affordable prices to the people as it 
would be difficult to people to travel long distan ces in search of a PMBJP 
kendra particularly when they are in urgent need of medicines. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend to open more PMBJP kendras in every 
district in the country so as to benefit more number of people. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 The Department is committed to increase the outreach of Jan Aushadhi 
Kendras to more people particularly in aspirational districts in the country.  As on 
30.04.2020, 6321 Jan Aushadhi Kendras are functional in 726 districts of the 
country. The Department i s taking proactive steps to open more Kendras and 
cover the remaining districts of the country in this Financial Year i.e. 2020-2021. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.16  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
  Recommendation No. 6 
2.11 The Committee are concerned to note that the Umbrella Scheme of the 
Department namely "Scheme for Development of Pharmaceutical Industry" 
largely remains non -starter due to various issues involving implementation 
of the Scheme.  This is a Central Sector Sc heme with a total outlay of Rs. 
480 crore for a three year period from 2017 -18 to 2019 -20.  About Rs. 4.64 
crore has only been spent during the period from 2017 -18 to 2018-19 and an 
allocation of Rs. 8.29 crore has only been made for 2019 -20.  This Scheme 
includes five sub -schemes viz. Assistance to Pharmaceutical Industry for 
Common Facilities (APICF); Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common 

31 
 
Facility Centre; Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility 
Centre; Pharmaceuticals Technology Up gradation Assistance Scheme 
(PTUAS); and  Pharmaceutical Promotion and Development Scheme (PPDS).  
The Committee find that only token allocation of Rs. 1 lakh has been made 
for the sub -schemes of Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation 
Assistance Scheme, As sistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common Facility 
Centre and Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility 
Centre during 2019 -20.  These schemes are running into third year of their 
implementation and still only token allocation has been made for 2019 -20.  
Since it is the flagship scheme of the Department aimed at overall 
development of the Pharmaceutical industry, the Committee recommend the 
following:- 
 
(i) Immediate and effective steps should be taken by the 
Department for actual  implementation of these schemes from 
the current financial year onwards.  The progress made in this 
regard should be conveyed to the Committee on each of the 
sub-scheme. 
(ii) Third Party evaluation of all sub -schemes should be conducted 
and  corrective steps should be taken based on the evaluation 
for flawless  implementation of the Schemes.  Similarities in the 
sub-schemes may  also be studied for suitable action. 
(iii) Fresh proposals have come under the sub -schemes.  All these 
proposals should be scrutinized as per scheme guidelines and 
timely approvals should be accorded on these proposals. Since 
budgetary allocation of only Rs. 8.30  crore has been made for 
the entire umbrella scheme, funds  required for 
implementation of the sub -schemes should be obtained at RE 
stage during 2019 -20. Scheme -wise details of action taken in 
this regard  should be furnished to the Committee within three 
months. 
(iv) Immediate steps should  be taken for implementation of the 
important Sub- scheme "Pharmaceuticals Technology 
Upgradation Assistance Scheme.  
 
The  process of selection of a Public Sector Financial Institution to 
implement the Scheme should be expedited and the progress made in 
this  regard should be conveyed to the Committee in the Action 
Taken Replies. 
 
 
 

32 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 Status of implementation of Umbrella scheme for Development of 
Pharmaceutical Industry: 
 
Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common facility Centre: 
 
2.13 The existing sub -scheme of Department of Pharmaceuticals termed as 
“Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common facility Centre” under the umbrella 
scheme for Development of Pharmaceutical Industry proposed to provide a one -
time grant-in-aid to the tune of Rs.100 crore per Bulk Drug Park CFC or 70% of 
the project cost, whichever is less, for creation of common facilities in the 
upcoming Bulk Drug Park promoted by State Government/State Corporations. 
 
Bulk drug manufacturing indust ry is highly capital intensive and to develop 
one Bulk Drug Park of world class facilities, it is felt that an investment of around  
Rs.1000 Crore per park would be required. Since the present financial assistance 
of Rs 100 Crore per Bulk Drug Park is quit e inadequate for the effective 
implementation of the scheme, it was decided to revise the existing sub -scheme. 
The revised scheme has been approved by the Union Cabinet on 20.03.20 and is 
now termed as “Promotion of Bulk Drug  Parks”. The total size of the  Scheme is 
Rs.3000 Crore and tenure of the Scheme will be five years (2020-21 – 2024-25). 
 
The scheme will provide grant -in-aid to 3 Bulk Drug Parks with a maximum 
limit of Rs.1000 Crore per park or 70% of the project cost of Common 
Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is less. In case of hilly states and North East 
Region, the grant -in-aid would be Rs.1000 Crore per park or 90% of the project 
cost of Common Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is less.The Common Facilities 
at the Par k would provide easy access to standard testing and infrastructure 
facilities and reduce the manufacturing cost significantly.  The scheme would be 
implemented through a State Implementing Agency (SIA). The guidelines of the 
sub-scheme are under preparation. 
 
Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility Centre: 
 
The existing sub -scheme of Department of Pharmaceuticals termed as 
“Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility Centre ” under the 
umbrella scheme for Development of Pharmaceutical Industry proposed to provide 
a one -time grant -in-aid to the tune of Rs.25 Crore or 70% of the project cost, 
whichever is less, for creation of common facilities in the upcoming medical device 
parks.   
 

33 
 
Since the common facilities creation requires a  large investment and the 
grant provided under the existing scheme was very less, it was decided to revise 
the existing sub -scheme so as to provide adequate funds to upcoming medical 
device parks for creation of common facilities. The revised scheme has be en 
approved by the Cabinet on 20.03.20 and is now termed as “Promotion of Medical 
Device Parks”.  The total size of the Scheme is Rs.400 Crore and tenure of the 
Scheme will be five years (2020-21 – 2024-25).  
 
The scheme will provide grant-in-aid to four (4) Medical Device Parks with a 
maximum limit of Rs.100 Crore per park or 70% of the project cost of Common 
Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is less. In case of hilly states and North East 
Region, the grant-in-aid would be Rs.100 Crore per park or 90% of the project cost 
of Common Infrastructure Facilities, whichever is less.This would reduce the 
manufacturing cost significantly and create a robust ecosystem for medical device 
manufacturing in the country. The scheme would be implemented through a State 
Implementing Agency (SIA). The guidelines of the sub -scheme are under 
preparation. 
 
Assistance to Pharmaceutical Industry for Common Facilities: 
 
Assistance under the sub -scheme is admissible for creation of Common 
Facilities by Government as well as Private Entrepreneurs in pharma sector. 
Under this sub -scheme grant -in-aid for creation of identified infrastructure and 
common facilities will be granted to a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) set up for the 
purpose. Maximum limit for the grant -in-aid under this sub-scheme would be Rs. 
20 Crore per Cluster or 70% of the project cost of Common Facilities, whichever is 
less. It is proposed to promote pharma units in existing 10 pharma clusters by 
2024-25. To implement this sub -scheme for 2020 -2025, a total sum of Rs. 200 
Crore would be required. An EFC note for the same is under preparation.  
 
Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS): 
In the change scenario, some amendments in the PTUAS  have been 
proposed and included in the Umbrella scheme as one of the Sub -Schemes for 
which an EFC Memorandum has already been moved by the Department.  Third 
Party evaluation for all the sub -schemes including PTUAS has been initiated and 
report is under finalisation.  
One of the major reasons for delay in operationalisation of the sub -scheme 
was due to non -boarding of any Public Sector Financial Institution (PSFI) through 
open competitive bidding.  In the revised guidelines, both options of the appointing 
PSFI through open competitive bidding or by nominations are included.  In case, 

34 
 
no PSFI comes on board through open competitive bidding, then the Department 
will appoint one eligible PSFI by nomination to implement the sub-scheme.  
New Schemes under the Umbrella Scheme: 
 
In addition, the Cabinet has approved on 20.03.2020 two Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) Schemes for Bulk Drugs and Medical devices industry to promote 
their domestic manufacturing and to address their high import dependence. These 
schemes are to be inclu ded under the umbrella scheme for development of 
Pharmaceutical Industry. The detailed Scheme Guidelines are under preparation. 
The highlights of the two schemes are as follows:  
 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for promotion of domestic 
manufacturing of critical Key Starting Materials (KSMS)/ drug intermediates 
and Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIS) in India. 
 
Under the scheme, financial incentive is given to eligible manufacturers of 
critical KSMs/Drug Intermediates and APIs on their incremental sales over the 
base year (FY 2019 -20) for a period of 7 years. The rate of incentive will be 20 % 
(of incremental sales value) for fe rmentation based bulk drugs and 10% for 
chemical synthesis based bulk drugs. A total outlay of Rs. 6,940 Crore has been 
approved for the scheme for a period of 07 years subsequent to the base year . 
The scheme would be implemented through a Project Management Agency (PMA) 
to be nominated by the Department of Pharmaceuticals. With the successful 
implementation of this Scheme it is expected that India would be well positioned 
as a global hub for manufacturing of critical KSMs/Drug Intermediates and APIs 
along with the final drug formulations.  
 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme for promoting domestic 
manufacturing of Medical Devices. 
 
Under the scheme, financial incentive of 5% is given on the incremental 
production / sales of targeted medical device seg ments over the base year (FY 
2019-20) for a period of 6 years. The target for PLI Scheme is to provide 
assistance to about 25-30 manufacturers under the following categories of medical 
devices:-  
e. Cancer care/Radiotherapy medical devices,  
f. Radiology & Imaging medical devices (both ionizing & non-ionizing radiation 
products) and Nuclear Imaging Devices, 
g. Anesthetics & Cardio -Respiratory medical devices including Catheters of 
Cardio Respiratory Category & Renal Care Medical Devices and  
h. All Implants including i mplantable electronic devices like Cochlear Implants 
and Pacemakers. 

35 
 
 
A total outlay of Rs. 3,420 Crore has been approved for the scheme for a 
period of 06 years . The scheme would be implemented through a Project 
Management Agency (PMA) to be nominated by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals. The PLI Scheme is expected to boost domestic manufacturing, 
attract large investments and lead to substantial reduction in import in the medical 
device sector, particularly in the identified target segments. 
 
Status of third party evaluation of the umbrella scheme for Development of 
Pharmaceutical Industry: 
 
The work of Third Party Evaluation of the Scheme "Development of 
Pharmaceutical Industry" was awarded to Centre for Global Development 
Research Private Ltd . (CGDR). As per the terms, it was directed to submit the 
report before 18.03.2020. However, on the request of CGDR vide their email dated 
16.03.2020, an extension upto 31.03.2020 was given. However, due to present 
COVID pandemic, CGDR could not submit the  report. The CGDR vide its email 
dated 27.04.2020 has informed the Department that they would submit the report 
within a week. 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.19  of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 Recommendation No.7 
2.14 The Committee note that there are five Central Public Sector 
Enterprises (CPSEs) under the administrative control of the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals.  Of the five PSUs, two viz. Indian Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL) & Hindustan Antibiotics Limite d (HAL) 
are sick, Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL) has 
reported losses since 2013 -14 and is incipient sick.  Karnataka 
Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL) & Bengal Chemicals & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) are profit making CPSEs.   The 
Committee further note that IDPL, HAL and RDPL are making huge losses 
and the Government has decided to go for strategic sale of HAL which 
means its plant and machinery will be sold to a manufacturer through a 
competitive bid.  As far as IDPL and RDP L are concerned, the 
Government propose to close these PSUs and to sell their assets to meet 
the liabilities.  The Committee are concerned about the settlement of 
salary and other dues of the employees of these sick PSUs and in this 

36 
 
regard, the Committee n ote that the Department has moved file to the 
Ministry of Finance to either make necessary provision in RE of 2019 -20 
or to provide one-time grant before RE so as to pay the salaries and other 
dues of the employees.  The Committee strongly recommend that t he 
Department should take concrete steps to settle the salaries and other 
dues of the employees of these PSUs by taking up at highest level in the 
Ministry of Finance to either provide one -time grant or make adequate 
provision in the RE of 2019 -20.  The co ncern expressed by this 
committee should also be conveyed to the Ministry of Finance.  The 
committee should be apprised of the progress made in this regard within 
three months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.15 The projection of funds in RE 2019 -20 was reflected by PSU Division. 
Further, D.O. letter dated 13.12.2019 from Secy (P) to Secy D/o Economic Affairs 
was issued requesting release of Rs.330.35 crore to PSUs to meet pending 
salaries and VRS as approved by the C abinet dated 17.07.2019. Further, t he 
matter was also taken up at the highest level and the Hon’ble Minister of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers requested the Union Finance Minister on 09.12.2019 for 
allocating the funds sought by the Department at RE 2019 -20/BE 20 20-21. 
Subsequently, M/o Finance has allocated Rs.160 crore in the First supplementary 
Demands for Grants 2019 -20 for payment of employee’s liabilities of unpaid 
salary/VRS of PSUs i.e. IDPL, RDPL and HAL. At RE 2019 -20, the Ministry of 
Finance has allotted Rs.333.18 crore for settlement of dues of PSUs. 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
2.16 The Committee are further concerned to note that the Department  had 
sought Rs. 250.00 crore  for seven NIPERs in BE 2019 -20. However, Ministry 
of Finance has allocated only Rs 1 50.00 crore to NIPERs. This financial 
allocation is not adequate to achieve the targets.  The Committee also note 
that Expenditure Finance Committee  in its meeting held on 26.03.2018 
approved Rs. 959.53 crore for the period 2017 -18 to 2019 -20. However, onl y 
Rs. 465.77 crore has been allocated for the period.   Recently, the 
Department has sent a request to Ministry of Finance to allocate additional 
Rs 300.00 crore including Rs 25.00 crore  to urgently fill up the regular posts 
of faculty and non -faculty in six NIPERs and Rs 275.00 crore for the 
purchase of equipments and machineries for six NIPERs and completion of 
the construction of NIPER Guwahati campus and starting of construction of 
NIPER Ahmedabad campus and the proposal is pending with the Ministry of  

37 
 
Finance.   Since the fund allocation is very much necessary for full -fledged 
functioning of these NIPERs, the Committee recommend that the 
Department should take up this matter of additional requirement of Rs. 300 
crore during 2019-20 for NIPERs at highest level with the Ministry of Finance 
for allocation of the funds at RE stage.  This recommendation of the 
Committee may also be sent to that Ministry for its compliance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.17 A Proposal for seeking additional funds of Rs. 300.00 crore for NIPERs 
from the fund allocated in EFC was sent to the Department of Expenditure, but 
only additional Rs. 10.00 crore were approved in RE 2019 -20.An amount of Rs. 
202.45 crore has been allocated to NIPERs for BE 2020-21.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 13 
 
2.18 The Committee note that the main functions of NPPA include fixation 
and revision of prices of scheduled formulations under the Drugs Price 
Control Order (DPCO), 2013.  Hence they are fixing prices of almost 18.6 per 
cent of the medicines manufactured by en tire Pharma industry.  Prices of 
rest of the medicines/drugs which are non -scheduled drugs are not 
controlled by NPPA.  Manufacturer can fix the price but the same cannot be 
increased by 10 per cent per annum.  In Committee's view, prices of non -
scheduled drugs which comprises 81.4% of the medicines/ drugs sold in the 
country should also be controlled by NPPA.  In this regard, the committee 
note the admission made by the Department that there is huge margin 
between the cost and price of non -scheduled drugs and they need to work 
on it.  Since it is very much necessary to control the prices of non-scheduled 
drugs, the committee recommend that suitable mechanism should be 
devised by the Department of Pharmaceuticals and NPPA to control the 
prices of non -scheduled drugs so as not to pinch the purses of common 
man.  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.19 The provisions of the Drugs Price Control Order (DPCO), 2013 are as per 
the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy 2012. However, the recommendation 
of the committee has been taken note of.  

38 
 
 
Recommendation No. 14 
2.20 The Committee note that ‘Assistance to Price Monitoring Resource 
Units (PMRUs)’ is one of the component of Consumer Awareness Publicity 
and Price Monitoring (CAPPM) scheme under which Government of India 
has initiated setting up of Price Monitoring and Resource Units (PMRU) at 
the States/Union Territories that would provide all necessary support to the 
State dr ug Controllers and National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority 
(NPPA) to trickle down benefits of the Drugs Prices Control Order (DPCO), 
2013 at the grass root level.  This Scheme is being implemented by NPPA.  
PMRUs are societies registered under Societies  Registration Act having 
their own Memorandum of Association/ Bye Laws.  The Committee note that 
10 PMRUs have been established in the states of Kerala, Gujarat, Odisha, 
Rajasthan, Haryana, Nagaland, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and Andhra 
Pradesh.  The Department has fixed target for setting up two more PMRUs 
during 2019-20 and to cover all states/ Union Territories by 2023 -24.  In this 
regard, the Committee note that the process of setting up of PMRUs largely 
depends upon the preparedness and cooperatio n of the respective State 
Government and their respective State Drug Controllers/ Food and Drug 
Administrators.  Since PMRUs will be helpful in monitoring prices of drugs 
at grass root level, the Committee recommend that concrete steps should be 
taken by the Department for the setting up of PMRUs in all the states/ UTs by 
2023-24.  In case of non -cooperation by any states/UTs, this matter may be 
taken at Chief Minister level by stating the benefits of the Scheme.  
 
Reply of the Government 
2.21 As per the revised target for the year 2019 -20, PMRUs have been set up in 
total 12 States/ UTs, viz., Kerala, Gujarat, Odisha, Rajasthan, Haryana, Nagaland, 
Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Mizoram and Jammu & Kashmir. 
 The suggestion of the Committee to take the concrete steps for setting up 
of PMRUs in all the States/ UTs by F.Y. 2023. -24 and in case of non -cooperation 
by any States/ UTs, matter may be taken at Chief Minister level by stating the 
benefits of the Scheme, is noted for action, if required in due course.  
  In the BE 2020 -21, a total budget provision of Rs.4.50 crore is made for 
Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring (CAPPM), this scheme has 
2 components, namely i)Assistance to Project Monitoring Resource 
Units(PMRUs)(Rs.2.50 crore) and ii) Advertising and Publicity of CAPPM (Rs.2.00 
crore).  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.29 of Chapter- I of the Report) 

39 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
NIL 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE OF INTERIM NATURE 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
5.1 In regard to other two profit making PSUs, the Committee note that the 
Government has decided to go for strategic investment of KAPL and 
strategic sale of BCPL.  However, these processes are on hold due to court 
cases.  In this regard, the Committee note that the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has not supported the disinvestment of KAPL at any stage 
as KAPL is a profit making PSU  since its inception and the Department has 
acknowledged its role in supply of generic medicines under various 
Government programmes. BCPL is also producer of anti-snake venom which 
is not produced by other PSUs. It has also brought turnaround in profits 
during the last three years. In Committee's view, co -existence of public 
sector and private Sector and the healthy competition between them would 
result in production of quality medicines at prices affordable to the people.  
KAPL and BCPL are profit making PSUs and their presence may be 
necessary for the supply of essential medicines during the time of natural 
calamities, other exigencies and outbreak of epidemics, etc.   Moreover, the 
presence of PSUs in this sector may provide a level playing field as far as 
the prices of medicines are concerned.  If this sector is entirely left to Private 
sector, prices of medicines may be fixed by them at their will in the absence 
of competition from Public Sector enterprises.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the  policy decision to disinvest/sale of KAPL and BCPL 
should be revisited in view of their strategic importance and instead they 
should be strengthened with modernization, diversification and superior 
technical know-how so as to enable them remain competitiv e in this crucial 
sector. The Committee are of the view that the policy decision of the 
Government should be based on facts and figures. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 The decisions of strategic disinvestment of BCPL and KAPL are as per the 
extant policy of the Government. Both the decisions are presently held up as the 
matters are pending before the Courts.  A copy of the Recommendation of the 
Committee has already been forwarded to M/o of Finance (DIPAM) and NITI 
Aayog for reconsideration of the de cision of strategic sale of KAPL & BCPL by 
PSU Division on 14.02.2020. However, their response/reply is awaited. 
  
 

42 
 
Recommendation No.9 
5.3 The Committee note that there are seven NIPERs at Mohali, Guwahati, 
Ahmedabad, Hajipur, Raebareli, Kolkata and Hyderabad. Out of these only 
NIPER-Mohali, which was established in 1998, is fully operational and others 
which were operational since 2007 -08 are functioning only with the help of 
Mentor Institutes. These new NIPERs are lacking infrastructure and regular 
academic and other staff.  In this regard, the Committee are satisfied to note 
that in these six NIPERs, the faculty posts have been created in J anuary 
2019 and the Recruitment Rules of all these posts have been framed  by the 
Department. NIPER Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Kolkata and 
Raebareli have already issued advertisements for filling up of the posts.  
NIPER Hajipur is in the process of ad vertising the posts.  It is expected that 
all the posts will be filled by NIPERs by December 2019.  Since more than a 
decade is over after creation of NIPERs at Guwahati, Ahmedabad, 
Hyderabad, Kolkata and Raebareli, the Committee recommend that faculty 
and other posts of these NIPERs should be filled by regular staff before 
December, 2019 and the Committee should be apprised about the progress 
made in this regard.   
Reply of the Government 
5.4 NIPER-Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Raebareli have fi lled 
up faculty and non -faculty posts based on the student’s strength and requirement. 
NIPER-Hajipur has also issued advertisement for filing up of posts, but the 
selection has been withheld due to lockdown due to COVID 19 pandemic. It is 
expected that all the posts will soon be filled on normalisation of the situation.  
 
Recommendation No.10 
5.5 The Committee also note that only NIPER at Mohali is functioning 
from its own premises and all other NIPERs have been allotted land for 
construction of their regular campus. As of now, about 90% construction of 
campus of NIPER Guwahati has been completed. NIPER Ahmedabad has 
finalized the design of campus and recently issued tender. The construction 
of campus would commence by January, 2020, subject to provision of 
additional funds by Ministry of Finance.  In case of other NIPERs, though  
Expenditure Finance Committee has decided to defer construction till March, 
2020, the individual Institutes have been advised to take steps to finalize 
drawings of their campus so that the construction of campuses can 
commence immediately on approval of Expenditure Finance Committee.  
The Committee are concerned to note that out of seven NIPERs, only NIPER, 
Mohali is having its own campus.  Since NIPERs are institutions of national 

43 
 
importance which imparts post graduate and doctorate education and 
conduct research in various streams of Pharmaceuticals, it is very much 
necessary that they have state of the art infrastructure and laboratory 
facilities.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that immediate necessary 
steps should be taken by the Department for the construction of regular 
campuses for all the six NIPERs within a definite period of time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.6 NIPER-Guwahati has already started functioning from its new regular 
campus. A provision of Rs. 22.00 crore have been made in the BE 2020 -2021 to 
complete the remaining construction work of the campus of the Institute.  
An amount of Rs. 20.00 crore has been allocated in BE 2020 -21 to NIPER-
Ahmedabad to start construction work of the campus.  
As regard construction of campus of NIPER-Raebareli, Kolkata, Hajipur and 
Hyderabad, the Department will take up the matter with the Department of 
Expenditure in the fresh Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Proposal.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.23 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.12 
5.7 The Committee note that the setting up of four new NIPERs at 
Madurai, Tamil Nadu and in the states of Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh and 
Maharashtra has been deferred by Expenditure Finance Committee till 
March, 2020 so as to consolidate the present NIPERs first.  In this regard, the 
Committee recommend that process of starting of these NIPERs should 
begin at the right earnest so that these States would also be benefitted of 
this institution of national importance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.8 EFC in its meeting held on 26.03.2018 had deferred setting up of the 
proposed four new NIPERs at Madurai, Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan. 
It was also suggested that the same may be reviewed in the year 2020 by the 
Department during the Fifteenth Finance Commission period  (2020-2025).  
 
 

44 
 
Accordingly, the matter will be taken up with the Department of Expenditure 
through EFC, after third party evaluation of the Scheme, which is under progress.   
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No.1.26 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                   KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
 8 February, 2021                                                                                      Chairperson 
19 Magha, 1942 2 (Saka)                                              Standing Committee on 
         Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
*** 
 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2019 -20) ON DEMAND FOR GRANTS 
(2019-20) OF THE MIN ISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS). 
 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations  14 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 2,3,4,5,6,7,11,13  and 14 )  
  
10 
 
Percentage of Total  71.43% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil)   
 
Nil 
 
Percentage of Total  0.0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-   
 (Vide Recommendation No.  Nil ) 
   
Nil 
Percentage of Total  0.0% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 8,9,10 and 12) 
 
4 
 
Percentage of Total  28.57% 
 
  
 
 
 
Appendix I 
 

46 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2019-20) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11 th August, 2020 from 1100 hrs. to 1430 
hrs. in Committee Room No. 1 Block A, Extension to Parliament House Annexe 
Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Smt.  Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
3. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
4. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
5. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
6. Dr. Manoj Rajoria 
RAJYA SABHA 
7 Dr. Anil Jain 
8 Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
9 Shri Arun Singh 
10 Shri A. D. Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
           1.         Shri Manoj K. Arora                -          OSD (LSS)              
           2.         Shri A. K. Srivastava              -           Director 
               3.         Shri C. Kalyanasundaram      -           Additional Director       
 
 2.         First the Hon’ble Chairperson expressed  her deep sorrow on the sad demise of 
Rajya Sabha Member  Shri Amar Singh who was also a sitting Member of the 
Committee.  The Committee observed two minutes silence as a mark of respect to the 
departed soul. 

47 
 
3.  The Hon'ble Chairperson then   welcomed three Rajya Sabha Members viz. Shri 
P.Selvarasu, Shri A.D.Singh and Shri Vanlalvena  who have been nominated as Members 
of the Committee.   
4.         The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption the following 
draft Action Taken Reports: 
(i)      Draft Action Taken Report on 'Demands for Grants 2019 -
20'  (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals);  
 (ii)        Draft Action taken report on 'Demands for Grants 2019-20' 
(Department of Fertilizers); and 
 (iii)       Draft Action Taken report on 'Demands for Grants 2019 -20' 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals. 
  
5.         After deliberations, the above mentioned Draft Action Taken Reports were 
unanimously adopted by the Committee without any changes/amendments.  
Session II 
xxx    xxx    xxx        xxx  
 
Session-III 
 
xxx    xxx    xxx       xxx 
  
         A copy of the recording of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
  
            The Committee then adjourned. 
 ___________________________________________________________________  
xxx matters not related to this report.   
 
 
  

48 
 
MINUTES OF THE    FIRST SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2020-21) 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 12th October, 2020 from 1100 hrs. to 1145hrs. 
in Committee Room  ‘B’,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi 
 
  Ms. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi  - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
2. Shri Deepak Baij 
3. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
4. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
5. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
6. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
7. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
8. Shri Indra Hang Subba 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri  M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
10. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
11. Shri Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
12. Shri Arun Singh 
13. Shri A.D. Singh 
14. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
15. shri K. Vanlalvena 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora  - Officer on Special Duty (LSS) 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava - Director 
3. Shri Panna Lal   -  Under Secretary  
 
 
 
Session I  
 
XXXX    XXXX    XXXX     
Session-II  
 
  XXXX    XXXX   XXXX 
 

49 
 
2. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration and adoption of following draft 
Action Taken Reports: 
 
(i) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019 -20 (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals); 
(ii) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019 -20 (Department of 
Fertilizers); 
(iii) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2019 -20 (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals); 
(iv) Action Taken Report on Study of System of Fertilizer Subsidy (Department 
of Fertilizers). 
(v) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals); 
(vi) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 (Department of 
Fertilizers); 
(vii) Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants 2020 -21 (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals). 
 
3. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Action Taken Report(s) 
unanimously without any change/amendments.  The Committee also authorized the 
Chairperson for finalize and present the Action Taken Reports to the Parliament. 
4. The Committee also decided to hold its next sitting tentatively in the second week 
of November, 2020. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________
XXXX matters not related to this report. 
 
  