1 
 
   
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Thirty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2022-2023)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
    August, 2022/ Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
37 

2 
 
CC&F No. 165 
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Thirty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2022-2023)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08 August 2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08 August 2022 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2022/ Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2021-22) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter I Report 1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
16 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government' s 
replies 
32 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
33 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
41 
 APPENDICES  
 I.  Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (2021-22) held on
 4 th August , 
2022.  
42 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty –Third Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers on  ‘Demands for Grants (2022-2023) ’ of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
44 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri Deepak Baij 
5. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
6. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
7. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
8. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
10. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
11. Shri Vasava Parbhubhai Nagarbhai  
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt Aparupa Poddar (Afrin Ali) 
14. Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
15. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
16. Shri M. Selvaraj 
17. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
18. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
19. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
21. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
24. Dr. Anil Jain 
25. Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
26. Shri Arun Singh 
27. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
28. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
29. Vacant* 
30. Vacant* 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Vinay Kumar Mohan  : Joint Secretary  
2. Shri  Nabin Kumar  Jha  : Director  
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh   : Deputy Secretary  
 
 
* Vacant vice Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar (LJD), MP (RS) retired on 02.04.2022 from the Membership of Rajya Sabha. (RSS I.D. 
No. 1(2)/2019- Coord dated 18.01.2022).  
* Vacant vice Shri Jaiprakash Nishad (BJP), MP (RS) retired on 04.07.2022 from the Membership of Rajya Sabha. (RSS I.D. No. 
1(2)/2019- Coord dated 18.01.2022).  
  

5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
(2021-2022) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on th eir behalf this 
Thirty-Seventh Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-Th ird 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2022- 23)’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
2.  The Thirty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sa bha 
on 21 st March, 2022. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals) furnished their replies on 30 th June, 2022 indicating 
Action Taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-T hird 
Report. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 
4th August, 2022. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Third Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
 08 August, 2022_ CHAIRPERSON, 
13 Sravana, 1944 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS. 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/  
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-Third Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2022- 23)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
1.2  The Thirty-Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 21st March, 2022. It contained 20 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of 
Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and 
categorized as follows:-  
(i)     Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:- 
Sl. Nos.: 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,10,11,13,14,15,17 and 19                                  (Total = 15) 
These are included in Chapter II of the Report.                                Percentage: 75.00% 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to p ursue in 
view of the Government’s reply:- 
Nil           (Total = 0) 
These are included in Chapter III of the Report.                               Percentage: 00.00% 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration:- 
Sl. Nos.: 2, 12, 16, 18 and 20                                                              (Total = 5) 
These are included in Chapter IV of the Report.                               Percentage: 25.00% 
(iv)  Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 
Nil           (Total = 0) 
These are included in Chapter V of the Report.                              Percentage: 00.00% 
 
1.3  The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be 
furnished expeditiously and not later than three months from the date of 
presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The committee will now deal with some of their earlier Observations/ 
Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
 

2 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
Proposed and Approved Allocations for the year 2022-23 of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
1.5 With regard to the Budgetary allocation for the Department, the Committee  had 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that for the year 2022-23, the Department prop osed 
a BE of ₹271.27 Crore but have been allocated an amount of ₹209.00 Crore 
only. The reasons for this cut of ₹62.27 Crore vis-à-vis the proposal, stated by 
the Department are overall expenditure incurred by the Department, resources 
available with the Government and its priorities. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the factors of overall priorities of the Government, availability  of 
resources are beyond the control of the Department but expenditure track of the 
previous financial years is one of the deciding factors in the allocation of funds to 
the Department commensurate with the proposal is the sole responsibility of the 
Department. The Committee hope that the Department will pay necessary 
attention for the utilization of the allocated funds. Further, the Departme nt has 
submitted that the prime shortfalls in budget proposed vis-à-vis budget allocated 
for the year 2022-23 include, ₹53.77 Crore under NSP, ₹5.70 Crore under IPFT, 
₹3.00 Crore under CPDS and a minor reduction of ₹1.13 Crore under CIPET 
which is not likely to hamper the scheme of the CIPET. The Committee note with 
concern that both the schemes of the Department namely (i) New Scheme o f 
Petrochemicals (NSP) and (ii) Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme 
(CPDS) have suffered a reduction of ₹53.77 Crore and ₹3.00 Crore respectively. 
Thus the prime schemes of the Department would have a negative impact on the 
functioning of the Department too. Further, the IPFT has suffered a reduction of 
₹ 5.70 Crore which too will have an adverse impact on the functioning of the 
Department. The Committee are somewhat satisfied with the submission of the 
Department that minor reduction of ₹1.13 Crore for CIPET is not likely to hamper 
severely the schemes/ programmes being implemented by it. The Committee 
however strongly recommend that the Department should judiciously and 
cautiously use the allocated funds for NSP & CPDS and also take up the matte r 
at appropriate level, if necessary, to get requisite allocation of funds for effective 
implementation of these schemes.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
 “ New Scheme of Petrochemicals (NSP) 
The shortfall of ₹53.77 cr in the allocated budget as indicated above, the 
implementation of the ongoing ‘NSP; will not be affected as the proposal for the 
five new Plastic Parks has been put on hold by the Department of Expen diture 
(DoE). Hence, the projected requirement comes down to ₹66.27 cr for the 
ongoing projects, out of which, ₹48.50 crore have been allocated. In this reg ard, 
it is mentioned that the Department assures the Committee that it will plan the  

3 
 
allocation of funds in a way that no or minimal effect could be ensured to the 
implementation of the ongoing projects under the NSP and if required, it will take 
up the matter at appropriate level. 
 
 Central Institute of Petrochemical Engineering & Technology (CIPET) 
 
Against the proposed BE 2022-23 of Rs.101.37 crore, an amount of 
Rs.100.24 crore was allocated to CIPET as Grant in aid for the CIPET schem es 
at BE 2022-23. However, the minor reduction of Rs. 1.13 Crore for CIPET is not 
likely to hamper and the allocated fund is adequate to meet the effective 
execution the schemes / projects during the year 2022-23.  Further, since the 
scheme of Enriching Technical Infrastructure facilities & capabilities to meet 
industry needs is on the verge of completion, there is minimum allocation  of fund 
for the scheme of “Enhancing capabilities in R&D and Technology Support at 
CIPET and the marginal cut of allocation of funds due to this, has not affected 
the functioning of CIPET. 
 Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS) 
Department had requested Department of Expenditure to accord their 
approval for continuation of CPDS beyond 31.3.2021 and also to merg e CPDS 
as sub-scheme with New Schemes of Petrochemicals (NSP) as an umbrella 
scheme. The objective of CPDS is to strive to develop the chemical and 
petrochemical sector in the country. The proposed budget outlay for the CPDS 
during 2021-22 to 2025-26 is given in the table below: 
  
Sl. No.  Financial Year  Proposed outlay  (₹ in crore)    
1.  2021-22  3.60 
2.  2022-23  6.15  
3.  2023-24  6.25  
4.  2024-25  6.30  
5.  2025-26  6.40  
Total  28.70  
   
 Department of Expenditure has conveyed their approval for continuation 
of CPDS beyond 31.3.2021. The proposal for merging CPDS as sub-scheme 
with New Schemes of Petrochemicals (NSP) as an umbrella scheme is under  
consideration in Finance Division. 
  
 For the FY 2022-23, an amount of Rs. 6.00 Crore was sought for CPDS. 
However, the amount of Rs.3.00 crore only has been allocated under Head of 
CPDS for 2022-23. As per the provisions of existing CPDS guidelines, 
Department sought proposals from Chemical and Petrochemical Divisions of th is 
Department and the Industry Associations, to be organized under CPDS du ring 
the year 2022-23. Proposals for organizing various events worth Rs.7.48 cror e 
have been received from various Industry Associations and PSUs & Autonomous 
Bodies of DCPC. A calendar of events to be organized under CPDS during 2022-
23 has been finalized, with the approval of Secretary(C&PC). However, as per 
existing CPDS guidelines, an amount of Rs.3.49 crore only can be given for 
these events. In addition to above, funds will also be allocated for co nducting 
studies as per the requirement of the Department. If required, the demand for 
additional funds will be made to Finance Division at RE Stage.” 

4 
 
1.7 New Schemes of Petrochemicals (NSP) 
 The Committee note that the New Scheme of Petrochemicals has two sub- 
schemes (i) Plastic Parks and (ii) Center of Excellence (CoE).  The BE for the 
scheme was Rs 102.73 Crore but a meager amount of Rs. 48.50 Crore has bee n 
allocated.  According to the Ministry, the shortfall of Rs. 53.77 Crore in the 
allocated budget would not affect the implementation of NSP as the proposal for 
the five new Plastic Parks has been put on hold by the Department of 
Expenditure (DoE). As such the projected requirement of funds for the NSP has 
now reduced to Rs. 66.27 Crore for the ongoing projects. In this regard, the 
Committee note that even if the requirement of funds for NSP has now been 
reduced to Rs. 66.27 Crore, the allocated funds of Rs. 48.50 Crore required for 
the scheme are still short of Rs. 17.77 Crore.  As such the implementation of th e 
scheme may be adversely affected. Against this background, the Department has 
submitted that it will ensure that the allocation of funds is planned in such a way 
that there is no or minimal effect on the implementation of the ongoing projects 
under NSP.  The Committee would like to know about the steps to be taken/being 
taken by the Ministry (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) in this 
regard.  
 Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS) 
1.8 The Committee note that the Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Expenditure  has been requested to accord their approval for continuation of 
CPDS beyond 31st March, 2021 and also to merge it as s ub-scheme with the NSP, 
while the Department of Expenditure  has conveyed their approval for 
continuation of CPDS beyond 31st March, 2022, the proposal for merging is under 
consideration in Finance Division. The Committee recommend that the matter 
may be pursued vigorously with the Finance Division at the highest level. 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
Budgetary Allocation and Utilization During 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 
 
1.9 With regard to the Budgetary allocation and utilization, the Commit tee had 
recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that the BE (2019-20) was ₹263.65 Crore which 
was revised upward to ₹370.18 Crore and the actual expenditure was ₹3 65.10 

5 
 
Crore. The BE (2020- 21) was ₹218.34 Crore but was again revised upward at 
RE stage to ₹ 395.70 Crore and the actual expenditure was ₹293.04 Cr ore. The 
BE (2021- 22) was ₹233.14 Crore but has been revised downward to ₹209.00 
Crore and the actual expenditure is ₹ 158.00 Crore as on 31.12.2021. The 
Committee are satisfied to see the utilization of allocated funds during 2019- 20 
and 2020-21 which comes out to be 98.6% and 99% of the RE for respectiv e 
years. Regarding the remaining fund utilization of ₹51.00 Crore during 2021-22 
the Committee have been informed that proposals by various Divisio ns have 
been forwarded to IFD and after concurrence, necessary sanction orders have  
been released by the Department to utilize the balance funds of ₹51 .00 Crore. 
The Committee hope that the Department would continue its performance  in the 
optimal utilization of the allocated funds in the years to come. As reg ards the 
reduction of BE (2021-22) from ₹233.14 Crore to ₹209.00 Crore at RE stage the 
Department has submitted that it is primarily due to two factors (i) reduction in 
allocation of fund for CIPET schemes and (ii) BGLD cost centre. ₹117.88 Cro re 
was allocated to CIPET which was reduced to ₹102.34 Crore due to various  
reasons like (i) non-allotment of land at Jammu, (ii) 50% of the project cost for 
establishment of CIPET at J&K being still under consideration etc. and as 
regards the BGLD, a total of ₹ 3.53 Crore has been reduced because of COVID-
19, a ceiling of 20% expenditure of the overall BE allocation has been  imposed 
by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee find that the issues relating to BGLD 
are not under the Control of the Department whereas the former issue relating to 
the CIPET are well under the administrative control of the Department. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should streamline and 
expedite the pending issues of various schemes so as to get a hig her allocation 
of funds in future. “  
Reply of the Government 
1.10 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
  “ CIPET 
The reduction of funds for CIPET schemes was due to various reasons 
like; non-allotment of land at J&K. The status and action taken with reg ard to 
J&K project is as under:  
 Initially, Govt. of J&K proposed to allot 15 kanals (1.875 acres) land near 
ITI, Zainakote. Since there was no positive response from Govt. of J&K after 
protracted follow up and correspondences, a proposal for shifting of the Cen tre 
to Jammu was deliberated in the 135th Governing Council (GC) meeting held  on 
13.03.2021. The G.C. approved the proposal subject to the agreement by J&K.  
Hon’ble Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Govt. of India vide D.O. letter 
dated 19.04.2021 has requested Lt. Governor of Jammu & Kashmir to approve 
the proposal by allotting land at Jammu and 50% of the project cost. 
Subsequently, the Secretary (C&PC) has written a D.O. letter dated 02.0 8.2021 
to the Chief Secretary (J&K) for allotment of land and funds.  
Govt. of J&K has agreed to allot 10 acres of land at Jammu and in this 
regard, a Committee comprising officials from DCPC and CIPET met DDC, 
Jammu on 01.11.2021 and inspected the site at Jagti Tehsil which was proposed 
for allotment to CIPET. The Committee after inspection found that the site is 

6 
 
unsuitable because of solid rocks which involve huge development work at the 
site and also less access route. The Committee also visited another site at 
Vijaypur which was also found to be unsuitable. In this regard, Deputy Secretary 
(PC), DCPC, GoI has written a letter dated 09.11.2021 to Principal Secretary , 
Deptt. of Skill Development, Govt. of J&K communicating the unsuitability o f the 
identified lands and requested Jammu Administration either to construct the 
building and hostel on the proposed land at Jagti, Jammu as part of th eir 
contribution or to provide suitable land preferably nearer to the industrial area  of 
Jammu where the site development cost would be minimal. Further, Secretary 
(C&PC), DCPC has written D.O. letter dated 19.05.2022 to the Chief Secreta ry 
to Govt. of J&K requesting to inform the exact location whether in Srinagar or in 
Jammu where the CIPET Centre is to be established so that funds can be 
utilized in time. Response from J&K Administration is awaited. 
             BGLD: 
As regard BGLD, it is stated that an amount of Rs.22.06 crore was 
allocated to the Head of BGLD during 2021-22. Out of which, a prov ision of 
Rs.14.90 crore was made under the Sub-head of Action Plan (Ex-gratia) which 
was subsequently reduced to Rs.14.73 crore due to re-appropriations of funds to 
Professional Services. D/o Expenditure directed to impose a cut of 20% in thi s 
Sub-Head, accordingly, Rs.11.75 crore was demanded in Revised Estimates 
2021-22.  Reduction of amount in Revised Estimates in other Sub-Heads viz. 
Salary and Medical Treatment Head is due to demise of 02 employees, 
retirement and decrease in submission of medical claims respectively. Hence 
the total budget revised to Rs.18.53 Crore in RE 2021-22.  
  
2. The revised amount under the Head of Action Plan (Ex-gratia) was fully 
disbursed to the beneficiaries in 2021-22. The actual expenditure was Rs.18.12 
Crore during 2021-22.” 
 
1.11 The Committee note that the BE of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) for the year 2021- 22 
was reduced from Rs. 233.14 Crore to 209.00 Crore at RE stage and according to 
the Ministry it is primarily due to reduction in allocation of fund for CIPET 
scheme and Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (BGLD). An amount of Rs. 117.88 Crore 
which was allocated to CIPET has been reduced to Rs. 102.34 Crore which was 
due to reasons like non-allotment of land at Jammu etc. In this regard the 
Committee note with concern that ‘in-principle’ approval for establishment of 
CIPET Centre at Srinagar/Jammu was accorded way back in the year 2015. 
Thereafter, a series of meetings have been held between the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) and 
State Government of Jammu and Kashmir besides several inspection units to the 
land proposed for the CIPET Centre. However, nothing concrete has emerged out 
of the whole exercise after the lapse of about eight years. The Committee during 

7 
 
its recent study visit to Srinagar from 10.06.2022 to 15.06.2022 has a lso 
discussed the matter at length with officials of the Jammu & Kashmir and 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals). The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should 
initiate some concrete measures urgently and the matter be vigorously pursued 
with the Government of Jammu & Kashmir to bring it to logical conclusion 
without further loss of time. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
steps taken in this regard. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
Proposal of Five New Plastic Parks 
 
1.12 With regard to the Proposal of Five New Plastic Parks, the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
 
“ The Committee note that there is a proposal to set up five new Plastic 
Parks till the year 2025- 26 at a total budget outlay of ₹202.50 Crore which 
include ₹40 Crore for each Park and ₹2.50 Crore as Programme Manager fees 
for each Park and the proposal has been approved by the Minister of Chemicals 
& Fertilizers and by Standing Committee on Finance but subject to the 
concurrence of Department of expenditure. As such the Department of 
expenditure has been requested to accord approval/concurrence for the 
proposal of five new Plastic Parks. In this regard, it has been submitted by the 
representative of the Department during oral evidence that the proposal ha s not 
been concurred because of slow progress in the setting up of Plastic Parks. 
However, they will now take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Expenditure). The Committee are perturbed to note thi s 
sequence of events and opine that the Department alone is responsible fo r slow 
progress in the setting up of Plastic Parks. Though the Department has 
submitted that they have initiated a slew of measures like (i) reviewing the 
progress submitted by state Governments, (ii) Holding review meetings/ field 
units and (iii) review of Plastic Parks by scheme steering Committee (SSC) etc. 
but the Committee feel that these measures have not been able to produ ce the 
desired objective of accelerating the pace of setting up of the Plastic P arks and 
need to be reviewed and at the same time concrete measures have to be taken 
by the Department. In this regard, the Department has submitted that the y 
expect an early concurrence of the said proposal by the Ministry of Fi nance 
(Department of Expenditure) nevertheless the Committee strongly recommend 
that the matter be pursued vigorously else the whole calculation of fun ds and  
plan of the five new Plastic Parks would not materialize. The Committe e also 
recommend that as far as possible the BE should be projected only after 
obtaining necessary approvals/concurrence from the Ministry of Finance.”  
 
 

8 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.13 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry o f 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
“The Department of Expenditure and the Department of Economic Affa irs 
have directed the Department to put on hold the current proposal for five new 
Plastic Parks till the ongoing parks under the scheme achieve completion. 
Accordingly, the Department has decided to direct its utmost efforts towards the 
effective implementation and completion of the ongoing projects. Once, the 
ongoing projects achieve completion and the scheme for Setting up of Plasti c 
Parks achieve measurable success, the Department will then pursue the 
proposal for the 5 new Plastic Parks in more vigorous manner.”  
 
1.14 The Committee note with concern that the proposal to set up five new 
Plastic Parks till the year 2025-26 at a total budget outlay of Rs. 20 2.50 Crore has 
been put on hold by the Department of Expenditure and the Department of 
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance till the ongoing parks under the scheme 
achieve completion. The Committee further note that as on date Six Plastic Park 
viz (i) Tamot, Madhya Pradesh, (ii) Paradeep, Odisha, (iii) Tinsukia, Assam, (iv) 
Bilaua, Madhya Pradesh, (iv) Deoghar, Jharkhan and (vi) Thiruvallur, Tamil Nadu 
are under various stages of progress but none of the Plastic Park has reached 
finality due to slow progress. Consequently, the proposal to set up five new 
Plastic Parks has been put on hold.   The Committee therefore, reiterates their 
earlier recommendation to review the progress of six ongoing Plastic Parks more 
vigorously and make them operational without further delay.  
 (Recommendation No. 12) 
Financial Achievements under Chemical Production and Distribution Scheme 
(CPDS) 
1.15 With regard to CPDS, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that BE of CPDS for the year 2019- 20 was ₹3.00 
Crore and the actual expenditure was ₹2.93 Crore. For the year 2020 -21 BE of 
₹3.50 Crore was projected but was reduced to ₹2.80 Crore and the actual 
expenditure is also ₹2.80 Crore. However,  for the year 2021-22 a higher BE of 
₹3.00 was fixed which was enhanced to ₹3.60 Crore at RE stage out of which as 
amount of ₹1.76 Crore has been spent upto 31.12.2021. Th e reason for the 
increase and decrease in the BE is stated to be the trend of number of proposals 
received by the Department. The Committee recommend that the trend of the 
proposals be studied thoroughly and a realistic BE may be projected in future.  
The Committee note that for the year 2022-23 the Department proposed a n 

9 
 
amount of ₹6.00Crore but have been allocated just ₹3.00 Crore. Th e Committee 
have also been informed that the Ministry of Finance (Department o f 
Expenditure) has not agreed for continuation of the scheme in its present form  
and a new scheme for Promotion and Development of Chemicals has bee n 
prepared with an outlay of ₹57.60 Crore for a period of five years a nd the 
approval of Ministry of Finance is awaited. The Committee recommend that the 
proposal be pushed with the Ministry at the highest level and there is no pa rallel 
scheme to the CPDS either inside or outside the Department for development 
and promotion of Chemical. However, the Committee note that even the new 
scheme has been confined to grant- in-aid and awards only. The difference 
between the CPDS and NCPDS in just the budget outlay. The Committee are of 
the view that the Chemical Sector cannot be developed only by providing gran t-
in-aid and awards. The Department should explore other ways also for the 
promotion and development of the Chemicals Sector.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.16 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
  
“An amount of Rs.3.00 crore was allocated in BE 2021-22 which was enhanc ed 
to Rs.3.60 Crore in RE 2021-22. Out of Rs.3.60 Crore, an amount of Rs.3.59  
crore approx. was incurred during the financial year 2021-22.  
  
2.         A proposal to allocate Rs.6.00 crore under CPDS in BE 2022-23 was 
sent to Finance Division. However, an amount of Rs.3.00 crore only has been  
allocated in BE 2022-23 under CPDS. During current financial year, proposals o f 
Rs.6.68 crore have been received from PSU/ABs of DCPC and various Industry  
Associations till date. The demand for additional funds will be made at RE Stage. 
  
3.         Approval of Department of Expenditure has been received for 
continuation of CPDS as a sub-scheme of New Scheme of Petrochemicals 
beyond 31st March, 2021 with proposed budget outlay of Rs.28.70 Cr ore during 
2021-22 to 2025-26.  
  
4.         CPDS guidelines are being revised to grant financial support to eligible 
organizations for research to formulate future vision and plan of actions 
regarding R&D in Chemical and Petrochemical sector, etc.  Financial support 
under CPDS may also be given to premier Universities/ Institutes/Autonomous 
Bodies/Centre of Excellence/ Industry associations for developing new 
technologies and process modifications etc. for promotion and development of 
the Chemical and Petrochemical Sector.” 
 
 
1.17 The Committee in their original Report had opined that the Chemical 
Sector cannot be developed by providing grant- in-aid and awards only. The 
Committee had, therefore, recommended to explore ‘other ways ’ also for the 
promotion and development of the Chemicals Sector. The Ministry has submitted 

10 
 
that CPDS guidelines are being revised to grant financial support to eligible 
organizations for research to formulate future vision and plan of actions 
regarding R&D in Chemical and Petrochemical sector.  However , the committee 
feel that their concern for promotion and development of the Chemical sector by 
way of exploring other options besides grant- in-aid and awards may be given 
due consideration and, accordingly, reiterate that the Ministry must explore 
‘other ways’ also for promotion and development of the Chemicals Sector in the 
country. 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
Plastic Waste Management Centre 
1.18 With regard to Plastic Waste Management Centre , the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that there is a proposal to set up at least one Plastic  
Waste Management Centre (PWMC) at 04 places viz., Ahmedabad (Gujara t), 
Patna (Bihar), Varanasi (UP) and Bengaluru (Karnataka). However, due to 
various issues with the State Governments there is delay in allotment of land to 
CIPET for establishment of PWMCs and there is no progress in the matter. 
Accordingly it has been proposed to revise the Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) and the revision of SOP is under process. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the revision of SOP be expedited and the Committee  may be 
apprised accordingly.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.19 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
  
“Revision in Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for establishment of 
Plastic Waste Management Centres (PWMC) is under process.  However, the 
present status of establishment of PWMCs in respect of Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, 
Patna and Varanasi is as follows:  
 
S. 
No. 
Centre Status 
1. PWMC, 
Ahmedab
ad 
1. 20.08.2021: During meeting, Municipal commissioner has 
asked about tangible benefit to Ahmedabad Municipal 
Corporation from the project and expressed his constrains 
to allot Land and infrastructure due to very high market 
rate of land near waste dumping site (i.e proposed location 
of PWMC). 
2. 28.08.2021: Dy. Municipal commissioner office asked 

11 
 
justification for proposed investment of AMC in tune of 
approximately rupees 60 crore towards land & 
infrastructure for 10-12 tone waste recycling proposed by 
CIPET. 
3. 08.09.2021: Letter addressing their query was sent as the 
land requirement of 5 acre is huge for city limit, it may be 
considered for minimum 3 acres of land for PWMC. 
AMC is looking for industrial scale solid waste recycling 
plant to handle 1000 tonnes per day, they are least 
interested for small capacity of 10 tonnes plant. 
CIPET:IPT-Ahmedabad suggests to grand ownership of   
land with infrastructure to municipal corporation/ state 
government so that they may be interested to allot the 
land for PWMC. 
2. PWMC, 
Bengalur
u 
1. 06.04.2021: Request Letter has sent to BBMP Chief 
Commissioner by Additional Secretary, MoC&F and DG, 
CIPET to allot and handover of land with pre- fabricated 
shed along with other facilities. 
2. Joint Commissioner, and BBMP Head informed that Gov. 
of Karnataka has alternate plans for the earmarked land 
and 05 acres of land is not available at the earlier identified 
site. 
3. Oct. 2021: Another, proposed land at Goddenahalli was a 
non-uniform quarry land and found to be not suitable for 
intended purpose and same was communicated to JS, 
BBMP Head Office. 
4. Oct. 2021 : Additional Secretary, MoC&F, directed CIPET 
HO to communicate to DCPC to write a letter to Chief 
Secretary, Gov. of Karnataka. 
5. CIPET HO proposed to submit a revised SOP to 
Administrative Ministry DCPC. 
 
3. PWMC, 
Patna 
1. Land requirement may be reduced to 2.5 – 3 acres instead 
of 5 acres. 
2. PMC may be asked to operate, maintain and safe keeping 
of plant and machinery of the PWMC after successful 
installation and commissioning by CIPET as PMC has to 
play a major role in getting the raw material for viable 
operation of the plant. 
3. CIPET shall extend support as technical partner during the 
project period. 
4. SOP is to be modified with reasonable revenue sharing 
model among CIPET, PMC and the industry partner to 
attract good and viable proposal from the  industry. 
 
4. PWMC, 
Varanasi 
1. 17th November 2021: Shri Navneet Sehgal I.A.S, Addl. 
Chief Secretary, Handloom, has given directives to District 
Magistrate Varanasi to complete the necessary 
procedures pertaining to the handover of 2.2 acres of land 
adjacent to CIPET site for the establishment of PWMC at 
Varanasi. 

12 
 
2. Subsequently, CIPET:CSTS official interaction with District 
Magistrate and Labour Commissioner it was found that 
12.22 Acre of land is already transferred from the 
department of Handloom and Textile to Labour 
Department including this piece of land through Cabinet 
approval from Govt. of U.P for the construction of Atal 
Awasiya Vidyalaya. 
 
        10th Dec. 2021: Additional Chief Secretary informed to 
Principal Director, CIPET:CSTS-Varanasi that this matter 
has already gone for the cabinet approval to transfer 2.2 
Acres of land to CIPET from 12.22 Acres of land. 
 
 
 
1.20 The Committee note that the Ministry had a proposal to set up one Plastic 
Waste Management Centre (PWMC) in Ahmedabad, Patna, Varanasi and 
Bengaluru. However, due to one reason or the other, the Ministry has so far not 
been able to set up the PWMC in any of these cities despite a number of sittings, 
request letters, etc. The Ministry has informed that revision in Standard 
Operating Procedures (SoP) for establishment of PWMC is under process. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the SoP be revised at the earliest so as to 
facilitate speedy setting up of the proposed PWMCs. 
(Recommendation No.18) 
Removal of Toxic Waste 
1.21 With regard to Removal of Toxic Waste from Bhopal Gas Leakage S ite, the 
Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“As far as the issue of removal of toxic waste is concerned the Committee 
have been informed that an oversight Committee has been formed h eaded by 
Hon’ble Minister of Environment and Forest. Further, the state Government of 
Madhya Pradesh has floated an intimational tender and an organization has also 
been identified to transport the toxic waste. Moreover, one proposal is being sent 
to the Ministry of Environment and Forest for necessary approval. The 
Committee are very much perturbed to note that the Bhopal Gas tragedy 
occurred way back in the year 1984 and even after lapse of about 3 8 years, and 
various steps taken by the Union Government as well as the State Governm ent 
of Madhya Pradesh, the matter is still under process. The Committee 
recommend that the Department should clearly come out with the details fo r 
removal of toxic waste and they be apprised accordingly.”  
 
 
 

13 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.22 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry o f 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
  
“ The GoM, in its meeting of 18-21st June, 2010, had recommended that 
the 350 MT of toxic waste of Union Carbide India Ltd (UCIL) be disposed of at 
Pithampur incinerator. GoM also recommended that remediation cost of 
approximately Rs. 310 crore is to be borne by Govt. of India, in the first instance . 
The same was approved by the Cabinet on 24th June, 2010.   
  
2.         As per Union Cabinet’s decision, incineration of stored hazardous wastes 
etc. (approximate 350 MT), inviting global tenders for different remediation 
activities, selection and finalization of contractors to carry out different 
remediation activities and completion of all remediation actions are the 
responsibility of GoMP. As regards release of Rs. 310 crore for remediation and 
waste disposal works, the Union Cabinet fixed the responsibility on Department 
of Expenditure, GoMP and M/o EF&C. As per the decision of Cabinet, an 
Oversight Committee at the level of the Government of India was constituted on 
15th July, 2010, in the Ministry of Environment and Forests to provide ov ersight 
and support to the Govt. of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP) in taking the ne cessary 
remedial action. This Oversight Committee is headed by the Minister of 
Environment and Forest, Government of India and co-chaired by the Minist er of 
Gas Relief, Government of Madhya Pradesh. Govt. of Madhya Pradesh was 
requested to prepare a comprehensive proposal with an execution plan for 
disposal of the remaining waste at the site. 
  
3.         Govt. of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP) vide letter dated 03.02.2022 has 
informed that it has floated tender for the purpose. In response to the tender, 
bids amounting Rs.126.08 Crore from M/s Pithampur Industrial Waste 
Management Private Limited and Rs.154.54 Crore from M/s Century Eco 
Solutions India Pvt Ltd. were received. After technical and financial evaluation of 
bids, M/s Pithampur Industrial Waste Management Private Limited has  been 
found to be L1 and it has been proposed that it may be selected for carrying out 
the disposal of toxic waste. The Committee formed for selection of bidde r 
included the Members of State Govt. of M.P., Central Pollution Control Board  
(CPCB) and Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board (MPPCB). GoMP has 
requested Govt. of India to release an amount of Rs.126.08 Crore for the  
purpose.   
  
4.         As per the decision of Cabinet, the proposal is to be endorsed by  the 
Oversight Committee before requesting Dept. of Expenditure for release of 
funds. The proposal received from GoMP has been forwarded to M/o E F&CC on 
30th March 2022 for consideration and endorsement by Oversight Committee.” 
1.23 The Committee in its original report had noted that the Bhopal Gas 
Tragedy occurred way back in the year 1984 and even after lapse of about 38  
years and various steps taken by the Union Government as well as the State 
Government of Madhya Pradesh, the matter has still not been resolved. 

14 
 
According to the Ministry, as per the decision of Cabinet the proposal received 
from the Government of Madhya Pradesh to carry out the disposal of toxic waste 
is to be endorsed by the oversight Committee before requesting Department of 
Expenditure for release of Funds. In this context, the Committee desires to kno w 
the present status of proposal sent by State Government of Madhya Pradesh to 
the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change.  
 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
Petroleum, Chemicals & Petrochemical Investment Regions (PCPIR) 
 
1.24 With regard to PCPIR, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the aims and objectives of PCPIR are to boost  
manufacturing in Chemical Sector, augment exports and generate employme nt. 
To achieve these lofty goals of PCPIR, four PCPIRs have been notified b y the 
Government at (i) Gujarat (Dahej) in 2009, (ii) Andhra Pradesh 
(Vishakhapatnam) in 2009, (iii) Odisha (Paradeep) in 2010 and (iv) Tamil Nadu  
(Cuddalore and Nagapattinam) in 2012. The Committee further note that these 
PCPIRs are stated to attract investment of ₹ 7.63 lakh Crore and expected to 
generate employment for 33.88 lakh people. However, the Committee regret to 
note that these four PCPIRs, conceived way back in the year 2009, 2010 and 
2012 are struggling to come into existence. For example for the PCPIR at  
Andhra Pradesh and Odisha the master plan is yet to be finalized, wh ereas for 
the PCPIR at Tamil Nadu it will be taken up after formation of PCPIR 
management Board. Further for the PCPIR at Andhra Pradesh, Odisha are 
awaiting environmental clearances whereas in Tamil Nadu the environmental 
clearances would be taken up after formation of PCPIR Management Bo ard. In 
this regard the Department has submitted that these are large projects with lon g 
gestation period of 20-25 years and realization of full potential is a  gradual 
process. The Committee do agree with the contention of the Department but  are 
of the view that even the basic issues like approval of Master plans and 
Environment Impact assessment could not be completed even after lapse of 
about 12 to 13 years of the inception of PCPIRs. The Committee, therefore , 
strongly recommend that the matter be looked into and concrete step s be taken 
at the earliest. The Committee has noted that the PCPIR policy is under active 
consideration of the Department with a view to make it more successful. Some  
of the amendments proposed include (i) reducing the minimum required a rea for 
new PCPIRs from 250 to 50 sq. km. (ii) Re-naming of ‘Management Boards’ as 
Development and Management Boards etc. The Committee strongly recommend 
that the necessary amendments be brought in PCPIR Policy at the earliest n ot 
only to give a concrete shape to the four PCPIRs but also for generating 
employment for 33.83 lakh people and attract investment of ₹ 7.63 lakh Crore as 
proposed by the Department.”    
 

15 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.25 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
“The Department has taken a note of the suggestions of the Committee 
and it has been taking up the matter with State Governments to speed u p the 
process of establishing PCPIRs in a time bound manner. For this purpose, the 
Department has recently reviewed the progress of the three PCPIRs and teams 
from the Department have visited the three PCPIRs at Dahej, Vishakhapatanam, 
and Paradeep.  Based on the inputs received from the State Governm ents, the 
Department will review the PCPIR Policy, 2007 to make it more effective.”  
 
1.26 With regard to PCPIRs, the Committee in their original report had noted 
that even the basic issues like approval of Master Plans and Environment Impact 
assessment have not been completed even after lapse of about 12 to 13 ye ars of 
the inception of PCPIRs. The Committee had also noted about the employment 
generation for 33.83 lakh people and attracting investment of Rs. 7.63 lakh Crore. 
However, in the Action Taken Reply there is no specific mention of any concrete 
steps taken by Ministry for time bound or early review of the PCPIR Policy, 200 7 
so as to ensure employment generation and investment, as aforesaid . The 
Committee, therefore, expresse their serious concern on not considering most 
major issues raised in the original report and simply submitting that “progress of 
the three PCPIRs at Dahej, Vishakhapatanam and Paradeep has been reviewed 
and based on the inputs received from the State Governments, the PCPIR Policy, 
2007 would be reviewed to make it more effective. ” The Committee take note of 
inordinate delay in establishment of PCPIRs at Dahej, Vishakhapatnam, Paradeep 
and Cuddalore, and recommend immediate concrete steps should be initiated by 
the Ministry to expedite in review of PCPIR policy and establishment of PCPIRs 
so as to facilitate employment generation for 33.83 lakh People and attracting 
investment of Rs. 7.63 lakh Crore. 
----- o ----- 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
Proposed and Approved Allocations for the year 2022-23 of the Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals 
2.1 With regard to the Budgetary allocation for the Department, the Committee  had 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that for the year 2022-23, the Department prop osed 
a BE of ₹271.27 Crore but have been allocated an amount of ₹209.00 Crore 
only. The reasons for this cut of ₹62.27 Crore vis-à-vis the proposal, stated by 
the Department are overall expenditure incurred by the Department, resources 
available with the Government and its priorities. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the factors of overall priorities of the Government, availability  of 
resources are beyond the control of the Department but expenditure track of the 
previous financial years is one of the deciding factors in the allocation of funds to 
the Department commensurate with the proposal is the sole responsibility of the 
Department. The Committee hope that the Department will pay necessary 
attention for the utilization of the allocated funds. Further, the Departm ent has 
submitted that the prime shortfalls in budget proposed vis-à-vis budget allocated 
for the year 2022-23 include, ₹53.77 Crore under NSP, ₹5.70 Crore under IPFT, 
₹3.00 Crore under CPDS and a minor reduction of ₹1.13 Crore under CIPET 
which is not likely to hamper the scheme of the CIPET. The Committee note with 
concern that both the schemes of the Department namely (i) New Scheme o f 
Petrochemicals (NSP) and (ii) Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme 
(CPDS) have suffered a reduction of ₹53.77 Crore and ₹3.00 Crore respectively. 
Thus the prime schemes of the Department would have a negative impact on the 
functioning of the Department too. Further, the IPFT has suffered a reduction of 
₹ 5.70 Crore which too will have an adverse impact on  the functioning of the 
Department. The Committee are somewhat satisfied with the submission of the 
Department that minor reduction of ₹1.13 Crore for CIPET is not likely to hamper 
severely the schemes/ programmes being implemented by it. The Committee 
however strongly recommend that the Department should judiciously and 
cautiously use the allocated funds for NSP & CPDS and also take up the matte r 
at appropriate level, if necessary, to get requisite allocation of funds fo r effective 
implementation of these schemes.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:-  
 
 

17 
 
“New Scheme of Petrochemicals (NSP) 
The shortfall of ₹53.77 cr in the allocated budget  as indicated above, the 
implementation of the ongoing ‘NSP; will not be affected as the proposal for the 
five new Plastic Parks has been put on hold by the Department of Expen diture 
(DoE). Hence, the projected requirement comes down to ₹66.27 cr for the 
ongoing projects, out of which, ₹48.50 crore have been allocated. In this rega rd, 
it is mentioned that the Department assures the Committee that it will plan the  
allocation of funds in a way that no or minimal effect could be ensured to the 
implementation of the ongoing projects under the NSP and if required, it will take 
up the matter at appropriate level. 
 
 
 Central Institute of Petrochemical Engineering & Tchnology (CIPET) 
 
Against the proposed BE 2022-23 of Rs.101.37 crore, an amount of 
Rs.100.24 crore was allocated to CIPET as Grant in aid for the CIPET schem es 
at BE 2022-23. However, the minor reduction of Rs. 1.13 Crore for CIPET is not 
likely to hamper and the allocated fund is adequate to meet the effective 
execution the schemes / projects during the year 2022-23.  Further, since the 
scheme of Enriching Technical Infrastructure facilities & capabilities to meet 
industry needs is on the verge of completion, there is minimum allocation of fund 
for the scheme of “Enhancing capabilities in R&D and Technology Support at 
CIPET and the marginal cut of allocation of funds due to this, has not affected 
the functioning of CIPET. 
 Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS) 
Department had requested Department of Expenditure to accord their 
approval for continuation of CPDS beyond 31.3.2021 and also to merg e CPDS 
as sub-scheme with New Schemes of Petrochemicals (NSP) as an umbrella 
scheme. The objective of CPDS is to strive to develop the chemical and 
petrochemical sector in the country. The proposed budget outlay for the CPDS 
during 2021-22 to 2025-26 is given in the table below: 
  
Sl. No.  Financial Year  Proposed outlay  (₹ in crore)    
1.  2021-22  3.60 
2.  2022-23  6.15  
3.  2023-24  6.25  
4.  2024-25  6.30  
5.  2025-26  6.40  
Total  28.70  
   
2. Department of Expenditure has conveyed their approval for continuation 
of CPDS beyond 31.3.2021. The proposal for merging CPDS as sub-scheme 
with New Schemes of Petrochemicals (NSP) as an umbrella scheme is under 
consideration in Finance Division. 
 
3. For the FY 2022-23, an amount of Rs. 6.00 Crore was sought for CPDS. 
However, the amount of Rs.3.00 crore only has been allocated under Head o f 
CPDS for 2022-23. As per the provisions of existing CPDS guidelines, 
Department sought proposals from Chemical and Petrochemical Divisions of this 

18 
 
Department and the Industry Associations, to be organized under CPDS during 
the year 2022-23. Proposals for organizing various events worth Rs.7.48 crore  
have been received from various Industry Associations and PSUs & 
Autonomous Bodies of DCPC. A calendar of events to be organized under 
CPDS during 2022-23 has been finalized, with the approval of Secretary(C&PC). 
However, as per existing CPDS guidelines, an amount of Rs.3.49 crore only can  
be given for these events. In addition to above, funds will also be a llocated for 
conducting studies as per the requirement of the Department. If required, the 
demand for additional funds will be made to Finance Division at RE Stage.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 & 1.8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
Utilisation of Funds Under New Schemes of Petrochemicals (NSP) For 2021-22.    
2.3 With regard to Utilisation of Funds Under NSP for 2021-22, the Committe e had 
recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that during the year 2021- 22 an amount of ₹53.73 
Crore was projected at BE for NSP which was reduced to ₹51.13 Crore at RE 
Stage and out of the reduced RE as on 31.01.2022 an amoun t of ₹42.54 Crore 
has been utilised by the Department. The Department has stated that the y have 
spent the amount as per the Monthly and Quarterly expenditure p lan limits 
assigned to them and they are hopeful to utilize the entire amount alloca ted 
under NSP at the RE Stage for the Financial year 2021-22. The Committee hope 
and trust that as assured the Department would be able to spend the remaining  
allocated amount by 31.03.2022.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
“The Department is pleased to state that as assured, it has released the 
entire amount of ₹51.13 Crore allocated as RE under the New Scheme of 
Petrochemicals for the FY 2021-22 till 31.03.2022.” 
 (Recommendation No. 4) 
Drastic Cut in BE (2022-23) of NSP 
2.5 With regard to Drastic Cut in BE (2022-23) of NSP, the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 

19 
 
“The Committee note that the Department proposed an amount of 
₹102.73 Crore as BE for the year 2022-23 but have been allocated ₹48.50 Crore 
only. As regards the amount of ₹102.27 Crore the Committee have been 
informed that ₹66.27 Crore were projected for the ongoing projects and ₹36.00 
Crore were proposed for new Centres of Excellence (CoEs) and new Plastic 
Parks. The Committee have also been informed that the curtailment of funds can 
affect the progress and implementation of the ageing projects as well as the 
continuation and expansion of the existing scheme. The Committee, therefor e, 
recommend that the Department should analyse urgently the reasons for dra stic 
cut in the proposed BE of ₹102.73 Crore and should also raise the mat ter at 
appropriate forum more forcefully to get allocation of funds commensurate t o the 
proposed BE for NSP. The Committee further recommend that at ‘no cost’ the 
implementation and expansion of the Scheme under NSP should be aff ected 
adversely.” 
Reply of the Government 
2.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
“As informed earlier, the Department had proposed ₹102.27 Crore with an 
amount of ₹66.27 Crore for the ongoing projects and ₹36.00 Crore for th e new 
proposed projects under NSP. Since, the proposal for the five new Plastic Parks  
has been put on hold by the DoE, hence, the projected requirement comes down 
to ₹66.27 Crore for the ongoing projects, out of which, ₹48.50 crore have b een 
allocated. In this regard, it is mentioned that the Department will ensure that the 
allocation of funds is planned in such a way that there is no or minimal eff ect to 
the implementation of the ongoing projects under the NSP.” 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
2.7 With regard to the Proposal of Five New Plastic Parks, the Committee h ad 
recommended as follows:- 
  
“ Proposal of Five New Plastic Parks.   
 
The Committee note that there is a proposal to set up five new Plast ic 
Parks till the year 2025- 26 at a total budget outlay of ₹202.50 Crore which 
include ₹40 Crore for each Park and ₹2.50 Crore as Programme Manager fees 
for each Park and the proposal has been approved by the Minister of Chemicals 
& Fertilizers and by Standing Committee on Finance but subject to the 
concurrence of Department of expenditure. As such the Department of 
expenditure has been requested to accord approval/concurrence for the 
proposal of five new Plastic Parks. In this regard, it has been submitted by the 
representative of the Department during oral evidence that the proposal ha s not 
been concurred because of slow progress in the setting up of Plastic Parks. 
However, they will now take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Expenditure). The Committee are perturbed to note thi s 
sequence of events and opine that the Department alone is responsible fo r slow 
progress in the setting up of Plastic Parks. Though the Department has 
submitted that they have initiated a slew of measures like (i) reviewing the 

20 
 
progress submitted by state Governments, (ii) Holding review meetings/ field 
units and (iii) review of Plastic Parks by scheme steering Committee (SSC) etc. 
but the Committee feel that these measures have not been able to prod uce the 
desired objective of accelerating the pace of setting up of the Plastic P arks and 
need to be reviewed and at the same time concrete measures have to be taken 
by the Department. In this regard, the Department has submitted that they 
expect an early concurrence of the said proposal by the Ministry of Fi nance 
(Department of Expenditure) nevertheless the Committee strongly recommend 
that the matter be pursued vigorously else the whole calculation of fund s and  
plan of the five new Plastic Parks would not materialize. The Committe e also 
recommend that as far as possible the BE should be projected only after 
obtaining necessary approvals/concurrence from the Ministry of Finance.”  
Reply of the Government 
2.8 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
“ The Department of Expenditure and the Department of Economic Affairs  
have directed the Department to put on hold the current proposal for five new 
Plastic Parks till the ongoing parks under the scheme achieve completion. 
Accordingly, the Department has decided to direct its utmost efforts towards the 
effective implementation and completion of the ongoing projects. Once, th e 
ongoing projects achieve completion and the scheme for Setting up of Plasti c 
Parks achieve measurable success, the Department will then pursue the 
proposal for the 5 new Plastic Parks in more vigorous manner.”  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
Revisiting the policy of Plastic Parks. 
2.9 With regard to Revisiting the policy of Plastic Parks, the Committee ha d 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee have been apprised that the Department has revisited the policy 
for establishment of Plastic Parks and now in addition to Greenfield projects, the 
brownfield projects would also be considered as per the request of the Industry and 
now the entrepreneur need not to purchase the land and block their capita l as they can 
now get the land on lease basis also. The Committee hope that by bringing this 
amendment the Department would be able to accelerate the pace of e stablishment of 
Plastic Parks.”  
 
 

21 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.10 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
“The Department has approved two Plastic Parks at Ganjimutt, Karnataka 
and Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh based on the revised Scheme Guidelines. Sinc e, 
the approvals have been granted recently, hence, the outcomes of the revised  
guidelines in these two parks will take time to get reflected. Further, as per bes t 
practices, the ongoing parks were suggested to provide land on lease/rent basis 
and as a result of these provisions, the pace of progress in terms of allotmen t of 
plots has picked up across the parks.” 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
Delay in establishment in Plastic Parks at Paradip Odisha and Assam. 
2.11 With regard to delay in establishment in Plastic Parks at Paradip Odisha and 
Assam, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“As regard, the delay in establishment of Plastic Parks at Odisha and 
Assam the Committee have been informed that the Common Facility Centre 
(CFC) is pending because the units are not coming forward and it has bee n 
deliberately decided not to put the machinery and equipment for CFC a s it will 
become obsolete. The Committee are of the view that the Plastic Parks at 
Paradip Odisha and Assam have become victim of lack of proper 
planning/management on the part of the Department.   The Committee  strongly 
recommend that the fate of these two Plastic Parks should be decided at the 
earliest and immediate steps be taken to encourage the industry to come  
forward. The Committee may also be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.” 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
“The Department has taken various steps to ensure success of its Plastic 
Parks being implemented in Odisha and Assam. Steps and provisions like 
allotment of land at subsidized prices; availability of feedstock/ raw materi al from 
PSUs at subsidized rates, etc. have now started to show positive results. Around 
19 plots have been allotted at the Paradeep Plastic Park at Odisha a nd around 
44 plots and 10 sheds have been allotted at the Assam Plastic Park. Further, the 
Department is hopeful that a majority of the available plots at these two p arks 
will be allotted by the end of the ongoing financial year.” 
 
 
 

22 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
Location of Plastic Parks 
2.13 With regard to the Location of Plastic Parks , the Committee had recommended 
as follows:- 
“The Committee have been apprised that the State Government partially  
selects the land for Plastic Parks and offer it to the Department. However ea rlier 
the Department was accepting the offers of land by the State Government 
irrespective of location of the land but now a steering Committee chaired b y 
Secretary has been constituted and the Department is continuously choosing the 
location of the land and the location is also shown to the industry and on ce it is 
concurred by them or they are ready for Plastic Parks at that location only then a  
Plastic Park is sanctioned. In view of the Committee it is a right step and it 
should have been taken earlier. Anyhow the Committee hope that th is step 
would minimize the delay in the setting up of Plastic Parks. The Committee have 
been informed that the Plastic Parks at Tinsukia is delayed mainly due to 
locational disadvantage. The Committee recommend that a final decision a bout 
Tinsukia Plastic Park should also be taken and it should not be left becau se of 
locational disadvantage.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
 “As mentioned in the reply to Recommendation No. 7, the Department has 
provided various suggestions to the authorities looking after the Assam Plastic 
Park for the speedy and effective implementation of the project. Due to the  
efforts of the Department and the AIDC (authority implementing the project of the 
Assam Plastic Park), the pace of progress in the recent times has taken an 
upward curve and AIDC has informed that they have achieved around 7 5% 
progress in terms of development of physical infrastructure and has also allotted 
around 44 plots out of the total planned 104 plots. In addition to the plots, AIDC 
has also allotted around 10 sheds based on the Plug & Play model to various 
units. “ 
 
 (Recommendation No. 9) 
Centres of Excellence (CoEs). 
2.15 With regard to CoEs, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that basic purpose of the Centres of Excellence 
(CoEs) is to promote Research and Development in the field of Petrochemicals 
and some CoEs have also been sanctioned so far. However, the sanction 
amount of ₹6.00 Crore per Centre of Excellence has now been reduce d to ₹5.00 
Crore. The Committee have not been apprised of the rationale behind th is 
reduction. The Committee feel that it is an important scheme of the Depart ment 

23 
 
as it is related to Research and Development in the field of Petrochemicals and 
therefore, recommend that the reason behind the reduction of the fund be 
analyzed appropriately.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry o f 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
“The Department decided to reduce the sanction amount of ₹6.00 Cro re 
per Centre of Excellence to ₹5.00 Crore based on the proposed deman ds from 
new probable Centers. Further, the Department aspired to promote the role of 
Industry in the scheme and accordingly gives priority to the proposal which 
have a considerable amount of connect and contribution from the ind ustry. 
Since the scheme envisages contributions from the institute and its industry 
partners, hence, the amount of ₹5.00 Crore was considered appropriate.”    
(Recommendation No. 10) 
“Chemicals Promotion and Development Scheme (CPDS). 
2.17 With regard to CPDS , the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the Department provide soft support under  
CPDS in the form of Grant- in-aid to various organizations/industry associations 
etc. to conduct workshops, seminars, studies etc. for creating awareness as well 
as dissemination of information for promotion and development of Che mical and 
Petrochemical Industry. The Committee further note that the Department also  
give awards for undertaking research and innovation in the field of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals to encourage them. As regards the grant- in-aid, the 
Committee note that during the year 2019-20, only 8 organizations were given 
grant-in-aid out of the 56 number of organizations/industry associations applied  
for. During the year 2020-21, 168 number of organizations/industry associatio ns 
applied but only 04 number of organizations/industry associations were provide d 
with the grant- in-aid. For the year 2021-22, upto 31.01.2022, 26 number of 
organizations applied but just 06 number of organizations have been provided 
with the grant- in-aid. During the period of four years i.e. from 2019 to 2022, the 
grant-in-aid has been provided to just 18 organisations/industry associations out 
of the 250 applications received. These figures cast a doubt on the policy  of 
providing grant-in-aid under CPDS. It appears to the Committee that there is lack 
of awareness among the organizations/industry associations regarding CPDS 
and also about the nitty-gritty of the schemes. The Committee recomme nd that 
appropriate steps are to be taken by the Department to make awa re the 
organizations/industry associations for obtaining grant- in-aid. The Department 
should also analyse the reasons for rejection of the applications an d initiate 
remedial steps. As regards to the applications lying pending with the Department 
received under CPDS, the Committee have been informed that proposals 
received by them have been processed as per the CPDS guidelines. However  
some proposals for grant- in-aid have been kept in abeyance for want of 
concurrence of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) for rele ase 

24 
 
of funds and the matter is being pursued by this Department with the 
Department of Expenditure. The Committee recommend that the matter be 
pursued and brought to logical conclusion and be informed of the final ou tcome 
in this regard.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry o f 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
 “The guidelines of the Scheme are available in the public domain on th e 
website of the Department. In the start of financial year, main organiza tions/ 
industry associations having expertise in Chemical and Petrochemical Sector, 
are requested to submit the calendar of proposed events to be organised d uring 
the financial year. The proposals which are found to be in consonance with  the 
objectives of the scheme, are provided financial support as per the provisions o f 
the CPDS guidelines during the financial year. Under the Component- II – 
Knowledge dissemination, proposals received from Government agencies, 
Autonomous bodies/PSUs under the Department, associations of industry in 
chemicals and petrochemicals sector, are considered. Department has also 
considered the proposals received from such specialized organizations which 
have been working in the sector for at least five years and have su ccessfully 
organized Knowledge Dissemination events in the past. The proposals received  
from the organisations, who do not fulfil the criteria of CPDS for g etting grant-in-
aid, have been rejected. During current financial year 2022-23, proposals o f 
Rs.6.68 crore have been received from PSU/ABs of DCPC and various Industry 
Associations till date.  
  
2.         Department of Expenditure has approved the continuation of CPDS as a 
sub-scheme of New Scheme of Petrochemicals beyond 31st March, 2021  with 
proposed budget outlay of Rs.28.70 Crore during 2021-22 to 20 25-26. After 
receiving the approval from Deptt. of Expenditure on 22.3.2022, financial 
sanctions of Rs.1.83 Crore were issued till 31.3.2022. Out of Rs.3.60 Crore 
allocated to CPDS in RE 2021-22, an amount of Rs.3.59 Crore was incurred 
during the financial year 2021-22.”   
 
(Recommendation No.11) 
Granting of Awards under CPDS. 
2.19 With regard to Granting of Awards under CPDS , the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
“As regards the awards being given as incentive for the innovations in 
petrochemicals and downstream plastic processing industry to individuals/group 
of scientists etc. the Committee note that according to the submission of the 
Department, the process of awarding under CPDS is very rigorous and an award 
is not given unless there is an innovation or the industry is getting benefitte d. A 
perusal of the figures of the awards reveals that the number of winners w hich 

25 
 
was 17 in the year 2015-16 has come down to 04 in the year 2019 -20. Similarly 
the number of runner-ups come down from 14 to 09 during the same period. The 
Committee express their deep anguish over the unfortunate decline in the 
number of awards. The Committee are of the opinion that the decline in the 
number of awards indicate a decline in the innovations in this field. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that appropriate steps be taken to promote 
innovations in this field and also to increase the participation of the 
individuals/organizations etc.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry o f 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
“The decline in the number of awardees has been considered as an 
indicator to the decline in the innovations in the field. The Department ha s also 
taken note of the declining numbers has put in efforts to expand th e reach of the 
awards. The guidelines have also been revised keeping in view the time  and 
demand driven changes in the policy. At present, the Department is focusing on 
expanding the outreach of the awards and also promoting fresh talent in the fi eld 
of R&D and innovation in the petrochemicals sector. “ 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
Enrollment under various programme of CIPET. 
2.21 With regard to Enrollment under various programme of CIPET , the Committee 
had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that as many as 13,494 candidates were enroll ed in 
the long term courses and only 4390 candidates are stated to have been 
assessed and just 3672 candidates have been declared successful. As reg ards 
the skill development (Short Term Courses) the Committee note that during th e 
years 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020-21, 20994, 14417 and 188 6 students 
respectively were employed in placement linked Skill Development Training 
Programme (SDTP). The Committee note that the number of 
students/candidates is decreasing every year and particularly the difference for 
the year 2019-20 and 2020-21 is a big difference. The Comm ittee are anxious to 
know the precise reasons for this decline and recommend that immediate st eps 
be taken to arrest the declining trend of the successful students. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that CIPET should render all possible help to the 
successful students/candidates to get meaningful placement.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.22 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry o f 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 

26 
 
“In the long term courses 13494 Students/ candidates (which includes 
students studying in 1st , 2nd , 3rd , 4th  and 5th  year courses in Post Diplo ma/ 
Post Graduate Diploma/ Diploma/ UG/PG programmes (all programmes & all 
years) offered at CIPET Centres. Out of this, 4390 candidates studying in final 
year (in each programme) of which 3672 candidates completed their respective 
courses in stipulated time period without backlog. 
Due to pandemic (COVID-19) restrictions, most of the training 
programmes were halted (by adhering the guidelines issued by respective state  
government / district administration) because of which the commenced and 
halted training programme could not be completed in time, accordingly there was 
delay in completion of the training programme. Subsequently the candidat es 
provided with placement opportunities were unable to join the industry due to 
lockdown/ closure of industries. Upon relaxation of COVID-19 restrictions CIPET 
centres has resumed the halted training programme, and subsequently providing 
suitable employment opportunities to the candidates successfully completing  the 
training programme. 
All the CIPET centres have dedicated placement cell to provide 
employment/ placement to the Students/ candidates. Further, CIPET Centr es 
have initiated to sign the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with pro minent 
Industries at their region for employment of CIPET Students.” 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
BE, RE and Actual Expenditure of CIPET During Previous Years. 
2.23 With regard to BE, RE and Actual Expenditure of CIPET during Previous Years, 
the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that BE (2019- 2020) was ₹ 80.00 Crore but was 
enhanced to ₹ 81.50 Crore and the entire amount of RE has been utili sed. The 
BE (2020-2021) was ₹ 98.25 Crore and was enhanced to ₹ 146.30 Crore as the 
Institute sought a one- time grant of ₹ 144.00 Crore and an amount of ₹ 50.00 
Crore were approved by the Ministry of Finance at RE stage and like in the y ear 
2019-2020 in this year too the w hole RE of ₹ 146.30 Crore was fully utilised. As 
far as BE (2021-22) is concerned the Committee note that it was ₹ 117.88 Crore 
but was revised downward to ₹ 102.34 Crore at RE stage and the actual 
utilisation is stated to be ₹ 81.70 Crore. The Committee a re satisfied with the 
impressive trend of utilization of funds during the year 2019-2020 and 2020-2021 
and hope that during the year 2021-2022 to the remaining allo cated amount 
would be utilised. The Committee note that on-line classes were conducted by 
CIPET as offline training programme were not permitted during the lockdown 
period. However on return of normalcy and as per the directions of respe ctive 
district administration all the centres of CIPET have commenced their training 
programmes through physical/offline mode. The Committee are of the view that 
it is a move in right direction and desire that some additional innovative 
measures may also be explored to neutralise the adverse impact of COVID- 19 
pandemic on the training programme of CIPET and for also to complete t he 
training of candidates/ students within the stipulated time. “ 
 

27 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.24 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
“The entire amount of Rs. 102.34 crore allocated to CIPET at RE stage 
were released to CIPET by the end of FY 2021 . CIPET Centres have 
commenced the offline training programmes for the ongoing even semester  
(January 2022 to June 2022). CIPET centres are informed to condu ct extra 
classes to compensate the missed out practical training during online classes of 
previous Semesters. 
CIPET Centres are promoting the various activities carried out at their 
Centres through Newspaper advertisement,  active participation in Social Media 
viz., Face book / Twitter posts, Digital marketing , Industry meet, Webinars , 
TV/Radio advertisements , distribution of admission pamphlets, participation in  
regional melas / Job fair.” 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
R&D in CIPET. 
 
2.25 With regard to R&D in CIPET, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee note that CIPET has three R&D wings viz. (i) Advanced 
Research School for Technology & Product Simulation (ARSTPS) at Chennai 
and (ii) Laboratory for Advanced Research in Polymeric Materials (LARPM) at 
Bhubaneswar and (iii) Advanced Polymer Design and Development Research 
Laboratory (APDDRL) at Bengaluru. Further during the year the R&D wings have 
undertaken 36 nos. R&D projects, 35 nos. of Research papers published in hig h 
impact factor peer-reviewed scientific journals and filed 5 nos. of pa tents.   Also, 
the SARPs have successfully transferred 11 nos. of technologies to the 
industries.  The research ideas have been translated to various Books / Book 
chapters by the SARP Team and 70 nos. have been published by leading 
International Publishers in the domain of Polymer Science & Technology. The 
Committee have noted that even though 45 Centres of CIPET are functioning 
throughout the Country, but just 03 centres of CIPET at Bhubaneswar, Bengaluru 
and Chennai have the Prime mandate to perform R&D work. The Committe e 
recommend that R&D activity should not be confined only to 03 centers of CIPET 
and the Department should take steps immediately to extend the R&D activities 
for other Centres of CIPET too. The Committee would like to be appri sed of the 
Steps taken by the Department in this regard.”  
Reply of the Government 
2.26 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry o f 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 

28 
 
“CIPET has classified its centres into 3 categories on the basis of its 
infrastructure, location, industry participation and the activities & programs. 
 Institute of Petrochemicals Technology (IPT): IPT centres are established 
in-line to the requirements for the offering of UG/PG, Diploma programs, Short  
Term Skill Development Training Program and Technical Support Services to 
the Petrochemical & Allied Industries.  
 Centre for Skilling and Technical Support (CSTS): CSTS centres are 
established in-line to the requirements for the offering of Diploma programs, 
Short Term Skill Development Training and Technical Support Services to the 
Petrochemical & Allied Industries.  
 School for Advanced Research in Petrochemicals (SARP): CIPET has 
established 03 research centers which are on par with international standards; 
thus enabling frontline researchers to execute their research goals in-line with 
the needs of the regions of the country. 
  
 For carrying out R&D activities in all the 45 centres of CIPET, a huge 
investment for state-of-the-art with excellent facilities in the field of R & D and the 
recruitment of suitable enough number of scientists shall be needed. Instead of 
diluting our focus on R&D by carrying out research in all centres, we are 
focussing only on 3 centres which have prime mandate to do R & D works.  
 
 Further steps are being taken to carry out research in IPTs and 
strengthening collaborative research work between CIPET and reputed institutes 
both in India and abroad. Qualified employees in IPTs are encouraged to 
undertake applied research based on their expertise and practical experience.” 
  
(Recommendation No. 17) 
Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (BGLD) 
2.27 With regard to Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (BGLD), the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that during 2019-2020 that BE was revised upwards 
to ₹ 27.95  crore but the actual expenditure was ₹ 23.61 crore. Similarly the BE 
was ₹ 31.80 Crore but reduced to ₹ 21.43 Crore and the actual ex penditure was 
₹ 18.93 Crore. For the year 2021-2022 BE (2021-2022) was ₹ 22.06 crore which 
was reduced to ₹ 18.53 Crore and the actual expenditure was ₹ 13.5 7 Crore. 
Thus there is a shortfall in the utilization of allocated funds for three co nsecutive 
years due to various reasons. The Committee don ’t want to go deeper into the 
reasons as they are administrative matters to be resolved by the Centre/State 
Governments. However, the Committee desire and also recommend that at least 
on humanitarian grounds, the Department should come up and resolve the 
issues involved in the payment of ex-gratia so as to provide succour to them.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.28 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 

29 
 
 “The Office of Welfare Commissioner, Bhopal Gas Victims, Bhopal 
disburse ex-gratia amount to the claimants on submission of applications by th e 
claimants who has suffered due to disaster, by the tribunals. Tribunals are bound 
to consider the matter judiciously. Tribunals also take care of the fact that n o 
fictitious or fraudulent claimants can get the amount which he does not de serve. 
Any issue involved in the payment of ex-gratia is resolved without any delay.” 
 
 (Recommendation No. 19) 
Import and Export of Major Chemicals and Petrochemicals. 
2.29 With regard to Import and Export of Major Chemicals and Petrochemicals , the 
Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
“As regards the details of imports & exports of major Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals for the last five years the Committee note that the trend of import 
and export indicates a mixed product wise trend, but as a whole import has 
increased year after year except the year 2019-20 (due to COVID-19). However, 
in case of exports there is increasing trend from 2016-17 to 2018-19, at the later 
years (2019-20 and 2020-21) the trend is decreasing. The Committee 
recommend that urgent steps be taken to increase the export of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals and to decreases its imports. The Committee may be informed 
the steps taken in this regard. A perturbing fact which has come to the notice  of 
the Committee is that the per capita consumption of chemicals and 
petrochemicals in India is very low as compared  to other developed countries  
indicating that there is enough potential for the growth of the sector in the 
coming year. As India is a big consumer of chemicals and petrochemicals, it is 
anticipated that production and consumption shall continue increasing in the 
coming decades. The Committee recommend that the Department should initiate 
concrete steps to tap the potential for the growth of the sector in future at the 
earliest. Another glaring feature which has come to the notice is that the re are 
products namely Polycarbonate, Super Absorbent Polymers, Methyl 
Methacrylate Butadiene Styrene, polyacetals, Methylene Diphenyl Diisocyanate, 
Ethylene-Vinyl Acetate and Ethylene Propylene Diene Monomer do not h ave 
domestic capacities and these are totally import dependent products. Furt her, 
there are no products out of the majorly traded petrochemicals where in 
domestic capacity is self-sufficient. However there are products like 
polyethylene’s, polypropylene, the domestic capacities are near to self-sufficient, 
still there are various grades of these polymers and their co-polymers which a re 
not manufactured in the country, being imported in a considerable quantities. In 
this regard, the Committee desire that the Department should look into the  issue 
on priority basis and initiate steps for reducing dependence on import o f these 
products. The Department should come out with a policy to achieve self 
sufficiency in the production of various grades of polymers and there co-
polymers which are not manufactured in the country and are being currently  
imported. “  
 
 

30 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.30 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
“1. To boost exports of Chemicals and Petrochemicals Remission of Duties 
and Taxes on Exported Products (RODTEP) scheme has been introduced.  At 
the same time to decrease in imports and to follow Mission Atma Nirbhar Bharat 
following step is taken: 
There has been huge quantity of sub-standard Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
import was taking place. To restrict the same, non-tariff measures have been  
adopted by the Government.  
  
2. The Department has taken following steps to reduce import dependence: 
 
PCPIR policy re-engineering is in process to facilitate investment and 
promote sector wise domestic production of speciality chemicals, polymers etc.  
The Project Development Cell has been set up to: 
 
I. To create projects with all approvals, land available for allocation and with 
complete Detailed Project Reports for adoption/ investment by investors. 
 
II. To identify issues that need to be resolved in order to attract and finali se 
the investments and put forth these before the Empowered Group. 
3. To achieve self-sufficiency in the production of various grades of 
polymers and co-polymers, the Department is in process of finalizing the 
perspective plan to formulate policy for growth of Petrochemical sector. The plan  
highlights the likely demand-supply scenarios over the next 10-15 ye ars and 
would also present options to meet the gap between domestic demand  and 
supply.    
 Various steps have been taken to increase growth of the chemical se ctor 
by rationalization of custom duty on the feedstock/building blocks/Intermediates  
for having synergy in the complete value chain. Department of Chemicals an d 
Petrochemicals has set the Vision to seize the opportunity to establish India as a 
leading chemicals & petrochemicals manufacturing hub with a thrust on 
reduction in import dependency, by attracting investments for manufacturing 
quality products using cutting-edge technologies in specified clusters with focus 
on sustainability. 
 
 To promote the Indian chemical and petrochemical industry, Department 
of Chemicals & Petrochemicals (DCPC), jointly with Federation of Indian 
Chambers of Commerce & Industry (FICCI), organizes mega “India Chem” event 
every alternate year, since the year 2000. It provides common platform to the 
Indian and international manufacturers, academia and researchers to exchange  
their views on latest technological development taking places in the sector, 
which facilitates future trend and growth of the industry. 11th edition of Ind ia-
Chem conference was organized in March, 2021, at New Delhi.  
 

31 
 
 To promote the industry and attract investments, the Department has also 
organized GCPMH (Global Chemicals & Petrochemicals Manufacturing Hub), an 
international event focusing on development of PCPIRs, during 25- 26 
November, 2021.  Also, Project Development Cell has been set up in the 
Department of chemical and petrochemicals to identify potential projects, 
conduct regular investor outreach programs along with facilitation to enhance 
investments in this sector.” 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT WANT 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE  
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
Budgetary Allocation & Utilization During 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22. 
4.1 With regard to the Budgetary allocation and utilization, the Comm ittee had 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the BE (2019-20) was ₹263.65 Crore which 
was revised upward to ₹370.18 Crore and the actual expenditure was ₹3 65.10 
Crore. The BE (2020- 21) was ₹218.34 Crore but was again revised upward at 
RE stage to ₹ 395.70 Crore and the actual expenditure was ₹293.04 Cr ore. The 
BE (2021- 22) was ₹233.14 Crore but has been revised downward to ₹209.00 
Crore and the actual expenditure is ₹ 158.00 Crore as on 31.12.2021. The 
Committee are satisfied to see the utilization of allocated funds during 2019- 20 
and 2020-21 which comes out to be 98.6% and 99% of the RE for respectiv e 
years. Regarding the remaining fund utilization of ₹51.00 Crore during 2021-22 
the Committee have been informed that proposals by various Divisio ns have 
been forwarded to IFD and after concurrence, necessary sanction orders have  
been released by the Department to utilize the balance funds of ₹51 .00 Crore. 
The Committee hope that the Department would continue its performance  in the 
optimal utilization of the allocated funds in the years to come. As reg ards the 
reduction of BE (2021-22) from ₹233.14 Crore to ₹209.00 Crore at RE stage the 
Department has submitted that it is primarily due to two factors (i) reduction in 
allocation of fund for CIPET schemes and (ii) BGLD cost centre. ₹117.88 Cro re 
was allocated to CIPET which was reduced to ₹102.34 Crore due to various 
reasons like (i) non-allotment of land at Jammu, (ii) 50% of the project cost for 
establishment of CIPET at J&K being still under consideration etc. and as 
regards the BGLD, a total of ₹ 3.53 Crore has been reduced because of COVID-
19, a ceiling of 20% expenditure of the overall BE allocation has been  imposed 
by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee find that the issues relating to BGLD 
are not under the Control of the Department whereas the former issue relating to 
the CIPET are well under the administrative control of the Department. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should streamline and 
expedite the pending issues of various schemes so as to get a hig her allocation 
of funds in future.”   
 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
“CIPET 
The reduction of funds for CIPET schemes was due to various reasons like; non-
allotment of land at J&K. The status and action taken with regard to J&K proje ct 
is as under:  

34 
 
Initially, Govt. of J&K, proposed to allot 15 kanals (1.875 acres) land near 
ITI, Zainakote. Since there was no positive response from Govt. of J&K after 
protracted follow up and correspondences, a proposal for shifting of the Cen tre 
to Jammu was deliberated in the 135th Governing Council (GC) meeting held on 
13.03.2021. The G.C. approved the proposal subject to the agreement by J&K.  
 Hon ’ble Minister of Chemicals & Fertilizers, Govt. of India vide D.O. letter 
dated 19.04.2021 has requested Lt. Governor of Jammu & Kashmir to approve 
the proposal by allotting land at Jammu and 50% of the project cost. 
Subsequently, the Secretary (C&PC) has written a D.O. letter dated 02.0 8.2021 
to the Chief Secretary (J&K) for allotment of land and funds.  
 Govt. of J&K has agreed to allot 10 acres of land at Jammu and in this 
regard, a Committee comprising officials from DCPC and CIPET met DDC, 
Jammu on 01.11.2021 and inspected the site at Jagti Tehsil which was proposed 
for allotment to CIPET. The Committee after inspection found that the site is 
unsuitable because of solid rocks which involve huge development work at the 
site and also less access route. The Committee also visited another site at 
Vijaypur which was also found to be unsuitable. In this regard, Deputy Secretary 
(PC), DCPC, GoI has written a letter dated 09.11.2021 to Principal Secretary, 
Deptt. of Skill Development, Govt. of J&K communicating the unsuitability o f the 
identified lands and requested Jammu Administration either to construct the 
building and hostel on the proposed land at Jagti, Jammu as part of th eir 
contribution or to provide suitable land preferably nearer to the industrial area  of 
Jammu where the site development cost would be minimal. Further, Secretary 
(C&PC), DCPC has written D.O. letter dated 19.05.2022 to the Chief Secreta ry 
to Govt. of J&K requesting to inform the exact location whether in Srinaga r or in 
Jammu where the CIPET Centre is to be established so that funds can be 
utilized in time. Response from J&K Administration is awaited. 
 BGLD: 
As regard BGLD, it is stated that an amount of Rs.22.06 crore was 
allocated to the Head of BGLD during 2021-22. Out of which, a prov ision of 
Rs.14.90 crore was made under the Sub-head of Action Plan (Ex-gratia) which 
was subsequently reduced to Rs.14.73 crore due to re-appropriations of funds to 
Professional Services. D/o Expenditure directed to impose a cut of 20% in thi s 
Sub-Head, accordingly, Rs.11.75 crore was demanded in Revised Estimates 
2021-22.  Reduction of amount in Revised Estimates in other Sub-Heads viz. 
Salary and Medical Treatment Head is due to demise of 02 employees, 
retirement and decrease in submission of medical claims respectively. Hence 
the total budget revised to Rs.18.53 Crore in RE 2021-22.  
  
The revised amount under the Head of Action Plan (Ex-gratia) was fully 
disbursed to the beneficiaries in 2021-22. The actual expenditure was Rs.18.12 
Crore during 2021-22.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 

35 
 
 (Recommendation No.12) 
Financial Achievements under Chemical Production and Distribution Scheme 
(CPDS) 
4.3 With regard to CPDS, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that BE of CPDS for the year 2019- 20 was ₹3.00 
Crore and the actual expenditure was ₹2.93 Crore. F or the year 2020-21 BE of 
₹3.50 Crore was projected but was reduced to ₹2.80 Crore and the actual 
expenditure is also ₹2.80 Crore. However, for the year 2021 -22 a higher BE of 
₹3.00 was fixed which was enhanced to ₹3.60 Crore at RE stage out of which as 
amount of ₹1.76 Crore has been spent upto 31.12.2021. The reason for the 
increase and decrease in the BE is stated to be the trend of number of proposals 
received by the Department. The Committee recommend that the trend of the 
proposals be studied thoroughly and a realistic BE may be projected in future . 
The Committee note that for the year 2022-23 the Department proposed a n 
amount of ₹6.00Crore but have been allocated just ₹3.00 Crore. Th e Committee 
have also been informed that the Ministry of Finance (Department o f 
Expenditure) has not agreed for continuation of the scheme in its present form  
and a new scheme for Promotion and Development of Chemicals has bee n 
prepared with an outlay of ₹57.60 Crore for a period of five years a nd the 
approval of Ministry of Finance is awaited. The Committee recommend that the  
proposal be pushed with the Ministry at the highest level and there is no pa rallel 
scheme to the CPDS either inside or outside the Department for development 
and promotion of Chemical. However, the Committee note that even the new 
scheme has been confined to grant- in-aid and awards only. The difference 
between the CPDS and NCPDS in just the budget outlay. The Committee are of 
the view that the Chemical Sector cannot be developed only by providing gran t-
in-aid and awards. The Department should explore other ways also for the 
promotion and development of the Chemicals Sector.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
  
“An amount of Rs.3.00 crore was allocated in BE 2021-22 which was 
enhanced to Rs.3.60 Crore in RE 2021-22. Out of Rs.3.60 Crore, an amount o f 
Rs.3.59 crore approx. was incurred during the financial year 2021-22.  
  
2.         A proposal to allocate Rs.6.00 crore under CPDS in BE 2022-23 was 
sent to Finance Division. However, an amount of Rs.3.00 crore only has been  
allocated in BE 2022-23 under CPDS. During current financial year, proposals o f 
Rs.6.68 crore have been received from PSU/ABs of DCPC and various Industry 
Associations till date. The demand for additional funds will be made at RE Stage. 
  
3.         Approval of Department of Expenditure has been received for 
continuation of CPDS as a sub-scheme of New Scheme of Petrochemicals 
beyond 31st March, 2021 with proposed budget outlay of Rs.28.70 Cr ore during 
2021-22 to 2025-26.  

36 
 
  
4.         CPDS guidelines are being revised to grant financial support to eligible 
organizations for research to formulate future vision and plan of actions 
regarding R&D in Chemical and Petrochemical sector, etc.  Financial support 
under CPDS may also be given to premier Universities/ Institutes/Autonomous 
Bodies/Centre of Excellence/ Industry associations for developing new 
technologies and process modifications etc. for promotion and development of 
the Chemical and Petrochemical Sector.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.17 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
Plastic Waste Management Centre. 
4.5 With regard to Plastic Waste Management Centre , the Committee had 
recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that there is a proposal to set up at least one Plastic  
Waste Management Centre (PWMC) at 04 places viz., Ahmedabad (Gujara t), 
Patna (Bihar), Varanasi (UP) and Bengaluru (Karnataka). However, due to 
various issues with the State Governments there is delay in allotment of land to 
CIPET for establishment of PWMCs and there is no progress in the matter. 
Accordingly it has been proposed to revise the Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) and the revision of SOP is under process. The Committee strongly 
recommend that the revision of SOP be expedited and the Committee  may be 
apprised accordingly.” 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
“Revision in Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for establishment of 
Plastic Waste Management Centres (PWMC) in under process.  However, the 
present status of establishment of PWMCs in respect of Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, 
Patna and Varanasi is as follows:  
 
 
S. 
No. 
Centre Status 
1. PWMC, 
Ahmedaba
d 
4. 20.08.2021: During meeting, Municipal commissioner has asked 
about tangible benefit to Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation 
from the project and expressed his constrains to allot Land and 
infrastructure due to very high market rate of land near waste 
dumping site (i.e proposed location of PWMC). 

37 
 
5. 28.08.2021: Dy. Municipal commissioner office asked 
justification for proposed investment of AMC in tune of 
approximately rupees 60 crore towards land & infrastructure 
for 10-12 tone waste recycling proposed by CIPET. 
6. 08.09.2021: Letter addressing their query was sent as the land 
requirement of 5 acre is huge for city limit, it may be considered 
for minimum 3 acres of land for PWMC. 
7. AMC is looking for industrial scale solid waste recycling plant to 
handle 1000 tonnes per day, they are least interested for small 
capacity of 10 tonnes plant. CIPET:IPT-Ahmedabad suggests to 
grand ownership of   land with infrastructure to municipal 
corporation/ state government so that they may be interested to 
allot the land for PWMC. 
2. PWMC, 
Bengaluru 
6. 06.04.2021: Request Letter has sent to BBMP Chief 
Commissioner by Additional Secretary, MoC&F and DG, CIPET 
to allot and handover of land with pre- fabricated shed along 
with other facilities. 
7. Joint Commissioner, and BBMP Head informed that Gov. of 
Karnataka has alternate plans for the earmarked land and 05 
acres of land is not available at the earlier identified site. 
8. Oct. 2021: Another, proposed land at Goddenahalli was a non-
uniform quarry land and found to be not suitable for intended 
purpose and same was communicated to JS, BBMP Head 
Office. 
9. Oct. 2021: Additional Secretary, MoC&F, directed CIPET HO to 
communicate to DCPC to write a letter to Chief Secretary, Gov. 
of Karnataka. 
10. CIPET HO proposed to submit a revised SOP to Administrative 
Ministry DCPC. 
3. PWMC, 
Patna 
5. Land requirement may be reduced to 2.5 – 3 acres instead of 5 
acres. 
6. PMC may be asked to operate, maintain and safe keeping of 
plant and machinery of the PWMC after successful installation 
and commissioning by CIPET as PMC has to play a major role 
in getting the raw material for viable operation of the plant. 
7. CIPET shall extend support as technical partner during the 
project period. 
8. SOP is to be modified with reasonable revenue sharing model 
among CIPET, PMC and the industry partner to attract good 
and viable proposal from the  industry. 
4. PWMC, 
Varanasi 
4. 17th November 2021: Shri Navneet Sehgal I.A.S, Addl. Chief 
Secretary, Handloom, has given directives to District Magistrate 
Varanasi to complete the necessary procedures pertaining to 
the handover of 2.2 acres of land adjacent to CIPET site for the 
establishment of PWMC at Varanasi. 
5. Subsequently, CIPET:CSTS official interaction with District 
Magistrate and Labour Commissioner it was found that 12.22 
Acre of land is already transferred from the department of 
Handloom and Textile to Labour Department including this 
piece of land through Cabinet approval from Govt. of U.P for the 
construction of Atal Awasiya Vidyalaya. 

38 
 
 
        10th Dec. 2021: Additional Chief Secretary informed to Principal 
Director, CIPET:CSTS-Varanasi that this matter has already 
gone for the cabinet approval to transfer 2.2 Acres of land to 
CIPET from 12.22 Acres of land. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No.18) 
Removal of Toxic Waste. 
4.7 With regard to Removal of Toxic Waste from Bhopal Gas Leakage Site, the 
Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“As far as the issue of removal of toxic waste is concerned the Committee 
have been informed that an oversight Committee has been formed he aded by 
Hon’ble Minister of Environment and Forest. Further, the state Government of 
Madhya Pradesh has floated an intimational tender and an organization has also 
been identified to transport the toxic waste. Moreover, one proposal is being sent 
to the Ministry of Environment and Forest for necessary approval. The 
Committee are very much perturbed to note that the Bhopal Gas tragedy 
occurred way back in the year 1984 and even after lapse of about 3 8 years, and 
various steps taken by the Union Government as well as the State Governme nt 
of Madhya Pradesh, the matter is still under process. The Committee 
recommend that the Department should clearly come out with the details fo r 
removal of toxic waste and they be apprised accordingly.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.8 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
  “The GoM, in its meeting of 18-21st June, 2010, had recommended that  
the 350 MT of toxic waste of Union Carbide India Ltd (UCIL) be disposed of at 
Pithampur incinerator. GoM also recommended that remediation cost of 
approximately Rs. 310 crore is to be borne by Govt. of India, in the first instance . 
The same was approved by the Cabinet on 24th June, 2010.   
  
2.         As per Union Cabinet’s decision, incineration of stored hazardous wastes 
etc. (approximate 350 MT), inviting global tenders for different remediation 
activities, selection and finalization of contractors to carry out different 
remediation activities and completion of all remediation actions are the 
responsibility of GoMP. As regards release of Rs. 310 crore for remediation and 
waste disposal works, the Union Cabinet fixed the responsibility on Department 
of Expenditure, GoMP and M/o EF&C. As per the decision of Cabinet, an 
Oversight Committee at the level of the Government of India was constituted on 

39 
 
15th July, 2010, in the Ministry of Environment and Forests to provide ov ersight 
and support to the Govt. of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP) in taking the ne cessary 
remedial action. This Oversight Committee is headed by the Minister of 
Environment and Forest, Government of India and co-chaired by the Ministe r of 
Gas Relief, Government of Madhya Pradesh. Govt. of Madhya Pradesh was 
requested to prepare a comprehensive proposal with an execution plan for 
disposal of the remaining waste at the site. 
  
3.         Govt. of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP) vide letter dated 03.02.2022 has 
informed that it has floated tender for the purpose. In response to the tender, 
bids amounting Rs.126.08 Crore from M/s Pithampur Industrial Waste 
Management Private Limited and Rs.154.54 Crore from M/s Century Eco 
Solutions India Pvt Ltd. were received. After technical and financial evaluation of 
bids, M/s Pithampur Industrial Waste Management Private Limited has  been 
found to be L1 and it has been proposed that it may be selected for carrying out 
the disposal of toxic waste. The Committee formed for selection of bidd er 
included the Members of State Govt. of M.P., Central Pollution Control Board  
(CPCB) and Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board (MPPCB). GoMP has 
requested Govt. of India to release an amount of Rs.126.08 Crore for the  
purpose.   
  
4.         As per the decision of Cabinet, the proposal is to be endorsed by  the 
Oversight Committee before requesting Dept. of Expenditure for release of 
funds. The proposal received from GoMP has been forwarded to M/o E F&CC on 
30th March 2022 for consideration and endorsement by Oversight Committee.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
Petroleum, Chemicals & Petrochemical Investment Regions (PCPIR) 
 
4.9 With regard to PCPIR, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
“The Committee note that the aims and objectives of PCPIR are to boost  
manufacturing in Chemical Sector, augment exports and generate employme nt. 
To achieve these lofty goals of PCPIR, four PCPIRs have been notified b y the 
Government at (i) Gujarat (Dahej) in 2009, (ii) Andhra Pradesh 
(Vishakhapatnam) in 2009, (iii) Odisha (Paradeep) in 2010 and (iv) Tamil Nadu  
(Cuddalore and Nagapattinam) in 2012. The Committee further note that these 
PCPIRs are stated to attract inve stment of ₹ 7.63 lakh Crore and expected to 
generate employment for 33.88 lakh people. However, the Committee regret to 
note that these four PCPIRs, conceived way back in the year 2009, 2010 and 
2012 are struggling to come into existence. For example for the PCPIR at  
Andhra Pradesh and Odisha the master plan is yet to be finalized, wh ereas for 
the PCPIR at Tamil Nadu it will be taken up after formation of PCPIR 
management Board. Further for the PCPIR at Andhra Pradesh, Odisha are 
awaiting environmental clearances whereas in Tamil Nadu the environmental 

40 
 
clearances would be taken up after formation of PCPIR Management Boa rd. In 
this regard the Department has submitted that these are large projects with lon g 
gestation period of 20-25 years and realization of full potential is a  gradual 
process. The Committee do agree with the contention of the Department but  are 
of the view that even the basic issues like approval of Master plans and 
Environment Impact assessment could not be completed even after lapse of 
about 12 to 13 years of the inception of PCPIRs. The Committee, therefore , 
strongly recommend that the matter be looked into and concrete step s be taken 
at the earliest. The Committee has noted that the PCPIR policy is under active 
consideration of the Department with a view to make it more successful. Some  
of the amendments proposed include (i) reducing the minimum required a rea for 
new PCPIRs from 250 to 50 sq. km. (ii) Re-naming of ‘Management Boards’ as 
Development and Management Boards etc. The Committee strongly recommend 
that the necessary amendments be brought in PCPIR Policy at the earliest n ot 
only to give a concrete shape to the four PCPIRs but also for generating 
employment for 33.83 lakh people and attract investment of ₹ 7.63 lakh Crore as 
proposed by the Department.”    
 
Reply of the Government 
4.10 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (DCPC) has stated as follows:- 
“The Department has taken a note of the suggestions of the Committee and it 
has been taking up the matter with State Governments to speed up the process 
of establishing PCPIRs in a time bound manner. For this purpose, the 
Department has recently reviewed the progress of the three PCPIRs and teams 
from the Department have visited the three PCPIRs at Dahej, Vishakhapatanam, 
and Paradeep.  Based on the inputs received from the State Governm ents, the 
Department will review the PCPIR Policy, 2007 to make it more effective. “ 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.26 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
08  August, 2022 Chairperson, 
13 Sravana, 1944 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
 Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
 
 
  

42 
 
APPENDIX-I 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
  
            The Committee sat on Thursday, the 04 th August, 2022 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
               PRESENT 
 
   Smt. Kanimozhi  Karunanidhi, Chairperson 
               Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ramakant Bhargarva   
3. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama   
4. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi   
5. Shri Kripanath Mallah   
6. Shri Satyadev Pachauri   
7. Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad   
8. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar   
9. Shri Indra Hang Subba   
  
  
  10. 
  
Rajya Sabha 
Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
  
  11. Dr. Anil Jain 
  12. Shri Arun Singh 
  13. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
  14. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
        
 SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Vinay Kumar Mohan       -           Joint Secretary  
2.  Shri  Nabin Kumar Jha           -           Director 

43 
 
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh              -           Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Panna Lal                         -           Under Secretary  
  
   XXX                   XXX                    XXX 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of  
the Committee, convened for consideration and adoption of the follow ing Draft 
Action Taken Reports: 
i. XXX                            XXX       XXX  
ii. XXX                            XXX       XXX  
iii. Thirty-Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-Third Report (17 th Lok 
Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants 2022-23' of the Ministry of Chemicals a nd 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
iv. XXX                            XXX       XXX  
3. Giving an overview of the important Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/ 
suggestions of the Members. 
 
4. The Committee, then, took up the Draft Action Taken Reports one by  one for 
consideration and after some discussions adopted them. 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Action Taken Reports 
and present the same to the Parliament. 
  
  
  
XXX  Matter Not Related  

44 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-THIRD REPORT (17TH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2021-
22) ON ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022-2023)’ OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS 
AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
I. Total Number of Recommendations: 20 
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
 Recommendation No.: 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,  9,10,11,13,14,15,17 and 
19 
15 
 Percentage 75.0% 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government reply: 
 
 Recommendation No.: Nil  
 Percentage 00.0% 
IV. Observation/Recommendation in respect of which reply of the 
Government has not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration: 
 
 Recommendation No.: 2, 12, 16, 18 & 20 5 
 Percentage 25.00% 
V. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
the Government is still awaited: 
 
 Recommendation No.: Nil  
 Percentage 00.00% 
 
 
 
 
 
 