i 
 
   
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
                            MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
                          (DEPARTMENT OF  PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their  Twenty Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Status of Covid-19 vaccine Production in India ’ of the  Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of  Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2021 /      AGRAHAYANA, 1943 (SAKA) 
30 


ii 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICLAS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their  Twenty Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
“Status of Covid-19 vaccine Production in India” of the  Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of  Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.12.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02.12.2021 
  
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2021 /  AGRAHAYANA, 1943 (SAKA) 
 
  


iii 
 
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) (iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22) (v) 
INTRODUCTION (vi) 
Chapter I Report  1 
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
18 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
35 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
42 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
43 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2020-21) held on 16.11.2021 
44 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on “Status of Covid-19 vaccine 
Production in India ” of the  Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of  Pharmaceuticals)] 
46 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Deepak Baij 
4 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
5 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
6 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
7 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8 Shri Pakauri Lal 
9 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
11 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
12 Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
13 Shri Atul Kumar Singh alias Atul Rai 
14 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15 Shri M. Selvaraj 
16 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
17 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
18 Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
19 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
20 Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari# 
21 Vacant* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26 Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27 
28 
Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
Shri Arun Singh$ 
29 Shri A.D. Singh 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj Kumar Arora  - Officer on Special Duty(LSS) 
2. Shri Nabin Kumar Jha - Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary 
5. Ms Sonia Sankhla - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
____________________________________________________________________________ 
$Re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.12.2020. 
#Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 28.12.2020 vice Shri Nandigam Suresh. 
*Vacant vice Shri Er. Bishweswar Tudu nominated MoS on 07.07.2021. 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri Deepak Baij 
5. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
6. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
7. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
8. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
10. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
11. Shri Vasava Prabhubhai Nagarbhai  
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt Aparupa Poddar (Afrin Ali) 
14. Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
15. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
16. Shri M. Selvaraj 
17. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
18. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
19. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
21. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
24. Dr. Anil Jain 
25. Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27. Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Arun Singh 
29. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
30. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
31. 
 
Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1 Shri Nabin Kumar Jha - Director  
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms Sonia Sankhla - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2021-22) 
having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their beh alf this Thirtieth 
Report on Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Twenty Second Report (Seventeenth Lok S abha) on  
“Status of Covid-19 vaccine Production in India ”, pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
2. The Twenty Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 17 th March, 2021. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) furnished their replies on 14th October, 2021 indicating action taken 
on the recommendations contained in that Report. The Committee at th eir sitting held 
on 16th November, 2021 considered and adopted the Draft Report. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
4. For the facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/  
Observations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body o f  
the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; KANIMOZHI  KARUNANIDHI 
16 November, 2021 
25 Kartika, 1943 (Saka) 
                                          Chairperson 
Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
   REPORT 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  contained 
in the Twenty Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on the subject 
"Status of COVID-19 vaccine production in India"  of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) which was presented to Lok Sabha and 
Rajya Sabha on 17.3.2021. In all, the Committee made 14 Observations /  
Recommendations containing 21 sub-recommendations in the Report. 
1.2  Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) were 
requested to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
22nd Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Report.  Th e Action 
Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 14 Observations / 
Recommendations containing 21 sub-recommendations  in the Report have bee n 
received from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) vide their OM No.31026/68/2020-IFD dated 06- 08-2021.  These 
Replies have been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government  :- 
 Sl. Nos. 1(ii),1(iii),1(iv), 1(v), 1(vi), 2(i), 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 11,12, 13, 14    
(Total = 15) 
   Included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.                                                   
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
 to pursue in view of the Government ’s reply :- 
 Sl.No.  1(i), 2(ii), 7(i) , 7(ii), 8, 9                               (Total = 6) 
 Included in Chapter III of the Draft Report. 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government   have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
   Sl.No Nil                                                     (Total = 0 )  
   Included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
 
 

2 
 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 
 
  Sl.No.  Nil                                             (Total=0 )  
 
 Included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter- I of this Report should be furnished 
expeditiously. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 1  
 
Availability of Safe, Secure and Effective Vaccine for COVID 19 
1.5 While stressing on the need for availability of safe, secure and eff ective vaccine 
for COVID 19, the Committee made the following recommendation:- 
"The Committee have noted that COVID 19 is an infectious disease cau sed by a 
newly discovered Corona virus SARS-COV 2.  It was first detected in Wuhan  city 
of Hubei province in China during December 2019.  Since then the virus ev olved 
and spread to other countries as a major health threat affecting th e socio 
economic life of the people at the global level.  World Health Organizatio n 
declared the outbreak of this highly infectious disease a pandemic on 11 Ma rch 
2020.  The pandemic has affected our country as well.  As of now , our country is 
the second most affected in the world after the USA in respect of num ber of 
cases.  However, the Committee are satisfied to note that our country 
has responded proactively to this pandemic through multitude of 
measures including imposition of nationwide lock down, social distancing, 
wearing mask, maintaining hand hygiene and above all following the principle 
of test, track and treat so as to control the spread.    As a result of strong  
measures taken in our country with the cooperation of the people, there is 
decline in number of new cases reported and the active cases across the 
country. As it is a new viral disease, no therapeutic solution or vaccine w as 
available for this highly infectious disease.  Since this pandemic disrupted the  
normal lives of the people throughout the world and gravely affected the 
economy of many countries, great interest has been generated among scien tists 
across the world to invent a vaccine for this disease, About 200 vaccine 
candidates on varied platforms are presently undergoing development a cross the 
globe, of which about 40 candidates are in human clinical developmen t. It is 

3 
 
heartening to note that nearly 30 groups, both academia and industry, are 
actively involved in development or collaboration or co-development and  trials for 
COVID-19 vaccine in our country.    As per the information available in the 
vaccine portal of Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR), Drug Controller 
General of India (DGCI) has granted approval for restricted use in emergency 
situation for two vaccine candidates viz, Covishield which is tested and 
manufactured by Serum Institute of India Pvt Ltd., Pune in coll aboration with 
Oxford University/ Astra Zeneca and COVAXIN which is  manufactured 
ingeniously  by M/s Bharat Biotech Ltd., Hyderabad  in collaboration with 
National  Institute of Virology (NIV) and Indian Council for Medical Research 
(ICMR).   As per the preliminary exercise undertaken by NEGVAC, about 6 6 
million doses of COVID-19 vaccine will be required in the first phase o f 
vaccination program in India. However, given the uncertainties in development of 
natural immunity, the pattern of disease spread etc, it is quite possible tha t there 
may be requirement for at least 100 crore doses of the vaccine demanding huge 
investments.  According to  CDSCO, current production capacity of vaccine 
manufacturers  in the country is  nearly 60.84 crore doses/annum which includes 
40 to 50 crore doses/annum of Covishield vaccine,  10 crore doses/annum of 
Covaxin vaccine  and 84 lakhs doses/annum of  ZyCoV-D vaccine  by Cadila 
Healthcare Limited, Ahmadabad which is still under Phase III Human Clinical 
Trials.   Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) has given 
permission for the stockpile of first two vaccines to the tune of 100 crore dose s 
per annum.   In the initial phase of vaccination, 3 Crore Health care workers an d 
frontline workers are likely to be covered. Currently the population of the coun try 
is about 138.7 crore.  With the present production capacity in the country , it may 
take more than four years   to meet the requirements of vaccinating whole o r 
majority of the population in the country as every person has to be g iven two 
doses. So, there is an urgent need to ramp up the manufacturing capa city of 
COVID-19 vaccine for successful implementation of programme of vaccination in 
the country. In view of the above observations, the Committee would like to make 
the following recommendations:-  
(i) The Government should chalk out a definite time  schedule  for 
vaccination for the whole or majority of the population in the country 
so as to create a strong herd immunity against COVID 19 at the 
earliest  particularly in the wake of spreading of highly infectious UK 
and South  African strains of  COVID 19 virus. 
(ii) The Government should take all the steps necessary for the large 
scale manufacturing of COVID 19 vaccines in the country for 
meeting the vaccine requirements of the country as per the time 
schedule.  
(iii)  Particular attention should be given for the implementation of 
“COVID Suraksha- the Indian COVID-19 Vaccine development 
Mission” in letter and spirit for accelerating the research and 
development of safe and efficacious vaccines so as to meet the 

4 
 
vaccine needs of the country in a time bound manner and also to 
fulfil the demands of other countries.  
(iv)  Proper monitoring as well as execution mechanism be evolved to 
ensure the vaccination of all.  
(v)  Steps should also be taken for getting country ’s share of vaccines 
from WHO ’s COVAX facility which aims to get 2 billion doses of 
COVID vaccine by the end of 2021 and has assured the participating 
countries to deliver vaccine doses to cover upto 20% of their 
country’s population. 
(vi)  Foolproof measures should be taken to ensure safety and efficacy 
of vaccines to be procured from both indigenous and foreign 
sources 
 1.6 In reply to the above recommendation No.1(i) of the Committee, the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
“Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) has informed that the COV ID-
19 vaccination is an ongoing and dynamic process, which is being ex panded to 
include beneficiary groups as prioritized by the National Expert Group on 
Vaccine Administration for COVID-1 9 (NEGVAC). With effect from 1st May 2021, 
as per the Lib eralized Pricing and Accelerated National COVID-19 Vaccination 
Strategy, the State Government/UT Administration and  private sec tor have 
been empowered to procure additional vaccine doses a nd have been given 
flexibility to customize to local needs and open vaccination to any age category 
above 1 8 years of age. Based on the experiences gained from 1st  May 2021 and 
requests from States, the Guidelines for National COVID Vaccination Program 
were revised wherein, now GoI will procure 75% of the vaccines being produced 
monthly by the manufacturers in the country and these will continue to be 
provided free of cost to States/UTs. These doses, in turn, will be administered by 
the States/UTs free of cost to all citizens as per priority through Governme nt 
Vaccination Centres. The private sector continues to have the option of d irect 
procurement of 25% of monthly production of the domestic vaccine 
manufacturers. The price of vaccine doses for private hospitals would be 
declared by each vaccine manufacture and the private hospitals may charge  up 
to a maximum of Rupees 150 per dose as service charges. Adequate quantity of 
COVID-19 vaccines is likely to be available for vaccination of all eligible 
beneficiaries aged 18 years and above, and the Government of India is 
committed to ensure vaccination of these beneficiaries in shortest possible 
time. In view of the dynamic nature of COVID-1 9 pandemic and evolving statu s 
of availability & type of COVID-1 9 vaccines, a definite time frame cannot b e 
indicated currently for completion of vaccination. The COVID-1 9 vaccination 
drive is based on WHO ’s r ecommendations & g lobal pr actices, with an a im to 
maximize the impact of vaccination, save lives and keep the health system 
intact and functioning”. 
 

5 
 
1.7   In its action taken reply to recommendation No.1(ii) above, the Depa rtment of 
Pharmaceuticals stated as under:-  
"The production capacity of the vaccines under the vaccination drive has bee n 
gradually ramped-up by the manufactures and is expected to increase furthe r in 
the next couple of months. To further support the manufacturers in ramping up 
vaccine production, Government of India has also provided financial support of 
INR 1500 crore to M/s Biological E Ltd for ‘at-risk manufacturing ’ of 30 crore 
doses and advance payment for 66 crore doses to be procured from M /s Serum 
Institute of India and M/s Bharat Biotech International Ltd. during July/Aug ’21 to 
Dec’21. This would ease the limitation of vaccine availability over time. New 
vaccines (domestic as well as offshore), as and when approved by the National  
Regulator, will be taken up under the programme to improve vaccine availa bility 
and vaccination coverage. 
            Further, as stated by CDSCO, for augmentation of producti on capacity of 
COVID-19 vaccines in the country, Inter-ministerial group has been formed for 
providing support to COVID-19 vaccine manufacturers. The group visited 
following manufacturing facilities- 
1.  M/s Serum Institute, Hadapsar and Manjari facilities.  
2.  M/s Bharat Biotech, Hyderabad and Bangalore facilities.  
3.  M/s Indian Immunologicals (IIL), Hyderabad facility.  
and provided guidance to firms to increase the production capacity and submitted 
the report. CDSCO is facilitating and handholding the applicants for reducing the 
processing time for scale up of manufacturing of approved COVID-19 vaccines 
through Post Approval Changes as per provisions of CDSCO guidance for 
industry. 
Department of Biotechnology (DBT) has further stated that the Governmen t of 
India is supporting vaccine development and manufacturing activities through 
both national efforts and international partnerships. Currently, in India, 04 vaccine 
candidates for COVID-19 have been approved for Emergency Use Authoriza tion 
(EUA). Besides these, about 09 vaccine candidates are in clinical stage of 
development and 01 candidate is in advanced pre-clinical stage of de velopment; 
several promising vaccine candidates are in early stages of development. 
Further, to address the urgent need for making available sufficient vaccine dose s 
to meet the existing requirements, efforts have been made to support sca le-up of 
vaccine production, under Mission COVID Suraksha. Accordingly, support for 
one private industry (Bharat Biotech, Hyderabad) and three public sector 
manufacturing facilities (Indian Immunologicals, Hyderabad; Haffkine 
Biopharmaceuticals, Mumbai; Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals, 
Bulandshar), is being provided to make them ready with enhanced capacities to 
support augmented production of Covaxin, over the next 6-8 months.  The 
Department of Biotechnology (DBT) is also facilitating technology transfer of 

6 
 
Covaxin production to Gujarat COVID Vaccine Consortium (GCVC), comprising 
of Hester Biosciences, OmniBRx Biotechnologies Pvt Ltd, and Gujarat 
Biotechnology Research Centre (GBRC), Department of Science and 
Technology, Govt. of Gujarat." 
 
1.8   In reply to the above recommendation No.1 (iii)of the Committee, the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals replied as under: 
 
"Department of Biotechnology has informed that to reinforce and accelerate  the 
COVID-19 vaccine development efforts and to address the urgent need for a safe 
and efficacious COVID-19 vaccine, ‘Mission COVID Suraksha - the Indian 
COVID-19 Vaccine Development Mission ’, was announced by the Government, 
as part of the Atmanirbhar Bharat 3.0 package.  The Mission is being 
implemented by Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC), a 
Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) of DBT, at a total cost of Rs. 900 Cr. for 1 2 
months. The goal of the Mission is to accelerate the development of at least 5-6 
COVID-19 vaccine candidates and ensure that some of these are brought closer 
to licensure and introduction in the market for consideration by regulatory 
authorities and for introduction in public health systems.  
 Three Requests for Expression of Interest (REOI) for COVID-19 candidate 
vaccine development, enhancement of capacities to support COVID-19 vaccine 
development and conduct of human clinical trials have been issued. Fou r 
COVID-19 vaccine candidates in advanced clinical development stage and one 
vaccine candidate in advanced pre-clinical development, are being supported  
under this Mission. Additionally, 19 clinical trial sites across the nation, three 
immunogenicity assay laboratories and three animal challenge facilities are also 
being supported under the Mission. Additionally, augmentation of facilities f or 
COVID-19 vaccine manufacturing, is also being supported under Mission COVID  
Suraksha.  
A strong technical and financial internal due diligence is an integral part of the  
mission implementation process. Domain area specific Scientific Advisory 
Groups (SAG), have been constituted for scientific and technical due diligence  of 
the applications received. An “Evaluation and Monitoring Committee for 
Technology Transfer”, was constituted, to provide oversight and expert guidance 
and to monitor the progress of the facility augmentation to support COVID- 19 
Vaccine manufacturing under Mission Covid Suraksha . The ultimate focus is on 
bringing to the citizens of the country a safe, efficacious, affordable, and 
accessible COVID vaccine at the earliest and to strengthen the vaccine 
development ecosystem in the country for other on-going and future vir al vaccine 
development." 
 
 

7 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.9    The Committee note that stand taken by the Government that  in view of t he 
dynamic nature of COVID-1 9 pandemic and evolving status of availability & type 
of COVID-19 vaccines, a definite time frame cannot be indi cated currently for 
completion of vaccination process in the country.  Further the Committee note 
that the Government has made efforts under Mission COVID Suraksha to support 
scale-up of vaccine production so as to address the urgent need for making 
available sufficient vaccine doses to meet the existing requirements of the 
country.   Four vaccine candidates for COVID 19 have been approved for 
Emergency Use Authorization.  Besides, 09 vaccine candidates are in clinical 
stage of development and one is in advanced pre-clinical stage of development.  
Several promising vaccine candidates are in early stages of development.  The 
Committee also note that support for one private industry and three public sector 
manufacturing facilities is being provided to make them ready with enhanced 
capacities to support augmented production of Covaxin over the 6-8 months. 
Further in order  to ease the vaccine availability ,  the Government has provided 
financial support of Rs 1500 crore to M/s Biological E Ltd for 'at risk 
manufacturing' of 30 crore doses and advance payment for 66 crore doses to be 
procured by M/s serum Institute of India and M/s Bharat Biotech International Ltd. 
during July/August 2021 to December 2021.   In this regard, the Committee hope 
that these efforts of the Government under Mission COVID Suraksha would be 
continued and it will be ensured that the required quantum of safe and efficacious 
vaccines will be produced in the country for vaccinating all the targeted 
population in the country in a time bound manner.  Progress made in this regard 
should be intimated to the committee. 

8 
 
1.10 Further the Committee also recommended in para 1(iv) above that "Proper 
monitoring as well as execution mechanism be evolved to ensure the  vaccination of all.  
In reply to this recommendation of the Committee, the Department of Pharm aceuticals 
replied as under: 
"Ministry o f Health and Family Welfare has informed that the reg ular 
review meetings of COVID-1 9 vaccination are conducted by the Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare with the States/UTs to orient them on n ew 
developments, review the vaccination drive implementation & performance 
status and resolve queries in the shortest  time frame. 
Another level of review of the vaccination drive takes place through the 
Empowered Group- 5 (EG- 5), constituted under the Disaster Management Act,  
2005, mandated to decisively and effectively address evolving challe nges in 
COVID-19 vaccination pertaining to vaccine procurement, manufacturing, 
import, logistics, daily supply, utilization and wastage monitoring. Further, 
National Expert Group on Vaccine Administration for COVID-19 (NEGVAC) also 
reviews the programme performance on a regular basis and provides guidance 
on all aspects of COVID-19 vaccination. Progress under the COVID-19 
vaccination drive is also reviewed by Cabinet Secretariat from time to time." 
 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.11 The Committee note from the action taken reply furnished by the 
Government that the entire vaccination process is monitored at the levels of 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Empowered Group-5 constituted under the 
Disaster Management Act, 2005, National Expert Group on Vaccination 
Administration for COVID 19(NEGVAC) and the Cabinet Secretariat.  Since the 
entire process of procurement and supply of vaccines is being done by the 
Government of India, it is very much necessary to ensure timely supply of 
adequate quantum of vaccines to all the States/UTs according to their 
requirements.  In this regard, the Committee would like to  recommend the 
following :-  
(i)  Availability and requirement of every State and UTs should be reviewed 
regularly and immediate steps should be taken to resolve the issues 
connected with the vaccination process in individual States/UTs.  

9 
 
(ii)  Particular attention should be paid for timely procurement and supply 
of requisite quantum of vaccines for meeting the requirements of all the 
States/UTs for administering  second dose of vaccines for those who are 
waiting for second dose of vaccine  as well as for the coverage of those 
who have not yet been vaccinated.    
(iii) Further the data collected from the monitoring process may  be utilized 
for evidence based policy making on fight against COVID-19 by all the 
concerned Departments. 
 
1.12 The Committee further recommended in para 1(v) above that "Step s should also 
be taken for getting country ’s share of vaccines from  WHO ’s COVAX facility 
which  aims to get 2 billion doses of COVID vaccine by the end of 2 021 and  has 
assured the participating countries  to deliver vaccine doses to cover  upto 20% of their 
country’s population."  In the action taken reply received from the Government of India, 
it has been stated as under: 
"India is an AMC eligible Country under COVAX facility to get donor suppo rted 
doses of COVID-19 vaccine. India has advocated for its fair share to get 
COVID-19 vaccines under COVAX Facility. In December 2020 meeting, Gavi 
Board approved high range package of support for India, providing 20% of total 
AMC doses, subject to vaccine prices and available funds. Gavi COVAX 
through a decision letter has communicated that 97,164,000 indicative dose s 
of AstraZeneca/SII with 35-40% in Q1 & 60-65% in Q2 will be supplied to India. 
Till date, Gavi COVAX has supplied 10 million doses of COVISHIELD to Ind ia 
through COVAX Facility. However, the remaining doses from COVAX facility 
are contingent upon availability of the same with COVAX." 
 
  Further Comments of the Committee 
1.13 The Committee note that Gavi COVAX Advance Market Commitment (AMC), 
a mechanism within the COVAX facility  is to ensure that  92 middle- and lower-
income countries that cannot fully afford to pay for Covid-19 vaccines themselves 
get equal access to Covid-19 vaccines as higher-income self-financing countries.   
The Committee note that India is an AMC eligible country and as per GAVI board 
approval, India will get 20 percent of total AMC doses subject to vaccine prices 
and available funds . However,   Gavi COVAX has so far supplied only 1 Crore 

10 
 
doses out of 9.71 Crore doses committed from COVAX facility but the remaining 
doses from COVAX facility are contingent upon availability of the same with 
COVAX.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that the Government should 
pursue vigorously for getting due share of doses of COVID vaccines for the 
country from COVAX facility as COVAX facility has assured to cover up to 20% of  
the population of participating countries.  Progress made in this regard may be 
intimated to the Committee. 
1.14 The Committee further recommended in Para 1(vi) above that foo lproof 
measures should be taken to ensure safety and efficacy of vaccines to b e procured 
from both indigenous and foreign sources. In reply to the above recommend ation of 
the Committee, the Department of Pharmaceuticals replied as below: 
"Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) has informed that as per 
the New Drugs & Clinical Trials Rules, 2019, for grant of permission to 
manufacture or import of a new drug including vaccines, the applicant is required 
to submit new drug application along with various data such as chemical a nd 
pharmaceutical information, non-clinical as well as clinical data of safety  and 
efficacy of the drug including results from local clinical trial as specified in the 
Second Schedule of the said Rules. The aforesaid Rules provide the detailed 
requirements and guidelines for conduct of nonclinical and clinical studies and 
approval of new drug which include vaccines. The requirements apply to both, 
vaccines manufactured in the country or imported from overseas.  Further, the 
Rules provide for grant of marketing authorization in certain special situations 
where relaxation, abbreviations, omission or deferment of data may be 
considered.  
CDSCO has issued regulatory pathway for approval of COVID-19 Vaccines in 
India for restricted use in emergency situation which are already approve d for 
restricted use by US FDA, EMA, UK MHRA, PMDA Japan or which are listed in 
WHO Emergency Use Listing (EUL). 
CDSCO has further revised the regulatory pathway on 01.06.2020, wherein th e 
requirement to conduct post marketing bridging trial and prior approval of CDL for 
release of each lot of the vaccine has been done away with if the v accine 
batch/lot has been certified and released by National Control Laboratory of 
Country of Origin. However, scrutiny and review of their Summary Lot Protocol & 
certificate of analysis of Batch/Lot shall be undertaken by CDL, Kasauli  for Batch 
release as per standard procedure.  
Further, SOP Guidance for import of COVID-19 vaccine by private sector or any 
person was issued on 04.05.2021." 

11 
 
  Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.15  The Committee note the above mentioned steps taken by the Government 
for ensuring safety and efficacy of vaccines procured from both indigenous and 
foreign sources.  In this regard, the Committee hope that the New Drugs & 
Clinical Trials Rules, 2019 and    the regulatory pathways/ SOP guidance iss ued 
by CDSCO are being followed due diligently while granting approvals for new 
vaccines   launched/ to be launched in the country both from   indigenous and 
foreign sources and that fool proof measures are being taken by the Government 
for ensuring safety and efficacy of COVID 19 vaccines being administered in the 
country.  
RECOMMENDATION NO 6  
Testing of Batches of Vaccines by Central Drug Laboratory (CDL) 
1.16 While stressing on the need for testing of batches of vaccines by Centra l Drug 
Laboratory (CDL), the Committee had made the following recommendation:- 
 
"The Committee note that every batch of COVID 19 vaccines for clinical tria l and 
marketing are tested /reviewed and released by Central Drugs Laboratory, 
Kasauli to ensure quality of the vaccines.  In this regard, it is not clear 
whether   samples of all the batches of COVID 19 vaccines meant for vaccination 
programme in the country will be taken to CDL, Kasauli which is in Himachal  
Pradesh or they will be tested in six other Central/Regional Drugs Testing 
Laboratories of Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) 
functioning in Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad, Guwahati and Chandigarh 
as per their proximity to vaccine manufacturer.   Since it is very much essential to 
ensure the quality of vaccines before their release for vaccination, the Committee 
strongly recommend that necessary arrangements should be made by CDSCO 
to mandatorily test the quality of every batch of vaccines either dome stically 
manufactured or imported before releasing for vaccination.    In case CDL,  
Kasauli is facing any difficulties in timely clearance of batches of vaccines, 
CDSCO may consider utilizing the services of other six laboratories under its 
jurisdiction." 
1.17  In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department  of 
Pharmaceuticals replied as follows: 

12 
 
"Central Drugs Laboratory (CDL), Kasauli alone has huge capacity to test nearly 
200 batches per month (which is far more than the number of batche s being 
received i.e. around 50 batches by CDL Kasauli for testing on monthly basis), 
and there is no delay for testing and release of the COVID-19 vaccines.  
However, to build the capacity of India for long run, Two more laboratories 
namely National Institute of Biologicals (NIB), Noida and National Centre for Cell 
Science (NCCS), Pune have been developed and notified for testing o f COVID-
19 Vaccines. Further, a laboratory at National Institute of Animal health (NIAH), 
Hyderabad is also under development specifically for COVID-19 vaccine testing. 
Six (06) laboratories of CDSCO other than CDL, Kasauli are designed for testing  
of Drugs, Devices and Cosmetics only, and not for vaccines." 
 
  Further Comments of the Committee 
1.18  The Committee note that there is no delay in testing and releasing of 
COVID 19 vaccines as Central Drugs Laboratory(CDL), Kasauli has huge capacity 
to test nearly 200 batches of vaccines per month.  However, as a long term 
measure two more laboratories at Pune and NOIDA have been developed and 
notified for testing COVID 19 vaccines.  One more laboratory at Hyderabad is 
under development.  In this regard, the Committee hope that all the three new 
laboratories would start functioning in a time bound manner and it would be 
ensured that every batch of vaccines is tested and certified by CDL, Kaushali 
before sending the batch for vaccination.  Progress made in this regard may be 
intimated to the Committee.   
RECOMMENDATION NO 10 
Need for Increasing Number of Primary and Intermediary Vaccine Stores 
1.19 While stressing on the need for increasing number of primary and intermediary  
vaccine stores, the Committee had made the following recommendation:- 
"The Committee note that there is an established mechanism of vaccine  
transportation in the country from primary vaccine stores to the session sites fo r 
maintaining required temperature of the vaccines. Manufacturers supply directly 
to 41 primary stores in the States/UTs/ and the Government Medical Stores 
Depots supply vaccines to 19 primary stores in the country. There are insulated 
vaccine vans supplied by the Govt. of India to all States for vaccine 
transportation. Cold boxes and vaccine carriers are used for vaccine 

13 
 
transportation to intermediary stores and session sites respectively.  The same 
mechanism will also be used for COVID-19 vaccine transportation.  In th is 
regard, the Committee are constrained to note that there are only 60 primary 
stores in 29 States/ 7 UTs with nearly 741 Districts in the country. That means 
roughly a primary store is catering to the requirements of nearly 1 2 Districts in 
the country. This storage facility might have been sufficient for handlin g the 
existing immunization programmes which are meant for targeted groups of 
persons like children in case of Polio vaccine programme.  But, present nu mber 
of primary stores may not be sufficient for handling the COVID 19 vaccination 
programme as almost entire population of the country has to be vaccinated.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that NEGVAC may make a comprehensive 
study/assessment of the number of primary stores and the number of 
intermediary stores required for hassle free storage and distribution of COVID 19 
vaccines and take immediate necessary steps for the creation of requisite 
infrastructure to increase the number of primary and intermediary stores as 
required by the States/Union Territories.  Necessary allocation of funds for th e 
purpose may also be considered. " 
  
1.20 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Depa rtment of 
Pharmaceuticals replied as under: 
"There are around 29,000 cold chain storage points at the State lev el & below 
catering to the requirement of COVID-19vaccines of 741 districts across 29 
States and 7 UTs. This cold chain network is spread from the State till su b-
District level such that the vaccines can be stored and managed across the 
country. Manufacturers supply vaccines directly to 41 primary stores in the 
States/UTs/Government Medical Stores Depots (GMSDs) while the GMSDs 
supply vaccines to 19 primary stores in the country. 
  
There are around 837 District/Regional Vaccine Stores and 28,258 sub- Distric t 
vaccine storage facilities. There exists a clear & established mechanism of 
vaccine supply from State to Divisional Stores (for large states)or State to 
District Stores (for smaller target ed groups of pers ons like childr en in case of 
states), and further to sub-district stores. Th e vaccines are transported through 
Insulated/refrigerated vaccine vans. An assessment of the Cold Chain 
Storage Space and transportation mechanism had been  carried out prior to 
introduction of the COVID-19 vaccine and the same h as been adequately 
strengthened to meet the storage requirement of COV ID-19 vaccine along 
with Universal Immunization Programme. It is also p ertinent to note that 
majority of the vaccines are stored at Sub-District  Cold Chain Points that are 
co-located/nearest to the COVID-19 Vaccination Centre s. The Primary Stores 
are usually meant for storage of Buffer Stocks and storing the vaccine 
supplies for albeit short duration of time. Present ly, the infrastructure is 
adequate to handle the storage and transportation r equirements for 
vaccination of the entire adult population of the c ountry."  

14 
 
  
Further   Comments of the Committee 
1.21   The Committee note from the above action taken reply furnished by the 
Government that the present infrastructure is adequate to ha ndle the storage 
and transportation requirements for vaccination of the entire adult population 
of the country. However, the children below 18 years  of age are yet to be 
covered under the vaccination programme.  Hence, th e Committee recommend 
that Government should review continuously the requ irements of cold storage 
facilities at state, district and sub-district leve ls of every State/UT and 
necessary steps should be taken for strengthening t he infrastructure required 
for storage and transportation of vaccines in every  state/UT in the country.   
Specific action taken reply   in this regard should  be furnished to the 
Committee.  
RECOMMENDATION NO  12 
Need for Pan India Consumer Awareness Programme by NEGVAC 
1.22 While stressing on the need for Pan India Consumer Awareness Programm e by 
NEGVAC, the Committee had made the following recommendation:- 
"The Committee note that Drug Controller General of India (DGCI) has granted 
approval for restricted use in emergency situation for two vaccine candidates v iz, 
Covishield and Covaxin.  Subsequently, the Government of India has decid ed to 
roll out the first phase of vaccination programme for the Health Care Worke rs 
and the Frontline Workers in the country.   However, there are several reports in 
media about safety and efficacy of these vaccines particularly about COVAXIN 
which has been given emergency use authorization before completion  of Phase 
III human trials.  In this regard, the Committee are confident that the Government  
must have taken this conscious decision to roll out these two vaccines based  on 
scientific evidence of their safety and efficacy.  However, the Committee fee l that 
it is necessary to keep the public informed about the credentials of these 
vaccines.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a pan India Consumer 
Awareness Programme needs to be launched by NEGVAC in coordination with 
States/UTs to eliminate apprehensions in the minds of the people about t he 
safety and efficacy of these vaccines." 
 

15 
 
1.23 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Depa rtment of 
Pharmaceuticals replied as under: 
"MoHFW has informed that the COVID-19 Vaccines Communication Strategy 
has been developed, for implementation at the National and State leve l, to raise 
awareness about the safety, efficacy and immunogenicity of COVID- 19 
vaccines, build vaccine confidence, address misinformation against vaccination , 
address vaccine hesitancy & vaccine eagerness and promote COVID 
appropriate behaviour. The strategy aims to promptly disseminate factua l 
information about the vaccines and the vaccination process through clear, 
consistent and transparent messaging. This is being done through multimedia 
platforms (print/electronic/ social media), through MoHFW website and 
engagement of various stakeholders, community leaders and influencers t o 
reach out to the last mile. The strategy is based on five key pillars – viz., 
advocacy, capacity building, media engagement, community engageme nt and 
crisis management. For successful implementation of the strategy, several 
measures have been taken so far. These include capacity building of 
stakeholders at National and State level including State Immunization and IEC 
officials, Civil Society Organizations, Radio jockeys including Community Radio 
professionals, etc. for leveraging their networks for active campaigning to create 
awareness about benefits of vaccination. Aggressive advocacy to build vaccine 
confidence through reputed public and private sector Doctors at National level 
and States/UTs and through other key influencers. 
  
A Communications National Media Rapid Response Ce ll has been 
established  at  MoHFW wh ich is carrying out real-time review of news reports 
and disseminating content on building confidence in vaccines and to counte r 
less than adequate informed media narrative. A special campaign against 
vaccine hesitancy was also launched by the Union Minister for Health and 
Family Welfare. T he Ministry has al so reached out to 22 Central line Ministries 
including Rural Development, Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and MyGov etc. for engaging their field level networks to su pport 
information dissemination and social mobilization”. 
  
Other measures include,  a special webpage on information pertaining to COV ID 
1 9 vaccine; national helpline number 1075 to answer queries regarding COVID-
1 9 vaccination drive; a new pre-caller tune; dissemination of communications 
package comprising of posters, banners, leaflets, bilingual Frequently Aske d 
Questions ( FAQs) and fact-check videos by key experts with information  on 
COVID 1 9 across States/ UTs; Panel discussions and interviews on Television; 
experts identified for op-eds and articles to build vaccine confidenc e; Digital 
campaign on social media platforms; articles in major National and Regiona l 
dailies etc." 
 

16 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.24 The Committee note that several steps have been taken by the Government 
to raise awareness about the safety, efficacy and immunogenicity of COVID- 19 
vaccines, build vaccine confidence, address misinformation against vaccination, 
address vaccine hesitancy & vaccine eagerness and promote COVID appropriate 
behaviour.  Eventhough, the country reached the mile stone of 100 crore 
vaccinations, as on 09 November, 2021, about 74.22 Crore people received first 
dose of vaccine and about 34.37 crore people were administered second dose of 
vaccine.  Out of about 134 crore population of the country of the country, about 
25.41 crore are yet to be vaccinated.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Government should continue its efforts with full vigour to create awareness 
and to eliminate apprehensions in the minds of the people about the safety , 
efficacy and immunogenicity of COVID 19 vaccines and to promote COVID 
appropriate behaviour among people of the country.   
RECOMMENDATION NO 14 
1.25 Since the subject under examination involved various Ministry/ Department 
/Organisations the Committee had made following recommendation:- 
"Submission of Action Taken Replies to above observations/recommenda tions: 
Since this subject involves more than one Central Ministries/ Departments viz. 
Ministry of Science and Technology (Department of Biotechnology), Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers(Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) etc., the Committee desire that the respective 
Ministry/Department may furnish their Action Taken Replies to the above 
observations/recommendations to the Department of Pharmaceuticals who m ay 
compile the replies and furnish the same within the stipulated time period of three 
months." 
1.26  In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Depa rtment of 
Pharmaceuticals replied as under: 
"Based on the inputs received from the Ministries/Departments/Organizations 
concerned, action taken replies to the above observations/recommendati ons of 
the Committee have been compiled by the Department of Pharmaceuticals,  
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers." 

17 
 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.27  Since this subject involves more than one Central Ministries/ Departments 
viz. Ministry of Science and Technology (Department of Biotechnology), Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare, Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers(Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) etc., the Committee desire that the respective 
Ministry/Department may furnish their Action Taken Replies to the above 
observations/recommendations to the Department of Pharmaceuticals who may 
compile the replies and furnish the same within the stipulated time period of three 
months. 
 
 
 
 
  

18 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 1 (II)  
    Availability of Safe, Secure and Effective Vaccine for COVID 19 
2.1 The Committee have noted that COVID 19 is an infectious disease caused 
by a newly discovered Corona virus SARS-COV 2.  It was first detected in Wuhan  
city of Hubei province in China during December 2019.  Since then the virus 
evolved and spread to other countries as a major health threat affecting the socio 
economic life of the people at the global level.  World Health Organization 
declared the outbreak of this highly infectious disease a pandemic on 11 March 
2020.  The pandemic has affected our country as well.  As of now, our country  is 
the second most affected in the world after the USA in respect of number of 
cases.  However, the Committee are satisfied to note that our country 
has  responded proactively to this pandemic through multitude of 
measures  including imposition of nationwide lock down, social distancing, 
wearing mask, maintaining hand hygiene  and above all  following the principle 
of  test, track and  treat so as to control the spread.    As a result of stron g 
measures taken in our country with the cooperation of the people, there is decline 
in number of new cases reported and the active cases across the country. As it is 
a new viral disease, no therapeutic solution or vaccine was available for this 
highly infectious disease.  Since this pandemic disrupted the normal lives of the 
people throughout the world  and gravely affected the economy of many 
countries, great interest has been generated among scientists across the world to 
invent a vaccine for this disease,  About 200 vaccine candidates on varie d 
platforms are presently undergoing development across the globe, of which 
about 40 candidates are in human clinical development. It is heartening to note 
that nearly 30 groups, both academia and industry, are actively involved in 
development or collaboration or co-development and trials for COVID-19 vaccine 
in our country.    As per the information available in the vaccine portal of Indian 
Council for Medical Research (ICMR), Drug Controller General of India (DGCI) has 
granted approval for restricted use in emergency situation for two vaccine 
candidates viz, Covishield which is tested and manufactured by Serum Institute 
of India Pvt Ltd., Pune in collaboration with Oxford University/ Astra Zeneca and 
COVAXIN which is  manufactured ingeniously  by M/s Bharat Biotech Ltd., 
Hyderabad  in collaboration with National  Institute of Virology (NIV) and Indian 
Council for Medical Research (ICMR).   As per the preliminary exercise 
undertaken by NEGVAC, about 66 million doses of COVID-19 vaccine will be 
required in the first phase of vaccination program in India. However, given the 
uncertainties in development of natural immunity, the pattern of disease spread 
etc, it is quite possible that there may be requirement for at least 100 crore doses 
of the vaccine demanding huge investments.  According to  CDSCO, current 

19 
 
production capacity of vaccine manufacturers  in the country is  nearly 60.84 
crore doses/annum which includes 40 to 50 crore doses/annum of Covishield 
vaccine,  10 crore doses/annum of Covaxin vaccine  and 84 lakhs doses/annum 
of  ZyCoV-D vaccine  by Cadila Healthcare Limited, Ahmadabad which is still 
under Phase III Human Clinical Trials.   Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation (CDSCO) has given permission for the stockpile of first two 
vaccines to the tune of 100 crore doses per annum.   In the initial phase of 
vaccination, 3 Crore Health care workers and frontline workers are likely to be 
covered. Currently the population of the country is about 138.7 crore.  With the 
present production capacity in the country, it may take more than four years   to 
meet the requirements of vaccinating whole or majority of the population in the 
country as every person has to be given two doses.  So, there is an urgent need 
to ramp up the manufacturing capacity of COVID-19 vaccine for successful 
implementation of programme of vaccination in the country. In view of the above 
observations, the Committee would like to make the following recommendations:- 
The Government should take all the steps necessary f or the large scale 
manufacturing of COVID 19 vaccines in the country for meeting the vaccine 
requirements of the country as per the time schedule.  
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
2.2 The production capacity of the vaccines under the vaccination drive has been 
gradually ramped-up by the manufactures and is expected to increase fu rther in the 
next couple of months. To further support the manufacturers in ramping up va ccine 
production, Government of India has also provided financial support of INR 1500 crore 
to M/s Biological E Ltd for ‘at-risk manufacturing ’ of 30 crore doses and advance 
payment for 66 crore doses to be procured from M/s Serum Institute of India and M/s 
Bharat Biotech International Ltd. during July/Aug ’21 to Dec ’21. This would ease the 
limitation of vaccine availability over time. New vaccines (domestic as well as offsh ore), 
as and when approved by the National Regulator, will be taken up un der the 
programme to improve vaccine availability and vaccination coverage. 
            Further, as stated by CDSCO, for augmentation of production  capacity of 
COVID-19 vaccines in the country, Inter-ministerial group has been formed for providin g 
support to COVID-19 vaccine manufacturers. The group visited following manuf acturing 
facilities- 
4.  M/s Serum Institute, Hadapsar and Manjari facilities.  
5.  M/s Bharat Biotech, Hyderabad and Bangalore facilities.  
6.  M/s Indian Immunologicals (IIL), Hyderabad facility.  
and provided guidance to firms to increase the production capacity and sub mitted the 
report. CDSCO is facilitating and handholding the applicants for reducing the processing 

20 
 
time for scale up of manufacturing of approved COVID-19 vaccines through  Post 
Approval Changes as per provisions of CDSCO guidance for industry. 
Department of Biotechnology (DBT) has further stated that the Governmen t of India is 
supporting vaccine development and manufacturing activities through both na tional 
efforts and international partnerships. Currently, in India, 04 vaccine candidates f or 
COVID-19 have been approved for Emergency Use Authorization (EUA). Beside s 
these, about 09 vaccine candidates are in clinical stage of development and 0 1 
candidate is in advanced pre-clinical stage of development; several promising v accine 
candidates are in early stages of development. Further, to address the u rgent need for 
making available sufficient vaccine doses to meet the existing requirements, e fforts 
have been made to support scale-up of vaccine production, under Mission COVID 
Suraksha. Accordingly, support for one private industry (Bharat Biotech, Hyderabad) 
and three public sector manufacturing facilities (Indian Immunologicals, Hyderaba d; 
Haffkine Biopharmaceuticals, Mumbai; Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals, 
Bulandshar), is being provided to make them ready with enhanced capacities to support 
augmented production of Covaxin, over the next 6-8 months.  The De partment of 
Biotechnology (DBT) is also facilitating technology transfer of Covaxin production to 
Gujarat COVID Vaccine Consortium (GCVC), comprising of Hester Biosciences, 
OmniBRx Biotechnologies Pvt Ltd, and Gujarat Biotechnology Research Centre 
(GBRC), Department of Science and Technology, Govt. of Gujarat .   
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 1 (III)  
 
2.3 Particular attention should be given for the implementation of “COVID 
Suraksha- the Indian COVID-19 Vaccine development Mission ” in letter and 
spirit for accelerating the research and development of  safe and effica cious 
vaccines   so as to meet  the vaccine needs  of the country  in a time  bound 
manner and also to fulfill the demands  of other countries. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
2.4 Department of Biotechnology has informed that to reinforce and accelera te the 
COVID-19 vaccine development efforts and to address the urgent need for a safe and 
efficacious COVID-19 vaccine, ‘Mission COVID Suraksha - the Indian COVID-19 
Vaccine Development Mission ’, was announced by the Government, as part of the 
Atmanirbhar Bharat 3.0 package.  The Mission is being implemented by B iotechnology 
Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC), a Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) of 
DBT, at a total cost of Rs. 900 Cr. for 12 months. The goal of the  Mission is to 
accelerate the development of at least 5-6 COVID-19 vaccine candidates and ensure 
that some of these are brought closer to licensure and introduction in the m arket for 
consideration by regulatory authorities and for introduction in public health systems.  

21 
 
 Three Requests for Expression of Interest (REOI) for COVID-19 candidate vaccine 
development, enhancement of capacities to support COVID-19 vaccine developme nt 
and conduct of human clinical trials have been issued. Four COVID-19 va ccine 
candidates in advanced clinical development stage and one vaccine ca ndidate in 
advanced pre-clinical development, are being supported under this Mission. 
Additionally, 19 clinical trial sites across the nation, three immunogenicity  assay 
laboratories and three animal challenge facilities are also being supported un der the 
Mission. Additionally, augmentation of facilities for COVID-19 vaccine manufacturi ng, is 
also being supported under Mission COVID Suraksha.  
A strong technical and financial internal due diligence is an integral part of th e mission 
implementation process. Domain area specific Scientific Advisory Groups (SAG), have 
been constituted for scientific and technical due diligence of the application s received. 
An “Evaluation and Monitoring Committee for Technology Transfer ”, was constituted, to 
provide oversight and expert guidance and to monitor the progress of the facility 
augmentation to support COVID-19 Vaccine manufacturing under Missio n Covid 
Suraksha. The ultimate focus is on bringing to the citizens of the country a safe, 
efficacious, affordable, and accessible COVID vaccine at the earliest and to strength en 
the vaccine development ecosystem in the country for other on-going and futu re viral 
vaccine development. 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.9  of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 1 (IV)  
 
2.5 Proper monitoring as well as execution mechanism be evolved to ensure 
the vaccination of all. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
2.6 MoHFW has informed that the regular review meetings of COVID-1 9 
vaccination are conducted by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare with t he 
States/UTs to orient them on n ew developme nts, review the vaccination drive 
implementation & performance status and resolve queries in the shortest  time frame. 
Another level of review of the vaccination drive takes place through the Em powered 
Group- 5 (EG- 5), constituted under the Disaster Management Act, 2005, ma ndated to 
decisively and effectively address evolving challenges in COVID-19 vaccina tion 
pertaining to vaccine procurement, manufacturing, import, logistics, daily supply, 
utilization and wastage monitoring. Further, National Expert Group on Va ccine 

22 
 
Administration for COVID-19 (NEGVAC) also reviews the programme performance on  
a regular basis and provides guidance on all aspects of COVID-19 vaccination. 
Progress under the COVID-19 vaccination drive is also reviewed by Cabinet Secretariat 
from time to time.  
 Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.11   of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 1 (V)  
 
2.7 Steps should also be taken for getting country ’s share of vaccines 
from  WHO’s COVAX facility which  aims to get 2 billion doses of COVID vaccine 
by the end of 2021 and  has assured the participating countries  to deliver vaccine 
doses to cover  upto 20% of their country’s population.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
2.8 India is an AMC eligible Country under COVAX facility to get donor suppo rted 
doses of COVID-19 vaccine. India has advocated for its fair share to get CO VID-19 
vaccines under COVAX Facility. In December 2020 meeting, Gavi Board approved 
high range package of support for India, providing 20% of total AMC doses, subject to 
vaccine prices and available funds. Gavi COVAX through a decision letter has  
communicated that 97,164,000 indicative doses of AstraZeneca/SII with 35-40 % in 
Q1 & 60-65% in Q2 will be supplied to India. Till date, Gavi COVAX has supplied 10 
million doses of COVISHIELD to India through COVAX Facility. However, the 
remaining doses from COVAX facility are contingent upon availability of the same 
with COVAX. 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 1 (VI)  
2.9 Foolproof measures should be taken to ensure safety and efficacy of 
vaccines to be procured from both indigenous and foreign sources. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 2.10 Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) has informed that as per 
the New Drugs & Clinical Trials Rules, 2019, for grant of permission to manufacture  or 

23 
 
import of a new drug including vaccines, the applicant is required to submit new drug 
application along with various data such as chemical and pharmaceutica l information, 
non-clinical as well as clinical data of safety and efficacy of the drug including results  
from local clinical trial as specified in the Second Schedule of the said Rules. The 
aforesaid Rules provide the detailed requirements and guidelines for conduct o f 
nonclinical and clinical studies and approval of new drug which include vaccines. The  
requirements apply to both, vaccines manufactured in the country or importe d from 
overseas.  Further, the Rules provide for grant of marketing authorization in certain 
special situations where relaxation, abbreviations, omission or deferment of data ma y 
be considered.  
CDSCO has issued regulatory pathway for approval of COVID-19 Vaccines in In dia for 
restricted use in emergency situation which are already approved for restricted u se by 
US FDA, EMA, UK MHRA, PMDA Japan or which are listed in WHO Emergency Use 
Listing (EUL). 
CDSCO has further revised the regulatory pathway on 01.06.2020, wherein the  
requirement to conduct post marketing bridging trial and prior approval of  CDL for 
release of each lot of the vaccine has been done away with if the va ccine batch/lot has 
been certified and released by National Control Laboratory of Country of 
Origin. However, scrutiny and review of their Summary Lot Protocol & certificate of 
analysis of Batch/Lot shall be undertaken by CDL, Kasauli for Batch rele ase as per 
standard procedure.  
Further, SOP Guidance for import of COVID-19 vaccine by private sector or any  person 
was issued on 04.05.2021. 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.15 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 RECOMMENDATION NO 2 (I) 
        Critical Analysis of Vaccine Candidates in Case of Parallel Studies : 
  
2.11 The Committee have noted that normally vaccine development takes close 
to 10 years for any infectious disease. But presently due to utmost urgency extra-
ordinary measures are being taken to fast-track the development and productio n 
of COVID-19 vaccine without compromising the rigor of science, safety and 
efficacy measures. The steps which are helping in the fast-tracking process are 
fruitful collaboration between organizations and companies, conducting the 
required studies in parallel rather than sequentially as are usually done, planning 
for next phase while the earlier one is being completed and streamlining the 
processes of application and approvals. In normal vaccine development, each 
step is performed in sequence.  In order to accelerate COVID-19 vaccine 
development, steps are being done in parallel. The Committee are sure that our 
scientists and the regulators would leave no stone unturned to ensure safety and 

24 
 
efficacy of vaccines being developed in the county even though they are 
following the fast track approach of parallel studies to make available vaccines  to 
the people at the earliest.  Since ours is a large country with huge population, 
multiple vaccines may have to be used for vaccinating the people  for 
creating  strong immunity against COVID 19 virus in an even manner amongst the 
people of various regions of the country who may receive different vaccines  and 
to prevent post vaccination  side effects,  the Committee strongly recommend 
that Drugs Controller General of India(DCGI) and Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organization(CDSCO) will critically analyze the  quality, safety, 
immunogenicity,  efficacy  and other mandatory requirements before 
granting  approval of  vaccine candidates   so as to create strong immunity 
against COVID 19 virus in an even manner amongst the people of various regions 
of the country,  who may receive different vaccines, without any post vaccination  
side effects.   In case of import of vaccines, the same rigorous process should be 
followed before granting their approval for import into the country.   
 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 CDSCO accords permission to manufacture or import COVID-19 vaccines after 
ensuring Safety, Quality, Immunogenicity and Efficacy of Vaccines in consult ation with 
Subject Expert Committee (SEC) comprising subject matter experts from Microbiology, 
Pulmonology, Immunology, Paediatrics, Internal medicine etc. and in complianc e with 
the provisions of New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019.  
  
RECOMMENDATION NO 3 
 Restricted Emergency Use Authorization  of Vaccine Candidates: 
  
 2.13 The Committee note that there are three vaccine candidates in the country 
which are in advanced  stage of development viz. COVAXIN, a whole virion 
inactivated SARS CoV-2 vaccine (BBV152),  Covishield, a Non- Replicating Viral 
Vector vaccine(ChAdOx1-S) ; and  ZyCoV-D, an indigenously developed DNA 
vaccine being tested by M/s Zydus Cadilla.  While comparing the efficacy of 
indigenous vaccines viz-a-viz foreign vaccine candidates, the Department of 
Biotechnology in their written reply stated that the vaccine candidate Covishield 
Vaccine has demonstrated an efficacy of 62-90% in the global Phase III clinica l 
trial, depending on the dose administered. The Russian Sputnik V vaccine and 
the mRNA vaccine candidates of Pfizer and Moderna, have reported an efficacy of 
>92%, based on interim analysis of the Phase III clinical trial data. The efficacy of  
the indigenously developed vaccine candidate, COVAXIN can be determined only 
after completion of the administration of the second dose in the Phase III trial.  As 
per latest information available in the Vaccine Portal hosted by  ICMR in its 
website,  Drugs Controller General of India has accorded approval for restricted 
use of COVISHIELD after completion of Phase III Human Clinical Trial.   However, 
DCGI has   given approval   for restricted use of COVAXIN in emergency situation 

25 
 
while Phase III Human Clinical trial is still going on. The Committee note that 
NEGVAC Provides guidance on selection of COVID-19 vaccine candidates for the 
country and  NEGVAC is  assisted by the Standing Technical Sub-committee of 
National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization (NTAGI) for this purpose. 
Accordingly, the NEGVAC, supported by NTAGI, is responsible for reviewing the 
available scientific evidence on safety, efficacy, reactogenicity, tolerability and 
immunogenicity of various vaccines while making a decision for selecting a 
vaccine for roll-out in the country.  Since the   safety and efficacy of an y vaccine 
is established only after the satisfactory completion of third phase of human 
clinical trials, the Committee recommend that only those vaccines candidates 
which prove safe and efficacious after completion of their phase-III human clinical 
trials should be given Emergency Use Authorization by Drugs Controller General 
of India.  Further, the Committee recommend that NEGVAC and NTAGI should 
carefully examine all the aspects viz. safety, efficacy, reactogenicity, to lerability 
and immunogenicity of various vaccine candidates before the decision on  their 
roll out for vaccination particularly keeping in view the DCGI approval only for 
restricted use  in emergency situation.   
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.14 As stated by the Department of Biotechnology, the Standing Technical S ub-
committee (STSC) of the National Technical Advisory Group on Immunization (NT AGI), 
co-chaired by Secretary, DBT; Secretary, Department of Health Research (DHR) & 
Director General, Indian Council of Medical research (DG, ICMR), has constituted the 
COVID-19 Working Group (WG), to provide evidence-based recommendation, on  the 
use of COVID-19 vaccines. The Department of Biotechnology is involved in 
deliberations of the COVID-19 WG on all aspects related to programmatic 
implementation of COVID-19 vaccines; introduction of validated assays for robust 
clinical development of COVID-19 vaccines; vaccine dosage, prioritization, delivery  and 
other logistics. 
 Further, CDSCO has stated that permission is accorded to manufacture o r import 
COVID-19 vaccines after ensuring Safety, Quality, Immunogenicity and Effica cy of 
Vaccines in consultation with Subject Expert Committee (SEC) comprising of subject  
matter experts from Microbiology, Pulmonology, Immunology, Paediatrics, I nternal 
medicine etc. and in compliance with the provisions of New Drugs and Clinica l Trials 
Rules, 2019.  
RECOMMENDATION NO 4 
Strengthening Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI) Processes 
2.15 The Committee note that in case of accelerated development of vaccine 
candidates, assessment of Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI) and 
Adverse Events of Special Interest (AESI)/Phase IV trial /post-marketing 
surveillance for side effects are critical after successful completion of Phase  III 
Human trials.  The Committee also note that in the post marketing phase, the 

26 
 
manufacturer is required to submit periodic safety update reports to Central 
Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) which contain the details of the 
adverse effects reported and CDSCO assess these adverse effects for taking 
necessary remedial measures. In the cases of vaccines supplied through national 
immunization programme, these adverse effects are captured and appropriate 
measures are taken by the Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI) 
Secretariat under Immunization Division in Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare.  Though the Committee understand that it is necessary to accelerate the 
processes of vaccine development, testing and approval processes in view of the 
present situation of COVID 19 pandemic, the Committee are of the firm view that it 
is mandatory to monitor whether there is any adverse side effects to the people  
who have been vaccinated.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that DCGI and 
CDSCO should obtain from vaccine manufacturers the weekly safety 
reports   which should contain the details of the post vaccination adverse 
effects/events reported and the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare/DCGI/CDCCO 
should initiate immediate corrective measures thereon.  Since it is a mass 
vaccination programme initiated by the Government of India, immediate and 
appropriate corrective measures should be taken by the AEFI Secretariat under 
Immunisation division in the cases of post vaccination adverse effects/events so 
as to ensure safety and efficaciousness of vaccines in the country. In this regard, 
AEFI Secretariat should obtain weekly reports from CDSCO and vaccine 
manufacturers for prompt action at their end.  If necessary, AEFI Secretariat in 
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare may be strengthened for the purpose. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.16 As post marketing surveillance, the applicants are required to submit Perio dic 
Safety Update Reports as specified in the Fifth Schedule of New Dr ugs and Clinical 
Trials Rules, 2019 for approved Vaccines every six months for the first two  years after 
approval. For subsequent two years, the periodic safety update reports nee d to be 
submitted annually. 
Further, considering COVID-19 pandemic, as per condition of the marketing 
authorization permission, the importer/manufacturers of approved COVID-19 v accines 
are required to submit the safety data including Adverse Event Following Immuniz ation 
(AEFI) & Adverse events of special interest (AESI) with due analysis every 15 da ys for 
first two months and monthly till completion of the ongoing clinical trial in the  country in 
addition to monitoring by Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI) committ ee of 
MoHFW. This will ensure active monitoring of the safety data of the va ccines permitted 
for use in the country. 
 As part of Adverse Events Following Immunization (AEFI) surveillance, a featur e for 
reporting of minor, serious and severe AEFIs occurring within 30 minutes of vaccination 
and also beyond 30 minutes of vaccination by vaccinators and District Immuniz ation 
Officers is already a part of the Co-WIN software which manages the alloc ation of 

27 
 
sessions and appointments for vaccination and records the processes of vaccination a t 
the session sites. After the rapid review of 498 reported serious and severe A EFIs, an 
advisory has been issued to states and districts for steps to be taken to identify, report, 
investigate and manage events such as Thrombosis and Thrombocytopenic Syndrome 
(TTS). Besides this, the data on serious and severe AEFIs reported follo wing use of 
COVAXIN under clinical trial mode has been shared on weekly basis with 
DCGI/CDSCO by the Immunization Division. To strengthen the AEFI system, more 
technical and clinical experts (medical specialists, cardiologists, neurologists, 
respiratory medicine specialists, etc.) have been involved as members of AEFI  
committee members (at national, state and district levels) for rapid review of reporte d 
serious and severe AEFIs for trend analysis and causality assessments. The h uman 
resources at the AEFI Secretariat have been increased to manage the surge in reported 
AEFIs. 
RECOMMENDATION NO 5 
Compliance of WHO Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) Standards while 
Manufacturing Vaccines 
2.17 The Committee are concerned to note the different stands taken by two 
wings under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on the important matter of 
quality of vaccines.    Drug Regulation Division of the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare in its submission to the Committee stated  that vaccines are 
required to be characterized and manufactured in compliance with the Good 
Manufacturing Practices (GMP). Manufacturing processes of every vaccine are 
validated, defined and controlled adequately to ensure batch to batch 
consistency.  In regard to the above submission of the Drug Regulation Division, 
the Committee desired to know whether any steps have been taken to 
manufacture COVID 19 vaccines as per WHO-GMP quality standards.  In its reply, 
CDSCO has stated that the applicant has to comply with the provisions under 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940; New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules (NDCT), 
2019 and Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 to manufacture and market Vaccines  
in the country and there is no requirement to comply with WHO GMP 
standards.  In this regard, the Committee feel that there is no doubt that it is 
necessary for the applicant to comply with the above mentioned law and the rules 
enacted therein but it is also necessary to comply with WHO GMP standards 
while producing vaccines.  Generally, all the drugs are expected to be 
manufactured in compliance with WHO GMP standards and the same standards 
may be followed for the manufacture of vaccines as well.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that this matter of different perceptions about the quality 
standards of vaccines between Drug Regulation Division and CDSCO may be 
looked into and ensure that all the vaccines for COVID 19 are  manufactured in 
accordance with  WHO-GMP standards also. 
  

28 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.18 The COVID-19 vaccine manufacturers develop & manufacture their products as 
per Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) requirements which are laid down in 
Schedule-M of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules and WHO guidelines. Therefore, quali ty 
standards are maintained as per WHO GMP Guidelines and under the provisions of 
Drugs & Cosmetics Rules, 1945.  In this regard, WHO has recoganized CDSCO as 
Functional National Regulatory Authority (NRA) for vaccines after assessment the  
regulatory system. 
  
RECOMMENDATION NO  6 
Testing of Batches of Vaccines by Central Drug Laboratory (CDL) 
2.19 The Committee note that every batch of COVID 19 vaccines for clinical trial  
and marketing are tested /reviewed and released by Central Drugs Laboratory, 
Kasauli to ensure quality of the vaccines.  In this regard, it is not clear 
whether   samples of all the batches of COVID 19 vaccines meant for va ccination 
programme in the country will be taken to CDL, Kasauli which is in Himachal 
Pradesh or they will be tested in six other Central/Regional Drugs Testing 
Laboratories of Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) 
functioning in Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad, Guwahati and Chandigarh 
as per their proximity to vaccine manufacturer.   Since it is very much essent ial to 
ensure the quality of vaccines before their release for vaccination, the Committee  
strongly recommend that necessary arrangements should be made by CDSCO to 
mandatorily test the quality of every batch of vaccines either domestically 
manufactured or imported before releasing for vaccination.    In case CDL, 
Kasauli is facing any difficulties in timely clearance of batches of vaccines, 
CDSCO may consider utilizing the services of other six laboratories under its 
jurisdiction. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.20 Central Drugs Laboratory (CDL), Kasauli alone has huge capacity to test nearly 
200 batches per month (which is far more than the number of bat ches being received 
i.e. around 50 batches by CDL Kasauli for testing on monthly basis), and there is no 
delay for testing and release of the COVID-19 vaccines. However, to build the  capacity 
of India for long run, Two more laboratories namely National Institute of Biologicals 
(NIB), Noida and National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), Pune have been develop ed 
and notified for testing of COVID-19 Vaccines. Further, a laboratory at National I nstitute 
of Animal health (NIAH), Hyderabad is also under development specifically  for COVID-
19 vaccine testing. Six (06) laboratories of CDSCO other than CDL, Kasauli are 
designed for testing of Drugs, Devices and Cosmetics only, and not for vaccines. 
 

29 
 
   Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.18 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 10 
Need for Increasing Number of Primary and Intermediary Vaccine Stores 
2.21 The Committee note that there is an established mechanism of vaccine 
transportation in the country from primary vaccine stores to the session sites for 
maintaining required temperature of the vaccines. Manufacturers supply directly 
to 41 primary stores in the States/UTs/ and the Government Medical Stores 
Depots supply vaccines to 19 primary stores in the country. There are insulated 
vaccine vans supplied by the Govt. of India to all States for vaccine 
transportation. Cold boxes and vaccine carriers are used for vaccine 
transportation to intermediary stores and session sites respectively.  The same 
mechanism will also be used for COVID-19 vaccine transportation.  In this regard, 
the Committee are constrained to note that there are only 60 primary stores in 29 
States/ 7 UTs with nearly 741 Districts in the country. That means roughly a 
primary store is catering to the requirements of nearly 12 Districts in the country. 
This storage facility might have been sufficient for handling the existing 
immunization programmes which are meant for targeted groups of persons like 
children in case of Polio vaccine programme.  But, present number of primary 
stores may not be sufficient for handling the COVID 19 vaccination programme as 
almost entire population of the country has to be vaccinated.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that NEGVAC may make a comprehensive 
study/assessment of the number of primary stores and the number of 
intermediary stores required for hassle free storage and distribution of COVID 19 
vaccines and take immediate necessary steps for the creation of requisite 
infrastructure to increase the number of primary and intermediary stores as 
required by the States/Union Territories.  Necessary allocation of funds for the 
purpose may also be considered.   
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 2.22 There are around 29,000 cold chain storage points at the State  level & below 
catering to the requirement of COVID-19vaccines of 741 districts across 29 State s and 
7 UTs. This cold chain network is spread from the State till sub-District leve l such that 
the vaccines can be stored and managed across the country. Manufacturers supply  
vaccines directly to 41 primary stores in the States/UTs/Government Medical Stores 
Depots (GMSDs) while the GMSDs supply vaccines to 19 primary stores in the country. 
  
There are around 837 District/Regional Vaccine Stores and 28,258 sub- District vaccine 
storage facilities. There exists a clear & established mechanism of vaccine supply from 
State to Divisional Stores (for large states)or State to District Stores (for smaller 

30 
 
targeted groups of pers ons like childr en in case of stat es), and further to s ub-district 
stores. The vaccines are transported through Insulated/refrigerated vaccine vans. An 
assessment of the Cold Chain Storage Space and tran sportation mechanism had 
been carried out prior to introduction of the COVID -19 vaccine and the same has 
been adequately strengthened to meet the storage re quirement of COVID- 19 
vaccine along with Universal Immunization Programme . It is also pertinent to note 
that majority of the vaccines are stored at Sub-Dis trict Cold Chain Points that are 
co-located/nearest to the COVID-19 Vaccination Centre s. The Primary Stores are 
usually meant for storage of Buffer Stocks and stor ing the vaccine supplies for albeit 
short duration of time. Presently, the infrastructu re is adequate to handle the 
storage and transportation requirements for vaccina tion of the entire adult 
population of the country. 
  
  Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.21 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 11 
Need to Bridge the Cold Chain Equipment Gap in all 36 States/UTs 
2.23 The Committee note that an assessment of Cold Chain Space requirement 
has been carried out for the entire country on the basis of which procurement 
process is being initiated for Cold Chain Equipment. In this regard, the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare has informed the Committee that under 
the guidance of NEGVAC, the Government of India is taking all measures for best 
vaccine supply practice from manufacturer to session sites to manage the 
stupendous tasks of distribution / delivery of COVID vaccine throughout the 
country. Quality cold chain equipment is supplied for storage capacity 
augmentation. The cold chain technician and the vaccine and cold chain handler 
are trained regularly on the equipment maintenance and on good storage and 
distribution principles. The Committee were also informed that for the additional 
requirement of Cold Chain Equipment, purchase orders have been placed for 
3089 Deep Freezers (DF) and 8767 Ice-lined refrigerators (ILR) while UNICEF is 
supporting supply of 20 Walk-in Freezers (WIF), 40 Walk-in Coolers (WIC), 620 
Deep Freezers and 2984 Ice-lined refrigerators. The supplies of the procured 
equipment to the states have begun from last week of November 2020. The 
Committee observe that total cold chain equipments that are available to 36 
states/UTs include 9312 ILR (Large), 35090 ILR(Small), 6751 DF(Large), 34134 
DF(Small), 260 WIC and 87 WIF.  However, 28 Walk-in Coolers (WIC), 3824 Ice-
lined Refrigerators (Large) and 570 Ice-lined Refrigerators (Small) are still needed 
as per the cold chain equipment gap analysis done specifically for COVID-19 
vaccination programme by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.  In this 
regard, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
in coordination with states/UTs should bridge these gaps in the requirements of 
cold chain equipments within a fixed time frame so that all 36 states/UTs possess 

31 
 
the required number of various kinds of cold chain equipments mainly Walk in 
Coolers and Ice-lined Refrigerators both large and small in size for safe storage 
and application of the vaccines. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.24 As per the cold chain equipment gap analysis done specifically for COVID- 19 
vaccination programme by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, the storage c apacity 
for COVID-19 vaccines has been augmented with additional supply of 88 87 Ice-Lined 
Refrigerator (Small), 4730 Ice-Lined Refrigerator (Large), 8178 Deep Freezer (Sm all), 
4298 Deep Freezer (Large), 106 Walk- in-Cooler and 52 Walk- in-Freezer at the various 
vaccine stores of all States/UTs. As a result, there is no any further gap in storing th e 
COVID-19 vaccines. 
  
RECOMMENDATION NO 12 
Need for Pan India Consumer Awareness Programme by NEGVAC 
2.25 The Committee note that Drug Controller General of India (DGCI) has 
granted approval for restricted use in emergency situation for two vaccine 
candidates viz, Covishield and Covaxin.  Subsequently, the Government of India 
has decided to roll out the first phase of vaccination programme for the Health 
Care Workers and the Frontline Workers in the country.   However, there are 
several reports in media about safety and efficacy of these vaccines partic ularly 
about COVAXIN which has been given emergency use authorization before 
completion of Phase III human trials.  In this regard, the Committee are confident 
that the Government must have taken this conscious decision to roll out these 
two vaccines based on scientific evidence of their safety and efficacy.  How ever, 
the Committee feel that it is necessary to keep the public informed about the 
credentials of these vaccines.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that a pan 
India Consumer Awareness Programme needs to be launched by NEGVAC in 
coordination with States/UTs to eliminate apprehensions in the minds of the 
people about the safety and efficacy of these vaccines. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.26 MoHFW has informed that the COVID-19 Vaccines Communication Strategy has 
been developed, for implementation at the National and State leve l, to raise awareness 
about the safety, efficacy and immunogenicity of COVID-19 vaccines, buil d vaccine 
confidence, address misinformation against vaccination, address vaccine hesitancy &  
vaccine eagerness and promote COVID appropriate behaviour. The strategy aims t o 
promptly disseminate factual information about the vaccines and the va ccination 
process through clear, consistent and transparent messaging. This is being done 

32 
 
through multimedia platforms (print/electronic/ social media), through MoHFW web site 
and engagement of various stakeholders, community leaders and influencers to reach 
out to the last mile. The strategy is based on five key pillars – viz., advocacy, capacity 
building, media engagement, community engagement and crisis managem ent. For 
successful implementation of the strategy, several measures have been ta ken so far. 
These include capacity building of stakeholders at National and State level including 
State Immunization and IEC officials, Civil Society Organizations, Radio jockeys 
including Community Radio professionals, etc. for leveraging their networks for active 
campaigning to create awareness about benefits of vaccination. Aggressive adv ocacy 
to build vaccine confidence through reputed public and private sector Doct ors at 
National level and States/UTs and through other key influencers. 
  
A Communications National Media Rapid Response Ce ll has been 
established  at  MoHFW wh ich is carrying out real-time review of news reports and 
disseminating content on building confidence in vaccines and to counter les s than 
adequate informed media narrative. A special campaign against vaccine hesitancy was 
also launched by the Union Minister for Health and Family Welfare. T he Ministry has 
also reached out to 22 Central line Ministries including Rural Development, Panchayati  
Raj, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and MyGov etc. for engaging their field 
level networks to support information dissemination and social mobilization. 
  
Other measures include,  a special webpage on information pertaining to COV ID 19 
vaccine; national helpline number 1075 to answer queries regarding COV ID-19 
vaccination drive; a new pre-caller tune; dissemination of communications package 
comprising of posters, banners, leaflets, bilingual Frequently Asked Questions ( FAQs) 
and fact-check videos by key experts with information on COVID 1 9 across States/ UTs; 
Panel discussions and interviews on Television; experts identified for op-eds  and 
articles to build vaccine confidence; Digital campaign on social media platfo rms; articles 
in major National and Regional dallies etc. 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.24 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 13 
Need to Allocate Separate Budgetary Support for COVID-19 Vaccination 
Programme: 
2.27 The Committee note that the Government proposes to vaccinate Health 
Care Workers (HCWs) and Front Line Workers (FLWs) during the first phase of 
vaccination. For covering 3 crore HCWs and FLWs with two doses of vaccine, 
around 6.6 crore doses will be required which is estimated to cost around Rs 
1485 crore. The procurement of vaccines by MoHFW will be done using domestic 

33 
 
funds.  However, the Department of Health and Family Welfare in their written 
note stated that the total fund required for vaccinating all those requiring vaccine 
will depend on the estimated number of total prioritized beneficiaries and the 
prevailing cost of vaccine. As per the statement of the Prime Minister, the entire 
cost of vaccinating three crore HCWs and FLWs will be borne by the Union 
Government.  The Committee observe that for nearly 138 crore population of the 
country, nearly 276 crore doses of vaccine would be required and approximately 
Rs.68310 crore would be necessary for covering every person in the country 
(deduced from 138 crore multiplied by Rs. 495 crore per crore population).  In 
regard to vaccination of entire population free of cost, the Committee note the 
reply of the Government that the financing mechanism for vaccinating the entire 
population of the country has not been finalized yet.  In case the Government find 
it difficult to mobilize funds for vaccinating entire population free of cost, the 
Committee recommend that  all the people belonging to lower middle class and 
the poor people living in urban and rural areas including the Below Poverty Line 
should  be given vaccination free of cost. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.28 MoHFW has stated that as per the Liberalized Pricing and Accelerated Nat ional 
COVID-19 Vaccination Strategy, the vaccination of population aged 18 years  and 
above has been opened up from 1 st May 2021 through State government/UT 
administration and private sector. It places more power in the hands of Sta tes to 
independently plan, process and execute vaccination drives according to their 
aspirations. It also empowers private sector & corporates to take up mass va ccination 
drives for various subsets of people. Govt. of India continues to suppo rt free of cost 
vaccination of population groups prioritized by NEGVAC, i.e. Health Care Workers 
(HCWs), Front Line Workers (FLWs) and population above 45 years of  age at 
Government COVID Vaccination Centres which receive vaccine doses from Govt. of 
India. All the States/UTs that have started vaccination of 18+ age group  are providing 
it free of cost to the beneficiaries through their CVCs while it’ll be at a charge at private 
CVCs. Any person, including people from lower middle class and people below 
poverty line, can avail vaccination free of cost from the Government CVCs. Recently , 
as per the revised Guidelines for National COVID Vaccination Program, which  came 
into effect from 21 st June 2021, Government of India is procuring 75% of the vaccines 
being produced by the manufacturers in the country. The vaccines procured ar e 
continue to be provided free of cost to States/UTs as has been the case f rom the 
commencement of the National Vaccination Programme. These doses will be 
administered by the States/UTs free of cost to all citizens as per priority throug h 
Government Vaccination Centres. The price of vaccine doses for private h ospitals 
would be declared by each vaccine manufacturer, and any subsequent changes would 
be notified in advance. The private hospitals may charge up t o a maximum of Rupees 
150 per dose as service charges. State Governments may monitor the price b eing so 
charged. All citizens irrespective of their income status are entitled to free va ccination. 
Those who have the ability to pay are encouraged to use private hospital’s vaccination 

34 
 
centres. Demand of vaccines from the private hospitals is aggregated in CoWIN porta l 
and payment of this is made directly to manufacturer by the private hospitals. 
Further, in the spirit of “Lok Kalyan ”, use of non-transferable Electronic Vouchers, 
which can be redeemed at private vaccination centers, will be encouraged, which 
would enable people to financially support vaccination of Economically Weaker 
Sections at private vaccination centres .  
  
RECOMMENDATION NO 14 
2.29 Submission of Action Taken Replies to above 
observations/recommendations: Since this subject involves more than one 
Central Ministries/ Departments viz. Ministry of Science and Technology 
(Department of Biotechnology), Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers(Department of Pharmaceuticals) etc., the Committee 
desire that the respective Ministry/Department may furnish their Action Taken 
Replies to the above observations/recommendations to the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals who may compile the replies and furnish the same within the 
stipulated time period of three months. 
                                               REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT                             
2.30 Based on the inputs received from the Ministries/Departments/Organizatio ns 
concerned, action taken replies to the above observations/recommendations of the 
Committee have been compiled by the Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry  of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.27 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
  
RECOMMENDATION NO 1 (I) 
 
Availability of Safe, Secure and Effective Vaccine for COVID 19 
3.1 The Committee have noted that COVID 19 is an infectious disease caused 
by a newly discovered Corona virus SARS-COV 2.  It was first detected in Wuhan  
city of Hubei province in China during December 2019.  Since then the virus 
evolved and spread to other countries as a major health threat affecting the socio 
economic life of the people at the global level.  World Health Organization 
declared the outbreak of this highly infectious disease a pandemic on 11 March 
2020.  The pandemic has affected our country as well.  As of now, our country is 
the second most affected in the world after the USA in respect of number of 
cases.  However, the Committee are satisfied to note that our country 
has  responded proactively to this pandemic through multitude of 
measures  including imposition of nationwide lock down, social distancing, 
wearing mask, maintaining hand hygiene  and above all  following the principle 
of  test, track and  treat so as to control the spread.    As a result of stron g 
measures taken in our country with the cooperation of the people, there is decline 
in number of new cases reported and the active cases across the country. As it is 
a new viral disease, no therapeutic solution or vaccine was available for this 
highly infectious disease.  Since this pandemic disrupted the normal lives of the 
people throughout the world  and gravely affected the economy of many 
countries, great interest has been generated among scientists across the world to 
invent a vaccine for this disease,  About 200 vaccine candidates on varie d 
platforms are presently undergoing development across the globe, of which 
about 40 candidates are in human clinical development. It is heartening to note 
that nearly 30 groups, both academia and industry, are actively involved in 
development or collaboration or co-development and trials for COVID-19 vaccine 
in our country.    As per the information available in the vaccine portal of Indian 
Council for Medical Research (ICMR), Drug Controller General of India (DGCI) has 
granted approval for restricted use in emergency situation for two vaccine 
candidates viz, Covishield which is tested and manufactured by Serum Institute 
of India Pvt Ltd., Pune in collaboration with Oxford University/ Astra Zeneca and 
COVAXIN which is  manufactured ingeniously  by M/s Bharat Biotech Ltd., 
Hyderabad  in collaboration with National  Institute of Virology (NIV) and Indian 
Council for Medical Research (ICMR).   As per the preliminary exercise 
undertaken by NEGVAC, about 66 million doses of COVID-19 vaccine will be 
required in the first phase of vaccination program in India. However, given the 
uncertainties in development of natural immunity, the pattern of disease spread 
etc, it is quite possible that there may be requirement for at least 100 crore doses 

36 
 
of the vaccine demanding huge investments.  According to  CDSCO, current 
production capacity of vaccine manufacturers  in the country is  nearly 60.84 
crore doses/annum which includes 40 to 50 crore doses/annum of Covishield 
vaccine,  10 crore doses/annum of Covaxin vaccine  and 84 lakhs doses/annum 
of  ZyCoV-D vaccine  by Cadila Healthcare Limited, Ahmadabad which is still 
under Phase III Human Clinical Trials.   Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation (CDSCO) has given permission for the stockpile of first two 
vaccines to the tune of 100 crore doses per annum.   In the initial phase of 
vaccination, 3 Crore Health care workers and frontline workers are likely to be 
covered. Currently the population of the country is about 138.7 crore.  With the 
present production capacity in the country, it may take more than four years   to 
meet the requirements of vaccinating whole or majority of the population in the 
country as every person has to be given two doses.  So, there is an urgent need 
to ramp up the manufacturing capacity of COVID-19 vaccine for successful 
implementation of programme of vaccination in the country. In view of the above 
observations, the Committee would like to make the following recommendations:- 
The Government should chalk out a definite time  schedule  for vaccination 
for the whole or majority of the population in the country so as to create a 
strong herd immunity against COVID 19 at the earliest  particularly in the 
wake of spreading of highly infectious UK and South  African strains 
of  COVID 19 virus. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
3.2 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) has informed that the  COV ID-
19 vaccination is an ongoing and dynamic process, which is being ex panded to include 
beneficiary groups as prioritized by the National Expert Group on Vaccine 
Administration for COVID-1 9 (NEGVAC). With effect from 1 st May 2021, as per th e 
Liberalized Pricing and Accelerated National COVID-19 Vaccination Strategy, the State 
Government/UT Administration and  private sector have been empowered to procure 
additional vaccine doses a nd have been given flexibi lity to customize to local needs 
and open vaccination to any age category above 1 8 years o f age. Based on the 
experiences gained from 1 st  May 2021 and requests from States, the Guidelines for 
National COVID Vaccination Program were revised wherein, now GoI will procure 75% 
of the vaccines being produced monthly by the manufacturers in the co untry and these 
will continue to be provided free of cost to States/UTs. These doses, in turn , will be 
administered by the States/UTs free of cost to all citizens as per priority through 
Government Vaccination Centres. The private sector continues to have the optio n of 
direct procurement of 25% of monthly production of the domestic vaccine 
manufacturers. The price of vaccine doses for private hospitals would be declared by 
each vaccine manufacture and the private hospitals may charge up to a maximum of 
Rupees 150 per dose as service charges. Adequate quantity of COVID-19 va ccines is 
likely to be available for vaccination of all eligible beneficiaries aged 18  years and 
above, and the Government of India is committed to ensure vaccination of these 

37 
 
beneficiaries in shortest possible time. In view of the dynamic nature o f COVID-1 9 
pandemic and evolving status of availability & type of COVID-1 9 vaccines, a definite 
time frame cannot be indicate d currently for completion of vaccination. The COVID-1 9 
vaccination drive is based on WHO ’s r ecommendations & g lobal pr actices, with an 
aim to m aximize the impact of vaccination, save lives and keep the health system 
intact and functioning. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 2(II) 
 
3.3 The Committee also feel that until the efficacy and safety of the COVID- 19 
vaccine is attained completely, it is responsibility of the Government of 
India to provide medical and life insurance cover to all persons vaccinated 
during Emergency Use Authorization phase of vaccination in case the 
consumers suffer post vaccination side effects. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 3.4 CDSCO accords permission to manufacture or import COVID-19 vaccines after 
ensuring Safety, Quality, Immunogenicity and Efficacy of Vaccines in consult ation with 
Subject Expert Committee (SEC) comprising subject matter experts from Microbiology, 
Pulmonology, Immunology, Paediatrics, Internal medicine etc. and in complianc e with 
the provisions of New Drugs and Clinical Trials Rules, 2019.  
MoHFW has informed that in view of the pandemic situation when vaccines are needed 
to be developed and administered in record time, globally, the countries are using  
COVID-19 vaccines under emergency use approval. These vaccines are approved fo r 
use only after these have documented minimum acceptable level of qu ality, safety and 
efficacy prescribed by the National Regulator. Same is the case in India. In India, there 
is no provision of compensation for recipients of COVID-19 vaccine against any  kind of 
side effects or medical complications that may arise due to COVID-19 inoculat ion. 
However, measures have been put in place like availability of anaphylax is kits at each 
vaccination site, observation of vaccine recipients for 30 minutes at session site for any  
adverse events so as to take timely corrective measure and if required imme diate 
referral to Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI) management centre. Also, the 
AEFI management of such cases are provided free of cost in Public Health F acilities. 
The COVID-19 vaccination is voluntary for the beneficiary and is in public health interest 
of the country. 
 
 RECOMMENDATION NO 7  
Need for Timely Creation of Beneficiary Identification Data by NEGVAC:  
3.5 The Committee note that the Government of India has set up a National 
Expert Group on Vaccine Administration for COVID-19 (NEGVAC) on 7 th August, 
2020 under the chairmanship of Dr V K Paul, Member NITI Aayog, with Secretary, 

38 
 
Health & Family Welfare as Co-chair and Secretaries of Ministries/Departments of 
External Affairs, Biotechnology, Health Research, Pharmaceuticals, Electronics & 
IT and other experts as members. One of the mandates of this Group for COVID-
19 vaccine roll out is prioritization of population groups. The Committee while 
examining the challenges faced by NEGVAC was informed that the specific 
challenges before the NEGVAC are identification of vaccine candidates for roll-
out in the country and prioritizing the beneficiaries for the same. In this regard, 
the Committee note that there will be huge demand for vaccine upon its 
availability in view of the global scale of pandemic.  Accordingly, NEGVAC has 
been discussing the prioritization of various groups in terms of Health Care 
Workers (HCWs), Front Line Workers (FLWs), elderly population (aged 50 years 
and above) and people aged less than 50 years with co-morbidities who could be 
covered first. States/UTs and central line ministries are creating the database of 
HCWs working in their respective health facilities/hospitals/laboratories etc. This 
database of HCWs will be used for vaccinating them in the first phase of 
vaccination. Similarly, databases for other priority groups are also being 
prepared. The Committee note that NEGVAC is able to create only the database of 
about 3 crore   HCWs and FLWs in the country since its creation five months 
ago.  In this regard, the Committee feel that authentic databases of various 
priority groups are very much necessary for timely and successful execution of 
COVID-19 vaccination programme, The Committee, therefore, would like to make 
the following recommendations: - 
(i)       Creation of databases of various priority groups viz. elderly population, 
people with co-morbidities, women and children should be expedited by Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare in coordination with states/UTs and this work may 
be completed within a definite time frame.   NEGVAC may coordinate this work on 
priority basis. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
3.6 At the  start  of  COVID-19  vaccination  drive , 
the  database  was  created  for  th e  prioritized groups of Health Care Workers and 
Front Line Workers as these a re defined a nd organized occupation categories which 
were linked with & vaccinated as per their pare nt organization/facility . However, 
subsequently, with expansion of the prioritiz ed categori es, i.e., pers ons > 60 years 
from 1st March 2021, persons aged 45- 59 years with co-morbidities from 1 5 th Marc h 
2021, all persons > 45 years of age from 1st April 2021 and most recently all persons > 
18 years of age from 1 st May 2021, the need for creation of a database before 
vaccination drive did not remain as the vaccination drive h as been opened for all 
adults a nd has been made people-centri c. To avail vaccination, individuals pre-
register themselves on Co-WIN portal by e ntering certain required details or take a 
walk-in appointment, thereby, negating the need for creation of a database 
beforehand. 
  

39 
 
States/UTs we re request ed to cre ate a database of Health Care Workers and Front 
Line Workers as these are defined and organized occupation categories which were 
linked & vaccinated as per their parent organization/facility. 
(ii)        Immediate attention should be paid for timely enumeration and 
vaccination of elderly population (aged 50 years and above) and people aged less 
than 50 years with co-morbidities throughout the country for their vaccination in 
the second phase of vaccination as they are vulnerable for the disease and 
mortality. 
Further HCWs and FLWs may constitute workers from both the organized and 
unorganized sectors.  In this regard, particular care may be taken by both the 
Union and States/UT Governments to vaccinate the workers from 
private/unorganized sectors particularly the temporary/casual/contractual 
workers. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT  
3.7 As also mention ed above, the vaccination process has evolved over the period 
of time a nd has been made people-centric where vacc ination is provid ed on-demand 
by the beneficiaries. They can c hoose the time and place of vaccination as per their 
convenience. To ensure ade quate protection through 1 st a nd 2 nd dose to this 
population group, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has time and again 
emphasised with States/UTs on ensuring the 2 nd dose to the due beneficiaries and has 
been conducting regular review meeting with the States/UTs to follow-up on the same. 
The Health Care Workers and Front Line Workers as prioritized by NEGVAC comprised 
workers from both public and private sector (including t e m p o r a r y/casual/ contractual 
workers). The same was communi cated to the States/UTs throu gh virtual m eetings, 
written communication and Operational Guide lines. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 8 
Priority Vaccination of People living in Dense Localities and Hot Spot Areas 
3.8 The Committee note the stand taken by the Government that the decision 
on prioritization of additional groups such as people living in dense localities of 
cities and towns, slum areas, etc.   for COVID-19 vaccination will be taken b ased 
on evolving scientific evidence to maximize the impact of vaccination 
drive.  COVID 19 is an infectious disease mainly spread through the non-
maintenance of social distancing.  In our country, there are plenty of densely 
populated areas in cities and towns including slum areas where social distancing 
norm is very difficult to be followed and those areas remain breeding grounds for 
COVID 19. Moreover, there are hot spot areas where COVID 19 cases are more 
when compared to other areas.  The Committee, therefore, recommend to 
NEGVAC to cover the densely populated areas in cities and towns, slum areas 
and hot spot areas under COVID 19 vaccination programme on priority basis to 
contain the spread of the disease in an effective manner. 

40 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
3.9 Initially, the COV ID- 19 vaccination drive covere d the Health Care Workers & 
Frontline Workers, which lat er opened up for all pers ons >45 years of ag e. With the 
introduction of the Liberalized Pricing a nd Accelerated National COVID- 1 9 
Vaccination Strategy from 1 st May 2021, the vaccination is open to a ll persons age d 
above 18 years irrespec tive of place of residence, gender or epidemiological situation 
of the area. This strategy cuts across a ll areas and has opened up vaccination 
opportunity to population beyond the groups initially prioritized by NEGVAC. 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO 9 
Smart Vaccination Programme 
3.10 The Committee note the proposal of the Indian Council for Medical 
Research that smart vaccination rather than mass vaccination is beneficial at the 
initial stages of vaccination programme due to limited availability of 
vaccines.  Such smart vaccination pertains to vaccinating those individuals who 
are at the highest risk of contracting COVID 19 infection or mortality. Through 
this approach, further reduction in number of symptomatic as well as 
asymptomatic cases is expected to achieve. In this regard, the Committee note 
that the Government of India has started the first phase of COVID 19 vaccination 
programme for vaccinating three crore Health Care Workers who are in direct 
contact with COVID 19 patients and also front line workers who at the greater risk 
of infection due to their nature of duties.  While the Committee is agreeing with 
the proposal that smart vaccination is beneficial at the initial stages of 
vaccination programme, the Committee are of the firm view that the goal of the 
COVID 19 vaccination programme should be universal vaccination of 
entire   population of the country with safe and efficacious vaccines so as to 
create strong herd immunity in the country against COVID 19.   The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should chalk out a definite 
programme for mass vaccination of all the people in the country with safe and 
efficacious vaccines and execute the same in a time bound manner. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
3.11 MoHFW has informed that the COVID-19 vaccination drive started on 1 6th 
January 2021. Th e Day 1 witnessed vaccination of the highest number of 
beneficiaries covered anywhere in the world on the first day. With limited  
manufacturing capacity and limited number of vaccine manufacturers, th e National 
Expert Group on Vaccine Administration for COV ID-1 9 (NEGVAC) prioritized 
beneficiaries for vaccination. From starting with the Health Care Workers from 1 6th 
Jan' 21, the vaccination drive has been sequentially expanded to cover Front Line 
Workers from 2 nd Feb' 21, persons aged 60 years and above and persons aged 4 5 
years and above with specified comorbidities from 1st March 2021. From 1 st April all 
persons above 45 years of age were made eligible for vaccination. From 1 st May all 

41 
 
persons above 18 years of age were made eligible depending upon the decision 
made by State/UT. As per Revised Guideline for National Covid Vaccination Program 
which came into effect from 21st June 2021 all citizen above 18 years of age are 
eligible for free vaccination in Government COVID vaccination centres. 
  
Under the Liberalized Pricing and Accelerated National COVI D-19 Vaccination 
Strategy, with effect from 1 st May 2021, all individuals above 1 8 years of age  are 
eligible for COVID-19 vaccination as per decisions made by State/UT governments. 
  
In the direction of universal vaccination of population of the country with safe and 
efficacious vaccines, GoI revised its Guidelines for National COVID Vaccination 
Program based on the experiences gained from 1st May 2021. Under this, GoI will 
procure 75% of the vaccines being produced by the manufacturers in the country  and 
will be provided free of cost to States/UTs as has been the case from the 
commencement of the National Vaccination Programme. These doses will be 
administered by the States/UTs free of cost to all citizens as per priority throu gh 
Government Vaccination Centres. It continues to engage with the private secto r to 
provide wider options and convenience to the beneficiaries, where priva te sector 
hospitals can directly procure vaccines upto 25% of monthly production of the 
manufacturers. All citizens irrespective of their income status are entitled to f ree 
vaccination under the programme. Those who have the ability to pay are en couraged 
to use private hospital ’s vaccination centres. Demand of vaccines from the private 
hospitals is aggregated in CoWIN portal and payment of this is made directly  to 
manufacturer by the private hospitals.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                          KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
16 November,  2021                                                Chairperson, 
25 Kartika, 1943 (Saka)                                           Standing Committee on  
                                        Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

44 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE  
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2021-22) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 16 th November, 2021 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1700.hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
K. KANIMOZHI -    CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
4. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
5. Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
6. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
7. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
8. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
9. 
 
 
 
       10  
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
 
Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
11 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
12 Dr. Anil Jain 
13 Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
14 Shri Arun Singh 
 
 SECRETARIAT  
1.  Shri  N. K. Jha  -  Director 
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director   
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Panna Lal   - Under Secretary 
  
  2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the newly  constituted 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to co nsider 
Memorandum No.1 regarding selection of subjects for examination during the  year 
(2021-22) and also to discuss the future course of action of the Committee duri ng the 
tenure.  
 
3. The Committee then considered Memorandum No. 1 and after discussion 
selected the following subjects pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Ferti lizers for 
detailed examination during 2021-22:- 
 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
1. Nano-fertilizers for sustainable crop production and maintaining soil    health.   
2. Tax structure on fertilizers sector in terms of GST and import duties – 
analysis of the tax structure of raw material and final products and its imp act 
                                 
APPENDIX - I 
 
 

45 
 
on self-sufficiency and use of fertilizers. 
3. Prices, Availability and distribution of fertilizers.  
 
 
II. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
4.  Vision 2024 - To establish India as a leading manufacturer of chemica ls and 
petrochemicals. 
5.  Insecticides – promotion and development including safe usage -   licensing 
regime for insecticides. 
6.  Disposal of toxic waste from Bhopal Gas Leak site. 
7. Environmental Impact of Petrochemical products. 
 
III. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
8.    Promotion of Medical Device Industry.  
9.    Availability of Medicines and Medical devices for COVID Management.  
10.  Self sufficiency of key starting Material and intermediates. 
 
4. The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft Action T aken 
Reports unanimously without any amendment/change:- 
 
i.     XXX    XXX     XXX  
 
ii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
iii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
iv.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
v.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
vi.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
vii. ATR on the recommendations/ observations of the Committee co ntained in the 
Twenty Second Report on the subject “Status of COVID-19 vaccine production in 
India” (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
 
5  The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to finalize and prese nt th e 
Action Taken Reports to the Parliament in the ensuing session. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

46 
 
Appendix – II 
(Vide Para-3 of Introduction to Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS ON THE SUBJECT 'STATUS OF COVID- 19 
VACCINE PRODUCTION IN INDIA' OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
I Total No. of Recommendations 21 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 (Vide Recommendation Nos. 1(ii),1(iii),1(iv), 1(v), 1(vi), 2(i), 3, 4, 5, 6, 
10, 11,12, 13 and 14  )   
15 
 
Percentage of Total 71.0% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
(Vide Recommendation No.  1(i), 2(ii), 7(i), 7(ii), 8 and 9)   
 
06 
 
Percentage of Total   
29.0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:-   
 (Vide Recommendation No. Nil )                                                              
Nil 
Percentage of Total   0% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
(Vide Recommendation No. Nil )                                                              
Nil 
Percentage of Total 0% 
Total 100% 
 