1 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Thirty-Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2022-2023)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
  
August, 2022/ Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
36 

2 
 
CC&F No. 164 
 
THIRTY- SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Thirty-Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2022-2023)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers) 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08 August, 2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08 August, 2022 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2022/ Sravana, 1944 (Saka) 


3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2021-22) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter I Report 1 
Chapter II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
12 
Chapter III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
27 
Chapter IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
28 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
34 
 APPENDICES  
 I.  Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2021-22) held on 4th August
, 2022.  
35 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second Report (17th 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers on  ‘Demands for Grants (2022-2023) ’ of the Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
37 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri Deepak Baij 
5. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
6. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
7. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
8. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
10. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
11. Shri Vasava Parbhubhai Nagarbhai  
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt Aparupa Poddar (Afrin Ali) 
14. Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
15. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
16. Shri M. Selvaraj 
17. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
18. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
19. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
21. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
24. Dr. Anil Jain 
25. Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
26. Shri Arun Singh 
27. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
28. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
29. Vacant* 
30. Vacant* 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Vinay Kumar Mohan  : Joint Secretary  
2. Shri  Nabin Kumar Jha   : Director  
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh   : Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Panna Lal    : Under Secretary 
 
* Vacant vice Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar (LJD), MP (RS) retired on 02.04.2022 from the Membership of Rajya Sabha. (RSS I.D. 
No. 1(2)/2019- Coord dated 18.01.2022).  
* Vacant vice Shri Jaiprakash Nishad (BJP), MP (RS) retired on 04.07.2022 from the Membership of Rajya Sabha. (RSS I.D. No. 
1(2)/2019- Coord dated 18.01.2022).  

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2021-2022) 
having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this Thirty-Sixth 
Report on Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendatio ns of 
the Committee contained in Thirty-Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on  
‘Demands for Grants (2022- 23)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers). 
2.  The Thirty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 21 st March, 2022. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers) furnished their replies on 12 th July, 2022 indicating Action Taken on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second Report. The 
Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 4 th August, 
2022. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second Report (Sev enteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
    
 
 
New Delhi; KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
 08 August, 2022_ CHAIRPERSON, 
13 Sravana, 1944 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS. 
 
 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observatio ns/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contains in their Thirty-Second Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2022- 23’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers). 
1.2  The Thirty-Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajy a Sabha 
on 21 March 2022. It contained 12 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of 
Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and  are 
categorized as follows:-  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
 
 Rec. Nos. 4, 6, 7, 8, 9 , 10, 11 and 12                                         (Tot al = 08)       
Included in Chapter-II of the Report                                 Percentage: 67%  
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply:-  
 
       Nil                                      (Total = 0)  
  Included in Chapter-III of the Report                            Percentage: 00.00% 
       
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the   
Government  have not  been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration:-   
     
Rec. No. 1, 2, 3 and 5                                                               (Total = 04)  
                                                                                           Percentage: 33% 
  Included in Chapter-IV of the Report    
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of t he 
Government are still awaited :- 
 
       Nil                                       (Total =0) 
                  Percentage: 00.00% 
 
   Included in Chapter-V of the Report                            
 1.3      The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the observations/ 
comments/ recommendations contained in Chapter- I of this Report may be 

2 
 
furnished expeditiously and not later than three months from the date of 
presentation of the Report. 
  
1.4       The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier Observations/ 
Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Inadequate Budgetary Allocation in Budget Estimates for 2022-23. 
 
1.5    With regard to the Inadequate Budgetary Allocation in Budget  Estimates for 
2022-23, the Committee had recommended as follows:-     
 
“The Committee note that a budgetary allocation of Rs.109242.23 Cr ore has been 
made in respect of Demand No.6 pertaining to Department of Fertilizers for the  year 
2022-23. This allocation has been made against the projected deman d of 
Rs.176760.59/- Crore of the Department to meet the requirements fo r its various 
schemes and policies.  In this regard, the Committee are dismayed to note tha t the cut 
in BE allocation is by Rs.67518.36/- Crore which amounts to 38 % of the  projected 
requirements of the Department.  According to the Department of Fertilizers, allocated 
amount is not sufficient to meet the projected requirement of subsidy f unds for the year 
2022-23 and the requirement for additional funds will be re-assessed an d demanded at 
the time of RE/Supplementary for 2022-23 depending on the prices of raw materials and 
fertilizers.  However, the expenditure before RE stage is done on the b asis of BE 
allocation only.  RE is mostly finalized by December every year and the same is 
regularized through 2 nd batch of supplementary demands for grants. Hence, the funds 
approved at RE stage mostly reaches the Department during the last quarter of  the 
financial year only.   During 2021-22, an allocation of Rs.84041.39 Cr ore was made at 
BE stage which was increased to Rs.149663.28 Crore at RE stage which was about 
78% increase over the BE.  As a result of such late infusion of funds, the  Department of 
Fertilizers was able to spend only Rs.117675.14 Crore as on 31 January, 2 022.  In view 
of the above, the Committee feel that the gap between the proj ected requirement for 
2022-23 and the budgetary allocation may eventually result in delayed  payment/ 
settlement of claims in respect of both Urea and P&K fertilizers subsidies an d will 
thereby adversely affect the financial performance of the fertilizer secto r as a whole. 
Taking this situation into consideration, the Committee recommended earlier also that 
Ministry of Finance be convinced at the highest level to declare the Depart ment of 
Fertilizers as a “Priority Department ” so that the fund requirements of the Department 
may be met without any cut.  Drastic reduction of funds at BE stage will upset the 
expenditure planning for the whole year and the substantial allocation of fund at RE 
stage for subsidy payment reflects the poor planning by both the Ministry  of Finance 
and the Department of Fertilizers.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Department of Fertilizers should strengthen its budgetary planning process and  come 

3 
 
out with accurate demand for funds so as to convince the Ministry of Finance to a llocate 
funds as per its requirements at BE stage itself without any cuts for its subsidy 
schemes. Considering the importance of providing fertilizers to the farmers at 
subsidized rates, the Ministry of Finance should accord priority status to this 
Department and strive to allocate the funds required by the Department at BE stage 
itself which will facilitate timely and optimum utilization of funds by the Department and 
will eventually give boost to the agriculture sector in the country. The sentiments 
expressed by this Committee may also be conveyed to the Ministry of Finan ce for its 
compliance. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made  in this 
regard.” 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT 
  
1.6      In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as follows:- 
  
    "Department of Fertilizers sends the budget proposal based on the proje ctions made 
for the coming year depending on the requirement of fertilizers a nd prices of raw 
material and fertilizers prevailing. The same is conveyed to M/o Finance  with proper 
justification. If and when, the need for more funds arises, the same are so ught at 
different stages during a Financial Year viz. 1 st, 2 nd and 3 rd Supplementary and RE 
Stage, based on the fund position/utilization. Department ensures th at there is no 
shortage of funds and at every stage, requirements are assessed and fun ds demanded 
from Ministry of Finance. In the past, Ministry of Finance has provided funds at all 
stages as per our requirement. 
 Recommendations of Standing Committee have been conveyed to M/o  
Finance." 
  
 
1.7 The Committee noted that the Department has been allocated an amount of 
Rs. 1,09242.23 Crore against the demand of Rs. 1,76,760.59 Crore for the financial 
year 2022-23, which  is 38% less than the BE.  According to the Department, the 
allocated funds are not sufficient to meet the projected requirement of subsidy 
funds for the year 2022-23 and the requirement for additional funds will be re-
assessed and demanded at the time of RE/Supplementary for 2022-23 which is 
finalized by the end of the year in the month of December.  The Committee, in its 
report, further noted that the Department was allocated an amount of Rs. 
84041.39 Crore at BE stage for 2021- 22  which was increased to Rs. 1,49,663.28 

4 
 
Crore at RE stage, that is,  about 78% increase over the BE. However, due to late 
release of funds, the Department could spend only Rs. 1, 17,675.14 Crore up to 31 
Jan 2022. The Committee also observed that funds approved at RE stage mostly 
reaches the Department during the last quarter of financial year only.  Taking into 
consideration the above facts and noting that there is a huge gap between the BE 
and RE of the Department for the year 2022-23 and 2021- 22, the Committee had 
recommended the Department to strengthen its budgetary planning process and 
come out with accurate demand for funds. However, the Committee regret to note 
that steps taken to strengthen budgetary planning process have not been 
furnished. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that 
urgent steps need to be initiated to strengthen the budgetary planning process 
and Committee be apprised accordingly. The Department has submitted that in 
the past, the Ministry of Finance has provided funds at all stages as per their 
requirement.  Now, therefore, it becomes imperative on the part of the Department 
to project realistic BE.   
Recommendation No. 2 
  
Timely placement of proposals for allocation at RE 2022-23 
             
1.8      With regard to the timely placement of proposals for   allo cation at RE 2022-23, 
the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee are concerned to note that the Department has been alloc ated Rs. 
42000 Crore in BE 2022-23 against the budgetary proposal  of  
Rs. 72702 Crore for Nutrient Based subsidy (NBS) scheme.  In respect of urea sub sidy, 
the Department has been allocated Rs. 67202.42 Crore in BE 2022-23 ag ainst its 
requirement of Rs. 104016.64 Crore for the year.  Further, the BE allocation for 2022-23 
in respect of urea subsidy is 21% lower than the Revised Estimates of 2021-22 a nd 
there is a 35 percent decrease in NBS subsidy this time when compared to RE o f 2021-
22.   In regard to the reasons for reduction of budgetary allocation at BE stage of 2022-
23 and its adequacy in meeting fund requirements of urea and NBS subsidy  schemes, 

5 
 
the Department of Fertilizers has stated that the Ministry of Finance a llocated the funds 
as per the priorities of the Government and financial space availab le.  Actual 
requirement of funds will depend on the prevailing prices of some fertilizers and raw 
materials in the market. However, if the need arises, it will request the Ministry of 
Finance to allocate additional funds at RE 2022-23 stage and in the  Supplementary 
Demands for Grants during 2022-23. Keeping in view the trend of the previous years, 
the Committee are of the view that the budgetary allocation at BE stage of 2022-23 may 
not be adequate to meet the entire fund requirements under Urea and  NBS subsidy 
Schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizers 
should calculate the fund requirement for the whole year and place its propos al timely 
before the Ministry of Finance for making additional allocations in RE 2022-23 so  as to 
meet its projected requirements under Urea and NBS subsidy Schemes both  for 
indigenous and imported fertilizers during the year.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the measures taken in this regard.” 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
1.9     In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
  
    "The recommendation suggested by the committee is duly considered.  The 
Programme divisions are regularly monitoring the expenditure and available fun ds 
under Urea and NBS schemes. The additional requirement of funds, if a ny, will be 
sought well in time at the RE – 2022-23 stage." 
 
1.10 The Committee had recommended that the Department should calculate 
the fund requirements for the whole year and place its proposal timely before the 
Ministry of Finance for making additional allocations at RE 2022-23 so as to meet 
its projected requirements under urea and NBS subsidy schemes both for 
indigenous and imported fertilizers during the year. The Committee had desired 
to be apprised of the measures taken in this regard. The Department in their reply 
has submitted that the recommendations suggested by the Committee is duly 
considered but the steps taken, if any, by the Department have not been 
furnished. The Committee therefore desire to know what steps have been initiated 
by the Ministry in this regard.  

6 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Need to dismantle Carry-over liabilities. 
 
1.11       With regard to the need to dismantle Carry-over liabilities, the Committee ha d 
recommended as follows:-    
  
Expressing its concern to the accumulation of huge amounts of carry over 
liabilities i.r.o. both indigenous and imported   urea and  P&K fertilizers ov er the years 
which reflected its lack of proper budgetary planning, the Committee recommended  as 
under:-  
  
“The Committee are concerned to note that the estimated carry-over li abilities 
(COL) for payment of subsidy during 2021-22 in respect of indigeno us and 
imported   urea will be Rs. 6000 Crore and  Rs. 12300 Crore, respectively a nd in 
respect of indigenous  and imported P&K fertilizers the same will be Rs.1 300 Crore 
and  Rs. 2073 Crore, respectively.  A total of Rs.21673 Crore is likely to be accumulated 
as COL in respect of indigenous and imported Urea and P&K fertilize rs by the end of 
2021-22. In this regard, Department of Fertilizer has stated that it has req uested for 
grant of Rs. 6000 Crore under 3rd supplementary grant to meet Indigen ous Urea funds 
requirement in Quarter-IV of 2021-22 and if the supplementary is not granted, 
anticipated carry-over liability of Rs. 6000 Crore would be settled in FY2022-2 3. The 
Department has also requested the Ministry of Finance to provide additional fun ds 
under 3rd Supplementary grant to clear COL in respect of imported urea. Howeve r, 
COL in respect of Indigenous P&K and Imported P&K are likely to be completely 
cleared from the available budget (RE 2021-22) by the end of March 2022. The 
Committee deplore the tendency of the Department of Fertilizers to accumu late carry 
over liabilities year-after-year.  This tendency clearly shows the lack o f proper planning 
in its budgetary process. In this regard, the Committee recommend that a concrete 
mechanism should  be developed by the Department of Fertilizers to accurate ly 
estimate the RE stage fund requirements for the payment of subsidies in respect of both 
indigenous and imported  fertilizers taking into account various factors including 
international price situation and place an accurate demand with the Ministry  of Finance 
for fund allocation at RE stage so that the Department may timely utiliz e the entire RE 
allocation for the payment of subsidies without any COL  by the end of  a financial 
year.  A copy of this recommendation may also be sent to Ministry of Fin ance for its 
compliance while deciding RE allocations for the Department of Fertilizers.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT 
1.12      In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) have stated as under:- 
  
         "The settlement of subsidy / DBT claims of fertilizer companies a re being done 
regularly subject to availability of funds. The actual Carry-over liabilities for 2021-22 are 
Rs.1529.37 crores against the estimated Carryover liabilities of Rs.6000.00 crores in r/o  

7 
 
Indigenous Urea.  The detailed information regarding utilization of fun ds allocated at RE 
2021-22 and status of Carryover liability (2021-22) in r/o Indigenous Urea is as under: 
  
Funds Status of 2021-22 Carryover liabilities status 
Final allocation Expenditure Carryover 
liability as on 
01.04.2022 
Carryover 
liability paid 
during 2022- 23 
as on date 
Balance 
Carryover 
liabilities as 
on date 
54619.72 54619.72 1529.37 1475.94 53.43 
  
The carry-over liabilities (COL) in respect of Indigenous P&K, Imported P &K and 
Imported Urea for the FY 2021-22 (as on 01.04.2022)are as follows; 
  
Sr. 
no. 
Scheme CoL as on 
1.4.22 
Remark 
1 Indigenous 
P&K 
237.66 Cr Digital Freight bills of Rs. 237.66 Cr could 
not be passed due to technical glitch in 
New Freight Module of iFMS. These 
claims were generated digitally for the first 
time. 
2 Imported P&K 2.57 Cr Claims worth rs. 2.57 cr could not be 
processed because of incomplete 
documents. 
3 Imported Urea 869.50 Cr Funds allocated in FY 2021-22 fully 
utilized.  
4 City Compost 0.00  -  
  
  
  
1.13   The Committee note that for the year 2021- 22, an amount of Rs. 54619.72 
Crore was allocated for indigenous Urea and the whole amount has been utilized 
but still a whopping amount of Rs. 1529.37 Crore was pending as on 01 April, 
2022. The Committee further note that during the year 2022-23 so far an amount 
of Rs. 1475.94 Crore have been paid for carryover liabilities but still a significant 
amount of Rs. 53.43 Crore remains to be paid. Carry over liabilities as on  
01 April, 2022 in respect of indigenous P&K, imported P&K and imported Urea for 
the year 2021-22 is also not satisfactory. The carry over liabilitie s of indigenous 
P&K as on 01 April 2022 which was Rs. 237.66 Crore could not be paid due to 

8 
 
technical glitch in new Freight Module of integrated Fertilizer Management 
System (iFMS). Further, the carry over liabilities of Imported P&K which were 2.57 
Crore could not be paid because of incomplete documents. The Committee had, 
therefore, recommended that a concrete mechanism should be developed by the 
Department of Fertilizers to estimate the RE stage fund requirements accurately 
for the payment of subsidies in respect of both indigenous and imported 
fertilizers. However, the Department has submitted nothing about it. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation and hope 
that the concrete mechanism may be brought into existence.  Further, issues like 
technical glitch in New Freight Module of iFMS and incomplete documents may 
be resolved expeditiously and at no cost such issues should be allowed to act as 
a hindrance in the payment of carry over liabilities. 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
  
Promotion of Single Super Phosphate (SSP) and Potash Derived from Molasses. 
  
1.14    With regard to the promotion of SSP and Potash Derived from Molass es, the 
Committee had recommended as follows:-    
 
            “The Committee is  glad to learn that Single Super Phosphate (SSP) fertilizer is 
100% manufactured indigenously in our country and  that Potash derive d from 
Molasses(PDM) has been included under NBS scheme to promote indigenous s ource 
of fertilizers.  According to the Department of Fertilizers,  the country ha s 111 
manufacturing units of SSP and the total production of SSP during  the rabi season of 
2020-21 and 2021-22 was 23.66 LMT and 21.53 LMT, respectiv ely. Farmers use two 
bags of SSP with 20 kilograms of urea to substitute one bag of DAP.   It was also learnt 
that last year the Government of  Rajasthan  had issued order that the us age of SSP  in 
place of DAP should be made the standard practice as SSP is   very cost effe ctive  and 
is thus known as the poor man ’s DAP.  The Committee is also pleased to note that the 
Department of Fertilizers is planning to include SSP in the freight subsidy scheme  to 
facilitate its availability in other States as well. However, the usage of SSP in dustry is 
limited to some States where it is mainly produced. The Committee therefore, stro ngly 
recommend that the Department may vigorously promote setting up of SSP and PDM 
manufacturing units throughout the country even through Public Priva te Partnership 
mode to increase their production capacity so that they are abundantly a vailable in the 
country.  This may also support balanced fertilization, save precious foreign exch ange 
and decrease our import dependence in respect of NPK fertilizers in the lon g run.  In 
view of the increase in the international prices of the NPK fertilizers,  the Comm ittee 

9 
 
hope that the Department of Fertilizers will accord top priority in p romotion of SSP and 
PDM in the country and apprise the Committee about the action taken b y it in the 
matter.” 
  
REPLY  OF   THE GOVERNMENT 
  
1.15   In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
  
      "Proposal of DoF has been approved by the Cabinet on 28.4. 22 to include SSP in 
the freight subsidy scheme and the fertilizer movement/ supply of DoF. This inclusion 
may facilitate the manufacturers of SSP to ensure availability of SSP throughout the 
country and make SSP available even to those states where it is not manufactured. DoF 
has been continuously promoting SSP and resultantly it has been noticed from the iFMS 
data that the sales of SSP has increased by 56 % and DAP has decreased by 21% 
during Rabi 2021-22 (from Oct. to Dec.). As per the analysis, the sale of D AP 
decreased with corresponding increase in sale of SSP in major states of India i.e . 
Assam, Bihar, Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, West Bengal etc. 
  
Potash derived from Molasses (PDM) is an indigenous fertilizer containing 14.5 % 
of potassic content. It has been included in the Nutrient Based Subsidy Reg ime vide 
Department of Fertilizer's Notification number 23011/1/2021-P&K dated  13.10.2021. 
Guidelines to register the PDM manufacturing companies under NBS regime ha ve been 
finalized and shall be issued shortly." 
  
  
1.16      The Committee note that the proposal to include SSP in the freight 
subsidy scheme has been approved by the Cabinet on 28 th April, 2022 which may 
facilitate the manufacturers of SSP to ensure its availability throughout the 
country. The Committee further note that Potash derived from Molasses (PDM) 
has also been included in the Nutrient Based Subsidy Regime vide Notification 
dated 13.10.2021 of the Department .  A perusal of iFMS data reveals that though 
the sales of SSP has increased by 56% and DAP has decreased by 21% during 
Rabi 2021-22.  However, the reply of the Department is silent on setting up of SSP 
and PDM manufacturing units throughout the country as recommended by the 
Committee.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation and desire 

10 
 
that the Department should vigorously promote setting up of SSP and PDM 
manufacturing units in all States/ UT’s, even through PPP mode.   
 
Recommendation No.6 
  
Need for continuance of Urea Subsidy scheme. 
  
1.17   With regard to the need for continuance of Urea Subsidy scheme, the C ommittee 
had recommended as follows:-    
 
            “The Committee note that for sustained agricultural growth it is imperative that 
Urea is made available to farmers at affordable prices and therefore urea  is being sold 
to farmers at statutorily notified uniform MRP. The difference between the delivered cost 
of urea at farm gate and net market realization by the urea units is  given as subsidy to 
the urea manufacturer/importer by the Government of India. The Depa rtment of 
Fertilizers has submitted the proposal for continuation of Urea Subsidy Scheme  for 5-
year period from 2021-22 to 2025-26 for the appraisal of Expen diture Finance 
Committee(EFC) on 2nd August, 2021. However,  EFC recommended that Urea Subsidy 
Scheme as per the present proposal may be continued for one year till 
31.03.2022.  EFC also inter alia recommended that it may also be ex amined if urea can 
be brought under Nutrient  Based Subsidy Scheme and  it may be ensured that nitrogen 
subsidy under urea subsidy policy as well as under Nutrient Based Subsidy  (NBS) 
policy should  be at par. However,  “Third Party Evaluation” conducted on  Urea Subsidy 
has recommended that there is necessity for continuation of the urea subsidy scheme to 
help the urea industries, farmers and the agriculture sector as it has a great impa ct on 
agricultural sector in increasing crop yield and reducing the expenditure of farmers for 
cultivation.  The Committee feel that Urea is a very sensitive  fertilizer in the country as 
it is used by most of the farmers and it has lead to green revolution in the co untry. 
Moreover, the Maximum Retail Price of  urea is statutorily fixed by the  Government 
whereas the market price of P & K fertilizers covered under NBS Scheme are 
determined by market forces based on demand/supply balance. The C ommittee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should make wide 
consultations with all stake holders including the farmers on the feasibility of bringing 
urea under NBS Scheme, the extent to which it would affect the interest s of farmers,  its 
impact on agricultural production, etc. before arriving at a considered decision in this 
regard.  Hence, the Ministry of Finance and EFC may be requested to exte nd the 
present urea subsidy scheme beyond 31 March, 2022 as recommended in the T hird 
Party Evaluation Report.  This recommendation may also be shared with the Ministr y of 
Finance for its consideration.  Progress made in the matter may be intimated to the 
Committee.”  
 
 
 
  

11 
 
REPLY  OF   THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.18   In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
  
“The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to Ministry of  Finance vide 
O.M. dated 27 th April, 2022. Further, Department of Fertilizers is in the process of 
preparing a fresh EFC proposal for continuation of Urea Subsidy Scheme u p to 
31.03.2025.” 
  
  
1.19    The Committee note that the recommendation of this Committee for 
extension of the present urea subsidy scheme beyond 31 st March 2022 as 
recommended in the Third Party Evaluation Report has been forwarded to the 
Ministry of Finance in April, 2022 and  the Department is in the process of 
preparing a fresh Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) proposal for 
continuation of Urea Subsidy Scheme up to 31.03.2025.  The Committee desire 
that the Department may take up the matter at the highest level with the Ministry 
of Finance for continuation of the present urea subsidy scheme beyond 31st 
March, 2022. The process of preparing a fresh EFC propos al for continuation of 
urea Subsidy scheme up to 31.03.2025 may also be expedited.  
  
  
  
  

12 
 
CHAPTER – II 
  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
 BY THE GOVERNMENT 
  
  
Recommendation No.4 
  
Need for diversification of sources of Imports of fertilizers, etc. 
 
2.1     With regard to the need for diversification of sources of Imports o f fertilizers, etc., 
the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
The Committee note with concern that over the last two financial years the sub sidy 
towards indigenously manufactured fertilizers has decreased and subsidy portio n 
towards imported fertilizers has increased.  According to the Department of Fertilize rs, 
the Country is dependent on imports of Phosphatic fertilizers up- to 90% and for 
Potassic Fertilizers up-to 100% either in the form of finished fertilizers or the ir raw 
material due to non-availability/scarce availability of raw materials in our country. The 
Committee was also apprised that nearly 25-30 per cent Urea is impo rted every year. 
Since P&K fertilizers is decontrolled under the NBS scheme, all P&K fertili zers are 
covered under Open General License (OGL) regime and are imported by the 
companies on commercially viable terms.The Committee noted with concern that th e 
international prices of fertilizers as well as raw materials are constantly increasing 
during the last 1 ½ years due to geo-political situations, etc. making the  import of raw 
material as well as NPK fertilizers particularly DAP very costly to import. As such, it 
leads to a huge expenditure on subsidy for maintaining the same quantity of supply. The 
Committee also learnt that last year the price of Urea has gone up from $300 per metric 
tonne in January, 2021 to around $1,000 per metric tonne in December, 2021. The 
situation may continue the current year as well thereby compelling the Departm ent to 
approach the Ministry of Finance for more funds at the time of Supp lementary 
Demands.  Since the international price situation may continuously increase the subsidy 
budget of the Government, the Committee recommend the following to address the 
situation:- 
i. In order to cushion the effects of fluctuations in international prices of fertilizers  
and raw materials,  the Department should take proactive steps in coordin ation 
with the Ministry of External Affairs and others concerned with result oriented 
approach to diversify the import sources through  signing of  long term 
agreements by our PSUs and other companies for joint ventures abroa d for 
obtaining regular supply of various fertilizers and its raw materials at reasonab le 
prices. 
ii. Since P&K fertilizers are covered under Open General License (OGL) regime 
and are imported by the companies on commercially viable terms a mec hanism 
may be drawn to constantly monitor the international prices and for maintaining 

13 
 
sufficient buffer stock of various fertilizers so as to off-set the effects of  sudden 
price fluctuations in the international market. 
iii. Department of Fertilizers should expedite the discussions with Ministry of Mines, 
Geological Survey of India, Minerals Exploration Corporations Limited and 
Projects & Development India Limited on exploration of minerals for raw 
materials for DAP and other fertilizers in our country itself  and start the 
exploration process at the earliest so as to reduce the dependence on oth er 
countries in case of availability of these minerals in our country itself.    
Above recommendations of the Committee may be conveyed to the Ministry of Finance, 
Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Mines  and others concerned for their 
compliance. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT 
2.2      In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
 (i)        D/o Fertilizers has been taking various efforts in coordination with MEA to 
ensure regular and sufficient supply of raw materials/finished fertilizers to Ind ia at 
reasonable prices from various countries like Canada, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Morocco, 
Jordan etc 
(ii)        Department of Fertilizers (DoF) has developed an IT enabled  system viz., 
Integrated Fertilizer Management System (iFMS), which captures end to end d etails of 
Fertilizer in terms of Production, Movement, availability, requirement, Sale, Su bsidy Bill 
Generation to Subsidy payment to fertilizer companies. The iFMS system can be 
accessed at http://mfms.nic.in/. Concerned stakeholders like DoF, State Agriculture 
Departments, District Collectors, Fertilizer Companies are all provided with separate 
user passwords for operating and monitoring purposes. Few features of iFMS p ortal are 
as below: 
  
 Real time, online tracking of fertilizer movement, along the plant/port-rake point-
district-wholesaler-retailer chain. 
 Real time Fertilizer availability data at State, district, wholesaler & retailer level. 
 Real time tracking of sale of fertilizers at subsidized rates to farmers through PoS 
devices. 
 A complete end to end transaction visibility of fertilizers starting from import/ 
production till sales to farmers. 
Also, a new initiative has been made by the Department of Fertilizers 
with  introduction of Dashboard for various detailed reports related to DoF and States. 
Through this dashboard, Department of Fertilizers is ensuring the availabil ity of stocks 
of all fertilizers at the Wholesalers and retailers. There is also Collector Dashboard, 
Company Dashboard and MarkFed Dashboard. Further, Department of Fertilizers as 
per its mandate, ensures comfortable level of availability in the pipeline so as to  keep a 
cushion for such scenarios that can impact the global supply chain. Fertili zers are made 

14 
 
available well in advance of actual consumption by way of giving all ocation more than 
the requirement for prepositioning of stocks at various points of supply chain esp ecially 
in the lean period of consumption. 
For example the average opening stock of urea, during the last 5 fi nancial years 
(01.04.2018 to 01.04.2022) has been 56.6 LMT whereas the average  requirement of 
urea for the same period has been 340 LMT. It is observed that  f inancial year has 
started with additional stocks (supplied by DoF and available with states), which ha s 
been round about 17 percent of the total annual requirement. Similarly, during last five 
financial years in respect of DAP, MOP and NPK, financial year has started with 
additional stocks which has been round about 25 percent, 23 percent  and 29 percent of 
the total annual requirement. However, there is no specific policy with regard to  buffer 
stock to offset the effects of fluctuations/escalation of price of raw materials in the 
international market. 
(iii)       D/o Fertilizers has been in discussions with M/o Mines, M/s Geological Survey of 
India and M/s Mineral Exploration and Consultancy Ltd. for exploration of raw materi als 
like Phosphate and Potash from the available sources of them in Ind ia. DoF has also 
organized meetings with Fertilizer PSUs and M/o Mines, for allocation of mineral 
blocks  of Phosphate and Potash. M/s FAGLMIL a PSU under DoF is also worki ng on 
exploration and mining of these minerals. 
Recommendation No.6 
 Need for continuance of Urea Subsidy scheme. 
  
2.3   With regard to the need for continuance of Urea Subsidy scheme, t he 
Committee had recommendation as follows:- 
  
Keeping in view the proposal submitted by the Department of Fertilizers 
regarding continuation of Urea Subsidy Scheme for 5-year period from 2021-22 to 
2025-26 for the appraisal of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on 2 nd August, 
2021; the Committee recommended as under: 
  
            “The Committee note that for sustained agricultural growth it is imperative that 
Urea is made available to farmers at affordable prices and therefore urea is being sold 
to farmers at statutorily notified uniform MRP. The difference between the delivered cost 
of urea at farm gate and net market realization by the urea units is  given as subsidy to 
the urea manufacturer/importer by the Government of India. The Dep artment of 
Fertilizers has submitted the proposal for continuation of Urea Subsidy Scheme  for 5-
year period from 2021-22 to 2025-26 for the appraisal of Expen diture Finance 
Committee (EFC) on 2nd August, 2021. However, EFC recommended that Urea Subsidy 
Scheme as per the present proposal may be continued for one year till 
31.03.2022.  EFC also inter alia recommended that it may also be ex amined if urea can 
be brought under Nutrient  Based Subsidy Scheme and  it may be ensured that nitrogen 
subsidy under urea subsidy policy as well as under Nutrient Based Subsid y (NBS) 
policy should   be at par. However, “Third Party Evaluation” conducted on  Urea Subsidy 

15 
 
has recommended that there is necessity for continuation of the urea subsidy scheme to 
help the urea industries, farmers and the agriculture sector as it has a great impa ct on 
agricultural sector in increasing crop yield and reducing the expenditure of farmers for 
cultivation.  The Committee feel that Urea is a very sensitive fertilizer in the co untry as it 
is used by most of the farmers and it has lead to green revolution in th e country. 
Moreover, the Maximum Retail Price of urea is statutorily fixed by the Government 
whereas the market price of P & K fertilizers covered under NBS Scheme are  
determined by market forces based on demand/supply balance. The C ommittee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should make wide 
consultations with all stake holders including the farmers on the feasibility of bringin g 
urea under NBS Scheme, the extent to which it would affect the interest s of farmers,  its 
impact on agricultural production, etc. before arriving at a considered decision in this 
regard.  Hence, the Ministry of Finance and EFC may be requested to exte nd the 
present urea subsidy scheme beyond 31 March, 2022 as recommended in the T hird 
Party Evaluation Report.  This recommendation may also be shared with the Ministr y of 
Finance for its consideration.  Progress made in the matter may be intimated to the 
Committee.”  
  
REPLY  OF   THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.4    In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
  
“The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to Ministry of  Finance vide 
O.M. dated 27 th April, 2022. Further, Department of Fertilizers is in the process of 
preparing a fresh EFC proposal for continuation of Urea Subsidy Scheme u p to 
31.03.2025.” 
  
Recommendation No.7 
 
Research and Development (R&D) activities in Fertilizers Sector. 
  
2.5    With regard to the research and Development (R&D) activities in Fertilizers 
Sector, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Finance opened/ revived a separate  head 
for R&D for the Department of Fertilizers on the basis of the recommendation  made 
by  the Committee in  20th Report (Demands for Grants 2021-22).  A budget of Rs.10 
lakh was provided under this head for  the financial year 2021-22 by taking  token 
supplementary. For the financial year 2022- 23,  an allocation of Rs. 10 lakh has been 
made under the head.  The Committee is however, distressed to note tha t the utilization 
of Rs. 10 lakh Grant- in-Aid (2021-22) for the promotion of R & D in Nano urea  is zero 
when information was furnished to the Committee.  Department has also n ot done any 
R&D activities in fertilizers sector for development of higher efficiency eco-friendly 
fertilizer products. According to the Department of Fertilizers,   Indian Council for 
Fertilizer & Fertilizer Nutrient Research (ICFFTR) has been constituted by fertiliz er 

16 
 
CPSEs under Department of Fertilizers with the objective to undertake resea rch in the 
area of fertilizer and fertilizer manufacturing technology, use of raw m aterial and 
innovation in fertilizer products.   It  is also learnt that  ICFFTR has not received any 
new research proposals for funding. Accordingly, no demand for funds has be en raised 
by ICFFTR to the Department of Fertilizers.  So no new projections were made. Fu rther, 
if any new research proposal is received for funding, fresh demands shall be  made by 
the Department in supplementary demand for grants. The Committee are no t satisfied 
with the half-hearted initiatives of the Department to promote R&D in the ferti lizers 
sector and feel that promotion of R & D in the fertilizer sector is very much  essential to 
attain self-sufficiency in the  sector.   The Committee, therefore, strongly reco mmend 
that  
v. R&D in the area of fertilizers and fertilizer manufacturing technology and 
innovation in fertilizer products should  be encouraged wholeheartedly with th e 
backing of suitable budgetary allocation for the same. 
vi.  R&D in fertilizer technology may be encouraged to develop more efficient  
fertilizers by diversifying the product basket to include indigenous varieties of 
Nano fertilizers (Urea/ P&K/ micro nutrients), bio-fertilizers, organic 
fertilizers,  compost, bio-stimulants, etc) which may be shared among the 
fertilizer PSUs. 
vii. The Department may identify Common Research Projects  
(4-5 each year) with Public Private Partnership (PPP Mode) making focuse d and 
integrated efforts with suitable budgetary support for development of new 
innovative efficient fertilizers and obtain patent for  the same which may in the 
long run facilitate the country to save precious foreign exchange and be a net 
exporter of fertilizers. 
viii. ICFFTR may be promoted as a dedicated national research institution exclusively 
devoted to promotion and research in fertilizer sector for development of 
innovative fertilizer products and development of indigenous technology  for 
improving energy efficiency in the fertilizer manufacturing plants. 
   
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
2.6    In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry  of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
  
  (i)         “Department of Fertilizer has noted the recommendation for innovation in 
fertilizer sector. The suitable budgetary allocation for the innovation of fertilizers will be 
considered as and when required. 
  
(ii)      Nano urea has been developed indigenously, for the first time in th e world at 
IFFCO - Nano Biotechnology Research Centre (NBRC) Kalol, Gujarat through a 
proprietary patented technology.  The trials of Nano Urea has been con ducted by 22 
ICAR Institutes and State Agricultural Universities on 13 major crops at 43 locations.  
Further, 11000 Farmers’ Field Trials on 94 crops in previous three Agriculture Seasons 

17 
 
under the supervision of ICAR & KVK have been conducted. Ministry o f Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare, Government of India, has provisionally notified Nano Urea (Liquid) as 
a nano fertilizer under the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO) vide notification date d 
24th February, 2021. 
  
Further, IFFCO has informed that Research and development efforts have also been 
undertaken for nanofertilizers like nano DAP, nano Zinc, Nano Copper. Con tinuous 
research and development efforts have been undertaken for manufacturing these 
nanofertilizers as well as establishing their efficacy vide experiments condu cted under 
the National Agriculture research System (NARS). Their reports have been submitted 
to DA&FW for inclusion in Fertiliser Control Order (FCO). 
  
(iii)     With the introduction of 8 Nano Urea pants and 5 revival urea units, it is 
estimated that, Department of Fertilizers will be self-sufficient in Urea  by 2025 end and 
there will be no import dependence. The domestic production of conve ntional urea and 
Nano Urea will be more than the demand.  
  
(iv)     It is informed that the directions given by standing committe e that “ICFFTR may 
be promoted as a dedicated national research institution exclusively devoted to 
promotion and research in fertilizer sector for development of innovative fertilizer 
products and development of indigenous technology for improving energ y efficiency in 
the fertilizer manufacturing plants”has been noted for compliance." 
  
  
Recommendation No.8 
  
 Necessity for formulation of a new scheme for  providing Market development  
 
2.7   With regard to the Necessity for formulation of a new scheme fo r providing 
Market development, the Committee had recommended as follows:-- 
  
“The Committee note that the scheme for promotion of City Compost which was 
launched in 2016 under Swachh Bharat Mission whereby Market Development 
Assistance was being  given to promote its use has been discontinued as per 
recommendations of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC)  after 30 th September, 
2021. The Committee was apprised that the EFC in its review regarding continua tion of 
the scheme during 2021-22 to 2025-26 observed that it is a v ery small scheme and 
since there are similar schemes in other Departments with larger budget and better field 
presence, promotion of city compost scheme should be discontinued.  The Committ ee 
however, desires that to promote the eco friendly natural fertilizers there is an 
immediate need for introducing a new scheme by enlarging the scope of the assistance 
for promoting production and use of organic and bio-fertilizers which are ma nufactured 
in rural areas are also covered under Fertilizer Control Order (FCO).  The Committee 
feel that MSMEs and big fertilizers companies be both involved  an d the manufacture 
and marketing of organic and bio-fertilizers be based on the aggreg ator model wherein 

18 
 
the big companies act as aggregators and they take these products from th e 
MSMEs.  A specific production target be fixed for grant of Market deve lopment 
assistance. This shall in the long run make eco-friendly fertilizers  easily available locally 
at cheaper rates to the  farmers and also be eco-friendly to the soil an d environment. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department of Fertilize rs 
should  draft a new scheme in a time bound manner with wider scope for providing 
Market development Assistance for production and use of Organic and bio-f ertilizers 
covered under FCO and place the same for the approval of Expenditure Finance 
Committee and to seek sufficient budget for the same in the near future . This 
recommendation may also be shared with the Ministry of Finance for its compliance”. 
  
REPLY  OF   THE GOVERNMENT 
  
2.8   In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the  Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
  
  “To promote organic and bio-fertilizers by extending  Market Development Assistance 
(MDA), Concept Note and EFC proposal  have been circulated to  stakeholde r 
Ministries/Departments including Niti Aayog for their comments.  In- Principle- Approval 
(IPA) of Department of Expenditure has been sought from Department of Expenditure 
on the Concept Note on the Scheme for Promotion of Organic and B io-
fertilizers. Comments of Department of Agriculture & Farmers ’ Welfare (DA & FW) have 
been sought on the observations of Department of Water Resources and Sanita tion 
(DWS), MoHUA, MoP&NG, ICAR,  Niti Aayog and  Department of Expenditure on the 
concept note for Scheme on  Promotion of Bio and Organic fertilizers”. 
  
Recommendation No.9 
 Need for timely availability of fertilizers to farmers and to  stop unfair trade 
practices. 
  
2.9   With regard to the, need for timely availability of fertilizers to farmers  and to stop 
unfair trade practices, the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee are concerned to note that the farmers at village level are not able 
to get required quantum of  fertilizers during peak agricultural seasons d espite of 
provision of  Rs. 1.2 lakh crore budget on  fertilizers subsidy.   There are reports that 
retailers ask the farmers  to buy other products manufactured by a particul ar company 
along with subsidized fertilizers. The Committee also noted with concern tha t on one 
hand the Department is claiming that there is no shortage of fertilizers while on the other 
hand there are news regarding the non-availability of fertilizers to the farmers. There are 
also reports that Urea is being sold in black market at higher prices due to mis-
management at the local level.  The Committee desire that even tho ugh distribution of 
fertilizers at the local levels is the prerogative of the State Governments, since re efforts 
must be made by the Department for streamlining, strengthening and improving  the 

19 
 
functioning of retail network system in the States/ UTs so as to check the menace  of 
black marketing, hoarding, artificial shortages and to ensure quality of fe rtilizers. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that:- 
i. States/UTs shall be requested to take all the steps for ensuring time ly availability 
of  required quantum of fertilizers to the farmers particularly during peak seasons 
of cultivation of crops and no farmer should be deprived of subsidised fertilizers. 
ii. Fool proof measures should be taken by the State/UT Governments to ch eck the 
menace of black marketing, hoarding, artificial shortages, etc.  
iii. The Department in coordination with all concerned Ministries/ State 
Governments/ Departments/ agencies should chalk out a frame-work for regular  
audit of the sales of subsidized fertilizers at the Company, Wholesaler and 
Retailer level as empowered under the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985 so 
as to check unfair practices, if any at various levels.  In case any mal -practice is 
noticed during the audit, prompt necessary action may be taken against the  
concerned person which benefit the agriculture sector in the long run.  
iv. The Department must ensure prompt installation of PoS devices at the Ret ail/ 
Wholesale points throughout the country so that the sale of fertilizers could be 
made compulsory through AADHAR authentication or through KCC and Vote r ID 
is admissible.  The iFMS Dash-Board system may also be further strengthened 
to stop any pilferage and monitor the stocks and availability at each level. 
            The sentiments expressed by this Committee may be con veyed to the all 
concerned Ministry/ State Governments/ Departments/ agencies for their 
compliance. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken  in the 
matter”. 
REPLY  OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
2.10   In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
  
  
  (i)      “As desired by the committee, letter to all states has been issued 
conveying the recommendations of the committee. 
  
(ii)       To avoid black marketing and hoarding, the state governments are adequate ly 
empowered under the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985 to take necessary steps. 
Department of Fertilizers regularly advise the state governments to take the requ ired 
steps so that the fertilizers is made available to the farmers at reasona ble prices and to 
keep a strict check on malpractices such as black marketing and hoarding.  
As recommended by the committee, states/UTs would again be requested to  
take needful action to check the menace.  
  
(iii)       Department of Fertilizers (DoF) has developed an IT enabled sy stem viz., 
Integrated Fertilizer Management System (iFMS), which captures end to end d etails of 
Fertilizer in terms of Production, Movement, availability, requirement, Sale, Su bsidy Bill 

20 
 
Generation to Subsidy payment to fertilizer companies. The iFMS system can be 
accessed at http://mfms.nic.in/. Also, a new initiative has been made by the Departm ent 
of Fertilizers with introduction of Dashboard for various detailed reports related to DoF 
and States. Through this dashboard, Department of Fertilizers is ensuring th e 
availability of stocks of all fertilizers at the Wholesalers and retailers. The re is also 
Collector Dashboard, Company Dashboard and MarkFed Dashboard.  
  
Further, to avoid black marketing and hoarding, the state governments are 
adequately empowered under the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985 to take 
necessary steps. Department of Fertilizers regularly advise the state governments to 
take the required steps so that the fertilizers is made available to the farmers at 
reasonable prices and to keep a strict check on malpractices such as black marketing 
and hoarding. 
  
(iv)      Under the fertilizer DBT system 100% subsidy on various fertilizer grade s is 
released to the fertilizer companies on the basis of actual sales made to farmers/buyers 
through Point Of Sale (POS) devices installed at each retail shop.All beneficia ries are 
identified through Aadhaar card (only in case of Assam and J&K authentica tion is done 
through KCC/Voter ID). 
  
The iFMS Dashboard system is being strengthened periodically to stop any 
pilferage and monitor the stocks and availability at each level”. 
  
   
Recommendation No.10 
  
Need to strengthen the Soil Health Card Scheme for balanced use of fertilizers.  
  
2.11   With regard to the need to strengthen the Soil Health Card Scheme f or balanced 
use of fertilizers, the Committee had recommended as follows:-  
 
“The Committee are concerned to note that the initiatives to educate the farmers 
about the appropriate and balanced use of fertilizers as per crop and soil type are not 
adequate.  
According to the Department of Fertilizers, urea is a very sensitive fertilizer 
in the country and is being provided to the farmers at a subsidized rate of Rs. 266.5 per 
45 kg. per bag on no-denial basis.  Farmers tend to use some fertilize rs particularly 
Urea more than the requirement and it leads to imbalanced use of fertiliz ers which 
affects the soil health in the long run.  So there is a need to create awareness among 
farmers about the judicious and balanced use of fertilizers as per the p rescription in Soil 
Health Cards.  The Committee are not convinced by the submission made by th e 
Department that it is a misnomer that if one uses Soil Health Card, then the fe rtilizer 
consumption will be reduced.  As the imbalanced use of chemical fe rtilizers result in 
deterioration of the soil health and affects the eco-system, the Committee strongly 
recommend the following:- 
  

21 
 
i. A re-look needs  be given to the Soil Health Card scheme in coordination with the 
Ministry of Agriculture, State Governments  and  other agencies so that it 
effectively helps to promote the  balanced use of fertilizers in a target ori ented 
manner and to monitor the percentage use of various chemical fertil izers in each 
region regularly.  
ii. Soil testing and mapping of each region of the country  may b e  done on priority 
basis;  
iii.  It may be examined whether the sale of fertilizers may be made a s per the 
recommendations of the soil health card so as to ensure application of fe rtilizers 
according to requirements of particular soil. 
iv.  The Department of Fertilizers should in coordination with all concerned 
Ministries/ State Governments /fertilizers companies/ other agencies chalk out 
monthly target oriented programmes for the education of farmers on the benefits 
of balanced use of fertilizers.  
             This recommendation may be conveyed to the all con cerned Ministries/ State 
Governments/ other concerned agencies for their compliance.  The Comm ittee would 
like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter”. 
  
REPLY  OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
  
2.10   “In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
 (i)         Pertains to DA&FW as the matter is regarding promoting balan ced use of 
fertilizers as per Soil Health Card and soil testing and mapping of each reg ion of the 
country.  
(ii)        Pertains to DA&FW as the matter is regarding promoting balanced  use of 
fertilizers as per Soil Health Card and soil testing and mapping of each reg ion of the 
country. 
(iii)       Pertains to DA&FW as the matter is regarding promoting balanced u se of 
fertilizers as per Soil Health Card and soil testing and mapping of each reg ion of the 
country. 
(iv)      The recommendation for coordination with Ministries/State Govt./Fertiliz er 
companies for monthly target oriented programme for education of farm ers on the 
benefits of balanced use of fertilizers has been noted by the dep artment for further 
necessary action”. 
  
  

22 
 
Recommendation No.11 
Need to promote Nano fertilizers  
2.12    With regard to the need to promote Nano fertilizers, the Committee had  
recommended as follows:- 
 “The Committee note the submission of Department of Fertilizers that IFFCO ha s 
indigenously developed Nano urea which is a next generation smart efficient fe rtilizer 
which apart from reducing input cost is environmentally very safe and beneficial.  IFFCO 
is also in process of developing other versions of Nano fertilizers like Nano DAP, Nano  
Zinc and Nano Boron which are at different stages of development and fiel d testing.  
According to Department of Fertilizers,  these are the shining examples of AtmaNirbh ar 
Bharat as it will not only increase the farmer ’s income, but also reduce import 
dependence and is very easy to transport.  Commercial production at IFFCO ’s Nano 
urea plant at Kalol, Gujarat  was started on 1st August, 2021and  2.40 crore Na no urea 
bottles were manufactured when this information was furnished to the Committee.    It is 
also noted that in terms of efficacy 1 Nano Urea bottle is equivalent to a  45 kg Urea 
bag.  The cost of Nano Urea bottle is Rs. 240 per 500 ML bottle wherea s that of 
conventional subsidized urea is Rs. 266.5 per 45 Kg bag.  Since 
Nano fertilizers are 
cheaper than the conventional subsidized fertilizers, no subsidies from the 
Government may be required for production of Nano fertilizers.  As researches have 
shown that the average crop productivity increase is around eight per cent,  it saves 
farmers to the tune of Rs. 5,000-Rs. 10,000 per hectare. Moreover, the efficacy  of nano 
fertilizer is more than 80 percent, whereas that of the conventional urea  efficacy is only 
30 per cent to 40 per cent.  Nano urea has the potential to replace c onventional urea by 
50 per cent. IFFCO is in the process of setting up of more plants.  Further the 
technology has been transferred to two Government PSUs viz. NFL and  RCF and  they 
are also setting up their Nano urea plants which will be operational in July, 2 024 and 
March 2024 respectively.   With the commissioning  of these plants, the tot al capacity of 
production of nano fertilizers  will be 44 crore bottles per year which will be equivalent to 
44 crore urea bags, around 200 LMT and it has the potential to reduce import of 90 LMT 
urea. 
Further, there are possibilities to transfer  the technology to the private sector on 
royalty basis once this nano fertilizer gets stabilized and becomes very  popular among 
the farmer community.  The Committee was also informed that requirement of 
separate budget head to provide subsidy /Incentive for production and sale of Nano 
fertilizers is not envisaged . Since the nano fertilizers  are cost effective,  eco-friendly, 
easy to transport,   improve crop productivity and  have potential to save Government’s 
subsidy spending to a large extent , the Committee would like to  recommend the 
following:-  

23 
 
i) Department of Fertilizers may encourage research and development of 
various nano fertilizers by public and private companies and may consider 
financial assistance in this regard. 
ii) Department of Fertilizers may consider providing subsidy on nano fertilizers to 
make them very cheap and attractive to the farmers. 
iii) Since the use of this smart fertilizer will remove our import dependency in the 
long run,  incentives may be considered for  production and sale of Nano 
fertilizers by the PSUs/ private entities. 
iv) A strong awareness campaign may be initiated  amongst the farmers to 
educate them about the features of nano fertilizers. 
v)  Initially the nano fertilizers  may be tagged  with the sale of conven tional 
fertilizers to popularize them among the farmers. 
vi) Since use of Nano fertilizers can be a game changer in the sector, th e 
Department may encourage transfer of Nano technology to the other fertilize r 
PSU’s and to the private fertilizer companies so as to maximize its production 
capacity which shall enable the country not only to meet its own requirem ent 
but also to be a net exporter.  
vii) The Department of Fertilizers may frame the Guidelines regarding application 
of drone technology for foliar application of Nano fertilizers on p riority basis in 
coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Civil Aviation 
seeking inputs from the fertilizer manufacturing companies, farmers and the 
village entrepreneurs, etc.  so as to provide training and other facilities for its 
convenient and efficient application.   
 
 The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter .” 
 
REPLY  OF  THE GOVERNMENT 
2.13    In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
 
(i) “Nano urea has been developed indigenously, for the first time in the  world at 
IFFCO - Nano Biotechnology Research Centre (NBRC) Kalol, Gujarat through a 
proprietary patented technology.  The trials of Nano Urea has been con ducted by 22 
ICAR Institutes and State Agricultural Universities on 13 major crops at 43 locations.  
Further, 11000 Farmers ’ Field Trials on 94 crops in previous three Agriculture Seasons 
under the supervision of ICAR & KVK have been conducted. Ministry of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare, Government of India, has provisionally notified Nano Ure a (Liquid) as 
a nano fertilizer under the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO) vide notification date d 
24th February, 2021. 
 
Further, IFFCO has informed that Research and development efforts have also 
been undertaken for nano fertilizers like nano DAP, nano Zinc, Nano Cop per. 

24 
 
Continuous research and development efforts have been undertaken for ma nufacturing 
these nanofertilizers as well as establishing their efficacy vide experiments conducted 
under the National Agriculture Research System (NARS). Their reports have been 
submitted to DA&FW for inclusion in Fertiliser Control Order (FCO). 
(ii) Nano fertilizers are cheaper than the conventional subsidized fertilizers and 
therefore, subsidies from the Government may not be required for production 
of Nano fertilizers
 
(iii) Nano fertilizers are cheaper than the conventional subsidized fertilizers 
and
therefore, subsidies from the Government may not be required for 
production of Nano fertilizers. Hence,  subsidy/incentive for production and sale 
of Nano fertilizers is not envisaged. 
(iv) Use of Nano Fertilizer is being promoted through awareness camps, webinars, 
nuked nataks, field demonstrations, kisansammelans and films in regional 
languages etc. DoF has prepared a movie on Nano Urea in English, Hind i and 
four other regional languages to promote the use of Nano Urea 
(v) At present, Department of Fertilizers doesn ’t not encourage tagging of fertilizers. 
However, use of Nano Fertilizer is being promoted through awareness camps, 
webinars, nuked nataks, field demonstrations, kisansammelans and films in 
regional languages etc. DoF has prepared a movie on Nano Urea in English, 
Hindi and four other regional languages to promote the use of Nano Urea. 
(vi) To boost the indigenous production of Nano Urea, two Central Pu blic Sector 
Undertaking (CPSU) namely National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) and Rashtriya 
Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF), under administrative control of 
Department of Fertilizers, has signed Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) & 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative 
(IFFCO) to transfer the technology of Nano Urea from IFFCO.The details of Nano 
Urea plants are as under:- 
 
 
         Location  Production Capacity 
Bottles (500 ml) per 
Year (in Crore)  
Commercial 
Production/Anticipated 
Commercial production 
IFFCO Kalol 
Gujarat  
5.0 August  2021  
IFFCO Phulpur UP  6.0  Sept 2022  
IFFCO Aonla UP  6.0  April 2023  
IFFCO Bengaluru, 
Karnataka  
6.0 March 2024  
RCF Trombay 
Maharashtra 
5.0  March 2024 
NFL Nangal 
Punjab  
5.0  July 2024 

25 
 
IFFCO Deoghar 
Jharkhand 
6.0 Nov 2024 
IFFCO Assam 5.0  Nov 2025 
 Capacity by 2025                            44.0 Crore Bottles Per Year  
 
IFFCO has been requested to transfer the technology of Nano urea to Brahma putra 
Valley Fertilizers Company Limited (BVFCL) and Fertilizers & Chemicals Travancore 
Limited (FACT) for free of cost. In this regard, IFFCO has conveyed that the license fee 
for grant of license & knowhow and the production based Royalty Fe e would be on 
chargeable basis for setting up Nano Urea (Liquid) fertilizer plant in India based on 
IFFCOs proprietary technology. 
(vii) Department has also issued guidelines for development of entrepreneurs for 
drone spraying of liquid fertilizers. Copy of guideline is at Annexure-I for kind perusal”. 
Recommendation No.12 
  
Interest free loan to HURL (Hindustan Urvarak & Rasayan Limited). 
  
2.14     With regard to Interest free loan to HURL (Hindustan Urvarak & Rasay an 
Limited), the Committee had recommended as follows:-   
 
“The Committee was glad to note that CCEA on 01.08.2018 appr oved interest free 
loan (IFL) of Rs. 1257.82 Crore equivalent to interest during construction (IDC) 
component to HURL projects (Sindri, Gorakhpur and Barauni).  During the financial year 
2020-21, 813.24 Crore was released to HURL as 1 st installment.  The Committee noted 
with concern that BE and RE for HURL during the year 2021-22 under the Capital 
Section was Rs. 444.58 Crore.   But  the  Actual Expenditure for the sa me  was Nil as 
on 31.01.02022.  The Committee also learnt that while processing the disbursement of 
2nd installment  it was noted that  IDC was approved by CCEA for the peri od not 
exceeding 36 months from the zero date.  However,  HURL had raised d emand of IFL 
equivalent to interest calculated for the period of 36months from the date of drawl of first 
instalment of loan from Bankers. As approved by CCEA,  the Department restricted the 
IFL  equivalent to IDC  for the period of 36 months from the zero d ate and accordingly 
an amount of Rs.81.56 Crore was released to HURL as 2nd and final insta lment of IFL 
and unutilized amount of Rs. 363.02  Crore was surrendered.  In this regard, the 
Committee would like to recommend the following:- 
  
i. It is a matter of concern that the Department of Fertilizer and the M inistry of 
Finance did not properly study the terms fixed by CCEA at the time of approval of 
loan before preparation of budget estimates for 2021-22 and this has led 
to  unnecessary locking of  Rs.363.02 Crore for about a year which would ha ve 
been resourcefully used  for other purposes.  The Committee hope that th e 
Department would be more careful while preparing the proposals for budgetary 
allocation so as to avoid unnecessary locking of scarce resources.     

26 
 
ii.  Matter regarding interest free loan including the issue of date of calculation of 
interest may be relooked and the possibilities of release of balance loan a mount 
to HURL may be explored so that it is helpful in timely revival of ur ea 
manufacturing plants.  The Committee would like to be apprised of  the action 
taken in the matter”. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.15  In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
 (i)         “As per CCEA approval dated 01.08.2018 and Loan Agreement signed  
between HURL and DoF on 08.09.2020, the Interest Free Loan (IFL) eq uivalent to 
actual interest incurred during construction for a period of 36 month s from the zero date 
or Rs. 1257.82 crores whichever is lower was payable to HURL. The actual IDC 
incurred by HURL till scheduled date of commissioning was Rs. 89.4.80 crore. 
Therefore, release of IFL was restricted to Rs. 894.80 crore only and balance  Rs. 
363.02 was surrendered by the department. 
(ii)        Since the IFL was disbursed as per CCEA approval and subseq uent loan 
Agreement signed between HURL and DoF, there is no scope to release the balance 
loan amount to HURL”. 
  
  

27 
 
CHAPTER – III 
  
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
  
 
 
 
NIL 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
   
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
                                                                               
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Inadequate Budgetary Allocation in Budget Estimates for 2022-23. 
 
4.1      With regard to Inadequate Budgetary allocation in Budget Estimates for 2022-23, 
the Committee had recommended as follows:-  
 
The Committee note that a budgetary allocation of Rs.109242.23 Cr ore has been 
made in respect of Demand No.6 pertaining toDepartment of Fertilizers for th e year 
2022-23. This allocation has been made against the projected deman d of 
Rs.176760.59/- Crore of the Department to meet the requirements fo r its various 
schemes and policies.  In this regard, the Committee are dismayed to note tha t the cut 
in BE allocation is by Rs.67518.36/- Crore which amounts to 38 % of the  projected 
requirements of the Department.  According to the Department of Fertilizers, allocated 
amount is not sufficient to meet the projected requirement of subsidy f unds for the year 
2022-23 and the requirement for additional funds will be re-assessed a nd demanded at 
the time of RE/Supplementary for 2022-23 depending on the prices of raw materials and 
fertilizers.  However, the expenditure before RE stage is done on the b asis of BE 
allocation only.  RE is mostly finalized by December every year and the same is 
regularized through 2 nd batch of supplementary demands for grants. Hence, the funds 
approved at RE stage mostly reaches the Department during the last quarter of  the 
financial year only.   During 2021-22, an allocation of Rs.84041.39 Cr ore was made at 
BE stage which was increased to Rs.149663.28 Crore at RE stage which was about 
78% increase over the BE.  As a result of such late infusion of funds, the  Department of 
Fertilizers was able to spend only Rs.117675.14 Crore as on 31 January, 2 022.  In view 
of the above, the Committee feel that the gap between the proj ected requirement for 
2022-23 and the budgetary allocation may eventually result in delayed  payment/ 
settlement of claims in respect of both Urea and P&K fertilizers subsidies an d will 
thereby adversely affect the financial performance of the fertilizer secto r as a whole. 
Taking this situation into consideration, the Committee recommended earlier also that 
Ministry of Finance be convinced at the highest level to declare the Depart ment of 
Fertilizers as a “Priority Department ” so that the fund requirements of the Department 
may be met without any cut.  Drastic reduction of funds at BE stage will upset the 
expenditure planning for the whole year and the substantial allocation of fund at RE 
stage for subsidy payment reflects the poor planning by both the Ministry  of Finance 
and the Department of Fertilizers.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Department of Fertilizers should strengthen its budgetary planning process and  come 
out with accurate demand for funds so as to convince the Ministry of Finance to a llocate 
funds as per its requirements at BE stage itself without any cuts for its subsidy 
schemes. Considering the importance of providing fertilizers to the farmers at 
subsidized rates, the Ministry of Finance should accord priority status to this 

29 
 
Department and strive to allocate the funds required by the Department at BE stage 
itself which will facilitate timely and optimum utilization of funds by the Department and 
will eventually give boost to the agriculture sector in the country. The sentiments 
expressed by this Committee may also be conveyed to the Ministry of Financ e for its 
compliance. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made  in this 
regard. 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT 
  
4.2      In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
  
     "Department of Fertilizers sends the budget proposal based on th e projections 
made for the coming year depending on the requirement of fertilizers and prices of raw 
material and fertilizers prevailing. The same is conveyed to M/o Finance  with proper 
justification. If and when, the need for more funds arises, the same are so ught at 
different stages during a Financial Year viz. 1 st, 2 nd and 3 rd Supplementary and RE 
Stage, based on the fund position/utilization. Department ensures th at there is no 
shortage of funds and at every stage, requirements are assessed and fun ds demanded 
from Ministry of Finance. In the past, Ministry of Finance has provided funds at all 
stages as per our requirement. 
 Recommendations of Standing Committee have been conveyed to M/o  
Finance." 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
  
Timely placement of proposals for allocation at RE 2022-23 
             
4.3      With regard to the timely placement of proposals for   allocation at RE 2022-23, 
the Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
“The Committee are concerned to note that the Department has been alloc ated Rs. 
42000 Crore in BE 2022-23 against the budgetary proposal  of  
Rs. 72702 Crore for Nutrient Based subsidy (NBS) scheme.  In respect of urea sub sidy, 
the Department has been allocated Rs. 67202.42 Crore in BE 2022-23 a gainst its 
requirement of Rs. 104016.64 Crore for the year.  Further, the BE allocation for 2022-23 
in respect of urea subsidy is 21% lower than the Revised Estimates of 2021-22 a nd 
there is a 35 percent decrease in NBS subsidy this time when compared to RE of 2021-
22.   In regard to the reasons for reduction of budgetary allocation at BE stage of 2022-
23 and its adequacy in meeting fund requirements of urea and NBS subsidy schemes, 
the Department of Fertilizers has stated that the Ministry of Finance allocated the funds 
as per the priorities of the Government and financial space availab le.  Actual 

30 
 
requirement of funds will depend on the prevailing prices of some fertilizers and raw 
materials in the market. However, if the need arises, it will request the Ministry of 
Finance to allocate additional funds at RE 2022-23 stage and in the  Supplementary 
Demands for Grants during 2022-23. Keeping in view the trend of the previous years, 
the Committee are of the view that the budgetary allocation at BE stage of 2022-23 may 
not be adequate to meet the entire fund requirements under Urea and  NBS subsidy 
Schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizers 
should calculate the fund requirement for the whole year and place its prop osal timely 
before the Ministry of Finance for making additional allocations in RE 2022-23 so  as to 
meet its projected requirements under Urea and NBS subsidy Schemes both for 
indigenous and imported fertilizers during the year.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the measures taken in this regard.” 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
4.4     In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
  
    "The recommendation suggested by the committee is duly considered.  The 
Programme divisions are regularly monitoring the expenditure and available fun ds 
under Urea and NBS schemes. The additional requirement of funds, if a ny, will be 
sought well in time at the RE – 2022-23 stage." 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 3 
Need to dismantle Carry-over liabilities. 
  
4.5      With regard to the need to dismantle carry-over liabilities, the Committee had 
recommended as follows:-  
 
Expressing its concern to the accumulation of huge amounts of carry over 
liabilities i.r.o. both indigenous and imported   urea and  P&K fertilizers ov er the years 
which reflected its lack of proper budgetary planning, the Committee recommende d as 
under:-  
  
“The Committee are concerned to note that the estimated carry-over li abilities 
(COL) for payment of subsidy during 2021-22 in respect of indigeno us and 
imported   urea will be Rs. 6000 Crore and  Rs. 12300 Crore, respectively a nd in 
respect of indigenous  and imported P&K fertilizers the same will be Rs.1300 Crore 
and  Rs. 2073 Crore, respectively.  A total of Rs.21673 Crore is likely to be accumulated 
as COL in respect of indigenous and imported Urea and P&K fertilize rs by the end of 
2021-22. In this regard, Department of Fertilizer has stated that it has requested for 
grant of Rs. 6000 Crore under 3rd supplementary grant to meet Indigen ous Urea funds 

31 
 
requirement in Quarter-IV of 2021-22 and if the supplementary is not granted, 
anticipated carry-over liability of Rs. 6000 Crore would be settled in FY2022-2 3. The 
Department has also requested the Ministry of Finance to provide additional fun ds 
under 3rd Supplementary grant to clear COL in respect of imported urea. Howeve r, 
COL in respect of Indigenous P&K and Imported P&K are likely to be completely 
cleared from the available budget (RE 2021-22) by the end of March 2022. The 
Committee deplore the tendency of the Department of Fertilizers to accumu late carry 
over liabilities year-after-year.  This tendency clearly shows the lack o f proper planning 
in its budgetary process. In this regard, the Committee recommend that a concrete 
mechanism should  be developed by the Department of Fertilizers to accurate ly 
estimate the RE stage fund requirements for the payment of subsidies in respect of both 
indigenous and imported  fertilizers taking into account various factors including 
international price situation and place an accurate demand with the Ministry  of Finance 
for fund allocation at RE stage so that the Department may timely utiliz e the entire RE 
allocation for the payment of subsidies without any COL  by the end of  a financial 
year.  A copy of this recommendation may also be sent to Ministry of Fin ance for its 
compliance while deciding RE allocations for the Department of Fertilizers.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT 
  
4.6      In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
  
         "The settlement of subsidy / DBT claims of fertilizer companies are being done 
regularly subject to availability of funds. The actual Carry-over liabilities for 2021-22 are 
Rs.1529.37 crores against the estimated Carryover liabilities of Rs.6000.00 crores in r/o  
Indigenous Urea.  The detailed information regarding utilization of fun ds allocated at RE 
2021-22 and status of Carryover liability (2021-22) in r/o Indigenous Urea is as under: 
  
Funds Status of 2021-22 Carryover liabilities status 
Final allocation Expenditure Carryover 
liability as on 
01.04.2022 
Carryover 
liability paid 
during 2022- 23 
as on date 
Balance 
Carryover 
liabilities as 
on date 
54619.72 54619.72 1529.37 1475.94 53.43 
  
The carry-over liabilities (COL) in respect of Indigenous P&K, Imported P &K and 
Imported Urea for the FY 2021-22 (as on 01.04.2022)are as follows; 
  
Sr. 
no. 
Scheme CoL as on 
1.4.22 
Remark 
1 Indigenous 
P&K 
237.66 Cr Digital Freight bills of Rs. 237.66 Cr could 
not be passed due to technical glitch in 

32 
 
New Freight Module of iFMS. These 
claims were generated digitally for the first 
time. 
2 Imported P&K 2.57 Cr Claims worth rs. 2.57 cr could not be 
processed because of incomplete 
documents. 
3 Imported Urea 869.50 Cr Funds allocated in FY 2021-22 fully 
utilized.  
4 City Compost 0.00  -  
  
  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
  
Promotion of SSP and Potash Derived from Molasses. 
  
4.7    With regard to the, promotion of SSP and Potash Derived from Molasses, the 
Committee had recommended as follows:- 
 
Expressing its pleasure to learn that Single Super Phosphate (SSP) fertilizer is 
manufactured indigenously and that Potash derived from Molasses (PDM) h as been 
included under NBS scheme to promote indigenous source of fertilizers which are v ery 
cost effective alternatives to DAP,  the Committee recommended as under:- 
  
            “The Committee is  glad to learn that Single Super Phosphate (SSP) fertilizer is 
100% manufactured indigenously in our country and  that Potash derive d from 
Molasses(PDM) has been included under NBS scheme to promote indigenous source 
of fertilizers.  According to the Department of Fertilizers,  the country ha s 111 
manufacturing units of SSP and the total production of SSP during  the rabi season of 
2020-21 and 2021-22 was 23.66 LMT and 21.53 LMT, respectively . Farmers use two 
bags of SSP with 20 kilograms of urea to substitute one bag of DAP.   It was also learnt 
that last year the Government of  Rajasthan  had issued order that the us age of SSP  in 
place of DAP should be made the standard practice as SSP is   very cost effe ctive  and 
is thus known as the poor man ’s DAP.  The Committee is also pleased to note that the 
Department of Fertilizers is planning to include SSP in the freight subsidy scheme  to 
facilitate its availability in other States as well. However, the usage of SSP in dustry is 
limited to some States where it is mainly produced. The Committee therefore, stro ngly 
recommend that the Department may vigorously promote setting up of SSP and PDM 
manufacturing units throughout the country even through Public Priva te Partnership 
mode to increase their production capacity so that they are abundantly a vailable in the 
country.  This may also support balanced fertilization, save precious foreign exch ange 

33 
 
and decrease our import dependence in respect of NPK fertilizers in the lon g run.  In 
view of the increase in the international prices of the NPK fertilizers,  the Comm ittee 
hope that the Department of Fertilizers will accord top priority in p romotion of SSP and 
PDM in the country and apprise the Committee about the action taken b y it in the 
matter.” 
  
REPLY  OF   THE GOVERNMENT 
  
4.8    In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the  Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) has stated as under:- 
  
      "Proposal of DoF has been approved by the Cabinet on 28.4.2 2 to include SSP in 
the freight subsidy scheme and the fertilizer movement/ supply of DoF. This inclusion 
may facilitate the manufacturers of SSP to ensure availability of SSP throughout the 
country and make SSP available even to those states where it is not manufactured. DoF 
has been continuously promoting SSP and resultantly it has been noticed from the iFMS 
data that the sales of SSP has increased by 56 % and DAP has decreased by 21% 
during Rabi 2021-22 (from Oct. to Dec.). As per the analysis, the sale of D AP 
decreased with corresponding increase in sale of SSP in major states of India i.e . 
Assam, Bihar, Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, West Bengal etc. 
  
Potash derived from Molasses(PDM) is an indigenous fertilizer containing 1 4.5% 
of potassic content. It has been included in the Nutrient Based Subsidy Reg ime vide 
Department of Fertilizer's Notification number 23011/1/2021-P&K dated  13.10.2021. 
Guidelines to register the PDM manufacturing companies under NBS regime hav e been 
finalized and shall be issued shortly." 
  
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER – V 
  
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLEIS OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED   
  
 
 
 
NIL 
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
New Delhi;                                                                           KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
                                                                                                                   Chairperson, 
08 August, 2022                                                                  Standing Committee on  
13 Sravana,  1944 (Saka)                                                      Chemicals and Fertilizers 
  
  
  
  

35 
 
APPENDIX-I 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
  
            The Committee sat on Thursday, the 04 th August, 2022 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1645 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
                
PRESENT 
  
   Smt. Kanimozhi  Karunanidhi, Chairperson 
               Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ramakant Bhargarva   
3. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama   
4. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi   
5. Shri Kripanath Mallah   
6. Shri Satyadev Pachauri   
7. Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad   
8. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar   
9. Shri Indra Hang Subba   
  
  
10. 
  
Rajya Sabha 
Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
  
  11. Dr. Anil Jain 
  12. Shri Arun Singh 
  13. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 

36 
 
  14. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
        
 SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Vinay Kumar Mohan       -           Joint Secretary  
2.  Shri  Nabin Kumar Jha           -           Director 
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh              -           Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Panna Lal                         -           Und er Secretary 
  
   XXX                   XXX                    XXX 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee, convened for consideration and adoption of the foll owing Draft 
Action Taken Reports: 
i. XXX                            XXX       XXX  
ii. Thirty-Sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second Report (17 th Lok 
Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants 2022-23' of the Ministry of Chemica ls and 
Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
iii. XXX                            XXX       XXX  
iv. XXX                            XXX       XXX  
3. Giving an overview of the important Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/ 
suggestions of the Members. 
 
4. The Committee, then, took up the Draft Action Taken Reports one b y one for 
consideration and after some discussions adopted them. 
 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalise the Action T aken Reports 
and present the same to the Parliament. 
  
XXX   Matter Not related  
  
  

37 
 
APPENDIX-II 
      
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY SECOND REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2021-22) ON DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2022-23) 
OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF 
FERTILIZERS).  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  Total No. of Recommendations  12 
I Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12)   
  
 8 
Percentage of Total 67%   
II Observations/Recommendations that the Committee do not 
like to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
        Nil  
  
00 
Percentage of Total      00.00% 
III Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
replies given by the Government  have not been accepted by 
the Committee: 
 (Vide Recommendation Nos 1,2,3 and 5  
  
  
04 
Percentage of Total 33%    
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited:  
          Nil 
  
00 
Percentage of Total  00.00%    