i 
 
 
25 
 
 
     STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
           MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 
       (DEPARTMENT OF  FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in the ir  Twentieth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2021-22) ’ of the Ministry of Chemical and 
Fertilizers (Department of  Fertilizers)] 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
  DECEMBER, 2021 / AGRAHAYANA, 1943  (SAKA) 
  
 25 
 

ii 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their  Twentieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) o n 
‘Demands for Grants (2021- 22)’ of the Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers 
(Department of  Fertilizers)] 
 
  
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  02.12.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  02.12.2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  DECEMBER, 2021 / AGRAHAYANA, 1943  (SAKA) 
  


iii 
 
 
 
 CONTENTS 
 
 
PAGE 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ( 2020-21) (iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ( 2021-22) (v) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(vi) 
Chapter -I Report  1 
Chapter -II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
17 
Chapter -III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
25 
Chapter -IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
committee  
26 
Chapter -V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
28 
  
APPENDICES 
 
 
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2021-22) held   on 16th November, 2021 . 
37 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth  Report  
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers on   Demands for Grants 2021-22 pertaining to the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers). 
 
39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Deepak Baij 
4 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
5 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
6 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
7 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8 Shri Pakauri Lal 
9 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
11 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
12 Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
13 Shri Atul Kumar Singh alias Atul Rai 
14 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15 Shri M. Selvaraj 
16 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
17 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
18 Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
19 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
20 Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari# 
21 Vacant* 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26 Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27 
28 
Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
Shri Arun Singh$ 
29 Shri A.D. Singh 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora    -  Officer on Special Duty 
2. Shri  Nabin Kumar Jha   -  Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram   -  Additional Director 
4. Shri Panna Lal    - Under Secretary 
5. Shri P.R. Siva Prasad   - Assistant Committee Officer  
 
$Re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.12.2020. 
#Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 28.12.2020 vice Shri Nandigam Suresh. 
*Vacant vice Shri Er. Bishweswar Tudu nominated MoS on 07.07.2021. 
  

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri Deepak Baij 
5. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
6. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
7. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
8. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
10. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
11. Shri Vasava Prabhubhai Nagarbhai  
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt Aparupa Poddar (Afrin Ali) 
14. Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
15. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
16. Shri M. Selvaraj 
17. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
18. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
19. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
21. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
24. Dr. Anil Jain 
25. Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27. Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Arun Singh 
29. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
30. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
31. 
 
Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Jha     -  Director  
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram   -  Additional Director 
3 . Shri Panna Lal    -          Under Secretary 
4. Shri P.R. Siva Prasad   - Assistant Committee Officer  
 
 
 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
  
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 (2021-22) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on the ir behalf, 
present this Twenty Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Action Take n by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations contained in the  Twentieth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers  
(2020-21) on ‘Demand for Grants (2021- 22)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of  Fertilizers). 
 
2. The Twentieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers was presented to Lok Sabha on 17.3.2021 and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 17.3.2021.  The Action Taken replies of Government to all ob servations/ 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 23.07.2021.  The Standing 
Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2021-22) considered and adopted this Report at 
their sitting held on 16th November 2021. 
 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the further comments of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in Chapter-I of the Report.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi,                                                                  KANIMOZHI KARUNA NIDHI 
 16 November,  2021                                                                            Chairperson, 
 25 Kartika, 1943 (Saka)                                                           Standing Committee on 
                    Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2021- 22) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommend ations 
contained in the Twentieth  Report (17 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals & Fertilizers on Demands for Grants (2021- 22) of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) which was presented to Lok Sabha and  laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 17.3.2021. In all, the Committee made 14 
Observations/Recommendations in the Report. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) were requeste d 
to furnish Action Taken Replies to the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Report, i.e. by 
17.06.2021. The Action Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the  
14 Observations / Recommendations contained in the Report were received fr om  the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) vide their O.M. 
No.14(5)/2021-Fin-I dated 23.07.2021.  These Replies have been examined and 
categorized as follows:-   
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Governme nt:- 
 
 Rec. Nos. 1, 9 , 11 & 12                         (Total = 4) 
   
  Included in Chapter-II of the Report 
       
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to p ursue 
in view of the Government’s reply:-  
 
Rec. No.  Nil.                       (Total =Nil) 
   
  Included in Chapter-III of the Report       
    
(iii)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies given b y the  
Government are not acceptable to the Committee:-   
     
Rec. Nos. 2 & 13                                           (Total = 2)
                                                                          
  Included in Chapter-IV of the Report  
    
(iv)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited- 
 
Rec. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10 & 14                     (Total =8) 
 

2 
 
   Included in Chapter-V of the Report       
    
 
 1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on further comments/ 
recommendations contained in Chapter-I and Chapter-V of this Report should be 
furnished expeditiously and not later than three months from the date of 
presentation of the Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of th eir 
Observations/ Recommendations which still require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Enhanced Budgetary allocation at RE 2020-21 to Department of Fertilizers 
 
1.5 Stressing the need to swiftly utilize the entire RE allocation of 2020-21 to payout the 
carryover liabilities of subsidy schemes of the Department by the end of financial year  
2020-21, the Committee recommended as under:- 
  
“The Committee are glad to note that the Budgetary Allocation was increased to  
Rs.138537.30 Crore at RE stage of 2020-21 from Rs.73939.00 Crore  alloca ted at 
BE stage so as to pay-out the carry-over liabilities in respect of both the urea and P 
& K fertilizer subsidies, completely. In the Reports of the Demands for Grants 
2019-20 and 2020-21 pertaining to the Department of Fertilizers, the Co mmittee 
strongly emphasized the need for meeting the carry-over liabilities of fertilizer 
subsidies due to inadequate budgetary allocation. In this regard, the Committe e 
recommended that an additional budgetary allocation may be made by the Ministry 
of Finance to disburse entire subsidy dues on both urea and P & K fertilizers. 
Accordingly, the Ministry of Finance allocated Rs.64598.30 Crore at RE stage of 
2020-21 in addition to Rs.73939.00 Crore allocated at BE stage to  meet the entire 
expenditure on both the urea subsidy and Nutrient Based Subsidy(NBS ).  The 
Committee hope that this additional allocation of funds would have enabled  the 
Department of Fertilizers to pay-out the carry-over liabilities of both Ur ea subsidy 
and NBS subsidy as well as Market Development Assistance(MDA) for City 
Compost completely by the end of 2020-21. According to the Department of 
Fertilizers, the carry over liabilities in respect of indigenous P&K and City Com post 
are being fully met and the balance of carry over liabilities in respect of Imp orted 
P&K amounting to Rs.102.76 crores only are left and the same is expected to be 
utilized by March-2021. In regard to urea subsidy, it has been stated by th e 
Department that Carry-over liabilities of imported urea is Rs.561.63 crore and the 
same is nil in respect of indigenous urea.  However, the Committee note that out of 
Rs. 99547.42 Crore allocated at RE stage for indigenous and imported u rea 
subsidy only Rs.60189.73 Crore has been utilized by the Department of Ferti lizers 
as on 22 January, 2021. As regards allocation for indigenous and imported P & K 
fertilizers, only Rs.17925.72 Crore has been spent as on 22 January, 20 21 out of 
Rs.38916.90 Crore allocated at RE stage of 2021-22. In regard to MDA for City  
Compost, out of the enhanced RE allocation of Rs.72.98 Crore, only Rs.29  Crore 
has been spent as on 22.01.2021. During previous years the Department was 
pointing out to the Ministry of Finance over the shortfall in allocation in this regard 

3 
 
leading to accumulation of carry over liabilities. Since the requisite amount of 
budgetary allocation has been made by Ministry of Finance at RE stage of  
2020-21, the Committee expect that the Department would act swiftly to utilize th e 
entire RE allocation of 2020-21 to payout the carryover liabilities o f subsidy 
schemes of the Department completely by the end of 2020-21. Complet e 
information about utilization of funds allocated at RE 2020-21 for disbursi ng 
indigenous and imported urea subsidy, indigenous and imported P & K  fertilizers 
subsidy and MDA on City Compost and also the status of carry over liab ilities on 
each of them should be furnished to the Committee.”  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.6     In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated 
as under:- 
 
“The settlement of subsidy / DBT claims of fertilizer companies are being done 
regularly subject to availability of funds. The details complete information regarding 
utilization of funds allocated at RE 2020-21 and status of Carryover lia bility (2019-
20) in r/o Indigenous Urea is as under: 
 
Funds Status of 2020-21 Carryover liabilities status 
BE RE Expenditure Carryover 
liability as on 
01.04.2020 
Carryover 
liability paid 
during 2020-
21 
Balance 
Carryover 
liabilities as 
on 
31.03.2021 
38375.00 74487.80 68807.41 32154.87 32154.87 NIL 
 
Other Schemes:  
 
Complete information about utilization of funds allocated at RE 2020-21 fo r disbursing 
indigenous and imported urea subsidy, indigenous and imported P & K fe rtilizers subsidy 
and MDA on City Compost and also the status of carry over liabilities on e ach of them is 
as given below; 
 
     
(Rs.in Crores) 
Sl.No. Scheme RE2020-
21 
Utilization Balance 
Carry-over 
liabilities as on 
01.04.2021 
1 2 3 4 5=3-4 6 
1 Imported Urea 25049.62 25049.62 0 546.98 
2 Indigenous 
P&K 
23901.53 22288.37 1613.16 0.85* 
3 Imported P&K 15015.37 15015.37 0 479.21 
4 City Compost 72.98 68.74 4.24 0.25* 
Total 64039.5 62422.1 1617.4 1027.29 
 
*Carryover liabilities in respect of Indigenous P&K and City Compost are because 
of claims received on the last day of the financial year.” 
 

4 
 
 
 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.7    The Committee are satisfied that the carry over liabilities in respect of 
indigenous urea have been completely met by the Department and as such the 
balance as on 01 April, 2021 was nil.  However,   the carry over liabilities to the tune  
of Rs.546.98 Crore and Rs.479.21 Crore for imported Urea and imported P & K 
fertilizers respectively  still remain to be settled as on 01 April, 2021  in spite  of fu ll 
utilization of   budgetary  allocations under these schemes by the Department of 
Fertilizers.  The Action Taken Reply furnished by the Department is silent on the 
reasons for the continuance of these carry over liabilities and the action being 
taken by it for settling the same.  Moreover, the explanation given by the 
Department regarding carry over liabilities in respect of indigenous P&K fertilizers 
and City Compost that these are  on account of claims being received on the last 
day of the financial year does not seem to be a tangible one.  Since it is very much 
necessary to completely dismantle carry over liabilities in respect of both the 
indigenous and imported fertilizers, the Committee recommend that expeditious 
steps,  including augmentation of budgetary allocation ,   should be taken by the 
Department of Fertilizers for settling  the carry over liabilities of imported urea and 
indigenous and imported P & K fertilizers.  The Department should also fix a strict 
timeline for the submission of subsidy/ Market Development Assistance (MDA) 
claims by fertilizer companies well before the last day of the financial year so as to    
completely utilize the budgetary allocation and to settle all the subsidy/MDA claims 
pertaining to a year before 31 st March of every year.   The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the action taken on the above recommendations.   
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 2 
Budgetary allocation in BE 2021-22 for the Department of Fertilizers 
 
1.8 While emphasizing the need for strengthening it ’s budgetary planning so as to get 
budgetary allocation in commensurate with requirements, timely and op timum utilization of 
funds allocated at BE stage and to put up timely proposal for the all ocation of required funds 
at RE stage before the Ministry of Finance so as to eliminate the carry forw ard liabilities of 
subsidy schemes, the Committee recommended as under:- 

5 
 
“The Committee are concerned to note that there is a huge gap betwee n the 
proposed budgetary allocation of the Department of Fertilizers for its fertili zer 
subsidy schemes and the budgetary allocation made by the Ministry of Fin ance for 
the year 2021-22. Budget Estimate(BE) of Rs. Rs.80011.39 Crore has been  made 
for the Department against its proposal for Rs.110310.40 Crore to meet the 
requirements of various fertilizer subsidy schemes. The Committee note tha t the 
allocation for Urea subsidy schemes at BE stage of 2021-22 is Rs. 62797.68  Crore 
against the proposed requirement of Rs.80650.40 crore and that for Nutrient 
Based Subsidy Policy is Rs. 20762.00 Crore against the proposed requirement for 
Rs. 29660.00 Crore. In this regard, as per the submission made by the Department 
of Fertilizers, BE 2021-22 of Rs. 62797.68 crore for urea subsidy is higher than the 
BE of 2020-21 which was Rs. 50435.00 crore. Further, BE 2021-22 of Rs.19550.00 
for import of urea is based on budgetary requirement. According to the 
Department, the requirement of urea subsidy depends upon a number o f factors 
like actual consumption of urea, price of natural gas etc. and at the time  of RE 
2021-22, if required, additional requirement for urea subsidy would be p rojected to 
Ministry of Finance. However, the Department has stated that 
 the reduced 
allocation is not sufficient to meet the fund requirements of P&K Fertilize rs and 
City-Compost and the funds required will be demanded through Suppl ementary 
demand and/or through Special Banking Arrangement. In view of the above, the 
Committee visualize that the reduced allocation will not be sufficient to meet the 
fund requirements in respect of Fertilizers subsidy schemes and will eventually 
result in delayed payment to the fertilizers companies which may adversely affe ct 
their financial performances. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the  
Department of Fertilizers should strengthen its budgetary planning so as to ge t 
budgetary allocation in commensurate with its requirements, take concrete step s 
for the timely and optimum utilization of funds allocated at BE stage  and put up 
timely proposal before the Ministry of Finance for the allocation of required funds at 
RE stage in case of requirement of additional funds for Urea and NBS Subsidy 
Schemes.  The Committee hope  that the Department will follow the abov e 
recommendations in letter and spirit during 2021-22 and will make sincere e fforts 
to convince the Ministry of Finance for the allocation of 
additional fund required 
under subsidy budget of the Department at RE stage . The Committee also urge 
the Ministry of Finance to continue the good work done by it during 20 20-21 for the 
elimination of carry forward liabilities and allocate the additional funds req uired by 
the Department of Fertilzers for the urea subsidy and NBS Schemes at RE stage  
of 2021-22 as accumulation of carry forward liabilities and the subsequent need for 
Special Banking Arrangement for making subsidy payment to fertilizer units is not a 
financially prudent measure. This recommendation may also be communicated to 
the Ministry of Finance for its compliance.”  
 
  

6 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.9    In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation o f the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated 
as under:- 
 
 
“FICC had proposed the demand of Rs.61089.00 crores for Indigenous Urea fo r 
BE 2021-22, but only an amount of Rs.43236.28 crores have been all ocated.  The 
FICC has projected requirement of budget estimates taking into consideration of 
prevalent gas price and exchange rate.  The requirement of Additional fun ds, if 
any, will be re-assessed at the time of Revised Estimates for 2021-22 a nd 
demanded at RE stage.” 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
  
1.10     The Committee are not satisfied with the incomplete action taken reply 
furnished by the Ministry. The reply deals with only the budgetary requirements of  
indigenous urea and it is silent on the position regarding imported urea,  
indigenous and imported P & K fertilizers and the city compost.   Moreover,  it is 
also not clear whether the Department had sent the recommendation of the 
Committee to the Ministry of Finance to  allocate the additional funds required by 
the Department of Fertilzers for the urea subsidy and NBS Schemes at RE stage of 
2021-22.  Since it is imperative that the Department of Fertilizers  strengthen its 
budgetary planning so as to get budgetary allocation in commensurate with its 
requirements, take concrete steps for the timely and optimum utilization of funds 
allocated at BE stage and put up timely proposal before the Ministry of Finance fo r 
the allocation of required funds at RE stage in case of requirement of additional 
funds for Urea and NBS Subsidy Schemes,  t he Committee reiterate the earlier 
recommendation and  hope that a comprehensive reply would be provided by the 
Department on the same.  Further, in case the Department had not conveyed the 
recommendation of the Committee to the Ministry of Finance, the same should be 
sent to that Ministry immediately for its compliance.  Specific action taken reply 
should be furnished in this regard. 
 
  

7 
 
Recommendation No. 6 
 
Initiatives to encourage Joint ventures Abroad for meeting the domestic 
requirement of P&K Fertilizers. 
 
1.11 Keeping in view the near total dependency of the country on both the  
P&K fertilizers and their raw materials and the need for setting up of ne w Joint Venture 
projects in countries rich in fertilizer resources, the Committee recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that India's dependency on import at present is upto the  
extent of 25% of our requirement of Urea, 90% in case of Phosphate either as raw 
material or finished fertilizers (DAP/MAP/TSP) and 100% in case of Potash. The 
Committee also note that the Government has been encouraging Indian 
Companies to establish Joint Ventures abroad in Countries which are rich in 
fertilizer resources for production facilities with buy back arrangements and to 
enter into long term agreement for supply of fertilizers and fertilizer inpu ts to 
India. The Committee also learnt that so far , the Department of Fertilizers has 
undertaken Joint Ventures abroad with five Countries during the previous years .  
Further, the Department is also working with the goal of having access to 
acquisition of the fertilizer raw materials abroad.  Presently, the Department of 
Fertilizers has no incentive scheme for fertilizer companies to form joint ventures in 
other resource rich countries, so as to secure its regular supply. However, in th e 
cases of requests for non-financial support received from companies, the 
Department has been making efforts to reduce hindrances being faced by them  
and to render assistance to them to the extent possible through the Ind ian 
Missions abroad and the Ministry of External Affairs.  According to DoF, no joint 
venture project with equity participation from PSUs under the Department of 
Fertilizers has been set up in the last three years and no such project is p roposed 
in the near future. During the year 2020-21, no joint venture with any country was 
signed by the Department but a number of major developments regarding bil ateral 
cooperation in the fertilizer sector took place. Since the country has near total  
dependency on both the P&K fertilizers and their raw materials, the  Committee 
recommend that the Department should make sincere and vigorous efforts for  
setting up of new Joint Venture projects with long term buy-back arrangemen t for 
securing supply of P&K fertilizers and their raw materials.  In this rega rd, the 
Department may encourage both the public and private sector for coming  forward 
for such joint ventures abroad and render them all assistance for the purpose.  Due 
importance should also be given for the acquisition of P & K  fertilizers raw  
materials abroad and to manufacture the fertilizers in the country so as to boost the 
production of P&K fertilizers in the country, create employment in the country a nd 
to reduce the cost of P& K fertilizers in the country. The Committee also 
recommend that a definite frame work may be chalked out by DoF in the entire 
matter of Joint Ventures abroad, acquisition of mines and raw materials, etc. fo r 
giving a definite orientation to the public and private companies eag er to enter into 
the field. The Committee feel that setting up of Joint Ventures abroad with buy-
back arrangements may prevent any shortages and price fluctuation of P &K 
fertilizers in the country thereby ensuring savings of precious foreign exchange on  
the Subsidy Head.”  
 
  

8 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.12    In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation  of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated 
as under:- 
 
 
“To strengthen the Overseas Acquisition of Raw Material by the Indian Fertilize r 
Companies and role of Government, NIAEPR (National Institute of Agriculture 
Economics and Policy Research) was awarded the Study for Framing Policy f or 
Overseas Acquisition of Raw Material by the Indian Fertilizer Companies and Role 
of the Government. NIAEPR (National Institute of Agriculture Economics and 
Policy Research) has furnished its final report. Comments of JS (Gulf),  
JS (Eurasia) and JS (DPA-I) of MEA, FAI, NFL, RCF, IIFCO, CIL, Kribhco and 
GSFC have been obtained on that. On the basis of the Study report and comments 
of various organizations on that, Draft guidelines for Overseas Acquisition of Raw 
Material by the Indian Fertilizer Companies and role of Government has be en 
prepared and under consideration.” 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
  
1.13     The Committee note that the Department had awarded a  Study for Framing 
Policy for Overseas Acquisition of Raw Material by the Indian Fertilizer Companies 
and Role of the Government to the National Institute of Agriculture Economics and 
Policy Research (NIAEPR).  On the basis of Study Report of NIAEPR and the 
comments received from various organizations on the same, draft guidelines for 
overseas acquisition of fertilizers raw material by the Indian fertilizer companies 
are under consideration by the Department .  Though the Committee appreciate the 
initiatives taken by the Department in this regard, it is constrained to note that the 
action taken reply furnished by the Department  is silent about the other aspects of 
the earlier recommendation  regarding establishment of  Joint Ventures abroad for 
production facilities with buy back arrangements for supply of fertilizers and its 
raw materials and acquisition of mines in the resource rich countries. In this 
regard, the Committee reiterate the earlier recommendation for a comprehensive 
approach in the entire matter of Joint Ventures abroad, acquisition of mines and 
raw materials, etc  and hope that a comprehensive reply would be furnished by the 
Department in the matter.  
 
  

9 
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
Need for Allocation of more funds to give impetus to the production of City 
Compost. 
 
1.14 Stressing the need for allocation of more funds and removal of infrastru cture and 
other bottlenecks to give impetus to the production of city compost by maximum utilization 
of bio-degradable city waste to meet the increasing demand of the f armers, the 
Committee recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the average cost of production of urea is about  
Rs.17690/MT (Ist quarter of 2020-21) and about 71% of the cost of prod uction is 
subsidy burden. It comes out Rs.12559.90/MT ( i.e. 17690 x .71) for urea, whereas 
it is only Rs.1500/MT under Market Development Assistance (MDA) for scaling up 
production and consumption of city compost w.e.f. 10.2.2016. This subsidy is not 
for the farmers. It is for the compost manufacturers and fertilizer manufacturers. 
Fertilizer manufacturers are allowed for  
co-marketing of city compost and claim subsidy. Not only this, large quantum of 
release of MDA funds remain unpaid at any given point of time as is e vident from 
the fact that only Rs.36.00 crore, 32.00 crore, 10.00 crore were released against 
the sale of compost 294017.40 MT, 324598.45 MT, 306630.43 MT du ring the year 
2020-21 (as on 31.1.21), 2019-20 and 2018-19 respectively. The Committee  feel 
that it is due to lack of adequate funds allocated in the Budget, impractical payment 
procedure, lack of infrastructural support like the laboratories for testing city 
compost, lack of awareness amongst the farmers, coordination amongst the 
Centre and the States/UTs and also amongst the various Ministries of the Union 
Government i.e. Department of Fertilizer of Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers, 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Administration and Ministry of Agriculture. It is also 
learnt that only 12 States/UTs have constituted State Level Steering Committee fo r 
coordination and promotion of city compost. Last year, it was only 11 states. Thus, 
there is an increase of only 01 State/UT in a year. In this regard, the Commit tee 
recommend that concerted efforts should be made by  various stakeholders to  
constitute State Level Stearing  Committee in all States/UTs.  The Committee 
further  recommend that the payment procedure of Market Development 
Assistance (MDA) should be simplified in such a manner that the fund be rele ased 
to the concerned within a reasonable period of time from the date of clai m 
furnished to the related authorities; State Governments/UTs should establish new 
and, if necessary, augment the capacity etc. of the existing laboratories for te sting 
city compost and  local municipal bodies should co-operate with  the city compost  
manufacturers in identifying the landfill sites.  The Committee further recommen d 
that the farmers should also be given token incentives for using appropriate  
proportion of city compost along with the chemical fertilizers.  As regards the 
creation of awareness amongst the farmers regarding the benefits of the city 
compost is concerned, the Committee is happy to learn that there are ample 
awareness amongst the farmers as is evident from the gradual increase in demand 
of city compost resulting in shortage of city compost in India.  There was sho rtage 
of 7249.77 MT in 2018-19 and 95668.5 MT in 2020-21 (as on 31.1.2021).  
However, during the year 2019-20, there was a surplus of 1017.86 M T, which was 
very nominal.  The Committee, therefore, observe that there is a need to give  
impetus to the production of city compost to meet the increasing demand of the 
farmers through allocation of more fund and removal of infrastructure and other 

10 
 
bottlenecks coming in the way of converting city waste to city compost particularly 
when Indian cities have been generating, as has been mentioned abov e, 1.5 lakh 
tonnes of solid waste per day containing bio-degradable ranges from 30% to 70%.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.15    In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated 
as under:- 
1.      “As on date,  14 States/UTs. i.e.  Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Nagaland,  
Odisha, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Chhattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir, Andaman  & 
Nicobar Islands, Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Goa have constituted  Steering 
Committee so far.  States/UTs are being reminded from time to time for co nstitution of 
State Level Steering Committee.  Through D.O. letters at    Secretary level the concerned 
 State Chief Secretaries have  been requested for constitution of Steerin g Committee. 
Recently, a reminder was sent in June, 2021 this year to remaining States/UTs  with the 
request to constitute the Committee.  
2.      Payment of Market Development Assistance (MDA) to compost marketer  a nd 
compost manufacturers for sale of city compost  are made as per the procedure laid down 
in guidelines dated 10.10.2016 and 9.1.2017 issued by Department of  Fertilizers.     
Sometimes there are delays in receipt of requisite documents from compost marketer and 
manufacturers, insufficient budget allocation etc.  which causes procedural delay in 
processing of payment.   DAC&FW has informed that for augmenting the cap acity of 
existing laboratories for testing of city compost, the States can avail the funds available 
under various schemes of DAC&FW.  It has further been informed that Stat es are,  being 
encouraged in the zonal conferences to increase sample testing.    
 3.       Inputs in respect of recommendation 8,  Para 3 above was sought from Ministry of 
Housing and  Urban Affairs. Reply is awaited  from MoHUA.”     
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
  
1.16     The Committee note from the reply given by the Department of Fertilizers 
that twelve States and two Union Territories have so far  constituted State Level 
Steering Committee for coordination and promotion of city compost.  While noting 
the efforts being made by the Department, the Committee expect that the 
Department take up with the other States/UTs at Chief Secretary/Administrator level 
for the constitution of steering committee by all the States/UTs within a definite 
time frame.    
 
1.17    The Committee note that sometimes there are delays in receipt of requisite  
documents from compost marketer and manufacturer, etc which causes procedural 
delay in processing of payment of Market Development Assistance for City 
Compost.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that a  strict timeline should 
be fixed by the Department for the submission of relevant documents by compost 

11 
 
marketer and manufacturers so as to ensure timely payment of MDA without any 
carry over liabilities.  
 
1.18        The Committee are concerned to note that the reply furnished by the 
Department is silent on the recommendation regarding providing token incentives 
to the farmers for using appropriate proportion of city compost.  Presently Market 
Development Assistance is being provided to compost marketing companies and 
manufacturers but the farmers who actually use the city compost are left out.  
Since providing incentives to farmers would encourage them use more city 
compost, the Committee reiterate the earlier recommendation and expect that the 
Department would furnish its specific action taken reply in this regard.   
 
1.19    In regard to the observation of the Committee  that there is a need to give 
impetus to the production of city compost to meet the increasing demand of the 
farmers through allocation of more fund and removal of infrastructure and other 
bottlenecks coming in the way of converting city waste to city compost, the 
Committee note that inputs  have been sought from Ministry of Housing and  Urban 
Affairs.  The Committee hope that the Department would pursue this matter with 
that Ministry for  early reply and would take concrete steps for the implementation 
of the recommendation.  Progress made in this regard may be intimated to the 
Committee. 
 
 
 
 
  

12 
 
 
Recommendation No.11 
 
Promotion of Balanced use of fertilizers. 
 
1.20 Highlighting the need for educating farmers about the balanced  use of fertilizers as per 
the soil conditions/ cropping pattern and sale of fertilizers according to the  recommendations  
of soil health card, the Committee recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the sale of Urea and other chemical fertilizers h as 
increased in the country over the years.  The total sale of chemical fe rtilizers was 
568.29 LMT in 2017-2018 which has increased to 615.14 LMT in 201 9-2020.  In 
the report of  Third Party evaluation of Nutrient Based subsidy scheme it h as been 
stated  that NBS Policy did not succeed in controlling the imbalanced use of N, P 
and K nutrients due to cheaper price of Urea than P&K fertilizers and the efforts for 
publicizing the balanced use of fertilizers is not appropriate.  In t his regard, DoF 
has stated that it organized a joint awareness programme for farmers on 22 nd 
October 2020 in collaboration with DAC&FW and DARE to disseminate knowledge 
on optimum usage of fertilizer nutrients and to make farmers aware of n ew 
developments in the field of fertilizer usage and management.  This aw areness 
campaign has been re-designed as outreach programmes through Video 
Conferences with the State Agriculture Departments and other stakeholders due to 
Covid-19 pandemic.   The Committee feel  that mass awareness programmes 
need to be conducted throughout the country  for the education of farmers about 
the balanced use of fertilizers as  presently the farmers generally have   very little 
knowledge on the balanced use of fertilizers  as per the  soil condit ions as well as 
the cropping patterns. Thus,  the Committee recommend the following:- 
(i) Department of fertilizers should make more sustained and sincere 
efforts in coordination with the concerned Departments of the Ministry of 
Agriculture, State Governments and other agencies in a  target oriented 
manner about the importance of soil testing and promotion of balance d use 
of fertilizers  among farmers throughout the year; 
(ii) Joint Awareness Programmes/out-reach programmes should be 
organized State/ District/ Block wise before the start of every cropping 
season on optimum and balanced  usage of fertilizer nutrients, ill e ffects of 
imbalanced use of fertilizers including its impact on soil fertility, new 
developments in the field of fertilizer usage and management , etc. 
  

13 
 
 
(iii)  Presently the purchase of quantum of fertilizers according to the s oil 
health card is only optional.  The Department may examine in consultation 
with various stake holders including the Ministry of Agriculture, state 
Governments and farmers whether it may be made mandatory to buy 
fertilizers according to the recommendation made in the soil health card 
and accordingly a decision may be taken thereon.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.21    In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated 
as under:- 
 
“(i), (ii) & (iii)  “Department of fertilizers has been taking necessary and sincere 
efforts for promoting balanced used of fertilizers. The Fertilizers applicatio n 
awareness programme (FAAP), which is a joint effort of DoF, DAC&FW and DARE 
is an important step towards it. The FAAP program envisaged to be held bi-
annually i.e. before Kharif and Rabi Cropping season. The program is aimed to 
disseminate information about advantages of balanced used of fertiliz ers, latest 
practices to be adopted etc. Though, the program uses live telecast to dissem inate 
such information/practices to farming community at pan-India level, in previous 
such FAAP program (2019), it was done with proper setup in ICAR building where 
the Hon’ble Ministers of concerned Ministries, along with senior officers, Scientists 
of ICAR to answer the queries of farmers and some farmers of nearby areas to 
represent farming community. Such setup led a huge gathering in ICAR building. In 
this pandemic time, it is not desirable to have such huge gatherings. Th us, though, 
the joint awareness programme is envisaged to be held before every Kharif and 
Rabi cropping season, it could not be held in 2020. However, the govt. is 
committed to inform the farming community about the advantages of  balanced use 
of fertilizers. Through, Soil Health Card scheme, the Ministry of Agriculture is 
already taking necessary steps in this direction. As far as the recommendation for 
looking into the modalities whether it may be made mandatory to buy fe rtilizers 
according to the recommendations in Soil health Card, comments from DAC&FW 
have been already sought.” 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
  
1.22    The Committee note that a Fertilizers Application Awareness Programme 
(FAAP), which is a joint effort of Department o f Fertilizers, Department of 
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) and Department of 
Agricultural Research and Education(DARE) is envisaged to be held bi-annually i.e. 
before Kharif and Rabi Cropping season but it could not be held during 2020 due to 
COVID pandemic.  In this regard, the Committee feel that this lone programme 
organized from New Delhi may not be sufficient to create the requisite level of 
awareness among farmers regarding balanced use of fertilizers.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate the earlier recommendations that the Department of Fertilizers 

14 
 
should make more sustained and sincere efforts in coordination with the 
concerned Departments of the Ministry of Agriculture, State Governments and 
other agencies in a  target oriented manner about the importance of soil testing 
and promotion of balanced use of fertilizers  among farmers throughout the year 
and  Joint Awareness Programmes/out-reach programmes should be organized 
State/ District/ Block wise before the start of every cropping season on optimum 
and balanced  usage of fertilizer nutrients, ill effects of imbalanced use of fertilizers 
including its impact on soil fertility, new developments in the field of fertilizer 
usage and management , etc.   Specific replies to the above recommendations may 
be furnished to the Committee. 
 
1.23   The Committee further note that the Department of Fertilizers has sought the  
comments of DAC&FW  to decide whether it may be made mandatory to buy 
fertilizers according to the recommendations in Soil health Card.  In this regard, the 
Committee desire that the comments of DAC&FW may be expedited and a decision 
in the matter may be taken at the earliest.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the progress made in this regard. 
 
 
  

15 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.13 
 
Promotion of Nano fertilizers. 
 
1.24 Stressing the need for a separate budgetary allocation for the promotio n of nano 
fertilizers so as to reduce the usage of chemical fertilizers in the country , the Committee 
recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF) and 
The Indian Farmers Fertiliser Cooperative Limited (IFFCO) have developed nano-  
fertilizers.  While former ’s nano fertilizer is yet to be tested, the latter is gearing up 
for the production of nano fertilizer. In this regard, a notification has recently been 
issued under the Fertilizer Control Order, 1985.  However, the main challenge with 
nano technology is the delivery system. The traditional fertilizers are given by hand 
mechanism but in the case of nano fertilizers, farmers need a fertigation .  There is 
already an existing scheme to promote fertigation among the farmers.  Both the 
nano fertilizer and fertigation technology have to be dove-tailed t o spread it among 
the farmers.  It is also less costly than the chemical fertilizers.  More so, it will also 
reduce the fertilizer usage by 50 per cent resulting in saving of foreign ex change. 
The Committee therefore, recommend that the Department should design a 
scheme to promote nano fertilizers in the country in a big way to reduce th e usage 
of chemical fertilizers.  A separate budgetary allocation for the promotio n of nano 
fertilizers may also be considered.” 
 
 
  

16 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.25    In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated 
as under:- 
 
“It  is the endeavor of the Government of India to encourage the innov ations in the 
field of agriculture. However, the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and 
Farmers Welfare has notified Nano Urea as Nano-Nitrogen fertilizers in Fertilizer 
(Control) Order, 1985.   A notification under clause 20 D of the Fertilize r (inorganic, 
organic or mixed) Control Order, 1985 has been issued allowing IFFCO to 
manufacturer nano urea    for a period of three years from the date  of issue of 
notification.  The Department of Fertilizers is promoting the policy on promotion  of 
city compost under which budgetary allocation for payment of Market Development 
Assistance (MDA) to promote city compost has been made.  At present there is no 
proposal in this Department   for separate budgetary allocation for promotion o f 
nano fertilizer.” 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.26  The Committee note that the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation 
and Farmers Welfare has notified Nano Urea as Nano-Nitrogen fertilizers in 
Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985.   A notification has also been issued allowing 
IFFCO to manufacture nano urea    for a period of three years from the date of issue 
of notification.    However, at present there no proposal in the Department of 
Fertilizers for separate budgetary allocation for promotion of nano-fertilizers. Reply 
given by the Department is also silent on the specific recommendation of the 
Committee that the Department should design a scheme to promote nano fertilizers 
in the country in a big way to reduce the usage of chemical fertilizers.  Since na no 
fertilizer is  cheaper than the chemical fertilizers and also it  reduces the fertilizer 
usage by 50 per cent resulting in saving of lot of  money,  the Committee would like 
to reiterate this   recommendation.   Further, designing this Scheme appropriate 
budgetary outlay for the same should be made for the effective implementation of 
the scheme.  Specific action taken reply should be furnished in regard to the a bove 
recommendation of the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

17 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
 BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Enhanced Budgetary allocation at RE 2020-21 to Department of Fertilizers 
 
2.1 “The Committee are glad to note that the Budgetary Allocation was increased to 
Rs.138537.30 Crore at RE stage of 2020-21 from Rs.73939.00 Crore  a llocated at BE stage 
so as to pay-out the carry-over liabilities in respect of both the urea an d P & K fertilizer 
subsidies, completely. In the Reports of the Demands for Grants 2019-20 and 20 20-21 
pertaining to the Department of Fertilizers, the Committee strongly emphasized th e need for 
meeting the carry-over liabilities of fertilizer subsidies due to inadequate budgetary allocation. 
In this regard, the Committee recommended that an additional budgetary allo cation may be 
made by the Ministry of Finance to disburse entire subsidy dues on both urea and P & K 
fertilizers. Accordingly, the Ministry of Finance allocated Rs.64598.30 Crore a t RE stage of 
2020-21 in addition to Rs.73939.00 Crore allocated at BE stage to m eet the entire 
expenditure on both the urea subsidy and Nutrient Based Subsidy(NBS ).  The Committee 
hope that this additional allocation of funds would have enabled the Department of Fertilizers 
to pay-out the carry-over liabilities of both Urea subsidy and NBS sub sidy as well as Market 
Development Assistance(MDA) for City Compost completely by the end of 2020-21.  
According to the Department of Fertilizers, the carry over liabilities in respect of in digenous 
P&K and City Compost are being fully met and the balance of carry  over liabilities in respect 
of Imported P&K amounting to Rs.102.76 crores only are left and the same is expected to be 
utilized by March-2021. In regard to urea subsidy, it has been stated by the  Department that 
Carry-over liabilities of imported urea is Rs.561.63 crore and the same is nil in respe ct of 
indigenous urea.  However, the Committee note that out of Rs. 99547.42 Crore  allocated at 
RE stage for indigenous and imported urea subsidy only Rs.60189.73 Crore has been 
utilized by the Department of Fertilizers as on 22 January, 2021. As reg ards allocation for 
indigenous and imported P & K fertilizers, only Rs.17925.72 Crore has been  spent as on 22 
January, 2021 out of Rs.38916.90 Crore allocated at RE stage of 202 1-22. In regard to MDA 
for City Compost, out of the enhanced RE allocation of Rs.72.98 Crore, only Rs.29 Crore has 
been spent as on 22.01.2021. During previous years the Department was p ointing out to the 
Ministry of Finance over the shortfall in allocation in this regard leading to  accumulation of 
carry over liabilities. Since the requisite amount of budgetary allocation ha s been made by 
Ministry of Finance at RE stage of 2020-21, the Committee expect that the Department would 
act swiftly to utilize the entire RE allocation of 2020-21 to payout th e carryover liabilities of 

18 
 
subsidy schemes of the Department completely by the end of 2020-21. Complete  information 
about utilization of funds allocated at RE 2020-21 for disbursing indigeno us and imported 
urea subsidy, indigenous and imported P & K fertilizers subsidy and MDA o n City Compost 
and also the status of carry over liabilities on each of them sh ould be furnished to the 
Committee.”  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.2     In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under:- 
 
“The settlement of subsidy / DBT claims of fertilizer companies are being done 
regularly subject to availability of funds. The details complete information regarding 
utilization of funds allocated at RE 2020-21 and status of Carryover lia bility (2019-
20) in r/o Indigenous Urea is as under: 
 
Funds Status of 2020-21 Carryover liabilities status 
BE RE Expenditure Carryover 
liability as on 
01.04.2020 
Carryover 
liability paid 
during 2020-
21 
Balance 
Carryover 
liabilities as 
on 
31.03.2021 
38375.00 74487.80 68807.41 32154.87 32154.87 NIL 
 
Other Schemes:  
 
Complete information about utilization of funds allocated at RE 2020-21 fo r disbursing 
indigenous and imported urea subsidy, indigenous and imported P & K fe rtilizers subsidy 
and MDA on City Compost and also the status of carry over liabilities on e ach of them is 
as given below; 
     
(Rs.in Crores) 
Sl.No. Scheme RE2020-
21 
Utilization Balance 
Carry-over 
liabilities as on 
01.04.2021 
1 2 3 4 5=3-4 6 
1 Imported Urea 25049.62 25049.62 0 546.98 
2 Indigenous 
P&K 
23901.53 22288.37 1613.16 0.85* 
3 Imported P&K 15015.37 15015.37 0 479.21 
4 City Compost 72.98 68.74 4.24 0.25* 
Total 64039.5 62422.1 1617.4 1027.29 
*Carryover liabilities in respect of Indigenous P&K and City Compost are because 
of claims received on the last day of the financial year.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 

19 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
Demand and Availability of Fertilizers. 
 
2.3 “The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers has been en trusted  with 
the responsibility to ensure movement and distribution of subsidized chemical ferti lizers, 
from various fertilizer plants and ports in accordance with the State-wise & month-wise 
requirement assessed by the Department of Agriculture & Co-operation an d Farmers 
Welfare (DACFW). Department of Fertilizers, accordingly, allocates sufficient/ a dequate 
quantities of fertilizers to States by issuing monthly supply plan and continuously monitors 
the availability.   The movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is being monitored 
throughout the country by an on-line web based monitoring system  called integrated 
Fertilizer Monitoring System (iFMS). The sales to the beneficiary are captured through the 
Point of Sale (PoS) machines installed at the retailer ’s end. The State Governments are 
regularly advised to coordinate with manufacturers and importers of fertilizers for  
streamlining the supplies through timely placement of indents for railway rakes throug h 
their state institutional agencies like Markfed, etc.   The Committee also learnt that regular 
weekly Video Conference is conducted jointly by Department of Agriculture & Cooperation 
and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) and Department of Fertilizers (DoF) with State  
Agriculture Officials and corrective actions are taken to dispatch fertilizer a s indicated by 
the State Governments.  To avoid black marketing and hoarding, the state  governments 
are adequately empowered under the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985 to t ake 
necessary steps. Department of Fertilizers regularly advises the state governments to 
take the required steps so that the fertilizer is made available to the farmers at reasonable 
prices and to keep a strict check on malpractices such as black marketing and hoardin g.
  
Eventhough the Department has conveyed that there is no shortage of fertilizers in the 
country at present, the Committee are constrained to note  there are numerous rep orts of 
non-availability or delayed availability of fertilizers in different parts of the  country 
particularly during the peak cultivation seasons.   According to the Departmen t, as per its 
mandate, it  supplies  Urea upto the State Government level and mon itor the stock 
availability at State level according to their requirement for a particular se ason through  
iFMS Dash-Boards. The Department endeavours to keep the supply somewhat more than 
the requirement and the colour code on the dash-board will reflect Gre en only when the 
supply is more.  The State Governments distribute the Urea and other fertili zers  
according to their own distribution plans. In case of any feedback regarding shortage of 
fertilizer is received, the Department intervenes and requests the State Gove rnment to 
take necessary corrective action.  The Committee are happy to note that as part of a new 
initiative, the Department has introduced a ‘Kisan Corner’ on the iFMS Dash-Board, which 
provides the stock details of all the retailers of the District and the farmer is be ing sent a 
message in his registered mobile number regarding the stock position of the reta iler from 
where he made the last purchase. Since it is very much necessary to ensure th e 
unhindered availability of fertilizers at ground level during peak cultivatio n season when 
the farmers needed them most, the Committee feel that fool proof arrangements should 
be made to ensure timely availability of fertilizers.  The Committee, t herefore, 
recommends that:- 
 
(i) The Department should take steps to create an institutional mechanism  
for ground level monitoring  so as to  ensure unhindered and transparent 
supply chain for adequate and timely availability of fertilizers to the 
farmers in the States upto the Block and village levels particularly during 
peak agricultural seasons when  the timely supply of fertilizers  is 
absolutely necessary. 
(ii) Weekly Joint Secretary level review by the Department of Fertilizer and 
the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation should review district 
level availability of fertilizers along with the state level availability.  In 

20 
 
case of any shortage in any district, immediate steps should be taken  to 
supply fertilizers to that district.  
(iii)   Presently the colour coding in the dash board of iFMS shows the map 
of a particular State green when the supply of fertilizers are more than 
the requirement.  Rather than State level approach, district level 
approach should be adopted in this regard i.e. the map should show 
green on a district map only when the required quantity is supplied to 
that particular  district so that immediate action may be taken in the  
cases of shortage of fertilizers.   
(iv)  The Department should monitor whether the State Government take 
necessary action as empowered under the Fertilizer Control Order 
(FCO), 1985 in the cases of artificial scarcity, black-marketing, hoarding 
and  to ensure quality of fertilizers supplied at the local levels.  In the 
cases of violations in this regard, the attention of the State Government 
should be drawn at Chief Secretary level for taking necessary action in 
those cases.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 “As stated in earlier replies of the DoF, it is once again reiterated that the ma ndate 
of the Department is to ensure adequate and timely availability of all fe rtilizers at the state 
level. However, the movement of Fertilizers to the various districts in a state is within the 
mandate of respective State Governments. 
 
 Department of Fertilizers has been entrusted  with the responsibility to ensure  
movement and distribution of subsidized chemical fertilizers, from various fe rtilizer plants 
and ports in accordance with the State- wise & month-wise requirement assessed by the 
Department of Agriculture & Co-operation and Farmers Welfare (DACFW). 
On the basis 
of month-wise & state-wise projection given by DAC&FW, Department of Fertilizers 
allocates sufficient/ adequate quantities of fertilizers to States by issuing monthly supply 
plan and continuously monitors the availability through the following system: 
 
(i) The movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is being monitored 
throughout the country by an on-line web based monitoring system ca lled 
integrated Fertilizer Monitoring System (iFMS); 
(ii) The State Governments are regularly advised to coordinate with 
manufacturers and importers of fertilizers for streamlining the supplies 
through timely placement of indents for railway rakes through their state 
institutional agencies like Markfed etc. 
(iii) Regular Weekly Video Conference is conducted jointly by Department of 
Agriculture & Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW), Department of 
Fertilizers (DoF), and Ministry of Railways with State Agriculture Officials and 
corrective actions are taken to dispatch fertilizer as indicated by the State 
Governments. 
(iv) In case of urea, to bridge the gap between assessed requirement and 
indigenous production, the Steering Committee of Secretaries (SCOS) gives 
authorization to DoF for urea imports. In case of P&K fertilizers, the impo rts 
come under Open General License (OGL) where companies are free to 
import based on commercial judgments. 
 
  
  

21 
 
Department of Fertilizers is closely monitoring the availability of Fertilizers in a ll the 
states. Further, it is submitted that a new initiative has been made by the Department of 
Fertilizersi.e. introduction of Dashboard in which various detailed reports related to DoF 
and States. The same is also in public domain. Through this dashboard, De partment of 
Fertilizers is ensuring the availability of stocks of all fertilizers at the Who lesalers and 
retailers. There is also Collector Dashboard, Company Dashboard and MarkFed 
Dashboard.Thus, with the steps as indicated above, Department of Fertilizers ensu res 
availability of fertilizers in all the States. At present, there is no shortag e of any fertilizers 
in the country. 
 
 Further, to avoid black marketing and hoarding, the state governments are 
adequately empowered under the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985 to take necessary 
steps. Department of Fertilizers regularly advise the state governments to take the 
required steps so that the fertilizers is made available to the farmers at rea sonable prices 
and to keep a strict check on malpractices such as black marketing and hoarding.” 
 
Recommendation No.11 
 
Promotion of Balanced use of fertilizers. 
 
 
2.5 “The Committee note that the sale of Urea and other chemical fertilizers h as 
increased in the country over the years.  The total sale of chemical fe rtilizers was 
568.29 LMT in 2017-2018 which has increased to 615.14 LMT in 201 9-2020.  In 
the report of  Third Party evaluation of Nutrient Based subsidy scheme it h as been 
stated  that NBS Policy did not succeed in controlling the imbalanced use of N, P 
and K nutrients due to cheaper price of Urea than P&K fertilizers and the efforts for 
publicizing the balance use of fertilizers is not appropriate.  In this regard, DoF has 
stated that it organized a joint awareness programme for farmers on 22 nd October 
2020 in collaboration with DAC&FW and DARE to disseminate knowledge on 
optimum usage of fertilizer nutrients and to make farmers aware of ne w 
developments in the field of fertilizer usage and management.  This aw areness 
campaign has been re-designed as outreach programmes through Video 
Conferences with the State Agriculture Departments and other stakeholders due to 
Covid-19 pandemic.   The Committee feel  that mass awareness programmes 
need to be conducted throughout the country  for the education of farmers about 
the balanced use of fertilizers as  presently the farmers generally have   very little 
knowledge on the balanced use of fertilizers  as per the  soil condit ions as well as 
the cropping patterns. Thus,  the Committee recommend the following:- 
(i) Department of fertilizers should make more sustained and sincere 
efforts in coordination with the concerned Departments of the Ministry 
of Agriculture, State Governments and other agencies in a  target 
oriented manner about the importance of soil testing and promotion 
of balanced use of fertilizers  among farmers throughout the year; 
(ii) Joint Awareness Programmes/out-reach programmes should be 
 organized State/ District/ Block wise before the start of every 
 cropping season on optimum and balanced  usage of fertilizer 
 nutrients, ill effects of imbalanced use of fertilizers including its 
 impact on soil fertility, new developments in the field of fertilizer 
 usage and management , etc. 

22 
 
(iii)  Presently the purchase of quantum of fertilizers according to 
 the soil health card is only optional.  The Department may 
 examine in consultation with various stake holders including the 
 Ministry of Agriculture, state Governments and farmers whether  it 
 may be made mandatory to buy fertilizers according to the 
 recommendation made in the soil health card and accordingly a 
 decision may be taken thereon. ” 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation o f the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated 
as under:- 
 
 (i), (ii) & (iii) “Department of fertilizers has been taking necessary and sincere efforts for 
promoting balanced used of fertilizers. The Fertilizers application awareness p rogramme 
(FAAP), which is a joint effort of DoF, DAC&FW and DARE is an important step towa rds 
it. The FAAP program envisaged to be held bi-annually i.e. before Khari f and Rabi 
Cropping season. The program is aimed to disseminate information about advan tages of 
balanced used of fertilizers, latest practices to be adopted etc. Though, the  program uses 
live telecast to disseminate such information/practices to farming community at p an-India 
level, in previous such FAAP program (2019), it was done with proper setup in ICAR 
building where the Hon ’ble Ministers of concerned Ministries, along with senior officers, 
Scientists of ICAR to answer the queries of farmers and some farmers of nea rby areas to 
represent farming community. Such setup led a huge gathering in ICAR building . In this 
pandemic time, it is not desirable to have such huge gatherings. Thus, tho ugh, the joint 
awareness programme is envisaged to be held before every Kharif and Rabi cropp ing 
season, it could not be held in 2020. However, the govt. is committed to info rm the 
farming community about the advantages of balanced use of fertilizers. Through, Soil 
Health Card scheme, the Ministry of Agriculture is already taking necessary steps in this  
direction. As far as the recommendation for looking into the modalities whether it may be 
made mandatory to buy fertilizers according to the recommendations in S oil health Card, 
comments from DAC&FW have been already sought.” 
              
FURTHER COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
Expeditious revival of closed and sick fertilizer Units. 
 
 2.7 “The Committee note that there were nine Fertilizer Public Sector Undertakings 
(PSUs) under the administrative control of the Department of Fertilizers.  Governmen t of 
India  in 2002 decided to close the operations of all the fertilizer Units of  Hindustan 
Fertilizers Corporation Limited (HFCL) and Fertilizers Corporation of India Limited (F CIL) 
due to un-viability of economic operations of the fertilizer Units.  There fore, at present, 
there are seven working PSUs of Department of Fertilizers, out of which, FCI Arav ali 
Gypsum & Minerals India Limited (FAGMIL) is engaged in mining of Gypsum and 
Projects & Development India Limited (PDIL) is Consultancy and Engineering 
Organization and the remaining five are fertilizer producing units. The Committ ee also 
learnt that National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) and Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers 
Limited (RCF) are profit making companies while Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizers  
Corporation Limited (BVFCL), Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL) and Fertilizers and 
Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) are loss making fertilizer PSUs.   Presently,  the 

23 
 
Government of India is reviving 5 closed units of FCIL / HFCL by setting up new 
Ammonia Urea units of 1.27 MMTPA capacity each at Ramagundam (T elangana), 
Talcher (Odisha), Gorakhpur (Uttar Pradesh), Sindri (Jharkhand) and Barauni (Bihar) 
through formation of Joint Ventures of leading PSUs consortia. Since the reviv al of the 
projects is of national importance, the Committee are  satisfied to learn th at the 
Department as well as NITI Aayog and Prime Minister ’s Office are closely monitoring and 
taking monthly meetings to review the progress of revival of these projects for ensurin g 
their timely completion.  Since the country is dependent on  import in case o f Urea to the 
extent of 25% while in case of Phosphates it is 90% and in case of P otash it is 100%, 
there is a  need for revival of Korba unit of FCIL and Durgapur and Haldia u nits of HFCL 
so as to decrease our dependency on imports and achieve self-sufficien cy in the sector.   
In this regard, the Committee are given to understand that the decision  on revival of 
Korba, Haldia & Durgapur units would be taken after viewing the progress of reviva l of 
four units of Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited (FCIL) viz., Talcher, Ramagu ndam, 
Gorakhpur and Sindri and one unit of Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limite d (HFCL) 
viz., Barauni based on the assessment of demand-supply gap of u rea in the country.  
According to the Department,  a decision has now been taken regarding a llocation of 
equity participation on nomination basis to CPSEs/ Govt of Assam for sett ing up of New-
Brownfield Ammonia-Urea Complex (Namrup-IV) in the existing premises of the 
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Ltd.   In regard to the above, the Committee 
recommend  the following:-  
(i) the Department will make utmost efforts to ensure that the 5 units of FCIL  / 
HFCL at Ramagundam (Telangana), Talcher (Odisha), Gorakhpur (Uttar 
Pradesh), Sindri (Jharkhand) and Barauni (Bihar) are completed/ made 
operational in stipulated schedule without any time over-run.  
(ii)  the process for revival of the Korba, Haldia and  Durgapur units may also  
be taken up expeditiously after timely assessment of the demand and  
supply gap so as to achieve self-sufficiency in the sector and reduce 
subsidy burden. 
(iii)  the construction work at Namrup- IV plant of BVFCL should  be taken up 
expeditiously in coordination with all parties concerned within a fixed time 
bound manner.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8.1 i. “The revival projects are being monitored closely by Department of fertilizers 
to ensure that these plants are completed within stipulated time schedule. The 
progress of the projects is reviewed by the Secretary (fertilizers) on monthly 
basis and issue/concerns brought to the notice during meetings are resolved 
suitably. It may be noted that Ramagundam Plant has started urea producti on 
on 22.03.2021. 
 
ii. Except Ramagundam, other projects are still under construction phase. Once, 
these five plants become operational, about 63.5 LMTPA capacity of 
indigenous urea production will be added to the country. Therefore, de mand 
and supply gap of urea in the country would be assessed at approp riate time 
and accordingly suitable decision would be taken in this regard. 
The above point is noted for compliance.  Further, Ramagundam h as started its 
commercial production of urea w.e.f. 22.03.2021.On operationalization of all 
other four revival plants i.e. Talcher (Odisha), Gorakhpur (Uttar Pradesh), Sindri 

24 
 
(Jharkhand) and Barauni (Bihar), demand and supply gap of urea in the cou ntry 
would be assessed and status of recommendation at Pt(ii) reviewed. 
iii. The re-allocation of equity participation on nomination basis has been decided 
as Government of Assam - 26%, M/s OIL - 18%, BVFCL - 11%, RCF - 17% and 
NFL -28%.  Accordingly, NFL/BVFCL have been requested to submit Techno  
Economic Feasibility Report (TEFR) of the project and detailed demand for  
Viability Gap Funding to make the Namrup-IV project viable to this Department 
at the earliest so that matter may be taken up with Cabinet for approva l of the 
same.” 
  

25 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
  

26 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
   
Recommendation No. 2 
 
Budgetary allocation in BE 2021-22 for the Department of Fertilizers 
 
4.1 “The Committee are concerned to note that there is a huge gap between t he 
proposed budgetary allocation of the Department of Fertilizers for its fertili zer 
subsidy schemes and the budgetary allocation made by the Ministry of Fin ance for 
the year 2021-22. Budget Estimate(BE) of Rs. Rs.80011.39 Crore has been  made 
for the Department against its proposal for Rs.110310.40 Crore to meet the 
requirements of various fertilizer subsidy schemes. The Committee note that the 
allocation for Urea subsidy schemes at BE stage of 2021-22 is Rs. 62797.68  Crore 
against the proposed requirement of Rs.80650.40 crore and that for Nutrient 
Based Subsidy Policy is Rs. 20762.00 Crore against the proposed requirement for 
Rs. 29660.00 Crore. In this regard, as per the submission made by the Department 
of Fertilizers, BE 2021-22 of Rs. 62797.68 crore for urea subsidy is higher than the 
BE of 2020-21 which was Rs. 50435.00 crore. Further, BE 2021-22 of Rs.19550.00 
for import of urea is based on budgetary requirement. According to the 
Department, the requirement of urea subsidy depends upon a number o f factors 
like actual consumption of urea, price of natural gas etc. and at the time  of RE 
2021-22, if required, additional requirement for urea subsidy would be p rojected to 
Ministry of Finance. However, the Department has stated that 
 the reduced 
allocation is not sufficient to meet the fund requirements of P&K Fertilize rs and 
City-Compost and the funds required will be demanded through Suppl ementary 
demand and/or through Special Banking Arrangement. In view of the above, the 
Committee visualize that the reduced allocation will not be sufficient to meet the 
fund requirements in respect of Fertilizers subsidy schemes and will eventually 
result in delayed payment to the fertilizers companies which may adversely affe ct 
their financial performances. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the  
Department of Fertilizers should strengthen its budgetary planning so as to ge t 
budgetary allocation in commensurate with its requirements, take concrete step s 
for the timely and optimum utilization of funds allocated at BE stage  and put up 
timely proposal before the Ministry of Finance for the allocation of required funds at 
RE stage in case of requirement of additional funds for Urea and NBS Subsidy 
Schemes.  The Committee hope  that the Department will follow the abov e 
recommendations in letter and spirit during 20 21-22 and will make sincere efforts 
to convince the Ministry of Finance for the allocation of 
additional fund required 
under subsidy budget of the Department at RE stage . The Committee also urge 
the Ministry of Finance to continue the good work done by it during 20 20-21 for the 
elimination of carry forward liabilities and allocate the additional funds req uired by 
the Department of Fertilzers for the urea subsidy and NBS Schemes at RE stage  
of 2021-22 as accumulation of carry forward liabilities and the subse quent need for 
Special Banking Arrangement for making subsidy payment to fertilizer units is not a 
financially prudent measure. This recommendation may also be communicated to 
the Ministry of Finance for its compliance.”  

27 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.2 “FICC had proposed the demand of Rs.61089.00 crores for Indigenous Urea fo r 
BE 2021-22, but only an amount of Rs.43236.28 crores have been all ocated.  The 
FICC has projected requirement of budget estimates taking into consideration of 
prevalent gas price and exchange rate.  The requirement of Additional fun ds, if 
any, will be re-assessed at the time of Revised Estimates for 2021-22 a nd 
demanded at RE stage.” 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation No.  13 
Promotion of Nano fertilizers. 
 
4.3 “The Committee note that Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF) and 
The Indian Farmers Fertiliser Cooperative Limited (IFFCO) have developed nano-  
fertilizers.  While former ’s nano fertilizer is yet to be tested, the latter is gearing up 
for the production of nano fertilizer. In this regard, a notification has recently been 
issued under the Fertilizer Control Order, 1985.  However, the main challenge with 
nano technology is the delivery system. The traditional fertilizers are given by hand 
mechanism but in the case of nano fertilizers, farmers need a fertigation .  There is 
already an existing scheme to promote fertigation among the farmers.  Both the 
nano fertilizer and fertigation technology have to be dove-tailed to spread it among 
the farmers.  It is also less costly than the chemical fertilizers.  More so, it will also 
reduce the fertilizer usage by 50 per cent resulting in saving of foreign ex change. 
The Committee therefore, recommend that the Department should design a 
scheme to promote nano fertilizers in the country in a big way to reduce th e usage 
of chemical fertilizers.  A separate budgetary allocation for the promotio n of nano 
fertilizers may also be considered.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4 “It  is the endeavor of the Government of India to encourage the innov ations in the 
field of agriculture. However, the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and 
Farmers Welfare has notified Nano Urea as Nano-Nitrogen fertilizers in Fertilize r 
(Control) Order, 1985.   A notification under clause 20 D of the Fertilize r (inorganic, 
organic or mixed) Control Order, 1985 has been issued allowing IFFCO to 
manufacturer nano urea    for a period of three years from the date  of issue of 
notification.  The Department of Fertilizers is promoting the policy on promotion  of 
city compost under which budgetary allocation for payment of Market Development 
Assistance (MDA) to promote city compost has been made.  At present there is no 
proposal in this Department   for separate budgetary allocation for promotion of 
nano fertilizer.” 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
  

28 
 
CHAPTER – V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLEIS OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED   
 
Recommendation No. 3 
5.1 Need for allocation of a separate Budgetary plan Head for Research & 
Development for self-sufficiency in fertilizers. 
 
“The Committee note that there is a strong need to enhance Research and  
Development activities in fertilizers sector so as to make the indigenous fertilizer 
production technology an internationally competitive one. Unfortunately, no 
budgetary allocation has been made for Research & Development in BE 202 1-22 
of the Department of Fertilizers. The Committee learnt that Indian Council for  
Fertilizer & Fertilizer Nutrient Research (ICFFTR) has been constituted by the 
fertilizer CPSEs under the Department of Fertilizers with the objective to u ndertake 
research in the area of fertilizer and fertilizer manufacturing technolo gy, use of raw 
material, innovation in fertilizer products etc. ICFFTR comprises of a Governing 
Council headed by Secretary, D/o fertilizers but DoF has not allocated an y fund to 
ICFFTR. In this regard, t he Committee are very much concerned to note the 
discontinuance of the budgetary head for R&D in the Demands for Grants of DoF. 
According to DoF, it is making all out efforts for allocation of a separate bud get 
head for Research & Development. However, Ministry of Finance did not agree to  
the proposal and advised the Department to first seek approval of the Parliament 
through 1 st Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants. Accordingly, proposal 
seeking token Supplementary was incorporated in the 1 st Batch of Supplementary 
Demands for Grants but the same was not included by Ministry of Finance. The 
Department has again incorporated a token Supplementary in the 2 nd Batch of 
Supplementary Demand for Grants. The communication in this regard is still 
awaited from M/o Finance. ” The Committee feel that it is very much necessary to 
financially support ICFFTR in its R & D efforts so as to achieve its objectives and 
also to encourage the initiatives of others engaged in research and development i n 
various fields of fertilizer sector including development of nano-fertilizers, pesticide 
coated slow release fertilizers, bio and organic fertilizers, etc. The Committee while 
deprecating the delay on the part of Ministry of Finance in the inclusion of  a 
separate  budgetary head for R & D in the Demands for Grants of the Depa rtment 
of Fertilizers, strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Department of 
Fertilizers should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance at the hig hest 
level for the inclusion of a separate budgetary head for R & D and for the allocation 
of sufficient funds for the purpose from RE 2021-22 onwards so as to boo st the R 
& D efforts of the indigenous fertilizer industry in order to make it internationa lly 
competitive fertilizer manufacturing technologies. Sentiments expressed by th is 
Committee may also be conveyed to the Ministry of Finance. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.” 
 
  

29 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 “In the 1st batch of Supplementary Demand for Grants 2021-22 laid by Department 
of Economic Affairs before the Parliament, the Token Supplementary requ ested by 
Department of Fertilizers for BVFCL and R&D Budget head has been includ ed. Approval 
of budget heads for BVFCL has already been obtained. 
The proposal for opening/revival of Budget Head for R&D is being sent to Departm ent of 
Economic Affairs for approval.” 
 
Recommendation No.4 
 
Exemption of Customs duty on import of raw materials for production of fertilizers 
 
5.3 “The Committee note that the actual production of urea in the cou ntry was 244.55 
LMT against the sale of 336.97 LMT during the financial year 2019-2 0.  91.99 LMT of 
Urea had to be imported to meet the gap between the demand and production. Against 
the sale of 234.13 LMT of P&K fertilizers (DAP + A/S + Complex + SS P), actual 
production in the country was 181.36 LMT during the financial year 2019-20. To meet the 
demands of the farmers 91.74 LMT of P&K fertilizers were to be import ed. Further, the 
Committee note that the actual production of Urea during 2019- 20 ha s been more than 
the installed capacity. However, the actual production of P&K fertilizers are ver y less 
compared to the installed capacity during 2019- 20. A
t present, there are 32 large size 
urea plants in the country manufacturing urea, 19 units producing DAP & comp lex 
fertilizers and 2 units manufacturing Ammonium Sulphate as a by-product . However, the 
country is dependent on imports of different fertilizers either in the form of finished 
fertilizers or their raw material due to non-availability/scarce availability of resources. The 
dependency is upto 90% in case of Phosphatic fertilizers and 100% in case o f Potassic 
Fertilizers.  The Committee feel that non-availability of P&K raw mate rials is the major 
impediment in achieving self-sufficiency in the production of P & K fertilizers. Even though 
the Country is facing a huge financial burden on import of both urea an d P & K fertilizers, 
the Committee fail to understand the reasons for levy of Basic Customs Duty on raw 
materials for manufacture of fertilizers.  In this regard, Department of Fertilize rs has 
requested the Ministry of Finance to grant exemption or levy nominal rate of 1% Basic 
Customs Duty (BCD) on intermediate and raw materials for manufacture of vario us 
fertilizers viz. Ammonia, Phosphoric acid, Rock Phosphate, Sulphur, Sulphu ric acid, Urea 
(as input), MOP (Muriate of Potash) (as input).  Considering the strategic importance of 
fertilizers for the country's food security, the Committee feel that there is a  need to 
incentivize indigenous fertilizer production in the form of nil or lower BCD so  as to reduce 
the production cost of fertilizers and to achieve optimum capacity utilization of the fertilizer 
plants in the country. This will also result in balanced use of fertilizers as it will  enable 
farmers to buy more P & K fertilizers because of their lesser prices.  In view of the above, 
the Committee strongly recommend that the Department may take sincere and vigorous 
initiatives to impress upon the Ministry of Finance to exempt or levy nominal rate of 1% 
Basic Customs Duty (BCD) on fertilizer raw materials which may augment the d omestic 
fertilizer production and curtail the expenditure on imports. The Committee w ould like to 
be apprised of the measures taken in this regard.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 “P&K fertilizers is a de-controlled commodity. P&K fertilizer industry take their  
policy decisions according to their commercial viable terms. P&K industry faced v arious 
issues which led them uncompetitive. One of such issues is the existence of inverted 
custom duty structure. The Basic Custom Duty (BCD) raw materials (i.e. Ammonia, 
Phosphoric acid, Sulphuric acid, Urea and MOP) is same as BCD on finished fertilizers at 

30 
 
5% except on rock phosphate and sulphur which is 2.5%. In order to encourage a nd 
improve the competitiveness of our fertilizer industry, Department of Fertilizers had 
requested the Ministry of Finance vide DO Letter No. 16050/3/2020-PMI-I dated 
20.11.2020 from Secretary (Fert) to Secretary (Finance), dated 15.02.2021 from MoS 
(C&F) to Finance Minister and further letter dated 30.03.2021 from  Minister (C&F) to 
Finance Minister to grant exemption or nominal rate of 1% BCD on raw materia ls for 
manufacture of fertilizers viz. Ammonia, Phosphoric acid, Rock Phosphate,  Sulphur, 
Sulphuric acid, Urea (as input), MOP (as input). That would improve the competitivene ss 
of our domestic fertilizers industry and also lead to promoting Atmanirbha r Bharat 
Mission. Reply from Ministry of Finance is still awaited on the matter.  
 
Fertilizer production data is as below: 
Para 2.6 
      
 
VII Trends in Fertilizer production 
   
     
(Fig.in 'LMT') 
 
 Year Type of Fertilizers 
 
 
Urea DAP NPK SSP Total 
 
 
2017-18 240.23 46.5 88.14 38.75 413.62 
 
 
2018-19 238.99 38.99 95.15 40.72 413.85 
 
 
2019-20 244.55 45.5 93.34 42.53 425.92 
 
 
2020-21 246.03 37.74 100.54 49.35 433.66 
 
 
NPK includes A/S and Complex fertilizers 
  
        Para 2.7 
   
(Fig.in 'LMT') 
 
S.No.  Sector 
2019-20 2020-21 
Urea DAP Complex 
Fertilizes Urea DAP Complex 
Fertilizes 
1 Public 65.75   14.81 66.63   14.54 
2 Cooperative 72.05 20.93 21.65 69.99 19.24 23.48 
3 Private 106.75 24.58 50.15 109.42 18.5 55.1 
Total 244.55 45.51 86.61 246.04 37.74 93.12 
        Recommendation No.5 
 
MRP of P& K fertilizers 
 
5.5 “The Committee note that the Government has implemented Nutrient Based 
Subsidy Policy w.e.f. 1.4.2010 for Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) Fertilizers w ith the 
objectives to ensure balanced use of fertilizers, promote growth of indigenous fe rtilizers 
industry, improve agriculture productivity and reduce subsidy burden. Under the policy, a 
fixed amount of subsidy, decided on annual basis, is provided on subsidiz ed P&K 
fertilizers depending on their nutrient content with an objective to make  available these 
fertilizers to farmers at a reduced price. Under this policy, MRP is fixed by fertili zer 
companies as per market dynamics at reasonable level. In the report of the third  party 
evaluation conducted by the Department of Fertilizers, it has been obse rved that 45% 
farmers reported P&K ingredients are too expensive and 46% of the farmers reported P & 
K ingredients were not available at MRP. In regard to the above observations, the 
Department of Fertilizers has said that majority of the farmers do not feel that P&K 
fertilizers are too expensive or are not available at MRP. The Committee a re not 
convinced with the reply furnished by the Department. However, the Department has 
issued Reasonableness guidelines wherein the reasonableness of MRP of the final P&K 

31 
 
product is being evaluated on the basis of the cost of production of these P &K fertilizers. 
In this regard, the Committee note that on the one hand the  MRP of u rea is fixed 
statutorily by the Government and on the other the fixing of MRP of P & K fertilizers are 
left to the market forces resulting in higher prices of P&K fertilizers. Thus, farmers find  
urea cheaper and tend to use more urea than the P & K fertilizers. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizers make an in-depth study of NBS 
Policy particularly in the context of unreasonable MRPs fixed by fertilizer co mpanies even 
after getting nutrient based subsidy under the Scheme and take nec essary action to 
ensure reasonableness of MRP of P & K fertilizers according to the subsidy gi ven under 
the Scheme.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.6 “Evaluation of NBS Scheme has been done by third party and duly ap proved by 
Secy(F). The outcomes of the report along with the EFC proposal has bee n forwarded to 
different ministries/departments for their comments. The Ministries/departments have 
given their comments too. DoF is at the finalizing stage of preparing final EFC proposal 
which contains the third party evaluation outcomes for its approval. 
  
The draft guidelines of Reasonableness of MRP of P&K Products have been 
finalized with little modification on the previous guidelines after due d iscussions and 
recommendation by the review committee on reasonableness guidelines. The upda ted 
guidelines is yet to receive Hon'ble Minister (C&F) assent on it.  , the draft upda ted 
guidelines has been forwarded to DoE for their comments and confirmation.” 
 
Recommendation No.6 
 
Initiatives to encourage Joint ventures Abroad for meeting the domestic 
requirement of P&K Fertilizers. 
 
5.7 “The Committee note that India's dependency on import at present is upto the  
extent of 25% of our requirement of Urea, 90% in case of Phosphat e either as raw 
material or finished fertilizers (DAP/MAP/TSP) and 100% in case of Potash. The  
Committee also note that the Government has been encouraging Indian Companie s to 
establish Joint Ventures abroad in Countries which are rich in fertilizer resources for 
production facilities with buy back arrangements and to enter into long term agreement for 
supply of fertilizers and fertilizer inputs to India. The Committee also  learnt that so far, the 
Department of Fertilizers has undertaken Joint Ventures abroad with five Countries during 
the previous years.  Further, the Department is also working with the goal of hav ing 
access to acquisition of the fertilizer raw materials abroad.  Presently, the Departm ent of 
Fertilizers has no incentive scheme for fertilizer companies to form joint ven tures in other 
resource rich countries, so as to secure its regular supply. However, in the cases of 
requests for non-financial support received from companies, the Department has been 
making efforts to reduce hindrances being faced by them and to render assistance to 
them to the extent possible through the Indian Missions abroad and the Ministry  of 
External Affairs.  According to DoF, no joint venture project with equity participation f rom 
PSUs under the Department of Fertilizers has been set up in the last three ye ars and no 
such project is proposed in the near future. During the year 2020-21, n o joint venture with 
any country was signed by the Department but a number of major dev elopments 
regarding bilateral cooperation in the fertilizer sector took place. Since the country h as 
near total dependency on both the P&K fertilizers and their raw mate rials, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should make sincere and vigorous efforts for se tting up 
of new Joint Venture projects with long term buy-back arrangement for securi ng supply of 
P&K fertilizers and their raw materials. In this regard, the Department may encourage 

32 
 
both the public and private sector for coming forward for such joint ventures abroad and 
render them all assistance for the purpose.  Due importance should also be g iven for the 
acquisition of P & K  fertilizers raw materials abroad and to manufactu re the fertilizers in 
the country so as to boost the production of P&K fertilizers in the cou ntry, create 
employment in the country and to reduce the cost of P& K fertilizers in the country. The 
Committee also recommend that a definite frame work may be chalked out  by DoF in the 
entire matter of Joint Ventures abroad, acquisition of mines and raw materia ls, etc. for 
giving a definite orientation to the public and private companies eager to enter into the 
field. The Committee feel that setting up of Joint Ventures abroad with buy -back 
arrangements may prevent any shortages and price fluctuation of P&K  fertilizers in the 
country thereby ensuring savings of precious foreign exchange on the Subsidy Head.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.8 “To strengthen the Overseas Acquisition of Raw Material by the Indian Fertilize r 
Companies and role of Government, NIAEPR (National Institute of Agriculture Economics  
and Policy Research) was awarded the Study for Framing Policy for Overseas Acquisition 
of Raw Material by the Indian Fertilizer Companies and Role of the Governm ent. NIAEPR 
(National Institute of Agriculture Economics and Policy Research) has furnished its final 
report (Flag ‘A.). Comments of JS (Gulf), JS (Eurasia) and JS (DPA-I) of MEA, FAI, NFL, 
RCF, IIFCO, CIL, Kribhco and GSFC have been obtained on that. On the  basis of the 
Study report and comments of various organizations on that, Draft guideli nes for 
Overseas Acquisition of Raw Material by the Indian Fertilizer Companies and rol e of 
Government has been prepared and under consideration.” 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
Recommendation No.7 
 
Formulation of time bound action plan to increase production and use of City 
Compost. 
 
5.9 “The Committee note with concern that only Rs.42.00 crore has been allocated for 
city compost out of total Budgetary allocation of Rs.20762.00 crore for the  year 2021- 22 
under the scheme Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy (M.H.2401). It is only 0.20% o f the total 
Budget of Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy for 2021-22. This percentage was merely 0.12% 
in each of the year 2019-20 and 2020-21. It is ironical that despite the huge potential for 
composting as Indian cities have been generating 1.5 lakh tonnes of solid waste per day 
containing bio-degradable wastes ranges from 30% to 70% and the benef it of compost 
applied to the soil, the country is able to convert less than 5% of the organic waste into 
compost. During the discussion, it was suggested to increase it upto 60%. In this 
connection, it is also pertinent to note here that a task force constituted in 2003 for 
promoting balanced and sustainable use of chemical fertilizers has suggested bu ndling 
bio-fertilizers with urea bags. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
must take action to increase the proportion of the budgetary allocation fo r city compost 
under Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy so as to meet the target of conve rting at least 60% 
of the total city waste generated each year in India into city compost. It is fu rther 
recommended that an action plan must be formulated immediately to achiev e this target 
in a time-bound manner.” 
 
  

33 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.10 “During 2020-21 in Budget Estimate (BE), funds of Rs. 42.00 crore have be en 
allocated for city compost.  However, depending upon the requirement of f unds, efforts 
will be made to increase the budgetary allocation for city compost    through 
supplementary demand.    Inputs in respect of above para was also sought from Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs.  Their reply   is   awaited.”  
 
Recommendation No. 8 
 
Need for Allocation of more funds to give impetus to the production of City 
Compost. 
 
5.11 “The Committee note that the average cost of production of urea is about 
Rs.17690/MT (Ist quarter of 2020-21) and about 71% of the cost of produ ction is subsidy 
burden. It comes out Rs.12559.90/MT ( i.e. 17690 x .71) for urea, whereas it is only 
Rs.1500/MT under Market Development Assistance (MDA) for scaling up production and 
consumption of city compost w.e.f. 10.2.2016. This subsidy is not for the farmers. It is for 
the compost manufacturers and fertilizer manufacturers. Fertilizer manufactu rers are 
allowed for co-marketing of city compost and claim subsidy. Not only this, larg e quantum 
of release of MDA funds remain unpaid at any given point of time as is evident from the 
fact that only Rs.36.00 crore, 32.00 crore, 10.00 crore were released against the sale of 
compost 294017.40 MT, 324598.45 MT, 306630.43 MT during the  year 2020-21 (as on 
31.1.21), 2019-20 and 2018-19 respectively. The Committee feel that it is due to lack of 
adequate funds allocated in the Budget, impractical payment procedure, lack of 
infrastructural support like the laboratories for testing city compost, lack of awareness  
amongst the farmers, coordination amongst the Centre and the States/UTs and also 
amongst the various Ministries of the Union Government i.e. Department of Fertilizer of 
Ministry of Chemical and Fertilizers, Ministry of Housing and Urban Administration an d 
Ministry of Agriculture. It is also learnt that only 12 States/UTs have constituted Sta te 
Level Steering Committee for coordination and promotion of city compost. Last y ear, it 
was only 11 states. Thus, there is an increase of only 01 State/UT in a year. In  this 
regard, the Committee recommend that concerted efforts should be made by  va rious 
stakeholders to constitute State Level Stearing  Committee in all States/UTs.  The 
Committee further  recommend that the payment procedure of Market Developmen t 
Assistance (MDA) should be simplified in such a manner that the fund be rele ased to the 
concerned within a reasonable period of time from the date of claim furnished  to the 
related authorities; State Governments/UTs should establish new and, if necessary, 
augment the capacity etc. of the existing laboratories for testing city compost and   local 
municipal bodies should co-operate with  the city compost manufacturers in identifying the 
landfill sites.  The Committee further recommend that the farmers should also be given 
token incentives for using appropriate proportion of city compost along w ith the chemical 
fertilizers.  As regards the creation of awareness amongst the farmers regarding the 
benefits of the city compost is concerned, the Committee is happy to learn that there are 
ample awareness amongst the farmers as is evident from the gradual increase in demand 
of city compost resulting in shortage of city compost in India.  There was shortage o f 
7249.77 MT in 2018-19 and 95668.5 MT in 2020-21 (as on 31.1. 2021).  However, during 
the year 2019-20, there was a surplus of 1017.86 MT, which was very nominal.  The 
Committee, therefore, observe that there is a need to give impetus to the  production of 
city compost to meet the increasing demand of the farmers through allocation  of more 
fund and removal of infrastructure and other bottlenecks coming in the way of converting 
city waste to city compost particularly when Indian cities have been generating, as has 
been mentioned above, 1.5 lakh tonnes of solid waste per day con taining bio-degradable 
ranges from 30% to 70%.” 

34 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.      “As on date,  14 States/UTs. i.e.  Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Nagaland,  
Odisha, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Chhattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir, Andaman  & 
Nicobar Islands, Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya and Goa  have constituted  Steering 
Committee so far.  States/UTs  are being reminded from time to time for constitution  of 
State Level Steering Committee.  Through D.O. letters at    Secretary level the concerned 
 State Chief Secretaries have  been requested for constitution of Steerin g Committee. 
Recently, a reminder was sent in June, 2021 this year to remaining States/UTs  with the 
request to constitute the Committee.  
2.      Payment of Market Development Assistance (MDA) to compost marketer  a nd 
compost manufacturers for sale of city compost  are made as per the procedure laid down 
in guidelines dated 10.10.2016 and 9.1.2017 issued by Department of  Fertilizers.     
Sometimes there are delays in receipt of requisite documents from compost marketer and 
manufacturers, insufficient budget allocation etc.  which causes procedural delay in 
processing of payment.   DAC&FW has informed that for  augmenting the capa city of 
existing laboratories for testing of city compost, the States can avail the funds  available 
under various schemes of DAC&FW.  It has further been informed that Stat es are,  being 
encouraged in the zonal conferences to increase sample testing.   
  
3.       Inputs in respect of recommendation 8,  Para 3 above was sough t from Ministry of 
Housing and  Urban Affairs. Reply  is awaited  from MoHUA.”     
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter- I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.10 
 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) to farmers. 
 
5.12 “The Committee note that the Government has introduced Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT) system in Fertilizers w.e.f. October 2016. Under the fertilizer DBT 
system, 100% subsidy on various fertilizer grades is released to the ferti lizer companies 
on the basis of actual sales made by the retailers to the beneficiaries. Sale of all 
subsidized fertilizers to farmers/buyers is made through Point of Sale (PoS) d evices 
installed at each retailer shop and the beneficiaries are identified throug h Aadhaar Card, 
KCC, Voter Identity Card etc.  T he Department of Fertilizers has successfully 
implemented Direct Benefit Transfer system across all States/U.Ts by 1 st March2018.  
The Department has also set up a Project Monitoring Cell to exclusively oversee th e 
implementation of DBT. State Coordinators have also been deployed across all States to 
coordinate the on-going DBT activities.  According to the  Department, it is continuously 
making efforts to improve the system based on the feedback received fro m various 
stakeholders which include Development of DBT Dashboards, Development  of PoS 3.0 
Software, Development of Desktop PoS Version, PoS Software 3.1 Version launched on 
30thSept, 2020 with contact-less OTP based Aadhaar Authentication in th e wake of 
Covid-19 pandemic and SMS gateway to farmers for sending SMS alerts . The 
Committee has been apprised that the phase-2 of DBT will explore the fe asibility of cash 
transfer to farmer’s accounts. An expert committee under NITI Aayog was constituted on 
28.9.2017 as per the request of the DoF  to suggest a model for the  implementation of 
phase-2.  The concept of  Direct Cash Transfer(DCT) to farmers has bee n under 
discussion at various forums such as PMO, Cabinet Secretariat and Niti Aayog and  that 
a Committee of Secretaries headed by Cabinet Secretary has been setup to de velop the 

35 
 
broad contours of the DCT framework under which DCT to farmers can be implemented. 
The last meeting was held on 16.01.2020.  The Committee note that t he CoS has inter-
alia recommended to constitute a Nodal Committee to be co-chaired by S ecretaries of 
DoF and DACFW to formulate and implement Direct Cash Transfer in Fertilizers.  
Accordingly, a Nodal Committee has been constituted by DoF and the first and secon d 
meetings of Nodal Committee were held on 25.06.2020 and 28.10.2020  respectively.  
The report of the Committee is under finalization. Department had organized a  ‘Chintan 
Shivir’ where the famers ’ leaders were also invited to debate and discuss on the entire 
issue which may facilitate early implementation of the scheme. In this regard, the 
Committee note that presently there is no consensus on most of the issues relating to 
DCT to farmers.  In the third party evaluation of urea subsidy scheme, it has been 
suggested that  it will not be suitable option that the subsidy could directly be transferred 
in the accounts of farmers since DBT to farmers is a complex system and that th e  
subsidy amount to the manufacturing/ importing companies should be given  as per the 
current policy. The Committee note that the definition of farmer is a com plex issue.  It is, 
therefore, recommended to amend the definition of farmers to include the actua l 
producers/tillers also.  It is solely for availing the benefits of subsidy for fertilizers and not 
for making any claim on the land.  It will serve the very basic purpose of the DCT 
scheme. The Committee however, is of the strong view that to achieve the real 
objectives of the scheme, the implementation of the DCT Scheme for pay ment of 
subsidy amount directly to the farmers/ producers/ tillers account may be expedite d by 
linking it with the Aadhaar Card, Kisan Credit Card and Soil Health Card which may 
eventually close the loopholes, if any, in the system and also save subsidy o utgo. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department may coordinate and ma ke 
earnest efforts for effective implementation of Direct-Cash Transfer of Fertilizer S ubsidy 
to farmers/ producers, in consonance with the policy formulated by the Nodal Committee 
constituted in this regard.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the a ction taken 
thereon.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 5.13 “Direct Cash Transfer (DCT) to farmers has been under discussion at various 
forum such as PMO, Cabinet Secretariat and Niti Aayog. A Committee of Secreta ries 
headed by Cabinet Secretary has been setup to develop the broad contou rs of the DCT 
framework under which DCT to farmers can be implemented. The last mee ting was held 
on 16.01.2020. The CoS inter alia has recommended to constitute a Nodal Committee to 
be co-chaired by Secretaries of Department of Fertilizers and Department o f Agriculture, 
Cooperation & Farmers Welfare to formulate and implement Direct Cash Transfer in 
Fertilizers. Accordingly, a Nodal Committee has been constituted vide DoF ’s OM no. 
15011/21/2019 dated 1st June, 2020 to formulate policy relating to imple mentation of 
Direct Cash Transfer of Fertilizer Subsidy to farmers.The first meeting of No dal 
Committee was held on 25.06.2020 and second meeting on 28.10.2020 t hrough Video 
Conferences. However, no decision has yet been taken for implementation of Direct Cash 
Transfer of fertilizer subsidies to farmers.   
  
  Further, vide notification dated 04.05.2020, Department of Fertilize rs has 
constituted Working Group for Chintan Shivir for Direct Benefit Transfer to farmer (Direct 
Fertilizer Subsidy to farmers account instead of an industry) under the chairm anship of 
Hon’ble Minister for Chemicals and Fertilizers. The Working Group is tasked to Examine 
the feasibility of introducing a direct fertilizer subsidy transfer to farmers, Suggest  
methods to safeguard against huge price rise and Unavailability of ferti lizers, Suggest the 
criteria of selection of farmers and their entitlement, Suggest the criteria f or determining 
the amount of subsidy to be transferred to farmers ’ accounts, Suggest the periodicity of 
subsidy transfer, Suggest any method to safeguard against negative eff ect on fertilizer 

36 
 
industry and Suggest the actual mechanism of fund transfer. First meetin g 
of Chintan Shivir was held on 18th May 2020 and second meeting wa s held on 13th July 
2020 with all the stake holders. A meeting with Farmers groups was also held on 10th 
August, 2020 and fourth meeting of the group was held on 08.09.20 20. However, no 
decision has yet been taken for implementation of Direct Cash Transfer o f fertilizer 
subsidies to farmers.”  
 
Recommendation No.14 
 
Encouragement to small units producing city compost/ organic or bio fertilizers. 
 
5.14 “The Committee note that the Government is spending huge amount of funds for 
subsidy Schemes on chemical fertilizers.  Even though the chemical fertili zers provide 
immediate results in the  form of increased yield, in the long run their usa ge leads to  
many environmental hazards viz reduction in   soil fertility, pollution of   ground water, etc.   
Hence, it is very much necessary to encourage large scale production of city compost / 
organic or bio fertilizers.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that the Governmen t 
may encourage smaller units which can manufacture city compost/ organic or b io 
fertilizers locally and the Government can provide financial support to those units so as to 
encourage more people come forward to set up such units.”  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.15 “The Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare (DAC&FW) is 
implementing a Capital Investment Subsidy Scheme (CISS) under which grant is 
available for setting up of State of art liquid/carrier based bio-fertili ser-bio-pesticide units 
of 200 Ton per annum capacity.  100% assistance is provided to State Govt./G ovt. 
agencies upto a maximum limit of Rs.160.00 lakh/unit. Similarly, for individuals/p rivate 
agencies, assistance upto 25% of cost limited to Rs.40 lakh/unit as capital invest ment is 
provided through NABARD.  Inputs in respect of city compost were sought from Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs.  Their reply is awaited.”  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                        KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
16 November, 2021                                                                                   Chairperson,               
 25 Kartika, 1943 (Saka)                                                       Standing Committee on 
                   Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
    
 
 
  

37 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2021-22) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 16 th November, 2021 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1700.hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
K. KANIMOZHI -    CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
     2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
4. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
5. Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
6. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
7. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
8. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
9. 
 
 
 
       10  
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
 
Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
11 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
12 Dr. Anil Jain 
13 Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
14 Shri Arun Singh 
 
 SECRETARIAT  
1.  Shri  N. K. Jha  -  Director 
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director   
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Panna Lal   - Under Secretary 
  
  2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the newly constituted Commi ttee 
and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to consider Memorandum No.1 reg arding 
selection of subjects for examination during the year (2021-22) and also to discuss the fu ture 
course of action of the Committee during the tenure.  
 
3. The Committee then considered Memorandum No. 1 and after discussion selecte d 
the following subjects pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers for deta iled 
examination during 2021-22:- 
 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
1. Nano-fertilizers for sustainable crop production and maintaining soil    health.   
2. Tax structure on fertilizers sector in terms of GST and import duties – analysis 
of the tax structure of raw material and final products and its impact on se lf-
                                 
APPENDIX - I 
 
 

38 
 
sufficiency and use of fertilizers. 
3. Prices, Availability and distribution of fertilizers.  
 
 
II. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
4.  Vision 2024 - To establish India as a leading manufacturer of chem icals and 
petrochemicals. 
5.  Insecticides – promotion and development including safe usage -   licensing 
regime for insecticides. 
6.  Disposal of toxic waste from Bhopal Gas Leak site. 
7. Environmental Impact of Petrochemical products. 
 
III. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
8.    Promotion of Medical Device Industry.  
9.    Availability of Medicines and Medical devices for COVID Management.  
10.  Self sufficiency of key starting Material and intermediates. 
 
4. The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft Action Taken 
Reports unanimously without any amendment/change:- 
 
i.    XXX    XXX     XXX  
 
ii. ATR on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained  in the 
Twentieth Report on “Demands for Grants (2021-22)” (Department of Fertilizers). 
 
iii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
iv.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
v.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
vi.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
vii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
5  The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to finalize and present the  Action 
Taken Reports to the Parliament in the ensuing session. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
  

39 
 
APPENDIX-II 
      
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2020-21) ON DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2021-22) 
OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Total No. of Recommendations 
 
 14 
I Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1, 9, 11 & 12)   
 
  
 04 
Percentage of Total 28.57%   
II Observations/Recommendations that the Committee do not 
like to pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
(Vide Recommendation No. NIL)   
 
  
NIL 
Percentage of Total      00.0% 
III Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
replies given by the Government  have not been accepted 
by the Committee: 
 (Vide Recommendation No. 2 & 13)   
 
  
 
02 
Percentage of Total 14.28%    
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  the 
final replies of the Government are still awaited:  
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 ,10 & 14) 
 
 
08 
Percentage of Total   57.14 