1 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS  
(2021-22) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
                  MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
               (DEPARTMENT OF  PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2021- 22)’ of the  Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of  Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
   
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
   DECEMBER, 2021 /      AGRAHAYANA, 1943 (SAKA) 
28 


2 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 
(2021-22) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICLAS) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in the  Twenty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  on 
"Demands for Grants (2021- 22)” of the  Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals)] 
 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.12.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02.12.2021 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
DECEMBER, 2021 /      AGRAHAYANA, 1943 (SAKA)  


3 
 
CONTENTS PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21)  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22)  
INTRODUCTION  
Chapter I Report   
Chapter II Observations / Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's  replies 
 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee  
 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2021-22) held on  16th November 2021 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report (17th 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers on "Demands for Grants (2021-22) ” pertaining to 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals). 
 
 
  

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2020-21) 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2 Shri  Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
3 Shri Deepak Baij 
4 Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
5 Shri Prataprao Govindrao Patil Chikhalikar 
6 Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama,  
7 Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
8 Shri Pakauri Lal 
9 Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10 Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
11 Smt Aparupa Poddar 
12 Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
13 Shri Atul Kumar Singh alias Atul Rai 
14 Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15 Shri M. Selvaraj 
16 Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
17 Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
18 Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
19 Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
20 Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari# 
21 Vacant* 
RAJYA SABHA 
22 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
23 Dr. Anil Jain 
24 Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
25 Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26 Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27 
28 
Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
Shri Arun Singh$ 
29 Shri A.D. Singh 
30. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
31. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Manoj Kumar Arora     - Officer on Special Duty(LSS) 
2. Shri Nabin Kumar Jha - Director  
3. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
4. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary 
5. Ms Sonia Sankhla - Assistant Executive Officer 
-  
$Re-nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23.12.2020. 
#Nominated to the Committee  w.e.f 28.12.2020 vice Shri Nandigam Suresh. 
*Vacant vice Shri Er. Bishweswar Tudu nominated MoS on 07.07.2021. 

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS 
(2021-22) 
 
Smt. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri Deepak Baij 
5. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
6. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
7. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
8. Shri Sanjay Shamrao Dhotre 
9. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
10. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
11. Shri Vasava Prabhubhai Nagarbhai  
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt Aparupa Poddar (Afrin Ali) 
14. Dr. M.K.Vishnu Prasad  
15. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
16. Shri M. Selvaraj 
17. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
18. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
19. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
20. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
21. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
24. Dr. Anil Jain 
25. Shri M.V. Shreyams Kumar 
26. Shri Jaiprakash Nishad 
27. Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
28. Shri Arun Singh 
29. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
30. Shri K. Vanlalvena 
31. 
 
Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Nabin Kumar Jha - Director  
2. Shri C.Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh - Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms Sonia Sankhla - Assistant Executive Officer 

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (2021-22) 
having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this Twenty Eighth 
Report on Action taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Twenty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha ) on 
"Demands for Grants (2021- 22)”, pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals).  
2. The Twenty First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 17 th March, 2021. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) furnished their replies on 8 th July, 2021 indicating action taken on the 
recommendations contained in that Report. The Committee at their sitting held on 16 
November 2021 considered and adopted the Draft Report. 
3. An analysis of the action taken by Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sa bha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-II.  
4. For the facility of reference and convenience Recommendations/  
Observations/further comments of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi; KANIMOZHI  KARUNANIDHI 
   16 November,  2021 
    25 Kartika, 1943 (Saka) 
                                             Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER  I 
 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations  contained 
in the Twenty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on  “Demands 
For Grants (2021- 22)" of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) which was presented to Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on  17.3.2021.In 
all, the Committee made 16 Observations / Recommendations in the Report. 
1.2  Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) were 
requested to furnish replies to the Observations / Recommendations contained i n the 
21st Report within three months from the date of presentation of the Rep ort.  The Action 
Taken Replies of the Government in respect of all the 16 Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry  of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) vide their OM 
No.23003/4/2021-IFD dated 08- 07-2021  These Replies  have been categorized as 
follows:- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government  :- 
 Sl. Nos.  1,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,13,15                                (Total = 11) 
   Included in Chapter II of the Draft Report.                                                   
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
 pursue in view of the Government ’s reply :- 
 Sl.No. Nil                                            (Total = 0) 
 Included in Chapter III of the Draft Report. 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government   have not been accepted by the Committee :- 
   Sl.No.  2, 10                                          (Total = 2)  
   Included in  Chapter IV of the Draft Report. 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:- 

2 
 
 
  Sl.No. 4, 14, 16                                      (Total=3 )  
 
 Included in  Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and V  of this Report should be furnished 
within three months from the date of presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on som e of  
the Observations/Recommendations which still require reiteration or further merit 
comments. 
 
Recommendation No-1 
 
Need for Enhanced Budgetary Allocation 
 
1.5 While stressing on the need for enhancing the budgetary allocation , the 
Committee had recommended as below:- 
 
"The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals has vision t o 
promote Indian pharmaceutical sector as the global leader for quality medici nes 
and to ensure availability, accessibility and affordability of drugs and medical 
devices in the country. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that the  
Gross Budgetary allocation for the year 2021-22 is  Rs. 470.41 Crore against the 
proposed outlay of Rs.2600.52 Crore which is only one sixth of the ou tlay 
proposed by the Department.  Out of Rs 470.41 Crore allocated to the  
Department, Rs. 31.53 Crore is towards the administrative expenditures for both 
the Department of Pharmaceuticals and National Pharmaceuticals Pricing 
Authority (NPPA) against proposed Budget Estimate of Rs. 35.98 Crore. 
Budgetary allocation for Central Sector Schemes is Rs.  429.76 Crore against 
proposed Budget Estimates of Rs.2564.48 Crore.  According to the Departme nt 
of Pharmaceuticals,    total funds allocated will fall short of the u rgent fund 
requirements projected by the Department for carrying out its laid down mandate 
and will adversely affect the central sector schemes being implemented by the 
Department viz. Development of Pharmaceuticals Industry  and National 
Institutes of Pharmaceuticals Education and Research (NIPER).  In this regard, 
the Committee note that the Department has been allocated Rs. 234.34  crore 
against its requirement of Rs. 1220 crore for NIPERs and only Rs. 124.42 crore 
against the proposal of the Department of Pharmaceuticals for a budgeta ry 
allocation of Rs. 1256.16 core for the implementation of important umbrella  

3 
 
scheme of the Department for the development of Pharmaceuticals indu stry 
during 2021- 22.   Going by the pace at which this umbrella scheme with 
important sub schemes for the holistic development of the Pharmaceutical 
Industry is being implemented by the Department, it is not surprising to th e 
committee that the Ministry of Finance has curtailed the allocation drast ically. 
Since it is very much  essential to develop state of the art common facilities,  t o 
provide funds for technology upgradation,  to offer production linked incentive s 
etc to the pharma industry including  bulk drug and medical devices 
industries,  the committee strongly recommend that the Department should take  
serious and concrete efforts for the implementation of all the sub scheme s of the 
umbrella scheme in a time bound manner particularly  to examine the proposals 
under various sub schemes expeditiously and to accord approval in a time bound 
manner  so as to enable the Ministry of Finance  allocate the requisite amount of 
funds for the implementation of various sub schemes under the u mbrella 
scheme. It is also necessary to make realistic budgetary proposals on actual 
need basis.   As far as fund allocation to NIPERs is concerned, the Committe e 
take a serious view of non-allocation of requisite amount of  funds b y 
the  Ministry of Finance for the infrastructural development of  NIPERS  e ven 
after a decade of their existence due to which these institutes are unable to attain 
their full potential.  Since the subject matter pertaining to the Departmen t of 
Pharmaceuticals is concerned with the drug security of the country, the 
Committee  urge  upon the Ministry of Finance to examine the budget propo sals 
of the Department of Pharmaceuticals  very carefully and the make  a dequate 
allocation of funds for the implementation of various Schemes and 
programmes  of the Department.   Since the allocation made at BE is very less to 
cope the fund requirements of various schemes which are at the advance d 
stages of proposal approval and fund release, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals should prepare fresh proposals for fund release at RE stage of 
2021-22 and the same should be submitted to Ministry of Finance f or the 
allocation of necessary funds at RE stage.  A copy of this recommendation  may 
also be sent to Ministry of Finance for its compliance." 
Reply of the Government 
1.6 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Depart ment of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
"Department has taken a matter with Department of Expenditure through EFC  
memos seeking the adequate funds for implementation of the ongoing schemes 
of Department. It is expected that the meeting of Expenditure Finance Committee 
(EFC) will be held shortly under the chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure). 
Department will send the recommendation of committee to the Departmen t of 
Expenditure as suggested." 

4 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.7  The Committee note that the reply given by the Department of Ph armaceuticals  
is silent to the  specific recommendation of the Committee that  the Departme nt should 
take serious and concrete efforts for the implementation of all the sub sch emes of the 
umbrella scheme in a time bound manner particularly  to examine th e proposals under 
various sub schemes expeditiously and to accord approval in a time bound m anner  so 
as to enable the Ministry of Finance  allocate the requisite amount of funds for the 
implementation of various sub schemes under the umbrella scheme. One of the 
yardsticks being used by the Ministry of Finance for the   allocation of fun ds to the 
Schemes/programmes of Ministries/Departments is the past performance .  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate the earlier recommendation that earnest steps 
should be taken by the Department of Pharmaceuticals for the speedy and 
holistic implementation of the umbrella scheme of the Department so as to 
convince the Ministry of Finance about the credentials of the Department.  
1.8 The Committee note that the Department has taken up the matter with  the 
Department of Expenditure through Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) mem os 
seeking the adequate funds for implementation of the ongoing scheme s of Department.  
Meeting of EFC is expected to be held shortly. In this regard, the Committee 
recommend that the matter may be pursued vigorously by Department at 
Secretary level with the Department of Expenditure and if necessary may be taken 
up at the Minister ’s level with the Minister of Finance.  The progress made in this 
regard may be intimated to the Committee.   
1.9    The Committee are constrained to see the reply of the Department th at it will send 
the recommendation of the Committee to the Department of Expenditure.  T wenty First 

5 
 
Report was presented to Parliament on 17 March, 2021 and the copy o f the report was 
sent to the Department immediately.  But the Department had not sent th e 
recommendation to the Department of Expenditure till 8 th July 2021 when it furnished 
this Action Taken Reply to the Committee.  Such delays will defeat the very purpose of 
the recommendation.  The Committee hope that such suggestions of the 
Committee to convey its recommendations to other Ministries/Departments would  
be sent immediately to the concerned Ministries/Departments for prompt action 
on their part.   
Recommendation No. 2 
Major issue of drug security associated with overdependence on imported 
API/Bulk Drugs 
1.8 While addressing the major issue of drug security associated with 
overdependence on imported API/Bulk Drugs, the Committee had  made  the following 
recommendation:- 
"The Committee note that pharmaceuticals has been identified as one of the 
champion sectors, which forms around 1.72 percent of the country ’s GDP but 
there is an urgent need to pay attention to major issue of drug security 
associated with overdependence on imported API/Bulk Drugs which if not 
handled can adversely affect the competitiveness of the domestic pharmaceutical 
sector in the years to come.  In this regard, the Department of Pharmaceutica ls 
has informed that the Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (API)/Bulk drugs and 
intermediates form 63% of India’s total pharma imports. Even production of some 
of the National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM) formulations is depend ent on 
imported APIs and intermediates. India imports bulk drugs and intermediates 
largely on economic considerations. China with a share of 67.6 % is the major 
source for API. India, being one of the largest manufacturers of medicines an d 
exporting these to over 200 countries, dependence on a single source fo r import 
of API is a matter of serious concern as any disruption in the supplies co uld 
jeopardize the pharma sector and affect the supplies of medicines both for  
domestic use and exports. In this regard, the Committee observed that during the 
early 90s, India was self-reliant in manufacturing APIs. However, with the ri se of 
China as a producer of API, it captured the Indian market with its low-cost API  
manufacturing industry. The worst hit was the Indian fermentation based b ulk 
drug Industry facing severe competition from overseas players mainly from 

6 
 
China. Local production slowly stopped when China started exporting these bulk 
drugs at very low prices in India. The cost of production of these bulk drug s was 
low in China due to multiplicity of factors including  low cost of capital followed by 
aggressive government funding models, tax incentives, availability of subsidiz ed 
utilities such as electricity, steam, brine, effluent treatment etc.  In order to negate 
imports,   the Department has issued guidelines dated 30.12.2020 for 
implementation of Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) Order dated 
16.09.2020 issued by Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal T rade, 
to Pharmaceuticals Sector which classify the suppliers for providing preference in 
public procurement based on their minimum local content for pharmaceuticals 
formulations. In 2020, the Committee under chairmanship of Dr Eswara Reddy 
identified APIs with high degree of import dependence.  Further, a Pro duction 
linked incentive scheme for promotion of domestic manufacturing of critica l Key 
Starting Materials (KSMs)/Drug Intermediates and APIs in the country has been 
launched by the Government.  The committee is also given to understand that 
Department has no policy to favourably distinguish between Pharma companies 
which manufacture drugs from domestically produced critical Key Starting 
Materials(KSMs)/Drug Intermediates (DI) and Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients 
(APIs) in comparison to those companies which manufacture drugs by importin g 
API/KSM/DI from other countries.  Since it is very much necessary to stop  the 
dumping of cheap raw material in the country by China , there is a need to curtail 
this trend and therefore, the Committee recommend  that the following me asures 
should be taken:- 
  
(i) NITI Ayog and the Department of Pharmaceuticals to make an inde pth 
study of various concessions being provided by China to its bulk drug industry 
and to initiate immediate appropriate measures in a war footing manner   for the 
creation of a very strong API/bulk drug/KSM industry in the country as a viable 
competitor and alternative source country for API/bulk drug/KSMs. 
(ii) Need to provide manufacturing support infrastructure viz. subsidized 
utilities such as electricity, water, steam, brine, effluent treatment plant etc and 
help create economies of scale for fermentation based bulk drug Industry 
clusters. 
(iii)      Reclassify suppliers into three categories Class-I with 100 percent local  
content, Class-II 80 percent local content and Class-III with 60 percent loca l 
content and  provide progressive incentives like zero duty on 100 percent local 
content suppliers and rationally increase duty on other two category of suppliers 
for both public and private procurements done in Pharmaceutical sectors. 
 
(iv)     Enhance the budget allocation for the scheme Promotion o f Bulk Drugs 
during  RE stage for the year 2021-22 to make effective stride in 

7 
 
establishing 3 Bulk  Drug Parks in the country and expand the scheme t o 
establish more Bulk Drug  parks in future.  
(v)       Department of Pharmaceuticals to frame a comprehensive incentive 
policy for  domestic bulk drugs producers.  
  
 This recommendation may also be sent to NITI Ayog for Action Taken Reply by 
both the Department of Pharmaceuticals and NITI Ayog." 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.9 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Depart ment of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
"As directed by Committee, the recommendation was also shared with NITI 
Aayog. 
  
Regarding points (i),(ii) & (v) above : Department of Pharmaceuticals in 
consultation of NITI Aayog has launched following three schemes for promotin g 
domestic manufacturing of bulk drugs by attracting large investments in the 
sector to ensure their sustainable domestic supply and thereby reduce Ind ia’s 
import dependence on other countries:- 
  
i. Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for promotion of domestic 
 manufacturing of critical Key Starting Materials (KSMs)/ Drug 
 Intermediates (DIs) and Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) In India;  
ii. Scheme for Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks; and 
iii. Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Pharmaceuticals. 
  
Regarding point (iii) above: Department of Pharmaceuticals vide order dated 
30.12.2020 has issued guidelines for implementation of Public Procurement 
(Preference to Make in India) (PPO) Order, 2017 to Pharmaceuticals Sector. The 
guidelines provide the percentage of local content which is to be used for 
providing preference in public procurement of goods & services related to 
Pharmaceuticals Sector as per PPO Order. The percentage of local conten t has 
been fixed at equal to or more than 80% for ‘Class-I Local Supplier ’, more than 
50% but less than 80% for ‘Class-II Local Supplier’ and less than or equal to 50% 
for ‘Non-Local Supplier’. 
  
Regarding point (iv) above:  The Cabinet has granted approval of 3 Bulk Dr ug 
Parks. Department will seek additional funds in R.E. Stage for establishmen t of 
the parks. As and when the 3 three Bulk Drug Parks will be established , the 

8 
 
department will approach to Cabinet for establishing new bulk drug parks in  the 
country." 
  
Comments of the Committee 
1.10 The Committee note that the Department in consultation with NITI Aayo g has 
launched three schemes viz. Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for promotion of 
domestic manufacturing of critical KSMs/DIs and APIs In India, Scheme for P romotion 
of Bulk Drug Parks and Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Pharm aceuticals.  
While appreciating the above mentioned steps taken by the Department, the 
Committee feel that it is necessary to make an indepth study of various 
concessions being provided by China to its bulk drug industry and to initiate 
further measures in a war footing manner so as to make the country a viable 
competitor  to China in the field of  production of API/bulk drug/KS Ms.  The 
Committee hope that immediate step s will be taken in this regard.  An action 
taken reply may be furnished to the Committee in the matter.  
1.11  The Committee are also of the strong view that it is very much necessary to 
facilitate API/KSM/DI manufacturing sector with robust infrastructural support and 
subsidized utilities such as electricity, water, steam, brine, effluent treatment pla nt etc to 
help create economies of scale for fermentation based bulk drug Industry clusters.   The 
Committee hope that the above mentioned schemes launched by the Government 
would have addressed these necessities for the creation of a strong fermentation 
based bulk drug industry in the country.  The Committee may be intimated about 
the extent of infrastructural and utilities support being provided under the new 
schemes launched by the Government for the promotion of API/bulk drug/KSMs 
industries in the country.   

9 
 
 1.12 In regard to the  reclassification of suppliers into three categories, the Committee 
note that the action taken  reply given by the Department  has stuck to the guidelines 
issued by it for implementation of Public Procurement (Preference to Make in 
India) (PPO) Order, 2017 to Pharmaceuticals Sector and the reply is silent   on  the 
recommendation of the Committee to provide progressive incentives like zero duty on 
100 percent local content suppliers and rationally increasing  duty on other two  
categories of suppliers for both public and private procurements done in Pharmaceutical 
sector. In this regard, the Committee strongly feel that the reclassification of local 
suppliers and giving attractive incentives to manufacturers for the use of local 
content is the need of the hour to promote the domestic API/KSM/bulkdrug/DI 
industry and  to discourage imports. The Committee, therefore, reiterate its earlier 
recommendation on reclassification of suppliers as stated above at para  No. 1.8 
(iii).  
1.13 The Committee also note that  the Department will seek  additional funds  at RE  
for Bulk Drugs Park Scheme for its implementation during 2021-22.  The Committee 
hope that this Scheme will get adequate and timely financial support from the 
Ministry of Finance and the progress made in this regard may be intimated to the 
Committee. Moreover, alongwith the establishment of  three bulk drug parks, the  
Committee recommend that the work to establish more such parks should also 
start at the right earnest so as to create a strong base for the manufacturing of 
bulk drugs in the country.   
1.14 The Committee note that the Department has shared above cited 
recommendations of the Committee with the NITI Aayog  but the action taken  replies of 
NITI Ayog have not been furnished.  Specific action taken replies of NITI Ayog 

10 
 
should be furnished to the Committee alongwith the action taken replies of the 
Department on this report.   
Recommendation No.5 
 
Promotion of Medical Devices Parks 
 1.15 While stressing on the need for promotion of Medical Devices Parks, the  
Committee had recommended as under:- 
         "The Committee are constrained to note that another sub-sc heme named 
“Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility Centre ” was also not 
properly implemented by the Department and the same has been revised   by the 
Union Cabinet During 2020- 21.  The sub-scheme has been renamed as 
“Promotion of Medical Devices Parks ” with a total financial outlay of Rs. 400 
crore. The objective of the sub-scheme is creation of world class infrastructure 
facilities in order to make Indian medical device industry a global leader. The 
tenure of the scheme is from 2020-2021 to 2024-2025. Maximum assistance 
under the scheme for one Medical Device Park would be limited to ₹ 100 
crore. Under this Scheme an allocation  of Rs.7.50 crore was made at BE stage  
of 2020-21 and the same was increased to Rs. 21.05 crore but the Department is 
able to spend only   Rs 7.49 crore so far.  In this background, the Departmen t 
had demanded Rs.120 crore for the implementation of the Scheme duri ng 2021-
22 but the Ministry of Finance has allocated only Rs.60 crore at BE stage.  The 
Committee note that in-principle approvals were given to the proposals received 
from Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Telangana.  Subsequen tly the 
proposal of Andhra Pradesh was first taken up.  After revision of the scheme   by 
the Union Cabinet, the guidelines of the revised scheme were issued on 
27.07.2020. After the revision of the scheme, 16 proposals have been received in 
accordance with the revised guidelines of the schem e.  All the proposals are 
being evaluated for giving in-principle approval. Taking into consideration th e 
importance of common laboratory and testing facilities  in reducing  the 
production cost of medical devices, the Committee recommend that the 
Department should take earnest steps for granting expeditious approvals to the 
eligible proposals under the Scheme  during 2021-22 and financia l assistance 
should also be provided to them according to the Scheme guidelines in a  time 
bound manner.  In case of necessity of further funds for the imp lementation of 
the Scheme during 2021-22, concrete proposals for allocation of the  same at RE 
stage should be made to the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee hope tha t the 
Department would act fast in coordination with State Implementing Agency (SIA), 
would expedite the approval procedures and disburse the funds allocated at BE 
2021-22, so as to enable the Ministry of Finance consider favourably th e 

11 
 
allocation of further funds at RE stage.  The progress made in this regard may b e 
intimated to the Committee. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.16 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Depa rtment of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated that as under:- 
 " Under the sub-scheme as “Assistance to Medical Device Industry for 
Common Facility Center ”, the Department has given approval for financial 
assistance of Rs. 25 crore to the project of Andhra Pradesh Medtech Zone Ltd 
(AMTZ), Andhra Pradesh for development of Common Facility Center 
for  superconducting magnetic coils testing and research facility.  A Bud getary 
allocation of Rs. 7.50 crore was allocated under the scheme in Budget E stimates 
2020-21.  The Department has  released 1 st instalment of Rs. 7.49 crore for the 
project  to AMTZ on 11.9.2020.  The budget allocation was increased to Rs. 
21.05 crore in Revised Estimates but no re-appropriation order was issued to 
enable this Section to release the fund.  Hence, the actual allocation was of Rs. 
7.50 crore. 
The sub scheme has been revised and renamed as “Promotion of Medical 
Device Parks ”. The guidelines of the scheme have been issued on 
27.7.2020.  The scheme is under implementation.  A budgetary allocation of Rs. 
60 crore has been allocated for the FY 2021-22. The application windo w of the 
scheme was closed on 15.10.2020.  A total number of 16 States/UTs have 
submitted their proposal under the scheme which are under evaluation." 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.17 The Committee  are concerned to note that  little progress has been m ade since 
the  revision  of the Sub-Scheme “Promotion of Medical Device Parks ” on 27.07.2020.  
As per the above action taken reply, application window of the Schem e was closed on 
15.10.2020 and 16 proposals submitted by States/UTs are still under evaluation till 
08.07.2021 when this reply was furnished to the Committee.   That means e valuation 
process has not completed even after the lapse of nine months.  The Committee feel 
that the Department should chalk out a time frame for completing the exercise of  
evaluation  instead of lingering on indefinitely.  This scheme is very crucial to 

12 
 
make our country self reliant and major manufacturing hub of medical devices. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate the earlier  recommendation  that the 
Department should take earnest steps for granting expeditious approvals to the 
eligible proposals under the Scheme  during 2021-22 and financial assistance 
should also be provided to them according to the Scheme guidelines in a time 
bound manner The progress made in this regard should  be furnished to the 
Committee in the Final Action Taken Replies by the Department. 
Recommendation No-9  
Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) 
1.18 While stressing on the need to ensure sustainability of PMBJP outlets the 
Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee note that  Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pari yojana 
(PMBJP) was launched by the Department of Pharmaceuticals  in the year 20 08 
with an objective of making quality generic medicines available at affo rdable 
prices to all especially for the poor and the deprived ones. Under this scheme, 
dedicated outlets known as Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Ke ndras 
(PMBJK) are opened all over the country to provide generic medicines to the 
masses. The Scheme has been approved for continuation with the f inancial 
outlay of Rs. 490 crore for the period 2020-2021 to 2024-2025.     The Committee 
note that PMBJP is designed to function on a self-financing model like a 
business.  Budgetary support is provided to the Scheme mainly for prom otion 
and for providing incentives to the entrepreneurs.  An amount of Rs.65 Cro re has 
been allocated at BE stage for 2021-22 against the proposal of the  Department 
for Rs.80 Crore.  In regard to the better implementation of the Scheme, the 
Committee recommend the following:- 
i. Although a  total of 7259 PMBJP kendras have been opened as on 31 
January, 2021 and  all the districts in the country have been covered, th e 
Department should take necessary steps for opening PMBJP kendras  in   every 
block at each  district in the country.  
ii. Presently three warehouses are functioning at Gurgoan, Chennai and 
Guwahati.  Fourth warehouse is under construction in Surat.  The Departmen t 
should consider opening a few more warehouses particularly in those regions of 
the country where there is no PMBJP warehouse. 
iii. Requisite number of distributors should be appointed in each State 
according to the size and number of PMBJP Kendras of the State. 

13 
 
iv. Entrepreneurs who set up kendras under the Scheme should be provided 
more incentives and the budgetary allocation in this regard may be increa sed for 
successful running of the Scheme 
v. Awareness Programmes about the features of the Scheme should be 
increased and should aimed at reaching poor people  including those living in 
slums and other economically deprived areas.  Budgetary allocation in this 
regard may be increased commensurately.  
vi. Marketing Officers who is responsible for smooth implementation of the 
Scheme at State and district levels should be appointed in each S tate/Union 
Territory and effective steps should be taken for monitoring the functio ning of 
each and every BMBJP Kendra at district level. 
vii. The Government/Department should forgo the self financing mode l for 
opening Janaushadhi Kendras in North East, hilly and island areas of the  
country. Instead  the Department should open government funded 
JanaushadhiKendras in North East states, hilly areas and island territory and 
allot them to Women, Divyang, SC, ST." 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
1. 19 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Departme nt of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
"(i)  The Department has taken various steps, which is as under:-  
1. Bureau of Pharma PSUs of India (BPPI) has already placed notice on its 
website and print media for inviting attention of applicants for applying for PMBJK 
in uncovered blocks of the country on priority basis. 
2. Preference is being given to applicants applying for PMBJK in unco vered 
block. 
3. Special incentive of Rs. 2.00 lakhs in addition to the normal incentives 
shall be granted for PMBJK opened by the Women entrepreneurs, divy aang, SC, 
ST & any entrepreneurs open PMBJK at aspirational districts (backward district)  
as notified by the NITI Aayog& in Himalayan, Island territories and North- Eastern 
state as per the new incentive plan for furthering the interest of applicants. 
(ii)  As of now, PMBJP have three warehouses at Gurugram, Chennai and 
Guwahati which are strategically located at northern, southern and eastern part 
of the country, respectively. The fourth warehouse at Surat is under construction 
which shall be catering to the western part of the country. Thus, with the 
functioning of all the four warehouses at northern, eastern, southern and 
western parts of the country along with the support network of suitable 
Distributors established across the country in most of the States/UTs, 
warehousing and logistics is expected to cater to the requisite need. However, 

14 
 
warehousing and logistics facilities can be scaled up on the basis of demand 
and requirement. 
(iii)  As of now, 37 Distributors has been appointed in most of the State s/UTs 
across the country. Notice inviting expression of interest for appointment of 
Distributor for anticipated location(s) is under process. However, appointment of 
more Distributor can be scaled up on the basis of demand and requirement. 
(iv)  As per the revised incentive plan, PMBJK run by 
entrepreneurs/Pharmacist/NGOs/NGOs & Charitable organization that are 
linked with BPPI headquarters through software will get incentive up to Rs. 5.0 0 
lakhs. The incentive will be given @ 15% of monthly purchase made from  BPPI 
by these PMBJKs subject to ceiling of Rs 15,000/- per month up to total limit of 
5.00 lakhs. It will also cover PMBJK opened by Women entrepreneurs, Divyang, 
SC, ST & any entrepreneurs open ‘PradhanMantriBhartiyaJanaushadhi Kendra 
(PMBJK)’ at aspirational districts as notified by the NITI Aayog, In Himalayan, 
Island territories and North- Eastern state. 
  This will be applicable to existing PMBJK also whose existing limit of 
incentives of Rs 2.50 lakh is fully disbursed, moreover it will also cover the 
PMBJK opened in government premises to whom one-time grant of Rs 2.50 
lakh was disbursed. They will get incentive of Rs 2.50 lakh based on purchase  
made by them from BPPI as per other terms and conditions applicable to  all 
PMBJKs. 
  In addition to this, special incentive amount of Rs. 2.00 lakhs shall be grante d 
for PMBJK opened by the Women entrepreneurs, divyaang, SC, ST & a ny 
entrepreneurs opening PMBJK at aspirational districts (backward district) as 
notified by the NITI Aayog& in Himalayan, Island territories and North- Eastern 
state. 
(v)   Government is spreading awareness about the salient features of PMB JP 
including Janaushadhi Suvidha Oxo-Biodegradable Sanitary Napkin through 
various types of advertisements such Print Media, Radio advertisement, TV  
advertisement, Cinema Advertisements and Outdoor publicity like Hoardings, 
Bus Queue Shelter branding, Bus branding, Auto wrapping, etc. In additio n to 
this, BPPI is also educating the public about the usages of Janaushad hi generic 
medicines through social media platforms like facebook, twitter, Instagram, 
Youtube, etc. regularly on daily basis. 
(vi)   As of now, BPPI is having a total of 36 on roll field staffs consisting  of Jr. 
Marketing Officer, Marketing Officer, Sr. Marketing Officer, Assistant Manager, 
Deputy Manager, Area Manager and Zonal Manager in a well-defined hierarchy 
of command and control for the smooth implementation of the Scheme in t he 
States/UTs. At least one field staff is present in most of the States/UTs, baring a 
few north eastern states and UTs. However, the north eastern states and U Ts 
where field staffs are not deployed, implementation and monitoring of th e 
scheme is done by field staff of the adjacent States/UTs. Even, 2 to 3 field staffs 
are deployed in some States/UTs depending on need and Marketing & Sales 
prospects of the State/UT. 

15 
 
Moreover, Information Technology (IT) enabled End- to-End supply chain 
system with Point-of-Sale (POS) application for value added services has been 
implemented in PMBJP. To ensure the efficient management and operatio n of 
the PMBJK, and the reporting of data and information to BPPI, a  computerized 
point of sale system (the "POS System") consisting of all sales transactions 
those are fed & updated in the system including placement of online orde rs/ 
indents, outstanding amount, etc. are in place. Technical training for running the 
POS system and trouble-shooting are also managed and assisted by BPPI by 
means of installation of software and technical guidance. The basic know- how 
and training videos are made available to the user remotely for ease of a ccess 
and ready reference. 
(vii)  As per the revised incentive plan, PMBJK run by 
entrepreneurs/Pharmacist/NGOs/NGOs & Charitable organization that are 
linked with BPPI headquarters through software will get incentive up to Rs. 5.0 0 
lakhs. The incentive will be given @ 15% of monthly purchase made from  BPPI 
by these PMBJKs subject to ceiling of Rs 15,000/- per month up to total limit of 
5.00 lakhs. It will also cover PMBJK opened by Women entrepreneurs,Divyang , 
SC, ST & any entrepreneurs open PMBJK at aspirational districts as notif ied by 
the NITI Aayog, In Himalayan, Island territories and North- Eastern state. 
        This will be applicable to existing PMBJK also whose existing limit of 
incentives of Rs 2.50 lakh is fully disbursed, moreover it will also cover the 
PMBJK opened in government premises to Whom one-time grant of Rs 2.50  
lakh was disbursed. They will get incentive of Rs 2.50 lakh based on purchase  
made by them from BPPI as per other terms and conditions applicable to  all 
PMBJKs. 
       In addition to this, special incentive amount of Rs. 2.00 lakhs shall b e 
granted for PMBJK opened by the Women entrepreneurs, divyaang, SC, ST & 
any entrepreneurs opening PMBJK at aspirational districts (backward district) as 
notified by the NITI Aayog& in Himalayan, Island territories and North- Eastern 
state." 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.20 The Committee note that Pharmaceuticals and Medeical Devices Bureau  
of India (PMBI) has invited applications in its website and print media  for PMBJP 
outlets in uncovered blocks of the country on priority basis.   The Committee also  
note the assurance of the Department to scale up the opening of m ore warehouses 
and appointment of more distributors can be scaled up   on the  basis of demand 
and requirement. The Committee hope that the Department will review and 

16 
 
take all the necessary steps on continuous basis on these matters 
particularly on opening more outlets at block level.  The progress made in 
this regard may be furnished to the Committee.  
1.21 The Committee note the various measures taken by PMBI for creating 
awareness among people about the Scheme but the Committee are of th e view 
that these awareness programmes are either inadequate or not planned properl y 
for the reach of the targeted population . Since most of the people belong to 
lower middle class, poor and down trodden sections of the society are still 
unaware of the availability of quality  medicines and medical devices at 
affordable prices under the Scheme, the Committee would like to reiterate the 
earlier recommendatation that awareness Programmes about the features of 
the Scheme should be increased and should aimed at reaching poor 
people  including those living in slums and other economically deprived 
areas.  Budgetary allocation in this regard may also be increased 
commensurately. 
1.22 The Committee further note that PMBI is implementing a  revised 
incentive plan for all  PMBJKs including those run by  women entrepreneurs,  
divyang, SC, ST and also for  PMBJKs opened at aspirational districts,  Hi malayan, 
Island territories and North- Eastern states . In this regard , the Committee    
recommend that the Department and PMBI  may analyse the improvements 
made in implementation of  the  Scheme particularly in attracting more 
entrepreneurs after the  upward revision of incentives under the Scheme and 
based on the outcome of the analysis further steps may be taken for 
increasing incentives under the Scheme so as to attract more entrepreneurs. 

17 
 
In case of continued failure to attract the entrepreneurs,   the Department and 
PMBI may consider opening of  government funded Janaushadhi Kendras in 
North East states, hilly areas and island territories  in place of self financing 
model. 
   1.23 The Committee also note that 36 field officers have been deployed in the 
states for smooth implementation of the scheme. The Committee also not e that a t 
least one field staff is present in most of the States/UTs, baring a few n orth eastern 
states and UTs. However, the north eastern states and UTs where field staffs are 
not deployed, implementation and monitoring of the scheme is don e by field staff of 
the adjacent States/UTs. Since the requisite number of field officers are 
necessary for smooth implementation of the Scheme in  every state, the 
Committee recommend that a review may be made by PMBI on the 
requirement  of number of field officers in every State/UT   and appropriate 
steps may be taken to increase the number of field officers in each State/UT. 
Atleast one field officer may be posted in each of North East States/ UTs for 
smooth implementation of the Scheme in those States/UTs. 
Recommendation No-10 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
1.24 While analyzing the role of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) , 
the Committee had recommended as under: 
 
" The Committee note that the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA), 
an independent body of experts in the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, 
Department of Pharmaceuticals is entrusted with the responsibilities of fixation 
and revision of prices of scheduled formulations under the Drugs (Pric es Control) 
Order (DPCO), as well as monitoring and enforcement of prices.  However, the  
Committee are concerned to note that NPPA fixes ceiling prices of only 
scheduled formulations which constitutes only about   17.2 per cent of the t otal 
formulations. The rest of 82.8 per cent of medicines are in the non-sche duled 

18 
 
segment and the NPPA does not fixes ceiling price of thos e 
medicines/drugs.  However, their price increase is permitted    only up to 10 p er 
cent of MRP per annum. So, there is a limitation of regulatory powers of NP PA in 
fixing and monitoring of prices of non-scheduled drug formulations.  Since  the 
expenditure on medicines constitutes more than 50 per cent of expenditu re on 
health, it is very much affecting poor families who struggle to cope with the high 
cost of medicines for treatment of any disease.  The Committee feel that th ere is 
immediate need to increase the percentage of regulation of medicines fro m 17.2 
percent to at least 50 percent within a year by incorporating suitable policy 
changes in this regard.  Moreover, the Committee also feel that there is a need to 
regulate the prices of medicines charged by private hospitals from the patients as 
a part of the overall treatment charges. In view of the above, the Committee 
recommend the following:- 
  
i.There is a need for introducing policy changes in the National Pharmaceutical 
Pricing Policy, 2012 and Drug Price Control Order (DPCO) wherein NPPA should 
be given autonomy to regulate the base prices of at least 50 percen t of all drugs 
sold in the domestic market, to expand NPPA price regulation function in an 
effective way beyond the scheduled drugs mentioned in the National List  of 
Essential Medicine (NLEM); 
ii.Apart from fixing the prices of scheduled drugs, NPPA should  also fix the ceiling 
prices of all non-scheduled drug formulations which are prescribed more often by 
medical practitioners for treating many of the common ailments; 
iii. Department of Pharmaceuticals and NPPA should examine critically whether it is 
necessary to permit 10%  increase of MRP of non-scheduled drugs per annu m 
particularly when the prices of raw materials, etc does not increase and 
appropriate steps should be initiated on the basis of outcome of the such  critical 
examination; 
iv.Also examine the rationalization of fixation of Maximum Retail Price (MRP), a s 
MRP itself is fixed on the higher side and subsequent 10 percent increase i n 
price per annum makes the cost of drugs unaffordable for the common people; 
and 
v.Department of Pharmaceuticals and NPPA should also examine the issues 
pertaining to high prices of medicines charged by private hospitals." 
Reply of the Government 
1.25  In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department o f 
Pharmaceuticals has stated as under:- 
"(i) & (ii) - The objective of the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy (NPP P), 
2012 is to put in place a regulatory framework for pricing of drugs so as to ensure 
availability of required medicines – 'essential medicines' – at reasonable prices 
even while providing sufficient opportunity for innovation and competitio n to 
support the growth of industry, thereby meeting the goals of employment an d 
shared economic well-being for all. The key principles for regulation of prices  in 

19 
 
the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy 2012 are (i) Essentiality of Drugs, (ii) 
Control of Formulations prices only, and (iii) Market Based Pricing. 
  
The current Drugs (Prices Control) Order (DPCO), 2013 is based on NPPP, 
2012. National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) gets its mandate fro m 
the DPCO. NPPA fixes the ceiling price of scheduled medicines specified in 
the Schedule-I (Schedule I of DPCO is the National List of Essential Medicin es 
which is notified by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare from time to tim e) of 
the DPCO, 2013 in accordance with the provisions of the DPCO. All 
manufactures of scheduled medicines (branded or generic) have to sell th eir 
products within the ceiling price (plus applicable Goods and Service Tax) fixed by 
the NPPA. A manufacturer is at liberty to fix the maximum retail price of a n on-
scheduled formulation branded or generic launched by it. However, as per the  
DPCO, the manufacturers of non-scheduled formulations are not allowed to  
increase the maximum retail price of such formulations by more than 10% pe r 
annum as per Para 20 of the DPCO, 2013. So far as regulation of d rugs used for 
common ailments prescribed by the medical practitioners are concerned, it 
is stated that all the essential drugs are included in the NLEM by the Committee 
of experts under MHFW from time to time.  In addition to above, Pa ra 19 of 
DPCO, 2013 empowers the Government " to fix ceiling price of any drug in 
extraordinary circumstances, if it considers necessary so to do in public interest 
for such period as it may deem fit". 
  
The recommendation of the Committee for introducing policy changes in the 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy, 2012 and Drug Price Control Order 
(DPCO) have been noted. 
  
(iii) & (iv) - DPCO, 2013 is framed as per the principles laid down in the NPPP , 
2012. The policy marked a shift to market-based pricing based on one of the 
principles enunciated in NPPP, 2012. Thus, DPCO, 2013 does not consider the 
aspect of cost while fixing the ceiling price of scheduled formulations. 
  
(v)  As per the provisions of the DPCO, no manufacturer can sell a scheduled or 
non-scheduled formulation at a price more than the MRP. If any complaint  
regarding overcharging by hospital(s) is received, NPPA initiates action in case 
of violations against the manufacturers as per the provisions of DPCO, 2013." 
 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
1.26 The Committee note that the Department has shown positive intent to m ake 
policy changes in the National Pharmaceutical Policy 2012  and Dr ugs Price Control 
Order 2013 with respect to the recommendation of the Committee that  NPPA should be 
given autonomy to regulate the base prices of at least 50 percent of all drugs sold in the 

20 
 
domestic market and  to expand NPPA price regulation function in an effective way 
beyond the scheduled drugs mentioned in the National List of Essential Med icine 
(NLEM).  Merely noting the recommendation is not adequate.  The Committee hope 
that prompt action would be taken by the Department in this regard.   The 
Committee would like to know the progress made in this regard in the final action 
taken replies.  
1.27 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply given by the Departm ent to the 
recommendation of the Committee that it alongwith  NPPA should examine critica lly the 
necessity of  permitting 10%  increase of MRP of non-scheduled drugs per annum 
particularly when the price of raw materials, etc does not increase.  The    reply given by 
the Department that DPCO, 2013 does not consider the aspect of cost wh ile fixing the 
ceiling price of scheduled formulations as  the policy marked a shift to ma rket-based 
pricing based on one of the principles enunciated in National Pharmace utical Pricing 
Policy, 2012 is not acceptable to the Committee .  Any pricing policy cannot be 
against the interest of common man.  Leaving everything to the market forces 
would defeat the goals of a welfare state.  Since the blanket permission to 
increase  the price of non scheduled drugs upto 10 % even when the price of raw 
materials does not increase is an unjustified provision which may result in 
increased spending on medicines  by the  people of the country and may pinch 
their pockets ,  the Committee reiterate the  earlier recommendation  and hope 
that the recommendation be examined in proper prospective for the benefit of the 
common man.  Action taken reply in this regard may be furnished to the 
Committee 
  

21 
 
Recommendation No-14 
Disinvestment of   Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) 
 1.28 While stressing on the need to reconsider the Disinvestment of profit making  
PSUs of the Committee had recommended had stated as under:- 
 
  "The Committee note there are five Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) under  
the aegis of the Department of Pharmaceuticals.  Karnataka Antibiotics & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL), Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals 
Limited (BCPL) and Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) are presently functional. 
While the first two are profit making, the third one is sick.    Indian Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL) and Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited 
(RDPL) are under closure.  In 2016, The Government of India decided for 
strategic disinvestment of 100% Government of India equity in Karnataka 
Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL), Bengaluru, strategic sale of BCPL 
and  closure of HAL. At that point of time, both BCPL and HAL were loss making 
but BCPL  has turned into profit making PSU as it was able to reduce 
procurement cost substantially, financial leakages, etc. due to concrete 
steps  taken such as centralization of Procurement System, Accounting System  
and HRM Record Maintenance System. On Similar lines, HAL has been able t o 
improve sales turnovers over the last few years, though still making losses with a 
number of initiatives taken, such as downsizing manpower through VRS scheme, 
product diversification and cost cutting measures.  In the aftermath of COVID 19 
pandemic, Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers had requested NITI Aayog to 
reconsider the decision of disinvestment of KAPL including Hindustan Antibiot ics 
Limited (HAL) and Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL). The 
Department is following up this matter with NITI Aayog for reconsideratio n of 
disinvestment/ feasibility of merger through in-depth examination by the Aayog 
itself or by awarding a comprehensive study to an independent agency o n 
priority.  Even though there is a strong private pharmaceutical industry , the 
Committee are of the firm view that it is very much necessary to retain functional  
public sector pharmaceutical units  as the coexistence of both the pub lic and 
private sector pharmaceutical industry is beneficial to the country particularly  to 
make available quality medicines at affordable prices to all sections of the society 
including poor and needy.  Moreover, the Government is committed to provide 
drug security at affordable cost for the people of the country. This can  be 
ensured  only with the  strengthening of  Pharmaceutical PSUs  because  private 
sector is driven by profit motive and market demand sentiment which doe s not 
cater to the needs of the lower middle class, poor and down trodden pe ople for 
the availability of quality drugs at affordable prices.  Keeping in view the 
wellbeing of the common people the, Committee, therefore, strongly recommend  
the following:- 

22 
 
 
i.  The proposal of strategic disinvestment of KAPL, which is a profit making 
mini ratna PSU, should be dropped.  
ii. The proposal of strategic sale of BCPL which has emerged as a profit 
making PSU should also be dropped.   
iii. The proposal for closure of HAL should also be dropped and corrective 
measures should be taken to make it profit making on the lines of BCPL. 
iv. Rather than disinvestment/sale, the Government should consider various 
measures for successful/profitable running of PSUs including reforms at 
administrative/ management level like professionalization of Board of Pha rma 
PSUs, promotion of Corporate Governance practices etc. to safeguard the 
interest of the common people who are dependent on affordable  and quality 
medicines produced by Pharmaceutical PSUs." 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.29 In reply to the above recommendation of the Committee, the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals has stated that as under:- 
" The Union Cabinet had decided on 28.12.2016 to strategically disinvest HAL & 
BCPL. Separately the CCEA on 01.11.2017 had decided to strategically disinvest 
100% of Central Govt. equity in KAPL based on the Cabinet note move d by 
DIPAM. 
Being a Policy decision, earlier Hon ’ble Minister (C&F) vide D.O. dated 
03.07.2020 and 23.12.2020 has requested to Vice Chairman, NITI Aayo g for 
reconsideration of the decision of disinvestment of three pharma PSUs nam ely 
KAPL, BCPL & HAL. Further, Secretary (P) vide D.O. dated 29.07.2020, 
26.10.2020, and 27.11.2020 has requested to CEO, NITI Aayog to get th e 
feasibility to merger of the pharma PSUs under disinvestment and examined  in 
depth either by the Aayog itself or by awarding a comprehensive study  to an 
independent agency on priority.   However, reply is still awaited." 
 
Further Comments of the Committee 
 
1.30  The Committee note that the reply of NITI Aayog with respect to reconside ration of 
the decision of strategic disinvestment/ strategic sale/ closure of three Pharma 
PSUs namely KAPL, BCPL & HAL respectively is still awaited.  In this regard, t he 
Committee are of the strong view that manufacturing of medicines/medical 

23 
 
devices should be considered as a strategic  sector as it involves drug 
security of the country .  Leaving  entire drug manufacturing at the hands of 
private sector may not be a prudent step as the prime motive o f private sector is 
profit making.  Hence, it is necessary that profit making and functioning pharma  
PSUs be encouraged to function in a healthy atmosphere.   The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate the earlier recommendation that the decision on the 
strategic sale/ disinvestment of profit making PSUs viz. KAPL and  
BCPL should be dropped and the proposal for closure of HAL should also be 
dropped and corrective measures should be taken to make it profit making 
on the lines of BCPL. The Committee also feel that rather than disinvestment of 
profit making PSUs, Government should provide enabling environment and bring 
about required administrative and management reforms at higher decisi on making 
levels so that sound business practices an d professional management techniques, 
processes and behavioural changes are inculcated to profitably manage these 
assets of the Government, which have been playing very important role o f 
providing affordable and quality medicines for the  people of the cou ntry who 
cannot afford the costly branded medicines sold in the market.   The Department 
of Pharmaceuticals should send this recommendation to NITI Ayog and it 
should furnish its specific reply to the Department of Pharmaceuticals for the 
submission of the same to the Committee within three months.   
  

24 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation No.1  
 
Need for Enhanced Budgetary Allocation 
2.1 The Committee note that the Department of Pharmaceuticals has vision  to 
promote Indian pharmaceutical sector as the global leader for quality medicine s and to 
ensure availability, accessibility and affordability of drugs and medical devices in th e 
country. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that  the Gross Budgeta ry 
allocation for the year 2021- 22  is   Rs. 470.41 Crore against the proposed outlay of 
Rs.2600.52 Crore which is only one sixth of the outlay proposed by the 
Department.  Out of Rs 470.41 Crore allocated to the Department, Rs. 3 1.53 Crore is 
towards the administrative expenditures for both the Department of Pharmace uticals 
and National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority (NPPA) against proposed Bud get 
Estimate of Rs. 35.98 Crore. Budgetary allocation for Central Sector Schemes is 
Rs.  429.76 Crore against proposed Budget Estimates of Rs.2564.48 Cro re.  According 
to the Department of Pharmaceuticals,    total funds allocated will fall short of the urgent 
fund requirements projected by the Department for carrying out its laid do wn mandate 
and will adversely affect the central sector schemes being implemented by th e 
Department viz. Development of Pharmaceuticals Industry  and National Institutes of 
Pharmaceuticals Education and Research (NIPER).  In this regard, the Committe e note 
that the Department has been allocated Rs. 234.34 crore against its require ment of Rs. 
1220 crore for NIPERs and only Rs. 124.42 crore against the proposal of the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals for a budgetary allocation of Rs. 1256.16 c ore for the 
implementation of important umbrella scheme of the Department for the de velopment of 
Pharmaceuticals industry during 2021-22.   Going by the pace at which th is umbrella 
scheme with important sub schemes for the holistic development of the P harmaceutical 
Industry is being implemented by the Department, it is not surprising to the co mmittee 
that the Ministry of Finance has curtailed the allocation drastically. Since it is ve ry 
much  essential to develop state of the art common facilities,  to provide fu nds for 
technology upgradation,  to offer production linked incentives etc to the pharma  industry 
including  bulk drug and medical devices industries,  the committee strongly recommend 
that the Department should take serious and concrete efforts for the imp lementation of 
all the sub schemes of the umbrella scheme in a time bound manne r particularly  to 
examine the proposals under various sub schemes expeditiously and to acco rd 
approval in a time bound manner  so as to enable the Ministry of Finan ce  allocate the 
requisite amount of funds for the implementation of various sub sche mes under the 
umbrella scheme. It is also necessary to make realistic budgetary proposals on actual 
need basis.   As far as fund allocation to NIPERs is concerned, the Committee take a 
serious view of non-allocation of requisite amount of funds by the Ministry of Finance for 
the infrastructural development of NIPERS even after a decade of their existence due to 
which these institutes are unable to attain their full potential.  Since the subject matter 
pertaining to the Department of Pharmaceuticals is concerned with the drug securi ty of 

25 
 
the country, the Committee urge upon the Ministry of Finance to examine the budget 
proposals of the Department of Pharmaceuticals very carefully and the  make adequate 
allocation of funds for the implementation of various Schemes and prog rammes of the 
Department.   Since the allocation made at BE is very less to cope the fund 
requirements of various schemes which are at the advanced stages of propo sal 
approval and fund release, the Department of Pharmaceuticals should pre pare fresh 
proposals for fund release at RE stage of 2021-22 and the same shou ld be submitted to 
Ministry of Finance for the allocation of necessary funds at RE stage.  A copy of this 
recommendation may also be sent to Ministry of Finance for its compliance. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.2  Department has taken a matter with Department of Expenditure through EFC  
memos seeking the adequate funds for implementation of the ongoing sche mes of 
Department. It is expected that the meeting of Expenditure Finance Committe e (EFC) 
will be held shortly under the chairmanship of Secretary (Expenditure). Depa rtment will 
send the recommendation of committee to the Department of Expend iture as 
suggested. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.7  of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.3 
 
Assistance to Pharmaceuticals Industry for common facilitation centre 
 
2.3 The Committee are concerned to note the very slow progress is being  made 
under the sub scheme of “Assistance to Pharmaceuticals Industry for common 
Facilitation center”.  This sub scheme earlier known as cluster Development has been 
rechristened after a dint of unsuccessful implementation.  Grant- in-aid of Rs. 20 crore 
per cluster or 70% of the cost of the project whichever is less is granted unde r this sub 
scheme.  During 2019-20, only Rs. 2.23 crore was spent on this scheme.  Duri ng 2020-
21, Rs, 12 crore allocated at BE stage was reduced to Rs. 7.23 crore at RE stage d ue 
to the inability of the Department to spend but the actual utilization was only Rs. 22 lakh. 
Under the sub scheme, one proposal from Chennai has already been approved.  During 
2020-21, there new proposals have been given in-principle approv al in  the months of 
September and  October, 2020 but the same are under examinatio n of PMC and as a 
result, no funds have so far been utilized under this  sub-scheme.  Such a slow 
approach on the part of the Department has resulted in on-paper existen ce of sub 
schemes under the umbrella scheme.  While deprecating such lackadaisical approach 
of the Department towards this important scheme, the committee strongly recom mend 
to expedite the process of final approval of the projects so as to dem and the funds 
required from the Ministry of Finance at RE stage.   Progress made in this regard should 
be intimated to the Committee. 

26 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 The Scheme Steering Committee (SSC) of Assistance to Pharmaceutical 
Industry for Common Facilities (API-CF) in its meeting held on 26.3.2021 has acco rded 
final approval to two projects viz: (i) Inducare Pharmaceuticals and Research 
Foundation (IPRF), Pune, Maharashtra for creation of Common Testing Facility, 
Research & Development with Pilot Plant and Common Logistic Centre. Total cost of 
the project is Rs 31,43,75,174/-. The eligible grant in aid is Rs. 20.00 crore. (ii) Ka la 
Amb Infrastructure Development Company (KIDC), Kala Amb, Himachal Pradesh to set 
up a Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP). The total cost of the project is Rs 
7,19,69,000/-. The eligible grant in aid is Rs 5,03,78,300/-. 
  
The Department has also released first installment of Rs 5,48,97,816/- to IP RF 
and Rs.1,51,13,490/- to KIDC on 30.3.2021. Thus Department has co mpletely utilized 
RE 2021-21. Details given below: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Head BE 2020-21 RE 2020-21 Expenditure as on 31.3.2021 
GIA-General 11.99 7.22 7.22 
GIA-Capital 0.01 0.01 00 
 
 
Recommendation No.4 
Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS) 
2.5 The Committee are dismayed to note that the important sub sch eme 
of Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS ) remains a 
non-starter since its approval in 2016.  Only a token allocation of Rs. 1 lakh was 
provided for the  sub scheme for  the financial years 2019-20 and  20 20-21.   Even 
though the Department had demanded Rs. 185 crore for the sub  scheme, again only a 
token allocation of Rs. 1 lakh  has been made by the Ministry of Finance  for 2020-
21.  This clearly shows the lack of faith in Department ’s credentials to implement this 
important scheme which aims to facilitate small and medium Pharma Ent erprises 
(SMEs) to upgrade their plant and machinery to WHO GMP standards so as to enab le 
them to participate and compete in global markets. As per the sub scheme, a ssistance 
in the form of interest subvention against the sanctioned loan by any sche duled 
commercial bank/financial institution, both in public and private sector will be provided to 
900 Pharma SMEs of proven track record.  The scheme is to be implemented by a 
Public Sector Financial Institution (PSFI).  But everything remains on paper without any 
concrete action to implement the scheme.  Non receipt of applications for financial 
assistance was the reason given by the Department for the non-moving of th e scheme 
ahead.  In this regard, the recommendations  made in third party evaluatio n viz. need 
for enough brain storming to set one liner objective for the Scheme, need  for 
implementation with liberal terms and conditions and opening of the scheme to MSME 
sector instead of SME sector are worth for consideration.  It is a matter of se rious 
concern that the Department could not appoint Public sector Financial Institu tion (PSFI) 
during the last 4 years of implementation of the scheme.  Since it is v ery much 
necessary to raise the standards of Pharma production units to that of WHO GMP 

27 
 
standards in order to medicines/drugs of highest standards to the people of the country 
and also for the export purpose, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Department should take prompt steps for the early Expenditure Finance  Committee 
approval of the scheme for   implementation of the sub scheme f rom 2021-22 to 2025-
26.  PSFI should be appointed immediately after the EFC approval and prompt  steps 
should be taken for the successful implementation the schemes from 2021-22 onwards. 
The Progress made in this regard should be intimated to this committee within 3 
months. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 The EFC Note has already been sent to Department of Expenditure. Further 
recommendations are noted for compliance.  
 
 
Recommendation No.5 
Promotion of Medical Devices Parks 
  
2.7         The Committee are constrained to note that another su b-scheme named 
“Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common Facility Centre ” was also not 
properly implemented by the Department and the same has been revised   by the Union 
Cabinet During 2020-21.  The sub-scheme has been renamed as “Promotion of Medical 
Devices Parks” with a total financial outlay of Rs. 400 crore. The objective of the sub-
scheme is creation of world class infrastructure facilities in order to make Indian medical 
device industry a global leader. The tenure of the scheme is from 2020-202 1 to 2024-
2025. Maximum assistance under the scheme for one Medical Device Park wo uld be 
limited to ₹ 100 crore.  Under this Scheme an allocation  of Rs.7.50 crore was made at 
BE stage of 2020-21 and the same was increased to Rs. 21.05 crore but  the 
Department is able to spend only   Rs 7.49 crore so far.  In this background, the  
Department had demanded Rs.120 crore for the implementation of the Scheme during 
2021-22 but the Ministry of Finance has allocated only Rs.60 crore at BE sta ge.  The 
Committee note that in-principle approvals were given to the proposals received from 
Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Telangana.  Subsequently the proposal of 
Andhra Pradesh was first taken up.  After revision of the scheme   by the Union Cabinet, 
the guidelines of the revised scheme were issued on 27.07.2020. After the rev ision of 
the scheme, 16 proposals have been received in accordance with the revised guidelines 
of the scheme.  All the proposals are being evaluated for giving in-pri nciple approval. 
Taking into consideration the importance of common laboratory and testing facilities  in 
reducing  the production cost of medical devices, the Committee recommend tha t the 
Department should take earnest steps for granting expeditious approvals to  the eligible 
proposals under the Scheme  during 2021-22 and financial assistance  should also be 
provided to them according to the Scheme guidelines in a time bound man ner.  In case 
of necessity of further funds for the implementation of the Scheme  during 2021-22, 
concrete proposals for allocation of the same at RE stage should be made  to the 
Ministry of Finance.  The Committee hope that the Department would act fast in 
coordination with State Implementing Agency (SIA), would expedite the app roval 
procedures and disburse the funds allocated at BE 2021-22, so as to en able the 

28 
 
Ministry of Finance consider favourably the allocation of further funds at RE stag e.  The 
progress made in this regard may be intimated to the Committee. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8  Under the sub-scheme as “Assistance to Medical Device Industry for Common 
Facility Center”, the Department has given approval for financial assistance of Rs. 25 
crore to the project of Andhra Pradesh Medtech Zone Ltd (AMTZ), Andhra Prad esh for 
development of Common Facility Center for  superconducting magnetic coils testing and 
research facility.  A Budgetary allocation of Rs. 7.50 crore was allocated un der the 
scheme in Budget Estimates 2020-21.  The Department has  released 1st installment of 
Rs. 7.49 crore for the project  to AMTZ on 11.9.2020.  The budget allo cation was 
increased to Rs. 21.05 crore in Revised Estimates but no re-appropriation o rder was 
issued to enable this Section to release the fund.  Hence, the actual alloca tion was of 
Rs. 7.50 crore. 
The sub scheme has been revised and renamed as “Promotion of Medical 
Device Parks ”. The guidelines of the scheme have been issued on 27.7.2020.  The 
scheme is under implementation.  A budgetary allocation of Rs. 60 crore h as been 
allocated for the FY 2021-22. The application window of the schem e was closed on 
15.10.2020.  A total number of 16 States/UTs have submitted the ir proposal under the 
scheme which are under evaluation. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.15 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.6 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing 
for Medical Device 
2.9 The Committee note that under the Umbrella Scheme of “Development of 
Pharmaceuticals Industry ”, a new sub-scheme “Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing for Medical Device ” has been approved 
by the Union  Cabinet in its meeting dated 20.3.2020 with a total outlay of Rs. 3420 
Crore.  However, only Rs.2.00 Crore was sought under the first  batch of 
Supplementary Demands for Grants 2020-21 from Ministry of Finance for  
implementation of the sub-scheme during the year and only an alloca tion of Rs. 2.36 
Crore has been made at BE stage for 2021-22. In regard to the reason s for less 
allocation of fund for the sub-scheme, the Committee note that as pe r scheme 
guidelines, the incentive to the applicants under four target segments will b e applicable 
from  2022-23 onwards only  and as such the funds for disbursal o f incentives to 
selected applicants are not required. Accordingly, the fee of Project Manag ement 
Agency (PMA) will only be paid during 2020-21 and 2021-22. The Committee further 

29 
 
note that 28 applications for four Target Segments o f the Scheme were received 
and out of them nine applications have been approved till 15 th February, 2021. As the 
country is largely dependent on imports for meeting its medical devices requirem ents, 
the Committee recommend that due attention should be paid by the Departm ent for the 
timely implementation of this sub-scheme in letter and spirit. The prog ress made in this 
regard may be intimated to the Committee. 
  
Reply of Government 
 2.10  All the 28 applications received have been processed and 14 applications with 
committed investment of Rs. 873.93 crore have been approved under the scheme .  The 
commercial production is projected to commence from 1 st April, 2022 onwards. The 
disbursal of production linked incentive by the Government over the five ye ars period 
would be up to a maximum of about Rs. 1,694 crore.  
 
 
Recommendation No.7 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for promotion of domestic 
manufacturing of critical Key Starting Materials (KSMs)/Drug Intermediates and 
APIs in the country 
2.11 The Committee note that a new sub scheme “Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
Scheme for promotion of domestic manufacturing of critical Key Starting Mate rials 
(KSMs)/Drug Intermediates and APIs in the country ” has been approved by the Union 
Cabinet in its meeting held on 20.3.2020 with a total outlay of  Rs. 6940  Crore under 
Umbrella Scheme of  “Development of Pharmaceuticals Industry ”.  However, only Rs. 
1.55 crore was sought for this sub-scheme under 1 st batch of Supplementary Demand 
for Grants 2020-21 from Ministry of Finance. Moreover, only a token all ocation of Rs. 
2.79 crore has been made at BE stage for 2021-22 for this Scheme. According to the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals, as per scheme guidelines of PLI scheme for Bulk 
Drugs, the gestation period for fermentation-based products is up to 20 22-23 and up to 
2021-22 for chemical synthesis-based products.  As such, funds for disbursal of 
incentives to selected applicants are not required. Accordingly, the fee of Project 
Management Agency (PMA) will only be paid during 2020-21 and  2021-22. The 
Committee note that a total 215 applications have been recei ved for the four 
Target Segments of the PLI scheme for Bulk Drugs. O ut of it only five 
applications have been approved till 15 th February, 2021 by the Empowered 
Committee under the chairmanship of CEO, NITI Aayog. In this regard, the Committee  
feel that outrightly rejecting vast majority of applications may not be cond ucive for the 
development of a strong bulk drug industry in the country.  The Committee, the refore, 
recommend that the prospective entrepreneurs, who are eager to set up
  API/bulk 
drug/KSMs industry in the country, whose applications have been rejected may be 
given a chance to resubmit their applications after fulfilling the requ irements of Scheme 
guidelines so as to encourage setting up of required number of bul k drug manufacturing 
units in the country.  The Committee also recommend that the Departmen t should act 
swiftly for the effective and total implementation of this vital scheme aimed at 

30 
 
safeguarding drug security of the country.  The Committee should be  apprised of the 
progress made in implementation of the Scheme. 
  
Reply of Government 
2.12   All the 215 applications received have been processed and a  total o f 47 
applications (excluding 2 successful applications withdrawn subsequently) with 
committed investment of Rs. 5366.35 crore have been approved by the Gov ernment. 
The commercial production of these plants is projected to commence from 1 st April, 
2023 onwards. The disbursal of production linked incentive by the Governme nt over the 
six years period would be up to a maximum of about Rs. 6,000 crore.  
 
Recommendation No.8 
Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common Facilitation Center 
2.13            The Committee are also constrained to note the on paper existence  of 
another  sub scheme “Assistance to Bulk Drug Industry for Common Facilitation 
Center” under the umbrella  scheme of “Development of Pharmaceutical Industry ”. The 
sub scheme has now been renamed as “Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks”.  The guidelines 
of the sub-scheme were released on 27.07.2020.  Only a    token allocation of Rs.2.00 
lakh was made for the Scheme during 2019- 20.   Rs. 21.52 crore was allocated at BE 
stage of 2020-21 which got reduced to only Rs. 1.69 crore at RE stage bu t no 
expenditure has so far been made under the   Scheme during 2 020-21.   In this 
backdrop, the Department had sought Rs.900.00 crore for the implem entation of the 
Scheme during 2021-22 but the Ministry of Finance has allocated only Rs.36.24 crore at 
BE stage.  In this regard, Department of Pharmaceuticals clarified that a total n umber of 
13 proposals have been received which are under evaluation. The Department will soon 
accord 'in-principle' approval to three States/UTs under the scheme. Those 
three  States/UTs will submit a detailed project report within 180 days of d ate of 
issuance of in-principle approval letter. As per scheme guidelines, the Department has 
to release first installment of 30% of the total financial assistance of Rs. 1000 crore at 
the time of final approval of the project by the Scheme Steering  Committee. Since the 
final approval may be accorded during 2021-22, there will be need of  Rs. 900 crore (Rs. 
300 crore each for 3 parks).  As there is an urgent need to create a very strong bulk 
drug industry in the country to meet the bulk drugs requirements of the co untry, the 
Committee recommend that definite time limits may be set for issuing in-principle and  
final approvals by the Department of Pharmaceuticals.  Moreover,   the co ncerned 
States may be requested to submit the detailed project reports with in three months (90 
days) rather than six months (180 days) so as to facilitate early impleme ntation of the 
Scheme.  Department of Pharmaceuticals should initiate prompt steps as recommended 
above for according final approvals to three parks well before projecting the requirement 
of Rs.900 Crore for  RE 2021-22 allocation   so as to enable the Ministry of Finance 
allocate the same at RE stage.  
 
 
 
 

31 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.14   As per the guidelines of the Scheme, the Project Management Agency will 
evaluate the proposals received from States and give its recommendations to the 
Department. The recommendations will then be placed before the Scheme Steering 
Committee for considering in-principal approval to three (03) States. Thereafter, the 
Department will issue a letter of in-principle approval to the three (03) select ed States. 
Proposals from 13 States have been received by the Project Management Agency 
which are under evaluation. All efforts will be made for expeditious implem entation of 
the timelines. 
 
 
Recommendation No.9 
Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) 
2.15 The Committee note that  Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana 
(PMBJP) was launched by the Department of Pharmaceuticals  in the year 2008 with an 
objective of making quality generic medicines available at affordable prices to  all 
especially for the poor and the deprived ones. Under this scheme, dedicated  outlets 
known as PradhanMantriBhartiyaJanaushadhiKendras (PMBJK) are opened all over the 
country to provide generic medicines to the masses. The Scheme has been  approved 
for continuation with the financial outlay of Rs. 490 crore for the period 2020- 2021 to 
2024-2025.     The Committee note that PMBJP is designed to functio n on a self-
financing model like a business.  Budgetary support is provided to the S cheme mainly 
for promotion and for providing incentives to the entrepreneurs.  An amount o f Rs.65 
Crore has been allocated at BE stage for 2021-22 against the  propososal of the 
Department for Rs.80 Crore.  In regard to the better implementation of the Sche me, the 
Committee recommend the following:- 
i. Although a total of 7259 PMBJP kendras have been opened a s on 31 January, 
2021 and all the districts in the country have been covered, the Departm ent 
should take necessary steps for opening PMBJP kendras  in   every block at 
each  district in the country.  
ii. Presently three warehouses are functioning at Gurgoan, Chennai and 
Guwahati.  Fourth warehouse is under construction in Surat.  The Departmen t 
should consider opening a few more warehouses particularly in those regions o f 
the country where there is no PMBJP warehouse. 
iii. Requisite number of distributors should be appointed in each State according  to 
the size and number of PMBJP Kendras of the State. 
iv. Entrepreneurs who set up kendras under the Scheme should be provide d more 
incentives and the budgetary allocation in this regard may be increased for 
successful running of the Scheme 
v. Awareness Programmes about the features of the Scheme should be increased  
and should aimed at reaching poor people  including those living in slums a nd 

32 
 
other economically deprived areas.  Budgetary allocation in this regard ma y be 
increased commensurately.  
vi. Marketing Officers who is responsible for smooth implementation of the Schem e 
at State and district levels should be appointed in each State/Union Territo ry and 
effective steps should be taken for monitoring the functioning of each a nd every 
BMBJP Kendra at district level. 
vii. The Government/Department should forgo the self financing mode l for opening 
Janaushadhi Kendras in North East, hilly and island areas of the country . Instead 
the Department should open government funded JanaushadhiKendras in North 
East states, hilly areas and island territory and allot them to Women, Divyang, 
SC, ST. 
 
Reply of Government 
2.16 (i) The Department has taken various steps, which is as under:- 
1. Bureau of Pharma PSUs of India (BPPI) has already placed notice on its website 
and print media for inviting attention of applicants for applying fo r PMBJK in 
uncovered blocks of the country on priority basis. 
2. Preference is being given to applicants applying for PMBJK in uncovered block. 
3. Special incentive of Rs. 2.00 lakhs in addition to the normal incentives sh all be 
granted for PMBJK opened by the Women entrepreneurs, divyaang, SC, ST & 
any entrepreneurs open PMBJK at aspirational districts (backward district) as 
notified by the NITI Aayog& in Himalayan, Island territories and North- Easter n 
state as per the new incentive plan for furthering the interest of applicants. 
(ii) As of now, PMBJP have three warehouses at Gurugram, Chennai and 
Guwahati which are strategically located at northern, southern and eastern part of 
the country, respectively. The fourth warehouse at Surat is under construction 
which shall be catering to the western part of the country. Thus, with the 
functioning of all the four warehouses at northern, eastern, southern and weste rn 
parts of the country along with the support network of suitable Distributors 
established across the country in most of the States/UTs, warehousing and 
logistics is expected to cater to the requisite need. However, warehousing and 
logistics facilities can be scaled up on the basis of demand and requirement. 
(iii) As of now, 37 Distributors has been appointed in most of the State s/UTs 
across the country. Notice inviting expression of interest for appointment of 
Distributor for anticipated location(s) is under process. However, appointment of 
more Distributor can be scaled up on the basis of demand and requirement. 
(iv) As per the revised incentive plan, PMBJK run by 
entrepreneurs/Pharmacist/NGOs/NGOs & Charitable organization that are linked 
with BPPI headquarters through software will get incentive up to Rs. 5.00 lakhs . 
The incentive will be given @ 15% of monthly purchase made from  BPPI by these 
PMBJKs subject to ceiling of Rs 15,000/- per month up to total limit of 5.00 lakhs. It 

33 
 
will also cover PMBJK opened by Women entrepreneurs, Divyang, SC, ST & any 
entrepreneurs open ‘PradhanMantriBhartiyaJanaushadhi Kendra (PMBJK) ’ at 
aspirational districts as notified by the NITI Aayog, In Himalayan, Island te rritories 
and North- Eastern state. 
  This will be applicable to existing PMBJK also whose existing limit of 
incentives of Rs 2.50 lakh is fully disbursed, moreover it will also cover the PMBJ K 
opened in government premises to Whom one-time grant of Rs 2.50 lakh w as 
disbursed. They will get incentive of Rs 2.50 lakh based on purchase made by  
them from BPPI as per other terms and conditions applicable to all PMBJKs. 
  In addition to this, special incentive amount of Rs. 2.00 lakhs shall be 
granted for PMBJK opened by the Women entrepreneurs, divyaang, SC, ST & 
any entrepreneurs opening PMBJK at aspirational districts (backward district) as 
notified by the NITI Aayog& in Himalayan, Island territories and North- E astern 
state. 
(v)   Government is spreading awareness about the salient features of PMBJP 
including Janaushadhi Suvidha Oxo-Biodegradable Sanitary Napkin through 
various types of advertisements such Print Media, Radio advertisement, TV 
advertisement, Cinema Advertisements and Outdoor publicity like Hoardings,  
Bus Queue Shelter branding, Bus branding, Auto wrapping, etc. In addition t o 
this, BPPI is also educating the public about the usages of Janaushadhi generic 
medicines through social media platforms like facebook, twitter, Instagram, 
Youtube, etc. regularly on daily basis. 
(vi)   As of now, BPPI is having a total of 36 on roll field staffs consisting of Jr. 
Marketing Officer, Marketing Officer, Sr. Marketing Officer, Assistant Manager, 
Deputy Manager, Area Manager and Zonal Manager in a well-defin ed hierarchy 
of command and control for the smooth implementation of the Sche me in the 
States/UTs. At least one field staff is present in most of the States/UTs, baring a 
few north eastern states and UTs. However, the north eastern states and  UTs 
where field staffs are not deployed, implementation and monitoring of the 
scheme is done by field staff of the adjacent States/UTs. Even, 2 to 3 field staffs 
are deployed in some States/UTs depending on need and Marketing & S ales 
prospects of the State/UT. 
Moreover, Information Technology (IT) enabled End- to-End supply chain 
system with Point-of-Sale (POS) application for value added services has been 
implemented in PMBJP. To ensure the efficient management and operatio n of 
the PMBJK, and the reporting of data and information to BPPI, a  computerized 
point of sale system (the "POS System") consisting of all sales transactions 
those are fed & updated in the system including placement of online orde rs/ 
indents, outstanding amount, etc. are in place. Technical training for running the 
POS system and trouble-shooting are also managed and assisted by BPPI by 
means of installation of software and technical guidance. The basic know- how 
and training videos are made available to the user remotely for ease of a ccess 
and ready reference. 

34 
 
(vii)  As per the revised incentive plan, PMBJK run by 
entrepreneurs/Pharmacist/NGOs/NGOs & Charitable organization that are 
linked with BPPI headquarters through software will get incentive up to Rs. 5.00  
lakhs. The incentive will be given @ 15% of monthly purchase made from  BPPI 
by these PMBJKs subject to ceiling of Rs 15,000/- per month up to  total limit of 
5.00 lakhs. It will also cover PMBJK opened by Women entrepreneurs,Divyang , 
SC, ST & any entrepreneurs open PMBJK at aspirational districts as notifie d by 
the NITI Aayog, In Himalayan, Island territories and North- Eastern state. 
        This will be applicable to existing PMBJK also whose existing lim it of 
incentives of Rs 2.50 lakh is fully disbursed, moreover it will also cover the 
PMBJK opened in government premises to whom one-time grant of Rs 2.50 
lakh was disbursed. They will get incentive of Rs 2.50 lakh based on purchase 
made by them from BPPI as per other terms and conditions applicable to all 
PMBJKs. 
       In addition to this, special incentive amount of Rs. 2.00 lakhs shall be 
granted for PMBJK opened by the Women entrepreneurs, divyaang, SC, ST & 
any entrepreneurs opening PMBJK at aspirational districts (backward district) as 
notified by the NITI Aayog& in Himalayan, Island territories and North- E astern 
state. 
   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.18, 1.19, 1.20 and 1.21 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation  No. 11 
Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring (CAPPM) 
 
2.17 The Committee note that there are two components Under the Cen tral Sector 
Scheme of NPPA, viz., ‘Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring ’ 
(CAPPM). First component is setting up of Price Monitoring and Resource Units 
(PMRUs) in the States/ Union Territories. The primary function of PMRUs is to assist 
NPPA in price monitoring, detection of violation of the provisions of DPCO, pricing  
compliance, ensuring availability of medicines and consumer awarene ss. The second 
component is advertisement and publicity. During the year 2020-21 Rs. 4.5 crore was 
allocated at BE stage and the same was reduced to Rs.3 crore at RE stage.  However, 
only Rs.1.78 crore has been spent as on 15.01.2021. Under the first comp onent 
(Assistance to PMRUs), it is expected that total funds will be utilized up to en d of the 
F.Y. 2020-21. As regard the 2 nd Component (Advertising and Publicity) the budget has 
been revised from Rs. 2.00 crore to Rs. 0.50 crore. The Committee note that the m obile 
application 'Pharma SahiDaam' launched by NPPA is non-functional that de feats the 
very purpose of launching the application. A budgetary allocation (BE) of  Rs.6 
crore  has been made for 2021-22.  Out of this, Rs.5Crore has been all ocated to 

35 
 
PMRUs and Rs.1 crore for Advertisement and publicity.  The Committee a lso note that 
in order to increase the effectiveness and outreach of NPPA, 17 PMRUs have been  set 
up in States of  Kerala, Gujarat, Odisha, Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Tripura, 
Nagaland, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Mizoram, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnatak a, 
Telangana, Maharashtra, Goa and Madhya Pradesh. However as submitted b y the 
Department PMRUs in only 12 States are fully functional as  PMRUs in the states of 
Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Telangana, Maharashtra, Goa and Madhya  Pradesh are 
newly set up.  The Committee feel that PMRUs are functioning as crucial li nk between 
the States and NPPA as they monitor drug price regulation, ensure availability of 
medicines, conduct IEC activities and organize seminar/ webinar etc. and henc e they 
should be set up in all States in a time bound manner.  Moreover, th e activities of NPPA 
in the area of advertisement and publicity are needed to be strengthened.  In view of the 
above, the Committee recommend the following:- 
i. Concerted efforts should be made by the Department of Pharmaceuticals (D oP) 
and NPPA to set up functional PMRUs in all the States and Union Territori es 
latest by 2023-24 as projected under the Vision Plan of NPPA.  In case  of non-
cooperation of any State/UT Government, the matter should be taken up at the 
highest level with those Governments. Alternatively, DoP and NPPA may explore 
the possibilities of setting up of PMRUs by the Union Government itself.  If 
needed the increase of budgetary allocation for the purpose may be considered.  
ii. Continuous monitoring by NPPA on proper functioning of PMRUs particularl y 
with regard to price monitoring, detection of violation of the provisions of DPCO, 
pricing compliance and ensuring availability of medicines to the people. 
iii. Awareness and publicity through print, electronic and social media about the  
pricing of scheduled and non scheduled drugs, availability of affordab le and 
quality generic medicines as alternatives to branded medicines, robust griev ance 
redressal mechanism in respect of overcharging, ensure proper functioning of 
Pharma SahiDaam app etc. and enhance the budgetary allocation  for the same 
as the present allocation of Rs.1 crore is inadequate. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 (i)    Price Monitoring and Resource Unit (PMRU) have been set up in the eighteen (18) 
States as per the target set for the period up to 2020- 21, viz., Kerala, Gujarat, Odisha, 
Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Tripura, Nagaland, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, 
Mizoram, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Telangana, Maharashtra, Goa, Madhya  
Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, despite the pandemic situation in the country. As suggested, 
in case of non-cooperation by any State/UT Government, the matter would be taken up 
at the highest level with those Governments. The budget allocation for Gra nt in Aid to 
PMRUs for the year 2021-22 has been doubled to Rs. 5.00 Crore a s against 2.50 crore 
in the year 2020-21. 
  
(ii)    Regular and continuous monitoring of functioning of PMRUs with regard to price 
monitoring, detection of violation of the provisions of DPCO, pricing complia nce and 
ensuring availability of medicines to the people is carried out on a monthly basis. 
Monthly reports are obtained from PMRUs. In view of the on-going COVID pand emic 

36 
 
since 2020, meetings through Video Conferencing are also held. Recently, PMRUs 
have also initiated weekly survey on the availability of drugs used in COVID 
management. 
  
(iii) The suggestion has been noted. Depending upon the progress, additional funds will 
be sought at various stages, as and when required, including Supplementary  and RE 
stage. 
 
 
 Recommendation   No. 12 
National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER) 
 
2.18 The Committee note that National Institute of Pharmaceutical Educatio n & 
Research (NIPER) at SAS Nagar (Mohali) was set up as a registered society under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860 and given statutory recognition by an act of Parliament, 
NIPER Act, 1998 and was declared as an Institute of National Importance. During 2007-
08, six new NIPERs were started at Ahmedabad, Guwahati, Hajipur, Hyderabad, K ol-
kata and Raebareli with the help of Mentor Institutes. Subsequently, NIPER a t Madurai 
was approved in the year 2012. During 2015-16, Finance Minister in his B udget Speech 
announced 3 new NIPERs for the states of Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra and  Rajasthan. 
Another NIPER is proposed to be set up at Bengaluru, Karnataka. With respect to the 
budgetary allocation made for the NIPERs for the ensuing year 2021-22 , the Committee 
note that  the Department has been allocated only  Rs. 234.34 crore a gainst its 
requirement of Rs. 1220 crore for NIPERs during 2020-21. Under NIPER scheme fund 
utilization pattern is 100 percent during the year 2018-19, 2019-20  and likely to be fully 
utilized during the year 2020-21 as well.   One of the physical targets of the Department 
is to create own campus with permanent buildings for all the existing NIPERs as well as 
for the newly proposed NIPERS. In this regard, a proposal for up-gradation and 
establishment of existing seven NIPERs as well as setting up of new five NIPERs at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 4,300 crore sent to the Department of Expenditure in June, 2 020 
was returned by the Ministry of Finance indicating that the continuing schem es needs to 
be appraised and approved further for the period of 2021-22 to 202 5-
26 after 15th Finance Commission recommendations are accepted and resource 
position of public exchequer is clear.  In pursuant to the Department of Ex penditure’s 
instructions issued dated 8 th December, 2020, a fresh proposal has been sent  to that 
Department in the revised format for consideration by the Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC). The Committee are deeply concerned to note that creation of 
requisite infrastructure for 6 NIPERs which were declared as Institutes of National 
Importance has been delayed by more than a decade.  The work of construction o f 
Permanent campus is nearing completion only in respect of Guwahati NIPER a nd the 
construction work of campus for Ahmedabad NIPER has been started recently.   In this 
regard, the Committee feel that it is very much necessary to create own campus  
for  NIPERs at Hyderabad, Kolkata, Raebareli and Hajipur so as to enable them 
function in a full fledged manner in the true spirit of  Institute of  National 
Importance.            The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a d efinite time 
schedule should be fixed for construction of own campus with permanent b uildings   for 
these NIPERS and accordingly enhanced budgetary allocation should be ma de for the 

37 
 
purpose.  The Department should pursue vigorously with the Department of Expenditure 
for the early EFC approval of the proposals for creation of own campus with permanent 
buildings for the existing NIPERs and for the setting up of five new NIPERS a t Madurai, 
Jhalawar, Raipur, Nagpur and Bangaluru.   Based on the approval, concrete st eps 
should be taken for the construction of permanent campus for the ex isting NIPERS and 
the time bound setting up of new NIPERS. 
Reply of the Government 
2.19 Department has already sent a comprehensive EFC proposal to the Department 
of Expenditure seeking funds to the tune of Rs.4300.00 cr. for a p eriod of five years. 
The proposal seeks, amongst others, funds for setting up regular campuses of existing 
NIPERs at Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Hajipur and Raebareli. It is relevant t o 
mention that the existing NIPER at Mohali already has a full-fledged ca mpus, whereas 
the construction of campus of NIPER at Guwahati has almost been co mpleted. Further, 
funds have also been sought in EFC proposal for setting up campuses of new NIPERs 
proposed to be set up at Madurai (Tamil Nadu), Jhalawar (Rajasthan), Nagpur  
(Maharashtra), New Raipur (Chhattisgarh) and Bengaluru (Karnataka). The Department 
is vigoursly pursuing with the Department of Expenditure for consideration/ approval of 
EFC proposal. 
Department of Expenditure has allocated additional Rs.121.82 crore in RE 202 1-
22, of which Rs.71.00 cr. have been released for purchase of equipment ’s and Rs. 
41.00 cr. for construction of NIPER Guwahati and NIPER Ahmedabad. Further, the 
Department of Expenditure has allotted Rs.234.34 cr. for NIPERs in Budget E stimates 
2021-22. 
  
Recommendation   No. 13 
Setting up of modern laboratories in NIPERS and faculty/staff welfare 
2.20 Grants in aid to NIPERs include the purchase of equipment by the existing 
NIPERs and payment of salary to faculty / staff. In this regard, the Comm ittee 
recommend the following:- 
i. Apart from construction of own campuses for NIPERs, due attention should be 
paid for setting up modern laboratories with state of the art  equipments for 
imparting pharmaceutical education in a holistic manner and for Research an d 
Development in the field.  Requisite amount of budgetary allocations shou ld be 
made for the purpose.  The Committee may be informed about the progress in 
this regard. 
ii. The Committee note that NIPERs have been directed to earn at least 1/3 rd of 
their salary to reduce dependency on Government Grants. While it is prudent that 
the  NIPERs need to strive to be self-reliant for meeting at least part of their 
operational expenses through fees from students, testing fee from equipments, 
projects, consultancies etc, the Committee are of the view that the interests of 
faculty and staff should be protected till they reach their full poten tial and hence 
recommend that  NIPERs should be provided enough budgetary grants so as to 

38 
 
meet the salary requirements of faculty and staff till they become self re liant with 
permanent building and strong laboratory facilities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.21  ( i) In addition to Rs. 333.82 crore released during the year 2020-21 for purchase 
of equipment ’s (calculate by deducting funds for construction of campus of Guwahati 
and Ahmedabad from the total releases made under Capital head), th e Department has 
released additional Rs.71.00 crore in the month of March, 2021 for purchase o f 
equipment’s by NIPERs. Further, during the FY 2021-22, fund will also be released for 
setting up modern laboratories/purchase of equipment ’s by NIPERs from the allocated 
BE Rs.234.34 crore. In addition, funds have been sought for up-gradation of 
laboratories and setting of Centers of Excellences in the EFC proposal.    
(ii) The direction to NIPERs is a step towards making the institutes self-reliant. It, 
however, does not imply that the funds towards salary requirements of fa culty and staff 
will not be made available by the Department.  Funds towards salary are made 
available under budget head of Grants in Aid – General/ Salary under the annual 
Budget Estimates. Further, in the EFC proposal sent to the Ministry of Finance fo r next 
five years, funds for salary and allowances of faculty and staff of NIP ERs have been 
sought. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER – III 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation   No. 2 
Major issue of drug security associated with overdependence on imported 
API/Bulk Drugs 
4.1 The Committee note that pharmaceuticals has been identified as one  of the 
champion sectors, which forms around 1.72 percent of the country ’s GDP but there is 
an urgent need to pay attention to major issue of drug security associat ed with 
overdependence on imported API/Bulk Drugs which if not handled can  adversely affect 
the competitiveness of the domestic pharmaceutical sector in the years to come. In this 
regard, the Department of Pharmaceuticals has informed that the Active Pharmaceutical 
Ingredients (API)/Bulk drugs and intermediates form 63% of India ’s total pharma 
imports. Even production of some of the National List of Essential Medicine s (NLEM) 
formulations is dependent on imported APIs and intermediates. India imports bulk drugs 
and intermediates largely on economic considerations. China with a share of 67.6 % is  
the major source for API. India, being one of the largest manufacturers of me dicines 
and exporting these to over 200 countries, dependence on a single so urce for import of 
API is a matter of serious concern as any disruption in the supplies could jeopardize the 
pharma sector and affect the supplies of medicines both for d omestic use and 
exports. In this regard, the Committee observed that during the early 90s, India was 
self-reliant in manufacturing APIs. However, with the rise of China as a p roducer of API, 
it captured the Indian market with its low-cost API manufacturing industry. Th e worst hit 
was the Indian fermentation based bulk drug Industry facing severe competition  from 
overseas players mainly from China. Local production slowly stopped when China 
started exporting these bulk drugs at very low prices in India. The cost of prod uction of 
these bulk drugs was low in China due to multiplicity of factors including  low cost of 
capital followed by aggressive government funding models, tax incentives, av ailability of 
subsidized utilities such as electricity, steam, brine, effluent treatment etc.  I n order to 
negate imports,   the Department has issued guidelines dated 30.12 .2020 for 
implementation of Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) Order dated  
16.09.2020 issued by Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, to 
Pharmaceuticals Sector which classify the suppliers for providing preference in publi c 
procurement based on their minimum local content for pharmaceuticals form ulations. In 
2020, the Committee under chairmanship of Dr Eswara Reddy identified APIs w ith high 
degree of import dependence.  Further,  a Production linked incentive  scheme for 
promotion of domestic manufacturing of critical Key Starting Materials (KSMs)/Drug 
Intermediates and APIs in the country has been launched by the Governmen t. The 
committee is also given to understand that Department has no policy to favourably 
distinguish between Pharma companies which manufacture drugs from domestically  
produced critical Key Starting Materials( KSMs)/Drug Intermediates (DI) and Active 
Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) in comparison to those companies which 

41 
 
manufacture drugs by importing API/KSM/DI from other countries.  Since it is very much 
necessary to stop  the dumping of cheap raw material in the country by China, there is a 
need to curtail this trend and therefore, the Committee recommend  that the fo llowing 
measures should be taken:- 
  
i. NITI Ayog and the Department of Pharmaceuticals to make an indepth study of 
various concessions being provided by China to its bulk drug industry and to 
initiate immediate appropriate measures in a war footing manner  for the crea tion 
of a very strong API/bulk drug/KSM industry in the country as a viable competit or 
and alternative source country for API/bulk drug/KSMs 
ii. Need to provide manufacturing support infrastructure viz. subsidized utilities such 
as electricity, water, steam, brine, effluent treatment plant etc and help create 
economies of scale for fermentation based bulk drug Industry clusters. 
(ii)        Reclassify suppliers into three categories Class-I with 100 percent  
local content, Class-II 80 percent local content and Class-III with 60 
percent local content and provide progressive incentives like zero duty on 
100 percent local content suppliers and rationally increase duty on other 
two category of suppliers for both public and private procurements don e in 
Pharmaceutical sectors. 
(iv)      Enhance the budget allocation for the scheme Promotion of Bulk 
Drugs during RE stage for the year 2021-22 to make effective stride in  
establishing 3 Bulk Drug Parks in the country and expand the scheme to  
establish more Bulk Drug parks in future. 
(v)        Department of Pharmaceuticals to frame a comprehensiv e 
incentive policy for domestic bulk drugs producers. 
  
 This recommendation may also be sent to NITI Ayog for Action Taken R eply by 
both the Department of Pharmaceuticals and NITI Ayog.  
  
  
Reply of the Government 
4.2 As directed by Committee, the recommendation was also shared with NITI  
Aayog. 
  
Regarding points (i),(ii) & (v) above : Department of Pharmaceuticals in consultation of 
NITI Aayog has launched following three schemes for promoting domestic 
manufacturing of bulk drugs by attracting large investments in the sector to ensu re their 
sustainable domestic supply and thereby reduce India ’s import dependence on other 
countries:- 
  
i. Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for promotion of domestic 
manufacturing of critical Key Starting Materials (KSMs)/ Drug Intermedia tes (DIs) 
and Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) In India; 
ii. Scheme for Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks; and 

42 
 
iii. Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Pharmaceuticals. 
  
Regarding point (iii) above:  Department of Pharmaceuticals vide order dated 
30.12.2020 has issued guidelines for implementation of Public Procurement (Preference 
to Make in India) (PPO) Order, 2017 to Pharmaceuticals Sector. The guideli nes provide 
the percentage of local content which is to be used for providing preference in public 
procurement of goods & services related to Pharmaceuticals Sector as per PPO Ord er. 
The percentage of local content has been fixed at equal to or mo re than 80% for ‘Class-
I Local Supplier’, more than 50% but less than 80% for ‘Class-II Local Supplier’ and less 
than or equal to 50% for ‘Non-Local Supplier’. 
  
Regarding point (iv) above:   The Cabinet has granted approval of 3 Bulk Drug Parks. 
Department will seek additional funds in R.E. Stage for establishment of the parks. As 
and when the 3 three Bulk Drug Parks will be established, the departm ent will approach 
to Cabinet for establishing new bulk drug parks in the country. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.10, 1.11 and 1.12 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation   No. 10 
 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
              
4.3            The Committee note that the National Pharmaceutica l Pricing Authority 
(NPPA), an independent body of experts in the Ministry of Chemicals and Fe rtilizers, 
Department of Pharmaceuticals is entrusted with the responsibilities of fixation and 
revision of prices of scheduled formulations under the Drugs (Prices Control) Order  
(DPCO), as well as monitoring and enforcement of prices.  However, the Com mittee are 
concerned to note that NPPA fixes ceiling prices of only scheduled formulatio ns which 
constitutes only about   17.2 per cent of the total formulations. The rest of 82.8 per cent 
of medicines are in the non-scheduled segment and the NPPA does no t fixes ceiling 
price of those medicines/drugs.  However, their price increase is permitted    on ly up to 
10 per cent of MRP per annum. So, there is a limitation of regulatory powers of NPPA in 
fixing and monitoring of prices of non-scheduled drug formulations.  Since  the 
expenditure on medicines constitutes more than 50 per cent of expend iture on health, it 
is very much affecting poor families who struggle to cope with the high co st of 
medicines for treatment of any disease.  The Committee feel that there is  immediate 
need to increase the percentage of regulation of medicines from 17.2 percent  to at least 
50 percent within a year by incorporating suitable policy changes in this 
regard.  Moreover, the Committee also feel that there is a need to regulate the prices of 
medicines charged by private hospitals from the patients as a part of the overall 
treatment charges. In view of the above, the Committee recommend the following:- 
  

43 
 
i.  There is a need for introducing policy changes in the National Pharmace utical 
Pricing Policy, 2012 and Drug Price Control Order (DPCO) wherein NPPA should 
be given autonomy to regulate the base prices of at least 50 percen t of all drugs 
sold in the domestic market, to expand NPPA price regulation function in an 
effective way beyond the scheduled drugs mentioned in the National List  of 
Essential Medicine (NLEM); 
ii. Apart from fixing the prices of scheduled drugs, NPPA should  also fix the  ceiling 
prices of all non-scheduled drug formulations which are prescribed more often  by 
medical practitioners for treating many of the common ailments; 
iii.  Department of Pharmaceuticals and NPPA should examine critically whether it is 
necessary to permit 10%  increase of MRP of non-scheduled drugs per annu m 
particularly when the prices of raw materials, etc does not increase and 
appropriate steps should be initiated on the basis of outcome of the such  critical 
examination; 
iv.  Also examine the rationalization of fixation of Maximum Retail Pri ce (MRP), as 
MRP itself is fixed on the higher side and subsequent 10 percent increase i n 
price per annum makes the cost of drugs unaffordable for the common people; 
and 
v. Department of Pharmaceuticals and NPPA should also examine the issues 
pertaining to high prices of medicines charged by private hospitals. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
4.4  (i) & (ii) - The objective of the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Poli cy (NPPP), 
2012 is to put in place a regulatory framework for pricing of drugs so as to  ensure 
availability of required medicines – 'essential medicines' – at reasonable prices even 
while providing sufficient opportunity for innovation and competition to sup port the 
growth of industry, thereby meeting the goals of employment and shared economic well-
being for all. The key principles for regulation of prices in the National Pharm aceuticals 
Pricing Policy 2012 are (i) Essentiality of Drugs, (ii) Control of Formulations prices only, 
and (iii) Market Based Pricing. 
  
The current Drugs (Prices Control) Order (DPCO), 2013 is based on NPPP, 
2012. National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) gets its mandate fr om the 
DPCO. NPPA fixes the ceiling price of scheduled medicines specified in the Sched ule-
I (Schedule I of DPCO is the National List of Essential Medicines which is no tified by 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare from time to time) of the DPCO, 201 3 in 
accordance with the provisions of the DPCO. All manufactures of scheduled medici nes 
(branded or generic) have to sell their products within the ceiling price (plus appli cable 
Goods and Service Tax) fixed by the NPPA. A manufacturer is at liberty to f ix the 
maximum retail price of a non-scheduled formulation branded or generi c launched by it. 
However, as per the DPCO, the manufacturers of non-scheduled formulations are  not 
allowed to increase the maximum retail price of such formulations by mor e than 10% 
per annum as per Para 20 of the DPCO, 2013. So far as regulation o f drugs used for 

44 
 
common ailments prescribed by the medical practitioners are concerned, it is stated that 
all the essential drugs are included in the NLEM by the Committee of experts under 
MHFW from time to time.  In addition to above, Para 19 of DPCO, 20 13 empowers the 
Government " to fix ceiling price of any drug in extraordinary circumstances, if it 
considers necessary so to do in public interest for such period as it may deem fit". 
  
The recommendation of the Committee for introducing policy changes in the 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy, 2012 and Drug Price Control Order (D PCO) 
have been noted. 
  
(iii) & (iv) - DPCO, 2013 is framed as per the principles laid down in the NPPP, 2012. 
The policy marked a shift to market-based pricing based on one of the  principles 
enunciated in NPPP, 2012. Thus, DPCO, 2013 does not consider the aspect of cost 
while fixing the ceiling price of scheduled formulations. 
  
(v)  As per the provisions of the DPCO, no manufacturer can sell a scheduled or non-
scheduled formulation at a price more than the MRP. If any complaint rega rding 
overcharging by hospital(s) is received, NPPA initiates action in case of violations 
against the manufacturers as per the provisions of DPCO, 2013. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.24 and 1.25 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

45 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation   No. 4 
Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS) 
5.1 The Committee are dismayed to note that the important sub sch eme 
of Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme (PTUAS ) remains a 
non-starter since its approval in 2016.  Only a token allocation of Rs. 1 lakh  was 
provided for the sub scheme for  the financial years 2019-20 and  2 020-21.   Even 
though the Department had demanded Rs. 185 crore for the sub  scheme, again only a 
token allocation of Rs. 1 lakh  has been made by the Ministry of Finance  for 2020-
21.  This clearly shows the lack of faith in Department ’s credentials to implement this 
important scheme which aims to facilitate small and medium Pharma Ent erprises 
(SMEs) to upgrade their plant and machinery to WHO GMP standards so as to enab le 
them to participate and compete in global markets. As per the sub scheme, a ssistance 
in the form of interest subvention against the sanctioned loan by any sche duled 
commercial bank/financial institution, both in public and private sector will be provided to 
900 Pharma SMEs of proven track record.  The scheme is to be implemented by a 
Public Sector Financial Institution (PSFI).  But everything remains on paper without any 
concrete action to implement the scheme.  Non receipt of applications for financial 
assistance was the reason given by the Department for the non-moving of th e scheme 
ahead.  In this regard, the recommendations  made in third party evalua tion viz. need 
for enough brain storming to set one liner objective for the Scheme, need  for 
implementation with liberal terms and conditions and opening of the scheme to MSME 
sector instead of SME sector are worth for consideration.  It is a matter of se rious 
concern that the Department could not appoint Public sector Financial Institu tion (PSFI) 
during the last 4 years of implementation of the scheme.  Since it is v ery much 
necessary to raise the standards of Pharma production units to that of WHO GMP  
standards in order to medicines/drugs of highest standards to the people of the country 
and also for the export purpose, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
Department should take prompt steps for the early Expenditure Finance  Committee 
approval of the scheme for   implementation of the sub scheme from 2021-22 to 2025-
26.  PSFI should be appointed immediately after the EFC approval and prompt  steps 
should be taken for the successful implementation the schemes from 2021-22 onwards. 
The Progress made in this regard should be intimated to this committee within 3 
months. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 The EFC Note has already been sent to Department of Expenditure. Further 
recommendations are noted for compliance.  

46 
 
 
 Recommendation   No. 14 
Disinvestment of Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) 
5.3 The Committee note there are five Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) unde r the 
aegis of the Department of Pharmaceuticals.  Karnataka Antibiotics & Pharmace uticals 
Limited (KAPL), Bengal Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL) and Hindu stan 
Antibiotics Limited (HAL) are presently functional. While the first two are profit making, 
the third one is sick.    Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (IDPL) and Raja sthan 
Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL) are under closure.  In 2016, T he Government 
of India decided for strategic disinvestment of 100% Government of India e quity in 
Karnataka Antibiotics & Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL), Bengaluru, strategic sale of 
BCPL and  closure of HAL. At that point of time, both BCPL and HAL were loss  making 
but BCPL  has turned into profit making PSU as it was able to reduce p rocurement cost 
substantially, financial leakages, etc. due to concrete steps  taken such as centralization 
of Procurement System, Accounting System and HRM Record Maintenance 
System. On Similar lines, HAL has been able to improve sales turnovers ov er the last 
few years, though still making losses with a number of initiatives taken, such as 
downsizing manpower through VRS scheme, product diversification and cost cutting 
measures.  In the aftermath of COVID 19 pandemic, Minister of Chemicals and  
Fertilizers had requested NITI Aayog to reconsider the decision of disinvest ment of 
KAPL including Hindustan Antibiotics Limited (HAL) and Bengal Chemicals and 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL). The Department is following up this matter with NIT I 
Aayog for reconsideration of disinvestment/ feasibility of merger through in-depth 
examination by the Aayog itself or by awarding a comprehensive study to a n 
independent agency on priority.  Even though there is a strong priv ate pharmaceutical 
industry, the Committee are of the firm view that it is very much necessary to  retain 
functional public sector pharmaceutical units  as the coexistence of both t he public and 
private sector pharmaceutical industry is beneficial to the country particularly to ma ke 
available quality medicines at affordable prices to all sections of the so ciety including 
poor and needy.  Moreover, the Government is committed to provide drug secu rity at 
affordable cost for the people of the country. This can be ensured  on ly with 
the  strengthening of  Pharmaceutical PSUs  because private sector is d riven by profit 
motive and market demand sentiment which does not cater to the needs o f the lower 
middle class, poor and down trodden people for the availability of q uality drugs at 
affordable prices.  Keeping in view the wellbeing of the common people the, Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend the following:- 
 
i.  The proposal of strategic disinvestment of KAPL, which is a profit making m ini 
ratna PSU, should be dropped.  
ii. The proposal of strategic sale of BCPL which has emerged as a profit making  PSU 
should also be dropped.   
iii. The proposal for closure of HAL should also be dropped and corrective mea sures 
should be taken to make it profit making on the lines of BCPL. 
iv. Rather than disinvestment/sale, the Government should consider various 
measures for successful/profitable running of PSUs including reforms at 

47 
 
administrative/ management level like professionalization of Board of Pharm a 
PSUs, promotion of Corporate Governance practices etc. to safeguard the interest 
of the common people who are dependent on affordable and quality  medicines 
produced by Pharmaceutical PSUs. 
Reply of the Government 
5.4  The Union Cabinet had decided on 28.12.2016 to strategically disinve st HAL & 
BCPL. Separately the CCEA on 01.11.2017 had decided to strategically disinve st 100% 
of Central Govt. equity in KAPL based on the Cabinet note moved by DIPAM. 
Being a Policy decision, earlier I Minister (C&F) vide D.O. dated 03.07.2020 an d 
23.12.2020 has requested to Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog for reconsideration of the 
decision of disinvestment of three pharma PSUs namely KAPL, BCPL & HAL. Further, 
Secretary (P) vide D.O. dated 29.07.2020, 26.10.2020, and 27.11.202 0 has requested 
to CEO, NITI Aayog to get the feasibility to merger of the pharma PSUs und er 
disinvestment and examined in depth either by the Aayog itself or by a warding a 
comprehensive study to an independent agency on priority.   Howe ver, reply is still 
awaited. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 1.28 of Chapter - I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation   No. 16 
Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL) 
5.5 The Committee note that   Rajasthan Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Limited 
(RDPL) set up in 1978, was declared Sick PSU in October 2016 and now is under  the 
process of closure having  liabilities of 75.29 crore.  During the years 2019-20 and 
2020-21, Rs. 48.71 crore and Rs. 2.40 crore was provided respectively as loan 
assistance to RDPL for repayment of liabilities. For the year 2021-22 Rs. 3.00  crore has 
been allocated at BE stage. The Committee also note that Departm ent of 
Pharmaceuticals did not refer the matter of sickness of Rajasthan Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL) to Board for Industrial & Financial Reconstruction 
(BIFR)/National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT) for detail scrutiny about its financial  
conditions/ management output/ business revival and to take appropri ate action 
thereon. The Committee feel that since RDPL is incipient sick PSU with net worth of 
Rs. 21.32 crore and operational loss of only Rs. 12.60 crore there is a 
scope  for  turnaround  of this PSU  into profit  making one as it hap pened in case of 
BCPL by making innovative and sound business revival plans with help of in dependent 
industry experts. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend the Department to  
prepare an innovative revival plan for RDPL. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 5.6 As per decision of the Union Cabinet on 28.12.2016,  RDPL is being close d. 
RDPL stopped its production since 2016. In 2019-20, Budgetary support o f Rs.43.70 

48 
 
crore was provided  to RDPL to meet VRS dues  and unpaid salary  dues of empl oyees. 
However, of the total employees, only 99 employees accepted VRS and 25 employees 
have approached the Hon ’ble High Court of Rajasthan, Jaipur Bench against 
retrenchment. 
 
Since, RDPL is a joint sector PSU (with 51:49 share between Government of India   and 
Government of Rajasthan), earlier  Government of Rajasthan was approached to take 
over the PSU by transfer of Government of India share. Of late, Governmen t of 
Rajasthan has shown interest about revival of the PSU and is expected to submit 
detailed proposal. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                        KANIMOZHI KARUNANIDHI 
16 November, 2021                                              Chairperson, 
 25 Kartika, 1943 (Saka)                                          Standing Committee on  
                                        Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 
  

49 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS (2021-22) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 16 th November, 2021 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1700.hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
K. KANIMOZHI -    CHAIRPERSON 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhlikar 
4. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
5. Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
6. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
7. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
8. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
9. 
 
 
 
       10  
Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
 
                      RAJYA SABHA 
 
Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
11 Shri G.C.Chandrashekhar 
12 Dr. Anil Jain 
13 Shri  Anthiyur P. Selvarasu 
14 Shri Arun Singh 
 
 SECRETARIAT  
1.  Shri  N. K. Jha  -  Director 
2. Shri C. Kalyanasundaram - Additional Director   
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Panna Lal   - Under Secretary 
  
  2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the newly  constituted 
Committee and apprised them that the sitting has been convened to co nsider 
Memorandum No.1 regarding selection of subjects for examination during the  year 
(2021-22) and also to discuss the future course of action of the Committee duri ng the 
tenure.  
 
3. The Committee then considered Memorandum No. 1 and after discussion 
selected the following subjects pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Ferti lizers for 
detailed examination during 2021-22:- 
 
I. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
1. Nano-fertilizers for sustainable crop production and maintaining soil    health.   

50 
 
2. Tax structure on fertilizers sector in terms of GST and import duties – 
analysis of the tax structure of raw material and final products and its imp act 
on self-sufficiency and use of fertilizers. 
3. Prices, Availability and distribution of fertilizers.  
 
 
II. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
4.  Vision 2024 - To establish India as a leading manufacturer of chemica ls and 
petrochemicals. 
5.  Insecticides – promotion and development including safe usage -   licensing 
regime for insecticides. 
6.  Disposal of toxic waste from Bhopal Gas Leak site. 
7. Environmental Impact of Petrochemical products. 
 
III. MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
8.    Promotion of Medical Device Industry.  
9.    Availability of Medicines and Medical devices for COVID Management.  
10.  Self sufficiency of key starting Material and intermediates. 
 
4. The Committee then considered and adopted the following draft Action T aken 
Reports unanimously without any amendment/change:- 
 
i.     XXX    XXX     XXX  
 
ii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
iii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
iv.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
v. ATR on the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in the 
Twenty First Report on “Demands for Grants (2021- 22)” (Department of  
Pharmaceuticals). 
 
vi.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
vii.     XXX    XXX     XXX 
 
5  The Committee also authorised the Chairperson to finalize and prese nt the 
Action Taken Reports to the Parliament in the ensuing session. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

51 
 
Appendix – II 
 
 
(Vide Para 3 of the Introduction) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS ON THE SUBJECT ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2021-22)' OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
I Total No. of Recommendations 16 
II Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government: 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. 1,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,11,13,15)   
11 
Percentage of Total 68.75% 
III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply:- 
(Vide Recommendation Nos. Nil)   
 
NIl 
 
Percentage of Total    0% 
IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which reply of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:-   
 (Vide Recommendation No. 2,10)   
2 
Percentage of Total 12.50% 
V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
(Vide Recommendation No. 4,14,16)   
3 
Percentage of Total 18.75% 
 