i 
 
38   
 
 
 
 
 
              
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2023-24) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Fortieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2023-2024)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers) 
 
FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
48
. 

ii 
 
CC&F NO. 176 
FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Fortieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2023-2024)’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Fertilizers) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 December, 2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 December, 2023 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023/ Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2023-24) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
10 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
23 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
24 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
29 
 APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2023-24) held on 14th December, 2023. 
30 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fortieth Report  
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘Demands for Grants (2023 -2024)’ of the Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
31 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(2023-24) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Dibyendu Adhikari 
3. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal 
4. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
5. Shri Deepak Baij 
6. Shri Ramakant Bhargava 
7. Shri Prataprao Patil Chikhalikar 
8. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama  
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal 
10. Shri Ramesh Chandappa Jigajinagi 
11. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
12. Shri Satyadev Pachauri 
13. Smt. Aparupa Poddar  
14. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
15. Shri Muniyan Selvaraj 
16. Dr. Sanjeev Kumar Singari 
17. Shri Atul Kumar Singh 
18. Shri Pradeep Kumar Singh 
19. Shri  Indra Hang Subba 
20. Shri Parbhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava 
21. Vacant* 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar  
23. Dr. Anil Jain  
24. Shri Arun Singh  
25. Shri Ram Nath Thakur 
26. Shri Vijay Pal Singh Tomar 
27. Vacant 
28. Vacant 
29. Vacant 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
  
      1.   Shri Chander Mohan        -                   Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Geeta Parmar                 -    Director 
3.   Shri Panna Lal                           -    Under Secretary 
 
* Vacant vice Shri Uday Pratap Singh, MP(LS) who resigned his seat in LS w.e.f. 06.12.2023. [Lok 
Sabha Secretariat Notification No. 21/1(1)/2023/T(B) dated 6th December, 2023]  

v 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2023-24) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Forty-Eighth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fortieth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023 -24)’ pertaining to the 
Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
2.  The Fortieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha  
on 21 st March, 2023. The Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers furnished their replies on 31 st July, 2023 indicating Action Taken on  
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fortieth Report. The Committee 
considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 14th December, 2023. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained i n the Forty -Eighth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
14 December, 2023 CHAIRPERSON, 
23 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the observations/ 
recommendations of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers contained in 
their Fortieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on 'Demands for Grants (2023 -24)’ of the 
Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
1.2 The Fortieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on  
21st March, 2023. The Report contained 15 Observations/Recommendations.  
Action Taken Replies in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations of the Report 
have been received and are categorized as under:  
   
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
          Rec. Para No. 1,2,4,6,7,8,9,11,12,13 and 15     
           (Total - 11) 
           Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire   
 to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
   Nil          (Total - 00) 
          Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration: 
  Rec. Para No. 3,5,10 and 14      (Total=04) 
Chapter-IV  
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
   Nil                             (Total = 00)  
                                                                                                     Chapter- V  
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Statement on the 
Observations/ Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report may be 
furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this 
Report. 

2 
 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
Proposed and Allocated Budgetary Allocation for 2023-24 
 
1.5 The Committee had noted in their Report on Demands for Grants for the year 
2023-24 that though the Department of Fertilizers(DoF) had projected an outlay of Rs. 
2,99,777.52 crore for its various schemes, the same was d rastically reduced by 59.75% 
to Rs. 1,79,128.48 crore.  For Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Scheme, the budgetary 
allocation was  only Rs. 44,000 crore against the projected requirement of Rs. 1,07,109 
crore and for subsidy for indigenous urea against the projected amount of Rs. 1,43,962 
crore, an  amount of Rs. 1,04,063 crore was allocated. It was submitted that the 
requirement of additional funds would be re -assessed in view of the reduced allocation 
to meet the requirement of subsidy funds and accordingly the Department would project 
their demand at the time of RE/Supplementary Demands for 2023 -24. While observing 
that  the department had projected the financial outlay as per the requirement of subsidy 
funds, the Committee had hoped that the allocation of funds would be suitably stepped 
up at RE, 2023-24. 
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
  
“Against the projected amount of Rs.1,43,962.00 crore, an amount of 
Rs.1,04,063.18 crore have been allocated under BE 2023 -24 for s ubsidy for 
indigenous urea. As the allocated amount is not sufficient to meet the 
projected requirement of subsidy funds for the year 2023 -24, the requirement 
of additional funds will be re -assessed and demanded at the time of 
RE/Supplementary for 2023 -24 (providing adequate quantity of fertilizers to 
farmers at an affordable rate is a priority for Government and funds will be 
made available, if needed). 
  Observations of the committee have been noted for compliance.”  
 
1.7  The Committee had noted in their  original report that during 2023-24 
against the projected outlay of Rs. 2,99,777.52 crore for its various fertilizer 

3 
 
subsidy schemes, the Department was allocated an amount of Rs. 1,79,128.48 
crore only. The allocation of funds was reduced drastically for Nutrient Based 
Subsidy (NBS) Scheme as well as Urea subsidy scheme. While observing that the 
department had projected the financial outlay  as per the requirement of subsidy 
funds, the Committee had desired that the allocation of funds should be stepped 
up at RE, 2023 -24. The Department in their Action Taken reply has informed that 
since the allocation of funds for subsidy of indigenous urea in BE 2023-24 is not 
sufficient to meet the projected requirements, it would re -assess and demand for 
additional funds at the time of RE/ Supplementary for 2023 -24. However, the 
Department has not communicated its planning for funds required for the NBS 
scheme, in view of the reduced allocation for the same during the year. The 
Committee expect the Department to inform accordingly. 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 3 
 
Research and Development (R&D) in Fertilizer Sector  
1.8. The Committee had noted that during 2023 -24, BE of Rs. 0.10 crore was 
allocated to the DoF as grant -in-aid under R&D Budget head. Further budget allocation 
of  Rs. 0.10 crore was made during 2022 -23, however expenditure was NIL upto 
September, 2022. The situation during 2021-22 was similar. It was submitted that R & D 
budget head is for funding on project basis and financial assistance would be extended 
to research agencies/organizations as and when the research project proposals are 
received.  The Committe e considered it a matter of concern that for years together 
nothing was spent on fertilizer research projects. It was submitted that the Department 
had created a budget head for ICFFTR (Indian Council for Fertilizer and Fertilizer 
Nutrient Research) for th e FY 2023 -24 with the objectives, inter -alia, to undertake 
research in the area of fertilizer and fertilizer manufacturing technology and would seek 
funds for the ICFFTR at the 1st Supplementary stage in FY 2023 -24. The Committee 
had desired to know how th e Department's budget head for ICFFTR is different from 
their R&D budget head and the reasons for not making fund projections under budget 
head for ICFFTR at BE, 2023-24.  
1.9 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 

4 
 
“ Indian Council for Fertilizer & Fertilizer Nutrient Research (ICFFTR) has 
been constituted and registered under Societies Registration Act of 1860 on 
19.08.2019. It has been constituted by fertilizer CPSEs under Department 
of Fertilizers. The major objective of the Council is to undertake research in 
the area of fertilizer and fertilizer manufacturing technology, use of raw 
material and innovation in fertilizer products etc  
Fertilizer PSUs viz. NFL, RCF and FAGMIL are founding members of 
ICFFTR. In order  to create initial fund for ICFFTR and to make the same 
operational, seed money initial corpus non -refundable is provided by (Rs.2 
crore each by NFL & RCF) and (Rs. 1  
crore by FAGMIL). In addition to these PSUs, MFL, FACT, BVFCL, PDIL, 
HFCL and FCIL are also its members.  
The membership of the Society is open to other organizations, Corporate 
Bodies / Joint Venture Companies, Institutions engaged in manufacturing 
and trading fertilizers. The annual subscription fee for each of the founder 
member of CPSEs under the administrative control of DoF is Rs. 1 lakh. For 
all other members, there is one-time admission fee Rs.5 lakhs at the time of 
admission and annual subscription of Rs. 1 lakhs. ICFFTR’s registered 
office is at Lodhi Road, New Delhi.  
 ICFFTR compri ses of Governing Council headed by Secretary, D/o 
fertilizers and Executive Committee headed by CMD, RCF. The Director 
General of the Society is the administrative head of the society. Some of the 
Research & Development activities planned to be undertaken by ICFFTR 
are as under: -  
a) To undertake research in the area of fertilizer and fertilizer manufacturing 
technology, use of raw material and innovation in fertilizer products.  
b) To identify and research, eco -friendly nutrients / micro nutrients and 
pesticide coated slow release fertilizers to ensure reduction of Carbon 
Footprint of Fertilizer sector and energy efficient operation. 
 c) To undertake research in bio fertilizer and its derivatives with appropriate 
coating or blending so as to protect and increase soil fertility.  
d) To undertake research in organic fertilizer and its derivatives or blending 
so as to protect and increase the soil fertility.  
e) To undertake research in Fertilizer Sectors & related activities.  
f) To undertake research in the field of agriculture. 
g) To undertake research in the application of science and scientific 
methods for the manufacture of fertilizers and their utilization in the fields 
either alone or in conjunction with preparations of other materials.  

5 
 
h) To make know n the results of all research discoveries, patents and 
investigations made in connection with the above objects.  
i) To adopt such means of making known the products of the Society as 
may seem expedient. 
 j) To allow the member organizations to utilize the  research carried out by 
the by the ICFFTR. 
R&D activities has been created by the Department to carry out Research & 
Development activities identified by the Department. As regards, R&D 
Budget head is concerned, Rs. 10.00 lakhs has been allocated at BE during 
financial year 2023 -24 in the Demand for grants of DoF for undertaking 
R&D activities in the fertilizer sector. ” 
 
1.10 The Committee had noted in their original report that the Department of 
Fertilizers had not conceived of any research project in the fertilizers sector and  
grant-in aid under R&D head in previous years remained un -utilised. Further, the 
Department has created a budget head for ICFFTR (Indian Council for Fertilizer 
and Fertilizer Nutrient Research) for the FY 2023 -24 with the objectives, inter-alia, 
to undertake research in the area of fertilizer and fertilizer manufacturing 
technology and would seek funds for ICFFTR at the 1st Supplementary stage in 
FY 2023 -24.   The Committee desired to know the reasons for not seeking 
sufficient funds for R&D and not making fund projections under the budget head 
for ICFFTR at BE, 2023-24.  
The Committee note from the Action Taken replies that the Department has  
not furnished specific replies to their concerns expressed in their original Report. 
The Committee further note that ICFFTR was constituted and registered under 
Societies Registration Act of 1860 on 19.08.2019  by fertilizer CPSEs under DoF, 
to undertake research in the area of fertilizer and fertilizer manufacturing 
technology, use of raw material and innovation in fertilizer products etc. However, 
no R & D activities have been undertaken since then, though some of the R & D 
activities have been planned. The Committee hope that, as submitted, the 
Department would seek funds for ICFFTR at the  1st Supplementary stage in FY 
2023-24 and ICFFTR would soon undertake R & D activities in the area of fertilizer 
and fertilizes manufacturing technology as already planned.  

6 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 5 
 
Payment In Respect of   Carry-over liabilities 
1.11 The Committee had noted that there was no carry -over liability in respect 
of Indigenous Urea. It was submitted that settlements of subsidy/DBT claims of 
fertilizers companies are being done regularly subject to the availability of funds. 
While observing that in respect of imported urea,  the carry-over liabilities of Rs. 
303.35 crore and balance claims were under process, the Committee had desired 
that concrete measures should be taken in a time bound manner to ensure that 
the balance amount of carry -over liability in respect of imported Urea is settled 
within the current financial year itself and urged the Department to project its 
demands of fund requirement for payment of subsidies in respect of Urea and 
P&K fertilizers (both indigenous and imported fertilize rs) at BE/RE stage in a 
more convincing manner, for timely payment of subsidies. 
1.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“Settlement of subsidy/DBT claims of fertilizers companies ar e being done 
regularly subject to availability of funds.   So far as Indigenous Urea is 
concerned, there is no carry over liability as on date pertaining the previous 
years.  
 
Observations of the committee have been noted for compliance.” 
1.13  The Committe e had urged the Department for a time bound paymen t of 
carry-over liabilities of Rs. 303.35 crore w.r.t. imported Urea and to take measures 
for settlement of such claims within the current financial year itself. However,  
the reply of the Department is sil ent in this regard. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge that the Department should 
convincingly project demands of required funds for payment of subsidies in 
respect of Urea and P&K fertilizers (both indigenous and imp orted fertilizers) at 
BE/RE stage, to avoid non -availability of funds thus ensuring timely payment of 
fertilizer subsidies. 
  

7 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 10 
 
Provision of Direct Cash Transfer (DCT) to farmers for fertilizer subsidy 
1.14 The Committee had noted that as per the recommendation of the Third -Party 
Evaluation report of the Urea Subsidy Scheme, it will not be a suitable option that the 
subsidy is directly transferred in the accounts of farmers since Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT) to farmers is a complex system and, therefore, subsidy amount should be given 
to the manufacturing/ importing companies as per the current policy . The Committee 
had desired that the present Urea S ubsidy Scheme should be continued in such a 
manner that it causes the least inconvenience to farmers.  
1.15 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“Based on the recommendations of the Nodal Committee, some of the states 
have nominated one distri ct each for initiation of pilot project for merging of 
beneficiaries database and iFMS system. Subsequently, pre -requisites for 
implementation of DCT and format in which database of beneficiaries is 
required, have been shared with the concerned states. Sim ultaneously, 
reminder has been sent to remaining states to nominate district for pilot 
project”. 
1.16 The Committee note that in pursuance of the recommendations of the 
nodal committee constituted to examine the p rovisions of Direct Cash Transfer 
(DCT) to farmers for fertilizer subsidy , some of the States have nominated one 
district each for initiation of the pilot project for the merging of beneficiaries 
database and iFMS system which is a pre -requisite for implementation of DCT. 
The Committee impress upon  the Ministry/Department to intensify the measures 
already initiated with collaborative efforts of States/UTs besides strengthening its 
monitoring mechanism so as to ensure that it serves the larger interest of the 
farmers.  
  

8 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 13 
Initiatives taken to introduce Innovative/alternate fertilizers  
1.17 While noting that the Government, as part of its initiatives to promote alternate 
fertilizers, had been considering use of two new fortified Urea combinations in the 
country viz (i) Sulp hur Coated Urea(SCU) also called as Urea Gold and (ii) a 
combination of Single Super Phosphate and Urea (SSP+Urea) which is used instead of 
DAP, the Committee has expressed hope that the Department/RCF should expedite the 
field trials in respect of (SSP+Ur ea) and SCU and soon start their pilot scale plant/ 
commercial production.  
1.18 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“ Sulphur coated urea in the name of ‘Urea Gold’ comprising of Nit rogen 
and Sulphur is proposed to be launched. In addition to providing sulphur, 
Urea Gold will also promote Nutrient Use Efficiency, and as a result it has 
potential to decrease urea consumption. Proposal for introduction of 
Sulphur Coated Urea has been approved by the Expenditure Finance 
Committee”.  
1.19 The Committee had noted in their Report that in order to promote alternate 
fertilizers, the Government had been  considering the use of two new fortified 
Urea combinations in the country, viz (i) Sulphur Coated Urea(SCU) also called as 
Urea Gold and (ii) a combination of Single Super Phosphate and Urea (SSP+Urea) 
which is used instead of DAP.  From the Action Taken Reply, the Committee note 
that the proposal for introduction of Sulphur Coated Ure a (SCU) has been 
approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee  (EFC). However, nothing has 
been mentioned with respect to the progress, if any, made towards field trials and 
introduction of fortified Urea combination of SSP+Urea in the country.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterates their earlier recommendation and desire to be 
apprised of developments with regard to promotion of SCU and SSP+Urea.  
Recommendation Sl. No. 14 
 
Scheme for providing Market Development Assistance for production and use of 
organic manure, compost, etc. 

9 
 
1.20 The Committee had noted that the Department of Fertilizers will be promoting 
the use of bio -manure which is produced under these SATAT and GOBARdhan 
Schemes of the  Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoP&NG), Department of 
Drinking Water & Sanitation (DDWS) and Ministry of New and Renewable 
Energy(MNRE), respectively. It was submitted that 5000 compressed biogas plants are 
to be set up under SATAT scheme by 2023 while 400 bio gas plants are to be set up 
under t he GOBARdhan scheme. The Committee had desired to be updated on the 
matter.  
1.21 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting held on 16th 
March, 2023 considered the proposal of this Department on promotion of 
organic fertilizers and recommended the Market Development Assistance 
(MDA), as per budget announcement, @ Rs.1,500/MT for 3 years (FY 
2023-24 to 2025 -26) for components of SATAT C BG plants and 
GOBARdhan plants with an outlay of Rs.1451.84 Crore which includes the 
components of MDA for CBG plants at an estimated outlay of Rs.1,013 
Crore, MDA for GOBARdhan plants at an estimated outlay of Rs.78.84 
Crore and corpus of Rs.360 Crore for  gap funding/research to be utilized 
only by Central/State Research Institutes or non -private fertilizer 
cooperatives”.  
1.22 The Committee have been informed that the Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) in its meeting held on 16th March, 2023 recommended for Market 
Development Assistance (MDA) @ Rs. 1500/ - per MT upto FY 2025 -26 for 
promotion of organic fertilizers produced by SATAT compressed biogas (CBG) 
plants, GOBARdhan plants, etc. and fund allocations have been made 
accordingly.  The Committee in the ir earlier Report had desired to be updated on 
the status of 5000 compressed biogas plants planned to be set up under SATAT 
scheme and 400 bio gas plants under the GOBARdhan scheme. However, the 
action taken reply furnished by the Department of Fetilisers has no mention of 
these aspects. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and urge the Department to vigorously pursue the matter for setting up of 5000 
CBG plants under the SATAT scheme and 400 bio -gas plants under the 
GOBARdhan scheme in a time bound manner in order to promote use of bio -
manure. 
 

10 
 
CHAPTER – II 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
 BY THE GOVERNMENT 
  
Recommendation No. 1 
 
Proposed and Allocated Budgetary Allocation for 2023-24 
2.1 The Committee n ote that the Department of Fertilizers(DoF)had projected an 
outlay of Rs. 2,99,777.52 crore for its various schemes and other requirements during 
the year 2023 -24. However, this outlay has been drastically reduced by 59.75% to Rs. 
1,79,128.48 crore by the Ministry of Finance(MoF).  The reduction has been made in 
both Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Scheme and Urea Subsidy Scheme of the 
Department. The Department has contended that reduction in budget allocation for 
2023-24 may increase pendency for all the Sche mes. Sub -Schemes under NBS will 
suffer the most as the budgetary allocation is only Rs. 44,000 crore against the 
requirement of Rs. 1,07,109 crore. Moreover, against the projected amount of Rs. 
1,43,962 crore for subsidy for indigenous urea an amount of Rs . 1,04,063 crore have 
been allocated. The Department would, however, re -assess the requirement of 
additional funds, in view of the insufficient funds available to meet the requirement of 
subsidy funds, and accordingly project their demand at the time of RE /Supplementary 
Demands for 2023-24. The Committee are of the opinion that the sanctity of the Budget 
should be maintained at all cost. After all, the financial outlay was projected as per the 
requirement of subsidy funds and therefore Subsidy Schemes of th e Government 
should not be allowed to suffer. The Committee hope that the allocation of funds will be 
suitably stepped up at RE, 2023-24. 
 
2.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 
 “Against the projected amount of Rs.1,43,962.00 crore, an amount of 
Rs.1,04,063.18 crore have been allocated under BE 2023 -24 for subsidy for 
indigenous urea. As the allocated amount is not sufficient to meet the 
projected requirement of subsidy funds for th e year 2023 -24, the requirement 
of additional funds will be re -assessed and demanded at the time of 
RE/Supplementary for 2023 -24 (Providing adequate quantity of fertilizers to 
farmers at affordable rate is a priority for Government and funds will be made 
available, if needed)”. 
  Observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 

11 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 2 
Financial Target and Achievements During Last Three Years  
2.3 The Committee note that BE allocation for Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy  and 
Urea Subsidy policy of the Department during fiscal 2022 -23 was Rs. 1,09,186.78 crore 
which was increased to Rs. 2,28,473.62 crore at RE stage. However, the actual 
expenditure remained Rs. 1,89,135.11 crore(up to 17.01.2023)  constituting 82.78% of 
the RE amount. The scheme wise analysis of utilization of budgetary funds during 2022 -
23 (up 17.01.2023) reveals that for most of the schemes, the percentage utilization 
remained to the extent of 80 to 90%. Besides, the Committee take note of the persistent 
under-utilization of funds allocated at RE stage for Nutrient Based subsidy scheme 
during 2020 -21 and 2021 -22. Out of RE, 2020 -21 and RE, 2021 -22 of Rs. 38989.88 
crore and Rs. 64192.00 crore, respectively, Rs. 37372.47 crore  and Rs. 52769.97 crore 
could be utilised. According to the Department, the reasons for under -utilization during 
the years are receipt of less number of bills owing to lesser sale in the last quarter of the 
FY; digital Freight bills of Rs. 237.66 crore could not be passed due to technical glitch in 
New Freight Module of iFMS; these claims were generated digitally for the first time and 
return of some incomplete bills which were not in order.  The Committee are not 
convinced by reasons adduced by the Department as some of these matters could have 
been resolved by taking timely measures. However, the Committee hope that the 
Department have been able to overcome the above mentioned constraints by now and 
as assured would optimally utilize the allocated funds by the end of financial year 2022 -
23. The Committee would like to be apprised of the figures for actual expenditure 
incurred by the Department of Fertilizers during 2022-23 in respect of all its Schemes.  
2.4 In their  Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows: 
        “Scheme wise actual expenditure for the FY 2022-23 is as follows. 
 (Rs in Crore) (Rs in Crore) (Rs in Crore)  
Subsidy Schemes BE 2022-23 Final RE 22-23 AE 2022-23 Utilization 
Nutrient Based Subsidy 
Policy 
    
(a)Indigenous P&K Fertilizers 25200 50089.67 50089.67 100% 
(b)Imported P&K Fertilizers 16800 36032.56 36032.56 100% 
NBS Total 42000 86122.23 86122.23 100% 
Urea Subsidy     
(a) Indigenous Urea 46596.78 127311.05 127311.05 100% 
(b)Import of Urea 20590   41365.6   41365.6 100% 
Urea Subsidy Total 67186.78 168676.65 168676.65 100% 
Total Subsidy (Gross) 109186.78 254798.88 254798.88 100% 

12 
 
 
So far as Indigenous urea is concerned, the AE as on 31-03-2023 was 
Rs.1,27,311.10 Crore against the total budget allocation of Rs.1,27,311.10 Crore. 
The total funds allocated for Indigenous Urea has been fully utilized upto 
31.03.2023”. 
  
Recommendation Sl. No. 4 
Fertilizers Production Targets and Achievements 
2.5 The Committee note that the consumption of major fertilizers in the country is 
around 636 lakh metric tonnes, which consist of Urea, NPK, DAP, MoP and SSP. The 
production of Urea in the country till last year was around 250 LMT and has inc reased 
to almost 280 LMT now. As far as P&K fertilizers is concerned, the country is fully 
dependent on imports in Potassic Fertilizer and to the extent of 90% in Phosphatic 
Fertilizer in the form of either finished products or its raw material. The domest ic 
production of P&K fertilizers consisting of NPK, MoP, DAP, SSP, etc. is about 185 LMT. 
Last year, the import of urea was around 91.3 LMT and that of P&K fertilizers was 90.92 
LMT. The country does not import SSP. But in the case of MoP, the country is f ully 
dependent on imports. In view of the foregoing, the Committee gather that the DoF 
need to take adequate measures to increase the domestic production of major fertilizers 
in the country. However, the Committee are concerned to note the under achievemen t 
of targets in respect of the production of Urea as well as P&K fertilizers during the last 
three years.  During 2020-21, against the target of 267.08 LMT of Urea and 271.30 LMT 
of P&K fertilizers, 246.05 LMT of Urea and 187.63 LMT of P&K fertilizers, res pectively 
could be produced. Similarly, during 2021 -22, against the target of 280.4 LMT of Urea 
and 284.14 LMT of P&K fertilizers, 250.72 LMT of Urea and 185.23 LMT of P&K 
fertilizers, respectively could be produced. During 2022 -23, against the target of 2 09.87 
LMT of Urea and 186.14 LMT of P&K fertilizers, 187.21 LMT of Urea and 133.58 LMT of 
P&K fertilizers have been produced up to November, 2022.  The reasons attributed for 
shortfall in the targets include non -availability of feedstock, Fertilizer plant accidents, 
technology up -gradation projects; Sindri, Barauni and Gorakhpur units could not start 
production during 2021 -22, delay in production by Matix Unit due to problem in gas 
pipeline connectivity, less production by RFCL-Ramagundam unit, etc. 
 The Co mmittee exhort the Department to  take all remedial measures to 
overcome the bottlenecks and intensify their efforts in removing the recurring 
impediments so as to ensure targetted production of Urea and other P & K Fertilizers.  
The Committee hope that th e Department would make every  effort to realise the target 
to produce 304 LMT of Urea and 185.00 LMT of P&K fertilizers during 2023 -24. The 
Committee would like to be kept informed of the production figures of Urea and P & K 
Fertilizers during 2022-23.  

13 
 
2.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 “The deliberations of the committee may be seen at page 9 to page 13 of the 
report. As far as measures to increase the domestic production are concerned, 
it may be stated that following measures have been taken to maximize the 
indigenous production of Urea: 
a) The Government had announced New Investment Policy (NIP) – 2012 
on 2 nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7 th October, 2014 to 
facilitate fresh investment in the urea sector and to make India self -
sufficient in the urea sector. Total 6 new urea units have been set up 
under NIP – 2012. These are Panagarh urea unit of Matix Fertilizers 
and Chemicals Ltd. (Matix); Gadepan -III urea unit of Chambal 
Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. (CFCL); Ramagundam urea unit of 
Ramagundam Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd.(RFCL); and  3 urea units 
namely Gorakhpur, Sindri and Barauni of Hindustan Urvarak&Rasayan 
Limited (HURL). Each of these units has the installed urea production 
capacity of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonne per annum. Therefore, these units 
have together added 76.2 LMT per annu m in the existing indigenous 
urea production capacity of the country. 
 
b) The annual installed capacity of indigenous urea production was 207.54 
LMT per annum. With the start of production from 6 new urea units set 
up under the provisions of NIP -2012, the annual installed production 
capacity of indigenous urea has become 283.74 LMT per annum.  
 
c) The Government has notified the New Urea Policy (NUP) – 2015 on 
25th May, 2015 with one of the objectives of maximizing indigenous 
urea production.  
 
d) The actual production of urea was used to be around 225 LMT per 
annum before 2015 -16. The NUP-2015 has resulted in to additional 
production of 20 -25 LMT per annum from existing urea units as 
compared to the urea production during 2014-15.  
 
e) With the addition of new capacities after start of production from all the 
six NIP-2012 units and additional production due to NUP-2015 together 
have facilitated the actual production of 284.95 LMT urea during 2022-
23 which is highest ever production, so far . The production is likely 

14 
 
to further increase with the stabilization of production by new units set 
up under NIP-2012. 
 
f) Further, an exclusive policy has been notified on 28 th April 2021 for the 
revival of Talcher unit of FCIL by setting up a new green field urea plant of 
12.7 LMT per annum at coal gasification route”. 
                                                            (Fg. in LMT) 
Name of the Product Achievement   
Urea 284.95 
P&K 200.35 
   
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 6 
Freight Subsidy on Single Super Phosphate (SSP) 
2.7 The Committee note that the Government had approved freight subsidy on 
Single Super Phosphate (SSP) which is 100% indigenously manufactured fertilizer, on 
pilot basis for Kharif -2022 and Rabi -2022 season to promote indigenous production of 
fertilizers. Based on the outcomes, the further requirement of freight subsidy on SSP is 
to be decided.  Supply plan has been issued for SSP fertilizer and the freight bills will be 
reimbursed as and when submitted, as per SSP freight policy. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the feedback received on the SSP Fertilizers and also decision of 
the Government to include the indigenously manufactured SSP in the freight subsidy 
scheme to facilitate its sufficient availability throughout the country as replacement to 
DAP which is largely imported.   
2.8 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows: 
 “Freight subsidy on Single Super Phosphate (SSP) was introduced in Kharif 
2022 on pilot basis. It has been continued in Rabi 2022 -23 also. IMC on NBS 
rates has recommended to continue this freight subsidy on SSP in Kharif 2023 
also.  
i.  Freight subsidy on SS P shall be admissible to those SSP units only to whom 
supply plan has been issued by D/o Fertilizers 
ii. Rail freight would be admissible for movement of SSP on actual basis beyond 
200km 
iii. The reimbursement of road movement above 200km and upto 500km would 
be admissible on actual basis or following slabs, whichever is lower: 

15 
 
Movement up to (KM) Rate Rs. per MT 
0-200 No subsidy 
201-300 316 
301-400 407 
401-500 (Max.) 500 
  
iv.   There shall be no reimbursement on account of secondary movement by road 
 from destination rake point to block HQ in the district”.  
Recommendation Sl. No. 7 
 
Continuation of the Urea Subsidy scheme 
2.9 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the Third Party 
evaluation Report of the Urea Subsidy Scheme has recommended the necessity for 
continuation of the Urea Subsidy Scheme(USS) to help the urea industries, farmers 
and the agriculture sec tor. Further, the Union Cabinet has decided to continue the 
schemes including USS till 30.09.2022. As the Department of Expenditure (DoE) had 
conveyed, DoF has submitted the proposal for continuation of USS beyond 30.09.2022. 
EFC Note for continuation of USS was sent to DoE for appraisal of EFC. EFC appraisal 
is stated to be currently under progress. In this context, the Committee would like to 
recall that last year during the course of examination of Demands for Grants, it was 
recommended for extension of the present Urea subsidy beyond 31 st March, 2022. 
While reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee would desire that the 
Department of Fertilizers should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance at the 
highest level for expediting the E FC approval for continuation of the Urea subsidy 
scheme. At the same time the Government are conscious that the price distortions 
resulting from the uneven pattern of Government subsidy have resulted in a skewed 
utilization of fertilizers by Indian farmers .  Instead of maintaining the desired proportion 
of Nitrogen, Phosphate and Potash (4:2:1), our country uses considerably more urea 
since it is cheaper for the farmer than other inputs, with damaging consequences for 
soil health.  A holistic view of the policy is now due and the Committee urge the Ministry 
to undertake one without delay. 
 
2.10 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows: 
 
“Deliberations may be seen at page 15 of the report of the Committee.  

16 
 
EFC memo for Continuation of Urea Subsidy Scheme and introduction of three 
more components namely Sulphur Coated Urea (Urea Gold), Market 
Development Assistance to promote Organic/ Bio -Fertilizers (MDA) and PM 
Programme for Restoration, Awa reness Generation, Nourishment and 
Amelioration of Mother -Earth (PM-PRANAM) was submitted for the appraisal of 
the EFC.EFC after examination of the entire fertilizer subsidy related issues in 
its 3 rounds of meetings (last meeting was held on 16 th March 20 23) has 
recommended for the continuation of urea subsidy scheme Continuation of the 
Urea Subsidy Scheme upto FY 2024 -25. Accordingly, the CCEA in its meeting 
held on 28.06.2023 had approved the proposal. The scheme will again be 
reviewed and appraised in first half of FY 2024-25.  
It is true that the NBS Policy tried to control the balanced use of N, P and K 
nutrients in the soil, however, was not able to do it effectively. However, as per 
the third party evaluation of NBS scheme, this imbalance is because of the the 
preference of Urea containing ‘N’   over P&K fertilizers under NBS scheme as 
Urea is available at a very cheap price (as prices are controlled for urea) in 
comparison to P&K fertilizers where prices are decontrolled.  
However, this Department has  introduced freight subsidy for Single Super 
Phosphate (SSP) and it has included Potash Derived from Molasses (PDM) 
under the NBS scheme. Both SSP and PDM are 100 indigenously manufactured 
fertilizers and not only promote the indigenous manufactured fertil izers but also 
help in improving the consumption ratio of P and K in comparison to N”.   
Recommendation Sl. No. 8 
Need for long term planning for fertilizers production and import 
2.11 It is a matter of concern that our country is totally dependent on imports for 
Potassic fertilizers, to the extent of 90% in Phosphatic fertilizers and upto 25% in case 
of Urea. In order to absorb the pressure of increased prices of P&K fertilizers due to 
increase in the international prices of P&K fertilizers, Government time and again, 
increases subsidy under NBS scheme. Long Term Agreements and Joint Ventures for 
Raw Materials/Finished Fertilizers through MoUs between the Indian Fertilizer 
Companies and Fertilizer Companies from other countries are being facilitated to 
ensure supply of raw materials and to bring down the prices of fertilizers in the 
international market thereby saving the valuable foreign exchange for the country. 
Besides, any increase in  cost of Natural Gas which constitutes about 85-90 % of the 
cost of urea production has direct impact on subsidy out go to the Government and 
therefore, DoF has issued advisory to all the urea manufacturing units to explore long 
term and mid-term sources of Natural Gas including RLNG. An Urea off-take Agreement 
has been finalized to import 10 LMT Urea annually for a period of 03 years from a 

17 
 
foreign company.  Also, efforts are being made for exploration of  minerals for raw 
materials for P&K fertilizers in I ndia. Appreciating the measures so taken by the 
Department to make available Urea and P&K Fertilizers at reasonable prices for farmers 
for agricultural purposes, the Committee call upon the Department to intensify its efforts 
and also explore other innovat ive measures in this direction. Feasibility of entering into 
Joint Ventures abroad with countries rich in fertilizer raw materials for production 
facilities with buy back agreements and acquisition of fertilizer mines, etc. may also be 
explored to ensure s ufficient availability of fertilizers and its raw materials without the 
pressure of price fluctuation in the international market and to save precious foreign 
exchange. 
 
2.12  In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows: 
 “India is fully dependent on imports in Potassic sector and to the extent of 90% 
in Phosphatic sector in the form of either finished products or its raw material. 
However, Government has taken following steps to increase indigenous 
production of P&K fertilizer: 
1.  DoF granted permission to Madhya Bharat Agro product Limited Unit-II, Banda 
Sagar, MP for production of DAP/NPK with installed capacity 2.40 LMT per 
annum.  
2.  DoF granted permission to M/s. Krishna Phoschem Lt d, MP for production of 
DAP/NPK with installed capacity 3.30 LMT per annum 
3.  PDM or Potash Derived from Molasses (0 -0-14.5-0) has been included under 
NBS scheme. 
4.  Freight Subsidy on SSP which is an indigenously manufactured fertilizers 
have been made applicable for Kharif and Rabi 2022-23.  
5.  Exploration of minerals for raw materials for DAP & other fertilizers in India, in 
consultation with Ministry of Mines, GSI, MECL, FAGMIL and concerned State 
Governments is a continuous process. 
6.  The initiatives to augment the capacity of raw materials/intermediates namely 
Phosphoric Acid, Rock Phosphate and Sulphuric Acid are as below: 
a. RSMML, a PSU of Government of Rajasthan, is producing Rock Phosphate to 
the tune of 7-8 LMT per annum (appx.) 
b. Coromandel International Limited has commissioned a Phosphoric Acid plant 
of 2 LMT in 2020 and is to set up a Sulphuric Acid plant of 5 LMT in July 2023. 

18 
 
c. IFFCO, Paradeep to set up a new Sulphuric Acid plant -III of capacity 2000 
MT/day to augment the Sulphuric Acid produc tion capacity of IFFCO, 
Paradeep from 7000 MT/day to 9000 MT/day. 
d. M/s. Greenstar Fertilizers Ltd. (Chennai) has obtained Consent to Operate for 
Phosphoric Acid production to the tune of 3.20 LMT per annum and Consent 
to Establish for expansion of Sulphuric  Acid plant of 8.5 LMT per annum from 
the State Pollution Control Board.   
7.  On the initiative of HMCF, DoF has facilitated long term MoUs between the 
Indian fertilizer companies and fertilizer companies from other countries based 
on formula based pricin g. Under the initiative, Joint venture for mining, 
manufacturing fertilizer intermediates and finished fertilizers have also been 
initiated/extended. Their progress is reviewed from time to time at various 
levels”.       
Recommendation Sl. No. 9 
Initiative to promote use of Nano Urea 
2.13  Only 30-40% of the nitrogen in the Urea is actually utilized by the plant, the rest 
is wasted and reaches the ground water or evaporates as ammonia which is an 
environmental hazard. The farmers are, however, tempted to us e Urea as it is available 
at a very cheap price as a result of Government subsidy .The Committee do share the 
optimism of the Department in mooting a proposal to promote the use of Nano urea by 
provisioning that for purchase of five (05) bags of Urea, the farmer may be sold one 
bottle of Nano Urea and four bags of Urea. The Committee have been told that the said 
proposal has not been implemented. Keeping in view the numerous benefits of Nano 
Urea on human health, soil and environment over the use of conventional Ureaand as 
the Government has the responsibility to ensure extensive use of Nano Urea by the 
farmers, the Committee, the refore, urge the Department to reconsider the feasibility of 
the proposal of compulsorily selling one bottle of Nano Urea with purchase of 4 bags of 
conventional urea to the farmers, to promote the use of Nano Urea. 
2.14 In their Action Taken Note furnishe d to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows: 
 “Department of Fertilizers has directed has all Fertilizers manufacturing 
companies to encourage farmers to purchase nano urea along with conventional Urea. 
Sale of Nano Urea along with traditional urea is excluded from the scope of regulation of 
tagging by DoF”. 

19 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 11 
2.15 The Committee are happy to note that the Department has taken up the 
introduction of DCT fertilizer subsidy at various levels in the Governmen t. A Nodal 
Committee co -chaired by Secretary (Fertilizers) and Secretary (DA&FW) has been 
constituted in this regard to examine issues related to it. The primary bottleneck in 
implementation of DCT is identification of beneficiaries (farmers), their land r ecords, soil 
type, cropping pattern, fertilizer requirement, etc. as all such information is being 
maintained by State Governments. It has been decided to merge the database of 
farmers maintained by the respective State Governments with subsidy payment sys tem 
of DoF to provide subsidy directly to the farmers and also to initiate the project on pilot 
basis in few districts / talukas of different States. Some of the States have furnished 
their consent in this regard. In view of the foregoing, the Committee de sire that the 
Department should  initiate  the  pilot  project in  right  earnest in coordination with  all  
the stakeholders for effective implementation of Direct -Cash Transfer of Fertilizer 
Subsidy to farmers/ producers. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
in the matter. 
2.16 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows: 
 “Based on the recommendations of the Nodal Committee, some of the states 
have nominated one district ea ch for initiation of pilot project for merging of 
beneficiaries database and iFMS system. Subsequently, pre -requisites for 
implementation of DCT and format in which database of beneficiaries is 
required, have been shared with the concerned states. Simultan eously, 
reminder has been sent to remaining states to nominate district for pilot 
project”. 
Recommendation Sl. No. 12 
 
PM-PRANAM- Promotion of organic fertilizers, bio-fertilizers, etc. 
 
2.17 The Government has announced PM Programme for Restoration Awareness 
and Nourishment and Amelioration of Mother Earth (PM -PRANAM) in the budget 2023-
24 with an objective to restore the health of the Mother Earth through promoting 
balanced/ sustainable use o f chemical fertilizers; adopting alternate fertilizers like 
organic/bio and nano fertilizers; promoting natural/ organic farming; etc.  which will thus 
save the soil, human health, ground water and environment. The scheme which is still 
under consideration of the Ministry of Finance aim to incentivize States and UTs which 
are involved in promotion of organic fertilizers, natural farming and organic farming. The 
Committee supports the idea of the Government to promote balanced use of fertilizers 

20 
 
by the farme rs all over the country. The Committee trust that PM -PRANAM scheme, 
subject to its effective implementation would be able to achieve its intended objectives. 
The Committee impress upon the Department to follow up status of scheme with the 
Ministry of Finance and keep them apprised.  
2.18 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“In the budget speech 2023-2024, launching of PM-PRANAM (PM Programme 
for Restoration, Awareness, Nourishment and Amelioration of Mother Earth) 
has been announced to incentivise State and Union Territories to promote 
alternative fertilisers and balanced use of chemical fertilisers. The scheme has 
been formulated to incentivize the states/UTs by 50% of the amount of savings 
in the subsidy outgo due to reduction in the consumption of chemical fertilizers 
(Urea, DAP, NPK, MOP) by the respective states and UTs compared to 
previous 3 years’ average consumption. Keeping in view the estimated 
increase of fertilizer consumptio n (CAGR 1.5 %) in the next three years, the 
estimated savings in consumption of fertilizers in the next 3 years is likely to 
be 45.78 LMT. The estimated financial savings due to aforesaid decrease in 
fertilizer consumption is likely to be Rs. 19,450 crores. 
PM PRANAM has been approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee”. 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 13 
Initiatives taken to introduce Innovative/alternate fertilizers  
2.19 The Committee appreciate that the Government, as part of its initiatives to 
promote alternate fertilizers, is considering use of two new fortified Urea combinations in 
the country viz (i) Sulphur Coated Urea(SCU) also called as Urea Gold and (ii) a 
combination of Single Super Phosphate and Urea (SSP+Urea) which is used instead of 
DAP.  As per the study conducted by ICAR, use of SCU leads to reduction in urea 
consumption by 25% and therefore it is proposed to introduce SCU as a premium urea 
in the market in 40 kg bags which will also meet the deficiency of Sulphur content in the 
soil. Its two main advantages are its slow -release mechanism and increased nitrogen 
adsorption efficiency by 40%.  It also improves the plant growth/ quality and the yield of 
seeds, es pecially oilseeds. Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF) has 
produced in -house laboratory scale SCU with specifications of FCO, 1985. The pilot 
scale plant/ commercial production is yet to be set up by RCF and results are yet to be 
seen. The in itial studies conducted by RCF are at laboratory scale. Field trials of SCU 
are going on by RCF. Keeping in view the numerous benefits of the SCU and 
(SSP+Urea), the Committee hope that the Department/RCF would expedite the field 
trials in respect of (SSP+ Urea) and SCU and soon start their pilot scale plant/ 

21 
 
commercial production. The Committee would like to be kept informed of the 
developments with regard to SCU and (SSP+Urea). 
2.20 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 “Sulphur coated urea in the name of ‘Urea Gold’ comprising of Nitrogen and 
Sulphur is proposed to be launched. In addition to providing sulphur, Urea 
Gold will also promote Nutrient Use Efficiency, and as a result it has potential 
to decrease urea consumption. Proposal for introduction of Sulphur Coated 
Urea has been approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 15 
2.21 While drawing attention towards the reported failures of Bio-gas plants operating 
in the country due to various technical reasons and also to the fact that because of less 
nitrogen content in the organic manure its use and application is too costly co mpared to 
Urea which is available at subsidized rates, the Committee earnestly desires that while 
approving the two schemes, the Government may consider granting suitable Market 
Development Assistance for the production and sale of bio -manure, compost, etc . 
produced from the plants so that they are available at affordable rates to the farmers to 
promote their use.  Moreover, the fertilizer companies and agencies may be 
incentivized to promote the sale and use of organic manures by the farmers. The 
Committee also exhorts the Ministry to take cogent measures for ensuring the 
availability of trained technical manpower at the village/ block/ district levels for 
maintenance of the bio -gas plants and constituting of a Central monitoring agency for 
ensuring their effective and efficient operation.  
2.22 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
“The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting held on 
28th June, 2023 approved the proposal of the Department of Fertilizers for  the 
Market Development Assistance @ Rs. 1,500/MT for  promotion of organic 
fertilizers/manures produced at plants under umbrella Galvanizing Organic 
Bio-Agro resources  (GOBARdhan) ini tiative  covering different Biogas/CBG 
support schemes/programmes of stakeholder Ministers/Departments such as 
sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable Transportation (SATAT) scheme of 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoP&NG), ‘Waste to Energy’ 
programme of Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE), Swachh Bharat 

22 
 
Mission (Grameen) of Department of Drinking  Water & sanitation (DDWS), 
etc. with the total outlay of Rs. 1,451.84 Crore (FY 2023 -24 to 2025-26), which 
includes a Corpus of Rs. 360 crore for research gap funding, etc  
       As per the Guidelines of SBM(G), the States can select technical agencies 
which may be empanelled by them or choose to take support from BDTCs/ State 
Nodal Agencies (SNAs) for Renewable energy for implementation of the 
GOBARdhan plants as well as op eration and maintenance of the plant. It has 
been also provisioned in the Guidelines that the project preparation, supervision 
and monitoring and maintenance cost for the first five years of the operation of 
the plants may be made part of the project cost.  District Water and Sanitation 
Committee (DWSC) is the monitoring agency at district level for ensuring the 
effective and efficient operation of the plants”. 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
OBSERVATION / RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 3 
Research and Development (R&D) in Fertilizer Sector  
4.1 The Committee note that as projected by the Department of Fertilizers,  
Rs. 0.10 crore has been allocated in BE 2023 -24 as grant -in-aid to R&D Budget head. 
Similarly, RE allocation of Rs. 0.10 crore was made in FY 2022-23 under the R&D head 
and the expenditure incurred upto September, 2022 is NIL. The situation was no 
different in the year 2021 -22. The Committee have been told that R & D budget head is 
for funding on project basis and Department would  extend financial assistance to 
research agencies/organizations as and when research project proposals are received.  
The Committee are surprised that for years together no research projects has been 
conceived by the research agencies/organisations and fee l sorry for this state of affairs. 
The Committee further note that the  Department has created a budget head for 
ICFFTR (Indian Council for Fertilizer and Fertilizer Nutrient Research) for the FY 2023 -
24 with the objectives, inter -alia, to undertake resear ch in the area of fertilizer and 
fertilizer manufacturing technology and will seek funds for ICFFTR at the  
1st Supplementary stage in FY 2023 -24. In this context, the Committee would like to be 
enlightened as to how Department's budget head for ICFFTR is different from their R&D 
head.  Also, the Committee would like to understand the reasons for not making funds 
projections at BE, 2023-24.  
 In this context only, the Committee would like to recall that in the course of 
examination of Demands for Grants for  the year 2021 -22 and 2022 -23, they had 
emphasized on the need for time bound research projects towards  developing more 
efficient fertilizers which may include indigenous varieties of nano fertilizers (Urea/ P&K/ 
micro nutrients), bio -fertilizers, organic  fertilizers, compost, bio -stimulants, etc. in due 
consultation with the research agencies and organizations and recommended for 
funding of the required level. The Committee regret to note that nothing has been done 
so far in this direction. The Committee hope that at least now the Department would 
give serious consideration to their recommendation and act accordingly. 
4.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 

25 
 
 “Indian Council for Fertilizer & Fertilizer Nutrient Research (ICFFTR) has been 
constituted and registered under Societies Registration Act of 1860 on 
19.08.2019. It has been constituted by fertilizer CPSEs under Department of 
Fertilizers. The major object ive of the Council is to undertake research in the 
area of fertilizer and fertilizer manufacturing technology, use of raw material 
and innovation in fertilizer products etc  
 Fertilizer PSUs viz. NFL, RCF and FAGMIL are founding members of ICFFTR. 
In order to create initial fund for ICFFTR and to make the same operational, 
seed money initial corpus non -refundable is provided by (Rs.2 crore each by 
NFL & RCF) and (Rs. 1 crore by FAGMIL). In addition to these PSUs, MFL, 
FACT, BVFCL, PDIL, HFCL and FCIL are also its members.  
 The membership of the Society is open to other organizations, Corporate 
Bodies / Joint Venture Companies, Institutions engaged in manufacturing and 
trading fertilizers. The annual subscription fee for each of the founder member 
of CPSEs under the administr ative control of DoF is Rs. 1 lakh. For all other 
members, there is one-time admission fee Rs.5 lakhs at the time of admission 
and annual subscription of Rs. 1 lakhs. ICFFTR’s registered office is at Lodhi 
Road, New Delhi.  
  ICFFTR comprises of Governing Council headed by Secretary, D/o fertilizers 
and Executive Committee headed by CMD, RCF. The Director General of the 
Society is the administrative head of the society. Some of the Research & 
Development activities planned to be undertaken by ICFFTR are as under: -  
 a) To undertake research in the area of fertilizer and fertilizer manufacturing 
technology, use of raw material and innovation in fertilizer products.  
 b) To identify and research, eco -friendly nutrients / micro nutrients and 
pesticide coated s low release fertilizers to ensure reduction of Carbon 
Footprint of Fertilizer sector and energy efficient operation. 
  c) To undertake research in bio fertilizer and its derivatives with appropriate 
coating or blending so as to protect and increase soil fertility.  
 d) To undertake research in organic fertilizer and its derivatives or blending so 
as to protect and increase the soil fertility.  
 e) To undertake research in Fertilizer Sectors & related activities.  
 f) To undertake research in the field of agriculture. 
 g) To undertake research in the application of science and scientific methods 
for the manufacture of fertilizers and their utilization in the fields either alone or 
in conjunction with preparations of other materials.  
 h) To make known the res ults of all research discoveries, patents and 
investigations made in connection with the above objects.  

26 
 
 i) To adopt such means of making known the products of the Society as may 
seem expedient. 
  j) To allow the member organizations to utilize the resear ch carried out by the by 
the ICFFTR. 
      R&D activities has been created by the Department to carry out Research & 
Development activities identified by the Department. As regards, R&D Budget 
head is concerned, Rs. 10.00 lakhs has been allocated at BE dur ing financial 
year 2023-24 in the Demand for grants of DoF for undertaking R&D activities in 
the fertilizer sector”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 5 
 
Payment In Respect of  Carry-over liabilities 
4.3 The Committee are pleased to note that there is no carry-over liability as on date 
pertaining to the previous years in respect of Indigenous Urea.  The settlement of 
subsidy/DBT claims of fertilizers companies are being done regularly  subject to 
availability of funds. Also, in respect of imported urea,  the carry-over liabilities which 
was Rs. 869.50 crore as on 01.04.2022 has been brought down to Rs. 303 .35 crore as 
on date and balance claims are under process at various stages. The Committee would 
desire that concrete measures should be taken in a time bound manner to ensure that 
the balance amount of carry -over liability in respect of imported Urea is s ettled within 
the current financial year itself.  The Committee urges the Department to project its 
demands of fund requirement for payment of subsidies in respect of Urea and P&K 
fertilizers (both indigenous and imported fertilizers) at BE/RE stage in a m ore 
convincing manner to get adequate allocations so that payment of subsidies are made 
timely. 
4.4 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 “Settlement of subsidy/DBT claims of fertilize rs companies are being done 
regularly subject to availability of funds.   So far as Indigenous Urea is 
concerned, there is no carry over liability as on date pertaining the previous 
years.  
 Observations of the committee have been noted for compliance”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 

27 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 10 
 
Provision of Direct Cash Transfer (DCT) to farmers for fertilizer subsidy 
4.5 The Committee note that as per the suggestions/recommendations contained in 
the Third -Party Evaluation report of the Urea subsidy Scheme, since there is need to 
continue subsidizing the urea for farmers, it will not be suitable option that the subsidy 
could directly be transferred in the accounts of farmers since Dire ct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT) to farmers is a complex system  and therefore, it is suggested that under the 
scheme, subsidy amount should be given to the manufacturing/ importing companies as 
per the current policy . The Committee, are of the considered view th at the present urea 
subsidy scheme should be continued in such a manner that it causes the least 
inconvenience to farmers.  
  4.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 “Based on the recommendations of the Nodal Committee, some of the states 
have nominated one district each for initiation of pilot project for merging of 
beneficiaries database and iFMS system. Subsequently, pre -requisites for 
implementation of DCT and format in which da tabase of beneficiaries is 
required, have been shared with the concerned states. Simultaneously, 
reminder has been sent to remaining states to nominate district for pilot 
project”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 14 
 
Scheme for providing Market Development Assistance for production and use of 
organic manure, compost, etc. 
4.7 The Government in budget 2023 -24 has made announcement of the SATAT and 
GOBARdhan Schemes for promotion of or ganic manures, compost, etc.While SATAT 
Scheme is managed by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas(MoP&NG), GOBARdhan 
scheme is managed by Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation (DDWS) and 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy(MNRE). SATAT programme prom otes 
compressed bio-gas plants wherein the by -product is fermented organic manure (FOM) 
GOBARdhan scheme promotes bio -gas plants and FOM is theby -product which is a 
bio-manure. The Department of Fertilizers will be promoting the use of bio -manure 

28 
 
which is produced under these two schemes as a by-product. There is an EFC Proposal 
for granting Market Development Assistance for FOM/ PROM/ other organic fertilizers & 
bio-fertilizers with focus on SATAT and “GOBARdhan scheme.  5000 compressed 
biogas plants are t o be set up under SATAT scheme by 2023 while 400 bio gas plants 
are to be set up under the GOBARdhan scheme. The Committee would like to be 
updated on the matter from time to time.  
4.8 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as follows:  
 “The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its meeting held on 16 th March, 
2023 considered the proposal of this Department on promotion of organic 
fertilizers and recommended the Market Development Assistance (MDA),  as 
per budget announcement, @ Rs.1,500/MT for 3 years (FY 2023 -24 to 2025-
26) for components of SATAT CBG plants and GOBARdhan plants with an 
outlay of Rs.1451.84 Crore which includes the components of MDA for CBG 
plants at an estimated outlay of Rs.1,013  Crore, MDA for GOBARdhan plants 
at an estimated outlay of Rs.78.84 Crore and corpus of Rs.360 Crore for gap 
funding/research to be utilized only by Central/State Research Institutes or 
non-private fertilizer cooperatives”.    
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
NIL 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                 DR. SHASHI THAROOR 
14 December,  2023                                               Chairperson, 
23 Agrahayana 1945 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on     
                                       Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
APPENDIX-II  
ANALYSIS OF ACTION T AKEN BY THE GOVERNME NT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONT AINED IN THE FORTIET H REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SAB HA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTIL IZERS (2023 -24) ON D EMAND FOR GRANTS  
(2023-24) OF THE MIN ISTRY OF CHEMICALS A ND FER TILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS).  
 
 
 
 
 
 Total No. of Recommendations 15 
I Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
(Recommendation Nos. 1,2,4,6,7,8,9,11,12,13 and 15)  
  
 11 
Percentage of Total 73%   
II Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not like to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
NIL 
  
00 
Percentage of Total      0% 
III Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies given 
by the Government  have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:  
(Recommendation No.  3, 5, 10 and 14)   
 
04 
Percentage of Total 27%    
IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  the final replies 
of the Government are still awaited:  
Nil 
 
0 
Percentage of Total  0%    