i 
 
 
 
     
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
           MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
   (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty-first Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2026 -27’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2026/ SRAVANA, 1948 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
30 


ii 
 
CC&F NO. 210 
 
 
THIRTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty -first Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2026-27’ of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06 August, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06 August, 2026 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2026/ SRAVANA, 1948 (SAKA) 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
11 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies  
 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2025-26) held on 03rd August, 2026. 
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty -first Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘Demands for Grants 2026 -27’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(2025-2026) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
21. Vacant* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Shri Ramesh Lingamaneni$ 
25. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
26. Shri Manmohan Samal& 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
29. Shri Tejveer Singh 
30. Shri L. K. Sudhish%  
31. Vacant 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Director 
3. Shri Abhishek Kumar - Joint Director 
 
 
* Vacant vice Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon, MP(LS), passed away on 19.02.2026 vide LS Table Office Notification No.21/4(8)/2026/TO(B) 
dated 20.02.2026. 
& Nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 04.06.2026 Para No. 5267.  
% Nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 04.06.2026 Para No. 5267. 
$ Nominated w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 24.07.2026 Para No. 5724. 
Dr. Bhagwat Karad, MP(RS) retired on 02.04.2026 vide Committee Branch note dated 19.02.2026.  
Shri G.K. Vasan, MP(RS) retired on 02.04.2026 vide Committee Branch note dated 19.02.2026. 
Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli, MP(RS) retired from the membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 21.06.2026 vide Committee Branch no te 
dated 19.02.2026.  
  

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Thirtieth Report on Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Twenty-first Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants 2026 -27’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers). 
2.  The Twenty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 13 th March, 2026. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers , Department of Fertilizers 
furnished their replies on 16 th June, 2026 indicating Action Taken on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -first Report. The Committee 
considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 03rd August, 2026. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirtieth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
03 August, 2026 Chairperson, 
12 Sravana, 1948 (saka) Standing Committee on 
    Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER — I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -First Report (18th Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers on 'Demands for Grants (2026-27)' of 
the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
1.2  The Twenty-First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
13.03.2026. It contained 21 Observations / Recommendations. Replies of the Government 
in respect of all the recommendations have been received and are categorized as follows: 
 
(i)Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II): 
Rec. Sl. No. 1, 2, 3,4, 5,7, 8, 9, 10,11, 13, 14,16, 17and 20  (Total = 15) 
 
(ii)Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's reply (Chapter III): 
-- NIL –         (Total = 00) 
 
(iii)Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
Rec. Sl. No.  6, 12, 15,18, 19 and 21      (Total = 06) 
 
(iv)Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are of interim nature (Chapter V): 
-- NIL –          (Total = 00) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and the final 
replies in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter IV for 
which interim replies have been furnished by the Ministry may be furnished to them at 
the earliest. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 6 
 
Strengthening Research and Development in the Fertilizer Sector and Indigenous Coal 
Gasification Technology 

2 
 
 
1.5 Noting with concern the inadequate investment in research and development and the 
need to strengthen indigenous technological capabilities in the fertilizer sector, the 
Committee recommended as under: – 
 
“The Committee observe with serious concern that research and development 
expenditure in the fertilizer sector remains extremely low and has been repeatedly curtailed 
despite the sector accounting for one of the largest components of Central Government 
subsidy expenditure. Against a proposal of Rs. 50 crores for FY 2026–27, only Rs. 15 crore 
was approved, while actual R and D expenditure in recent years has remained negligible. 
The Committee are of the view that a sector facing major challenges such as import 
dependence for raw materials, technological gaps in fertilizer production and mining, and 
rising subsidy burdens cannot afford such minimal investment in innovation. The Committee 
therefore recommend the creation of a dedicated Fertilizer Technology and Innovation Fund 
with an annual allocation of at least Rs. 500 crores to support research in fertilizer 
technologies, mineral exploration, alternative feedstocks and sustainable nutrient 
management. The Committee further note that despite possessing one of the world’s largest 
coal reserves, India continues to depend heavily on imported natural gas for urea production. 
Coal gasification offers a major opportunity to convert domestic coal into syngas for fertilizer 
manufacturing and reduce energy import dependence . While the Talcher coal -gasification 
based urea project in Odisha represents an important milestone, India currently relies largely 
on imported gasification technologies that are not fully suited to high ash Indian coal. The 
Committee therefore strongly r ecommend launching a mission mode programme for 
development of indigenous coal gasification technology, focusing on high ash coal, pilot scale 
demonstration plants and integration with carbon capture and urea production. Strengthening 
domestic capability in coal gasification could significantly reduce natural gas imports, lower 
fertilizer subsidy exposure to global energy price volatility and contribute to long term fertilizer 
and energy security.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.6 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated as under: - 
“Government mandated revival of Talcher unit of M/s FCIL, located in Angul district, 
Odisha. Accordingly, a Joint Venture Company named M/s. Talcher Fertilizers Ltd. (TFL) has 
been incorporated for setting up Coal Gasification -based Ammonia Urea Plant of 12 .7 
LMTPA capacity, which is first of its kind in India. The proposed TFL project has been 
envisaged for utilizing the abundantly available domestic coal for Urea production as it has 
emerged as the best possible option since the country is endowed with rich reserves of coal. 
On completion of the project, the production of urea in the country will increase by 12.7 
LMTPA and will assist in maximizing the indigenous production of Urea and provide security 
in feedstock supply as coal would be sourced domestica lly and providing alternate route of 
urea production to diversify the feedstock risk in the sector.” 

3 
 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.7 The Committee had made two distinct and specific recommendations: (a) 
creation of a dedicated Fertilizer Technology and Innovation Fund with an annual 
allocation of at least Rs. 500 crore for research in fertilizer technologies, mineral 
exploration, alternative feedstocks and sustainable nutrient management; and (b) 
launching a mission -mode programme specifically for development of indigenous 
coal gasification technology suited to high -ash Indian coal, including pilot -scale 
demonstration plants and integration with carbon capture. The  Committee observe 
that the Action Taken Reply simply  describes the existing Talcher Fertilizers Limited 
project, a single plant employing imported (not indige nous) coal gasification 
technology from a foreign technology partner , and stated that India 'relies largely on 
imported gasification technologies that are not fully suited to high ash Indian coal.' 
The Committee observe that TFL does not develop indigenous technology, it rather 
deploys imported technology to a domestic coal -based project. The Committee note 
that reduced approval under R&D Head for FY 2026-27 standing at Rs. 15 crore against 
a proposal of Rs. 50 crore, the Government's response to a serious technology and 
innovation gap continues to be of concern. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their  
earlier recommendation and desire that the Department: (i) examine the feasibility of 
establishing a dedicated Fertilizer Technology and Innovation Fund with an annual 
allocation of at least Rs. 500 crore, and place the proposal before the Ministry of 
Finance; (ii) formulate a mission -mode programme, in coordination with CSIR, DST 
and other scientific institutions, specifically targeted at developing indigenous coal 
gasification technology suited to high-ash Indian coal, distinct from and in addition to 
the existing TFL project; and (iii) furnish to the Committee a clear a ccount of what 
indigenous R&D, if any, was being undertaken to reduce future dependence on foreign 
gasification technology partners such as the one engaged for the TFL project.  The 
Committee may be apprised of the concrete action taken on these recommendations. 
 
Recommendation SL. No. 12 
 
Strengthening the DBT Framework, Scaling Haryana Model Nationally, and Deploying 
Artificial Intelligence for Fertilizer Subsidy Management 
 
1.8 Taking note of the successful pilot integration of the Meri Fasal Mera Byora (MFMB) 
portal with the Integrated Fertilizer Management System (iFMS)/Point of Sale (PoS) system 
in Haryana, the Committee underscored the need to accelerate digital transformatio n in 
fertilizer subsidy management and recommended as under: – 
 
“The Committee note with considerable appreciation the results of the pilot integration 
of the Meri Fasal Mera Byora (MFMB) portal of the Government of Haryana with the 

4 
 
iFMS/PoS system for targeted and authenticated sale of subsidized fertilizers. The pilot, 
implemented across Haryana from October 2025, has produced tangible outcomes within a 
very short period: urea consumption declined by about 10 per cent, P&K fertilize r sales fell 
by about 26 per cent indicating reduction in excess use, and estimated subsidy savings have 
reached Rs. 700.53 crore in just four months from October 2025 to February 2026. The share 
of small buyers purchasing fewer than 10 bags increased by o ver 50 per cent, suggesting 
improved access for marginal and small farmers. Maharashtra has achieved 100 per cent 
AgriStack seeding, which makes it ready for a similar integration exercise. The Committee 
further note that the Integrated Fertilizer Manageme nt System (iFMS) has achieved full 
integration with the Public Financial Management System (PFMS) from January 2026, 
enabling real -time audit trails of subsidy payments to companies and consumers, a 
significant transparency milestone. However, the Committe e observe that the DBT 
framework still lacks a comprehensive digital database of identified farmer -beneficiaries at 
the national level, making it difficult to deploy AI -based analytics for purchase pattern 
detection in the manner used in other welfare schemes such as PDS. The Committee are of 
the strong view that the Department has considerable untapped potential in deploying 
advanced Artificial Intelligence and data analytics to further improve the efficiency, accuracy, 
and fraud-detection capability of th e fertilizer subsidy system. The success of AI -enabled 
reforms in the Public Distribution System, where identification and elimination of ghost and 
duplicate beneficiaries is estimated to have saved Rs. 3.48 lakh crore between 2009 and 
2024; demonstrates t he transformative potential of this approach. The Haryana pilot itself, 
saving Rs. 700 crore in just four months, offers a compelling proof of concept. The Committee 
recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should develop a time bound national roadmap 
for the integration of iFMS with the AgriStack platform, including a State wise implementation 
schedule, technical support from NIC, and an independent evaluation framework. The 
Department should also actively coordinate with the Department of Agriculture and Farmers' 
Welfare to expedite completion of the Farmers' Registry under AgriStack and prepare a 
roadmap for the use of AI enabled analytics within the iFMS system. Pending full integration 
with Agri Stack, the Committee further recommend that the Department should initiate a pilot 
project for AI based anomaly detection in at least five States with high urea consumption, 
with the objective of identifying suspicious purchase patterns, unusually large repeat buyers, 
and possible diversion of subsidized fert ilizers at the PoS level. The Committee also 
recommend that a dedicated annual allocation of Rs. 100 crores should be earmarked within 
the Department's budget for deployment of artificial intelligence and digital analytics tools in 
the fertilizer subsidy management system, so as to strengthen monitoring, improve targeting 
of subsidies and minimize diversion.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.9 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 

5 
 
“As per the recommendations of the Standing Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers, in close coordination and consultation with the Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), has been undertaking continuous efforts towards strengthening 
and impl ementing Farmer's registry and GFR integration -based sale mechanisms in a 
phased and systematic manner. Various technical, operational, and procedural aspects 
related to the integration process are being examined and simultaneously being addressed 
in cons ultation with the concerned stakeholders to ensure smooth implementation and 
effective monitoring of fertilizer sales and distribution. In this regard, the recommendations 
of the Standing Committee have been duly noted and shall be taken into consideration  by 
the Department while undertaking further policy decisions, system enhancements, and 
implementation-related measures in the matter.” 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.10 The Committee had made  recommendations relating to: (a) preparation of a 
time-bound national roadmap for integration of the Integrated Fertilizer Management 
System (iFMS) with AgriStack; (b) technical support from the National Informatics 
Centre (NIC) and an independent evaluation framework; (c) pilot projects for AI-based 
anomaly detection in high urea-consumption States; and (d) earmarking of a dedicated 
annual allocation for deployment of artificial intelligence and digital analytics in 
fertilizer subsidy management. The Committee had also highlighted the encouraging 
results of the Haryana pilot, which demonstrated significant reduction in fertilizer 
consumption and subsidy savings, as evidence of the potential of technology-enabled 
fertilizer subsidy management. The Committee are happy to note that the Action Taken 
Reply stated that the recommendation have been duly noted and being taken into 
consideration while undertaking further policy decisions, system enhancements and 
implementation related measure s in the matter.  The Committee further  note that as 
per the ir recommendations, the Department of Fertili zers in coordination with the 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare (DA&FW) had been continuously 
undertaking efforts towards stren gthening and implementing Farmers’ Registry and 
CGFR integration based safe mechanism in a phased and system atic manner. 
However, the Committee observe that the reply does not indicate concrete roadmap, 
implementation timelines, pilot programmes or utilization of the budgetary allocation. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendations and desire that the 
Department apprise the Committee of the tangible outcomes of the implementation of 
the recommendation. 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 15 
 
Integrating Soil Health Card Recommendations with the Fertilizer Distribution System 
 

6 
 
1.11 Noting the importance of scientific nutrient management and the need to leverage 
digital platforms for promoting balanced fertilizer use, the Committee recommended as 
under: – 
“The Committee note that the Soil Health and Fertility Scheme, implemented since 
2014–15, has issued 25.85 crore Soil Health Cards and established 8,313 soil testing 
laboratories. Studies show that 62 to 68 per cent of farmers follow SHC recommendations, 
leading to 4 to 10 per cent reduction in input costs, 5 to 10 per cent lower chemical fertilizer 
use, and moderate yield gains. However, integration of SHC based recommendations with 
the iFMS Point of Sale system, which could guide farmers towards soil spec ific fertilizer 
purchases, has not yet been implemented. The Department of Fertilizers has indicated that 
action will be taken after receiving a proposal from the Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare. The Committee believe that limited inter depar tmental coordination has 
delayed this important reform. The Committee recommend that the Department of Fertilizers 
should proactively coordinate with the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare to 
integrate General Fertilizer Recommendations and Soil  Health Card advisories with the 
iFMS-PoS system within a defined timeline. A monitoring mechanism should also be 
established to assess its impact on improving soil health practices and reducing unnecessary 
fertilizer consumption and subsidy expenditure.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.12 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated as under: - 
 
“As per the recommendations of the Standing Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers, in close coordination and consultation with the Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), has been undertaking continuous efforts towards strengthening 
and impl ementing Farmer’s registry and GFR integration -based sale mechanisms in a 
phased and systematic manner. Various technical, operational, and procedural aspects 
related to the integration process are being examined and simultaneously being addressed 
in cons ultation with the concerned stakeholders to ensure smooth implementation and 
effective monitoring of fertilizer sales and distribution.  Integration of Soil Health Card based 
recommendation with iFMS-POS system is useful for farmers. This promotes the Balanced 
and judicious use of fertilizer, which may lead to increase in productivity. Integration further 
provides the exact quantity of nutrient required in particular soil and in particular crop. Further, 
the soil Health Card recommendation is based on Genera l Fertilizer recommendation. 
However, it is pertinent to mention that Digital Agriculture Division of DA&FW is already 
working on GFR based recommendation on use of fertilizer under National Fertilizer 
Framework.” 
 
 
 

7 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.13 The Committee  had recommended  a defined timeline for integration of Soil 
Health Card (SHC) advisories with the Integrated Fertilizer Management System 
(iFMS)-Point of Sale (PoS) system. The Department in their Action Taken Reply outline 
the initiatives being undertaken by the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
(DA&FW) under the National Fertilizer Framework and  efforts towards continuous  
coordination between the Department of Fertilizers and DA&FW for carrying forward 
this important reform. The Committee are happy to note that a large number of Soil 
Health Cards h ad already been issued and that adoption of SHC recommendations 
demonstrated measurable benefits in promoting balanced fertilizer use and reducing 
input costs. The Committee are, however, of the view that integration of SHC 
advisories with the iFMS -PoS system need to be accorded priority  with stipulated 
timelines for effective implementation. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendations and desire that the Department: (i) Finalize in consultation with the 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, a defined timeline for integrating 
General Fertilizer Recommendations and Soil Health Card advisories with the iFMS -
PoS system; (ii) Establish an appropriate coordination mechanism bet ween the two 
Departments to oversee the implementation of this initiative; and (iii) Put in place a 
monitoring framework to assess the impact of such integration on balanced fertilizer 
use and subsidy efficiency. 
 
Recommendation SL. No. 18 
 
Effective Utilization of Land and Assets of Closed Fertilizer Units 
1.14 Noting the need for effective management and productive utilization of surplus land 
assets held by closed fertilizer Public Sector Undertakings, the Committee recommended as 
under: – 
“The Committee note that Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited and Hindustan 
Fertilizer Corporation Limited, both closed Public Sector Undertakings, continue to hold 
substantial land assets across locations such as Sindri, Gorakhpur, Durgapur, Haldia and 
Barauni. While parts of these lands have been utilized for joint venture projects under HURL, 
RFCL and TFL, significant portions remain underutilized or are locked in disputes. For 
instance, 268.335 acres of FCIL land at Gorakhpur has been placed under the control of the 
District Magistrate by the Government of Uttar Pradesh without FCIL’s consent, and HFCL’s 
land at Durgapur is subject to a regularization claim of Rs. 526.63 crore by the Government 
of West Bengal. The Committee are concerned that prolonged inaction on these strategically 
located land parcels reflects weak asset management and represents a significant loss of 
productive economic potential. Such lands could support fertilizer production, allied industries 
and other industrial infrastructure. The Committee also recommend that the Department 
should examine the feasibility of restarting the fertilizer plant at Durgapur, given its strategic 
industrial location and potential cost advantages in logistics and infrastructure. The 

8 
 
Committee therefore strongly recommend that the Department of Fertilizers adopt a time 
bound and proactive approach to resolve land disputes with State Governments through 
negotiation or legal action where necessary, and formulate a clear asset utilization  strategy 
for surplus land held by FCIL and HFCL. The Committee further recommend that a 
comprehensive plan should be drawn up for optimal utilization of these land assets, taking 
into account the need for revamping old and vintage urea plants and establis hing additional 
urea capacity to move towards national self -sufficiency, particularly in view of the likely 
increase in natural gas prices arising from geopolitical tensions and conflicts in key energy 
regions. Such a strategy would contribute to strengthe ning domestic fertilizer security and 
advancing the broader objective of Atmanirbhar Bharat.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.15 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated as under: - 
“With regard to urea, the Government had announced New Investment Policy (NIP) – 
2012 on 2nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7th October, 2014 to facilitate fresh 
investment in the urea sector andto make India self-sufficient in the urea sector. Total 6 new 
urea units have been set up under NIP-2012 which includes 4 urea units set up through Joint 
Venture Companies (JVC) of nominated PSUs and 2 urea units set up by the private 
companies. The units set up through JVC are Ramagundam urea unit of Ramagundam  
Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd (RFCL) in Telangana and 3 urea units namely Gorakhpur, 
Sindri and Barauni of Hindustan Urvarak&Rasayan Limited (HURL) at Gorakhpur in Uttar 
Pradesh Sindri in Jharkhand and Barauni in Bihar, respectively. The units set up by p rivate 
companies are Panagarh urea unit of Matix Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. (Matix) in West 
Bengal; and Gadepan -III urea unit of Chambal Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. (CFCL) in 
Rajasthan. Each of these units has installed capacity of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonne per annum 
(LMTPA). These units are highly energy efficient as they are based on latest technology. 
Ramagundam, Gorakhpur, Barauni and Sindri units have started Urea production on 
22.03.2021, 07.12.2021, 18.10.2022 05.11.2022 respectively. Therefore, these units have 
together added urea production capacity of 50.8 LMTPA. These revived units have been 
constructed on land of FCIL & HFCL.The land utilization status of Fertilizer Corporation of 
India Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFCL) highlights ongoing 
efforts to optimize surplus land holdings. In FCIL, at Sindri, around 1,375 acres remained 
after leasing land to HURL, out of which 390 acres have been leased to SAIL and ACC, 
leaving about 985 acres available for further leas ing as per government policy. At 
Ramagundam and Talcher, no surplus land is available following leasing to RFCL and TFL. 
At Korba, 587 acres of leasehold land (without a formal lease deed) and 36 acres of freehold 
land remain vacant.In HFCL, at Haldia, the process of surrendering land to Kolkata Port Trust 
was decided in consultation with Ministry of Shipping. HFCL has surrendered 183.94 acres 
of Land to Kolkata Port Trust and the surrender of Township land measuring 65.694 acres is 
in process. At Durgapur, 830.17 acres of land provided by the Government of West Bengal 

9 
 
remains without a formal lease deed, and a claim of ₹526.63 crore has been raised for its 
regularization. At Barauni, approximately 90 acres of land remains available for leasing after 
allotment to HURL. Overall, efforts are being made to monetize, regularize, or optimally utilize 
surplus land in line with policy guidelines.It is mentioned that in the previous submissions to 
the Standing Committee included land details and revival possibilities for Haldia and 
Durgapur plants vide DoF's letter dated 18.02.20 25 and 05.06.2025. Revival decisions are 
contingent to urea supply demand dynamics in the country; however, the recommendations 
of the Committee have been noted. Towards this direction, a VC meeting was held on 
04.09.2025 between CMD HFCL -cum-Addl. Secreta ry, DoF and CEO, ADDA confirming 
payment position on part of HFCL with the request to execute the lease deed in favour of 
HFCL in Durgapur. This has been followed by a request dated 04.11.2025 to the State 
Government of West Bengal for early finalization o f the matter. Senior Economic Adviser, 
DoF wrote to Additional Chief Secretary, Department of Urban Development and Municipal 
Affairs (Government of West Bengal) on 18th May, 2026 requesting for early finalization of 
the lease deed in favour of HFCL in Dur gapur, in reference to the earlier letter dated 
04.11.2025.” 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.16 The Committee had recommended that the Department of Fertilizers to: (i) 
Examine the feasibility of restarting fertilizer production at Durgapur  of fertilizer to , 
taking into account infrastructure, logistics, feedstock availability and financial 
viability; (ii) Pursue the resolution of the Durgapur land issues with the Government 
of West Bengal through appropriate channels and apprise the Committee of the 
progress made within three months; and (iii) Furnish a detailed status note on the 
steps taken to reso lve the issue relating to the 268.335 acres of FCIL land at 
Gorakhpur. The Committee are happy to note that the action taken reply f urnished a 
detailed status of the land assets of Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited (FCIL) and 
Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFCL), which wa s a positive step towards 
providing a comprehensive picture of the assets held by the  two Public Sector 
Undertakings. The Committee, however, observe that t he reply was  confined to the 
status of the lease deed and the regul arization claim and does not indicate whether 
the viability of reviving the fertilizer plant at Durgapur was examined considering its 
strategic industrial location and existing infrastructure . The Committee further note 
that, despite continued correspondence with the Government of West Bengal, the 
issues relating to the Durgapur land remain unresolved. The Action Taken Reply has 
also not indicated the present status of the land at Gorakhpur that was placed under 
the control of the District Magistrate without the consent of FCIL.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that they be apprised of 
the action taken in the matter. 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 19 

10 
 
 
Achieving Self Reliance in Potash and Phosphate Mineral Exploration 
1.17 Recognizing the need to enhance India's self -reliance in potash and phosphate 
resources through indigenous exploration and technological innovation, the Committee 
recommended as under: – 
 
“The Committee note with serious concern that India remains almost entirely import 
dependent for potash and heavily dependent for rock phosphate, importing nearly 100 per 
cent of potash and about 90 per cent of rock phosphate requirements. This exposes the 
country to major strategic and economic vulnerabilities, as disruptions in global supply chains 
or price volatility in supplier countries can directly affect fertilizer availability, subsidy 
expenditure and ultimately national food security. At the same time, the Committee note that 
substantial potash resources have been identified in the Nagaur Ganganagar Evaporite 
Basin in Rajasthan, with estimated resources of over 23,000 MT, while other potential 
occurrences of potash and phosphate minerals have been r eported in Rajasthan, Gujarat, 
Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya and Andhra Pradesh. However, 
only a small portion of these deposits has been systematically explored and India still lacks 
indigenous technology for deep solution mining of potash and for efficient beneficiation of 
low-grade phosphate ores. Although the recent auction of potash blocks in Hanumangarh 
district marks an important step, the Committee observe that exploration and technology 
development remain far below the scale required to achieve meaningful import substitution. 
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that the Government launch a mission mode 
National Programme for Potash and Phosphate Mineral Development, led by the Department 
of Fertilizers in coordination wi th the Ministry of Mines, Geological Survey of India, Mineral 
Exploration and Consultancy Limited (MECL) and scientific institutions. This programme 
should focus on accelerated exploration of the Nagaur-Ganganagar Basin and other potential 
regions, development of indigenous solution mining technology for deep potash deposits, 
research on beneficiation of low-grade rock phosphate and evaluation of alternative potassic 
minerals such as glauconite. The Committee further recommend the creation of a dedicated 
research and exploration framework with adequate annual funding, as even modest 
investments in domestic mineral exploration and technology development could significantly 
reduce India’s long -term dependence on imported fertilizer raw materials and strengthen  
national fertilizer security.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.18 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated as under: - 
“Department of Fertilizers (DoF) is actively taking up the matter with the Ministry of 
Mines to expedite exploration and development of potash and phosphate resources in the 
country. In this regard, it is submitted that the Ministry of Mines, vide Order dated 09.04.2026, 
has approved extension of the period for execution of the mining lease for the Birmania Rock 
Phosphate Block (400 hectares) in favour of M/s FAGMIL under sub -section (4) of Section 

11 
 
17A of the MMDR Act, for a further period of two years. This step is expected to facilitate 
early operationalization of the block, augment domestic production of rock phosphate and 
reduce import dependence.” 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.19 The Committee had recommended that the Department: (i) Examine, in 
consultation with the Ministry of Mines, the Geological Survey of India and Mineral 
Exploration and Consultancy Limited (MECL), the feasibility of establishing a 
structured National Programme for Potash and Phosphate Mineral Development with 
an appropriate institutional framework; (ii) Furnish to the Committee, within three 
months, the present status of exploration in the Nagaur-Ganganagar Evaporite Basin 
together with a roadmap for its accelerated development; and (iii) Examine and report 
on the feasibility of developing indigenous technologies for deep solution mining of 
potash and beneficiation of low-grade rock phosphate, with a view to reducing India's 
long-term import dependence on  these critical minerals . The Committee had 
recommended a comprehensive, mission -mode National Programme for Potash and 
Phosphate Mineral Development encompassing accelerated exploration of domestic 
mineral resources, development of indigenous technologies for potash solution 
mining and beneficiatio n of low -grade rock phosphate, and evaluation of alternative 
potassic minerals, supported by an appropriate institutional and funding framework. 
The Committee, however, find the Action Taken Reply, cited an approved extension of 
an existing mining lease fo r the Birmania Rock Phosphate block while indicating the 
Department's active involvement with the Ministry of Mines to expedite exploration 
and development of potash and phosphate r eserves in its country. The Committee, 
however, note that the reply was silent on the present status of exploration of the 
substantial potash resources identified in the Nagaur -Ganganagar Evaporite Basin, 
nor does it address the development of indigenous technologies for potash solution 
mining, beneficiation of low -grade rock pho sphate or the evaluation of alternative 
potassic minerals. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and desire that a complete action taken on all the recommendation made be apprised 
to them. 
 
Recommendation SL. No. 21 
 
Formulating a Long -Term National Strategy for Sustainable and Balanced Fertilizer 
Use 
1.20 Noting the need to promote balanced, efficient and sustainable fertilizer use through 
a coordinated national approach, the Committee recommended as under: – 
 
“The Committee observe that India's fertilizer ecosystem is currently caught in a 
structural tension: on one hand, the country must ensure adequate and affordable supply of 

12 
 
fertilizers to sustain agricultural productivity and food security; on the other, unchecked 
dependence on chemical fertilizers, particularly urea, is contributing to soil degradation, 
nutrient imbalance, groundwater contamination, and growing greenhouse ga s emissions 
from the agricultural sector. The NPK use ratio, which ideally should be close to 4:2:1, has 
been badly distorted by the differential subsidy structure that makes urea disproportionately 
cheap relative to phosphatic and potassic fertilizers, incentivizing over-application of nitrogen 
and under -application of phosphorus and potassium. The Committee note that the 
Government initiatives like expanding Nano Urea and Nano DAP, issuing Soil Health Cards, 
promoting organic fertilizers through the MDA s cheme and the GOBARdhan initiative, 
integrating PM-PRANAM for chemical fertilizer reduction incentives, remain siloed without 
cohering into a unified national strategy for sustainable fertilizer use. The Committee further 
note that bio -fertilizers and prec ision agriculture technologies remain largely outside the 
existing policy and subsidy framework despite their potential to reduce chemical fertilizer 
dependence. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Department of Fertilizers, in 
coordination with relevant ministries and ICAR, formulate a time-bound National Sustainable 
Fertilizer Use Strategy that links subsidized fertilizer dispensation to soil -specific 
recommendations, corrects the skewed NPK consumption ratio, establishes a Bio -Fertilizer 
Development Mission, integrates drone -based and technology -driven tools into farmer 
outreach, and introduces a mandatory annual Fertilizer Sustainability Report to track 
progress on soil health, consumption trends, and greenhouse gas emissions.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.21 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated as under: - 
“The Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is actively promoting 
the judicious use of fertilizers to ensure balanced nutrient management, improve soil health, 
enhance fertilizer use efficiency, and reduce the environmental impact of excessive fertilizer 
application. A key initiative in this direction is the Soil Health Card (SHC) Scheme, under 
which more than 26 crore Soil Health Cards have been generated since 2014 -15. These 
cards provide farmers with crop-wise recommendations on the appropriate type and quantity 
of fertilizers based on the nutrient status of their soils, thereby enabling need -based and 
scientific fertilizer application.To further encourage balanced fertilization and reduce 
dependence on imported fertilizers, the Government is promoting the use of alternative 
nutrient sources. Farmers are being encouraged to adopt NPK fertilizers and Single Super 
Phosphate (SSP) as suitable alternatives to excessive dependence on DAP. Similarly, the 
use of Ammonium Sulphate is being promoted as an alternative source of nitrogen and 
sulphur to reduce over-reliance on urea. The Government is also advocating the adoption of 
green manuring practices, which help improve soil organic matter content and naturally 
supplement nitrogen requirements, the reby lowering the need for chemical fertilizers.In 
addition, a National Fertilizer Framework has been developed to guide farmers and 
stakeholders on the judicious and balanced use of fertilizers based on general fertilizer 

13 
 
recommendations. Complementing these efforts, DA&FW and ICAR have jointly undertaken 
extensive awareness campaigns on the scientific use of fertilizers. During this year, 1,76,527 
awareness campaigns programmes have been conducted, benefiting approximately  47.48 
lakh farmers, thereby strengthening farmers' capacity to adopt sustainable nutrient 
management practices.” 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.22 The Committee had recommended that the  Department: (i) Formulate a time -
bound National Sustainable Fertilizer Use Strategy integrating the existing initiatives 
under a unified framework with clearly defined objectives and outcomes; (ii) Examine 
and propose measures to address the distorted NPK  consumption ratio arising from 
the differential subsidy structure; (iii) Examine the feasibility of establishing a 
dedicated Bio -Fertilizer Development Mission; and (iv) Institute an annual Fertilizer 
Sustainability Report, to be furnished to the Committee, covering key indicators 
relating to soil health, fertilizer use and environmental sustainability.  The Committee 
are happy to note that the Action Taken Reply primarily outlines the initiatives relating 
to Soil Health Cards, the National Fertilizer Framework and farmer awareness 
programmes. The Committee, however, observe that the reply is apparently silent on 
aspects pertaining to correction of distorted NPK consumption ratio, establishment of 
a Bio -Fertilizer Development Mission, greater use of technology -driven farmer 
outreach or publication of an annual Fertilizer Sustainability Report.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their recommendation s and desire tha t they be apprised of the 
point wise Action Taken on all their recommendations. 
******* 

14 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.1 
 
Adequacy of Budgetary Allocation and the Pattern of Under-Provisioning 
 
2.1 The Committee, in their Twenty-First Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as 
under: - 
 
      “The Committee note that the total Demands for Grants (2026 -27) for the 
Department of Fertilizers have been placed at Rs. 1,87,162.53 crore (BE), 
representing an increase of approximately 1.67 per cent over the BE of Rs. 
1,84,082.44 crore for 2025 -26. The C ommittee, however, observe a consistent and 
structurally significant pattern of under -provisioning at the Budget Estimate stage, 
where the initial allocations have invariably fallen short of actual expenditure 
requirements over the years. In 2023 -24, the BE of Rs. 1,79,128.48 crore expanded 
to a final allocation of Rs. 1,95,479.29 crore. In 2024 -25, the BE of Rs. 1,68,130.81 
crore was ultimately enhanced to Rs. 1,77,236.29 crore. In 2025 -26, the BE of Rs. 
1,84,082.44 crore was revised to Rs. 2,15,148.63 cro re, an upward revision of over 
Rs. 31,000 crore. The Committee are of the considered view that this recurring pattern 
of underestimation at the BE stage and subsequent mid -year enhancement through 
supplementary grants creates operational uncertainty, disru pts subsidy release 
cycles, and impairs the long -term planning capacity of the fertilizer industry. The 
practice of parking subsidies in subsequent year's liabilities also distorts the true 
picture of Government's subsidy outgo. The Committee, therefore, s trongly urge the 
Government to adopt a more realistic, data-driven approach to budgetary estimation; 
one that takes into account historical expenditure trends, projected consumption, 
prevailing international commodity prices, exchange rate volatility, and natural gas 
price fluctuations, so that BE allocations are as close to actual requirements as 
possible. The Committee further desire that the Finance Ministry should be more 
responsive to the Department's genuine requirements at the stage of finalizing Budget 
Estimates, and adequate flexibility should be built into the system to avoid fiscal 
distress during peak crop seasons.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.2 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated as under: - 
 
“The Committee’s observations are well noted, however, it is important to 
highlight the following point: 

15 
 
At the BE stage, allocations are finalized by Ministry of Finance based on the 
estimation of subsidy which depends upon several factors like the price of 
International Gas Price etc. The Department seeks additional funds at RE stage 
depending upon the requirements so as to ensure that there is no impact on the 
release of subsidy payment.  Fertilizers subsidies are highly sensitive to International 
Urea/ DAP/MOP prices and natural gas costs. These are inherently volatile and 
difficult to predict with precision, at the BE stage. Ministry of Finance reviews and 
allocates funds at different stages as per need and requirement.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.2 
 
Underutilisation of Funds, Re -appropriation and Surrender: Strengthening 
Expenditure Management and Accountability 
2.3 The Committee, in their Twenty -First Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: - 
   “The Committee observe that an analysis of Budget Estimates (BE), Revised 
Estimates (RE), actual expenditure and targets versus achievements of the 
Department of Fertilizers during 2023 to 2026 reveals a recurring pattern of 
underutilisation of funds under several developmental and technology schemes, even 
as the Department regularly seeks supplementary allocations for major subsidy 
heads. This coexistence of under provision in subsidy heads and underutilisation in 
development schemes indicates structura l weaknesses in financial planning and 
expenditure management. Scheme wise data highlights this concern. Under the 
Market Development Assistance (MDA) scheme for organic fertilizers, the three -year 
average achievement stands at about 68 per cent. Under Research and Development 
in Organic Fertilizers, expenditure has remained far below allocations, resulting in 
repeated reductions in Revised Estimates and a sharp reduction in Budget Estimate 
for 2026 to 2027 to Rs. 15 crores from the earlier proposed Rs. 50 crores. The 
Committee also note instances of re appropriation and surrender of funds, including 
Rs. 7.30 crore under DBT Capital Outlay (MH 5475) due to non -finalisation of bids 
and surrender under Secretariat Expenditure (MH 3451) due to 51 vacant posts o ut 
of 198 sanctioned posts. At the same time, sharp revisions in subsidy estimates, such 
as the increase in imported urea subsidy from Budget Estimate Rs. 21,000 crores to 
Revised Estimate Rs. 51,972 crores in 2025 to 2026, point to weaknesses in demand 
estimation. The Committee recommend that the Department should institute a scheme 
wise expenditure performance framework with variance analysis as part of the 
Demands for Grants. Developmental schemes should be supported by advance 
annual action plans with q uarterly expenditure milestones and monthly monitoring. 
The Department should also expedite procurement for DBT infrastructure, avoid token 
allocations where expenditure is not anticipated, ensure realistic budgeting, and fill 
vacant posts in a time bound manner, so as to minimise surrender of funds and 
strengthen financial discipline.” 

16 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.4 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
 
“The Government has approved the Market Development Assistance (MDA) @ 
W1500/MT to promote soil carbon enhancers like Fermented Organic Manure (FOM), 
Liquid Fermented Organic Manure (LFOM) and Phosphate Rich Organic Manure 
(PROM) organic fertilizers produce d at plants under GOBARdhan initiatives, with the 
total outlay of T1451.84 crore (FY 2023 -24 to 2025 -26), which includes a corpus of 
1360 crore for research gap funding etc. 
At the time of launch of the scheme, it was envisaged to set up 1100 (400 CBG +700 
BG) plants. However, as on 31.3.2026, only 137 CBG/BG plants are registered on 
iFMS portal for sale of FOM/LFOM/PROM under MDA scheme. 
The sale of FOM/LFOM/PROM has registered a significant increase from 56058.62 
MTs in 2023-24 to 25,22,851.31 MTs (cumulative) in 2026 -27, as on 8.4.2026. The 
expenditure on sale of FOM/LFOM/PROM which was 28.00 crore against RE of Rs. 
35.00 crore in 2024-25 has increased to Rs. 100.00 crore in 2025-26, as on 31.3.2026 
against RE of Rs. 100.00 crore. There has been 100% utilization of funds during the 
year 2025-26. However, as per the directions of PMO, MoPNG is preparing a new 
scheme for the CBG sector. The Scheme of MDA is also proposed to be subsumed 
under this new scheme. 
Department of Fertilizers has invited proposals on R&D in organic fertilizers from 
Central/State Research Institutes, non-private fertilizer cooperatives, all government 
institutions including central and State institutions, ICAR institutions, Agro Economic 
Research Centers (AERCs), Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), State Agriculture 
Universities (SAUs), non -private cooperatives to undertake the research/ 
development/ promotion on issues related to MDA. 
Under Research & Development MDA scheme, only four projects (3 from ICAR 
and 1 from Y.S.Parmar University, H.P) have been approved by the Department with 
project cost of Rs. 2859.47 lakhs. Mls Project & Development India Limited (PDIL) 
has been nominated the Central Nodal Agency (CNA) for the Central Sector Scheme 
of "Promotion of Organic Fertilizers (Research & Development). 
  
Details of year-wise budgetary allocation and expenditure under 
Research & Development (R&D) is as under: 
                       (Rs. in Crore) 
S.No. Components             2023 -24 2024-25 2025-26 
    BE RE Exp BE RE Exp. BE RE Exp 
1 R&D 120 1.00 0.25 20.00 10.00 4.56 50.00 8.00 5.37 

17 
 
As per COS meeting held on 24.06.2025 under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary 
to review scheme related to Compressed Bio Gas (CBG) and GOBARdhan, it was 
recommended that ICAR will be the Nodal Department to take forward R&D initiatives 
for improving oñ take of CBG by -products. The scheme has been extended for two 
years beyond 2025-2026 upto 2028-29, with existing outlay. 
  
The observations of standing committee on surrender of funds for DBT infrastructure 
have been noted for compliance during FY 2026-27. 
  
Department of Fertilizers is not the direct cadre controlling authority for all posts under 
its administrative jurisdiction and, therefore, is not directly responsible for vacancies 
arising therein except for MTS, AD (Shipping), AC (Shipping) & DC (POP). W henever 
any post falls vacant due to retirement, resignation, promotion, deputation, etc, the 
concerned cadre controlling authorities are informed promptly for taking necessary 
action to fill up the vacancies in a time-bound manner. Further, with regard to surrender 
of funds under Secretariat Expenditure (MH 3451), due to vacant posts out of 
sanctioned posts, it is submitted that only a meagre amount of Rs. 5 lakh has been 
surrendered.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.3 
 
Rationalising Budgetary Provision for Imported Urea 
 
2.5 The Committee, in their Twenty -First Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: - 
“The Committee observe that the budgetary provision for imported urea has 
shown considerable volatility, reflecting the challenges in accurately estimating subsidy 
requirements in a sector influenced by domestic production levels and global price 
movements. In FY 2025–26, the Budget Estimate (BE) of Rs. 21,000 crore was revised 
to Rs. 51,972 crore at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage, representing an increase of 
Rs. 30,972 crore (about 147 per cent). As of 27 January 2026, actual expenditure had 
already reach ed Rs. 36,952.33 crore. The Committee note that such variations are 
closely linked to gaps between targeted and actual domestic production. Urea 
production in 2024 –25 was 306.67 LMT against the target of 316.78 LMT, while in 
2022–23 it stood at 284.94 LMT against a target of 317.00 LMT. Given the subsidy 
differential of about Rs. 2,100 per bag for imported urea compared to Rs. 1,397 per bag 
for domestically produced urea, even modest domestic production shortfalls 
significantly increase subsidy outgo. It ha s been indicated that a 10 LMT shortfall in 
domestic production may lead to nearly Rs. 7,000 crore of additional subsidy due to 
higher imports. Conversely, in 2024 –25 an amount of Rs. 678.50 crore had to be re -
appropriated due to lower -than-anticipated imp orts, highlighting the uncertainty in 
current projections. The Committee, therefore, recommend that budget estimates for 

18 
 
imported urea should be prepared using a scenario -based approach, incorporating 
baseline, optimistic and adverse cases with explicit assumptions regarding domestic 
production, global urea prices and exchange rates. The Committee also recommend 
strengthening real -time monitoring of plant -level production across all urea units to 
enable monthly forecasting and timely adjustment of import planning, thereby improving 
the reliability of subsidy projections.” 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.6 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
 
   “It is informed that every effort is made by the Fertilizer Subsidy Division to 
prepare realistic Budget Estimates (BE) by duly factoring in demand projections, 
anticipated domestic production, prevailing global prices of urea, exchange rate trends, 
and other cost components. These estimates are based on the best available data and 
inter-ministerial consultations at the time of formulation. 
However, given the inherent volatility in global fertilizer prices, uncertainties in 
exchange rates, and variations in domestic production levels, some degree of 
fluctuation in subsidy requirements remains unavoidable. 
Notwithstanding the above, the Department has taken note of the recommendations of 
the Committee namely:  
Adoption of a scenario -based approach for preparation of Budget Estimates for 
imported urea, incorporating baseline, optimistic and adverse scenarios with clearly 
defined assumptions regarding domestic production, global prices and exchange rates 
to further strengthen the estimation process and address the challenges of volatility. It 
is submitted that sincere efforts will be made to incorporate above recommendations 
while formulating the BE in future, to further improve the robustness and accuracy of 
Budget Estimates and subsidy projections.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.4 
 
Continuation and Review of the Urea Subsidy Scheme 
 
2.7 The Committee, in their Twenty-First Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: - 
            “The Committee note that the continuation of the Urea Subsidy Scheme beyond 
31 March 2026 is contingent on the outcome of an evaluation being carried out by the 
Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO), NITI Aayog, and a study being 
conducted by NITI Aayog for continuation of the NBS scheme for P&K fertilizers. The 
Committee acknowledge the importance of these evidence -based evaluations for 

19 
 
ensuring that fertilizer subsidies are both fiscally efficient and agronomically effective. 
However, they are deeply concerned about the uncertainty that arises if decisions on 
continuation are delayed beyond the expiry of the existing scheme. Urea account s for 
the largest share of the fertilizer subsidy budget, and any gap in the legal continuity of 
the Urea Subsidy Scheme, even temporarily, could create confusion at the level of 
manufacturers, importers, and distribution chains, potentially affecting supply to farmers 
during the critical Kharif and Rabi sowing seasons. The Committee note that as per the 
data furnished, the domestic production of urea stood at 306.67 LMT in 2024 -25, and 
imports of approximately 85 LMT are projected for 2026 -27, entailing a subsidy outgo 
of Rs. 91,000 crore (for Indigenous Urea) and Rs. 31,999 crore (for Imported Urea) 
respectively. Timely continuation of the scheme is indispensable to ensure supply chain 
continuity and price stability. The Committee, therefore, urge the Gove rnment to 
expedite the completion of the NITI Aayog/DMEO evaluation, ensure that the Cabinet 
decision on continuation of both the Urea Subsidy Scheme and the NBS scheme is 
taken well before their date of expiry, and that the industry, States, and distribut ion 
channels are informed in advance to avoid any disruption. The Committee further desire 
that the revised subsidy framework, as and when approved, should comprehensively 
address key issues, including the rationalization of energy norms, the adoption of import 
substitution strategies, and the promotion of Nano Urea as a supplement to 
conventional urea.” 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.8 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
 
   “Draft Report for Urea Subsidy Scheme has been received in the Department 
from NITI Aayog and is currently under examination in the Department. 
It is submitted that the evaluation of the Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Scheme by the 
Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO), NITI Aayog, is currently 
underway. The Department is closely coordinating with NITI Aayog to ensure 
expeditious completion of the evaluation. The Cabinet in its meeting held on 08.04.2026 
has approved NBS subsidy rates for Kharif 2026. 
In order to promote balanced and efficient use of fertilizers, the Government is 
encouraging the adoption of Nano Fertilizers, including Nano Urea and Nano DAP, as 
supplements to conventional fertilizers. The following measures have been undertaken 
in this regard: 
i. Use of Nano Fertilizers is promoted through different activities such as awareness 
camps, webinars, field demonstrations, Kisan Sammelans and films in regional 
languages etc.  

20 
 
ii. Nano Fertilizers are made available at Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samridhi Kendras 
(PMKSKs) by concerned companies. 
iii. Nano Fertilizers has been included under monthly supply plan issued by 
Department of Fertilizers (DoF) regularly.  
iv. For ease in application and utilization of Nano fertilizers like Nano Urea through 
foliar application, initiatives such as innovative spraying options like 'Kisan Drones' 
and distribution of battery -operated Sprayers at retail points are undertaken. For 
this purpose, pilot training and custom hiring spr aying services through Village 
Level Entrepreneurs are actively promoted. 
v. DoF in collaboration with fertilizer companies has initiated a Maha Abhiyan for 
adoption of Nano DAP in all 15 agro -climatic zones of the country through 
consultations and field level demonstrations. Further, DoF in collaboration with 
fertilizer companies has also launched campaign for field level demonstrations and 
awareness programs of Nano Urea plus in 100 districts of the country. 
Nevertheless, the recommendation of the Committee has been duly noted and will be 
considered while finalizing future fertilizer subsidy policies, with a focus on efficient 
use of funds, sustainable farming, and the welfare of farmers.” 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.5 
 
Rationalizing the Subsidy Burden: Indigenous Production versus Imports 
 
2.9 The Committee, in their Twenty -First Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: - 
            “The Committee observe that the per-bag subsidy burden on imported urea, at 
approximately Rs. 2,100 per 45 -kg bag, is substantially higher than the subsidy of 
approximately Rs. 1,397 per bag for domestically produced urea. The significant 
difference arises from the volatility of international urea prices, freight and insurance 
costs, port handling charges, and exchange rate fluctuations. Similarly, in the case of 
phosphatic and potassic fertilizers, the subsidy outgo for imported varieties is 
structurally higher than for domestically produced fertilizers. The Committee note with 
concern that the Government's continued reliance on imports as a buffer against 
domestic supply gaps exposes the exchequer to significant and unpredictable fiscal 
pressures. In 2025 -26, the Revised Estimates for imported urea alone stood at Rs. 
51,972 crore, far exceeding the Budget Estimate of Rs. 21,000 crore, primarily due to 
unforeseen demand and supply disruptions in global markets. At the same time, the 
Committee observe that Ind ia currently has 33 urea manufacturing units, of which 27 
units are over 25 years old and 7 units are over 50 years old. Many of these vintage 
plants require substantial investments in modernization, implementation of Energy 
Saving Scheme (ESS) measures, and ongoing operations and maintenance in order to 
sustain efficient production levels. The Committee are of the view that continued 

21 
 
reliance on ageing plants without a structured modernization or replacement strategy 
may constrain the long -term expansion of domestic urea production capacity. The 
Committee therefore believe that the most effective long-term strategy for reducing the 
subsidy burden on imports lies in strengthening domestic production capacity through 
modernization of existing plants and establishment of new, energy -efficient units. The 
Committee also note that certain major projects, including the Talcher Fertilizers Limited 
coal gasification -based urea project and the brownfield complex of Assam Valley 
Fertilizer and Chemical Company Limited at Namrup, are expected to contribute to 
domestic production once commissioned. The Committee recommend that the 
Department of Ferti lizers should draw up a clear and time -bound roadmap for 
modernization, revamping, and phased replacement of ageing urea plants, particularly 
those that are more than 25 –50 years old, with new energy -efficient facilities. The 
roadmap should include annual milestones for commissioning of new plants, 
implementation of Energy Saving Scheme (ESS) measures, and mobilization of the 
necessary capital expenditure by fertilizer companies.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.10 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
 
“It is stated that as per the recommendation of the Expert Group under the 
chairmanship of Dr. V. Saraswat, Member, NITI Aayog, vide OM dated 30 th October 
2025, Multi -Disciplinary Committee of Technical Experts is being constituted. 
Nominations have been sought from the concerned Departments. The details of the 
composition of the committee are as follows: 
S. No. Designation Role in Committee 
1  Member, NITI Aayog (to be nominated by CEO NITI 
Aayog) 
Chairperson 
2 Technical Expert from NITI Aayog (to be nominated 
by CEO NITI Aayog) 
Member 
3 CMD-RCF Member 
4 CMD-PDIL Member 
5 Representative from GAIL.  
(to be nominated by MoPNG) 
Member 
6 Director (Tech.)-NFL Convener 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.7 
 
Talcher Fertilizers Limited: Timely Commissioning of India's First Coal 
Gasification-based Urea Plant 
 
2.11 The Committee, in their Twenty -First Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: - 
            “The Committee note that the Talcher Fertilizers Limited (TFL) project, 
conceived as India's pioneering coal gasification -based urea plant with an annual 
capacity of 12.7 LMTPA, has suffered significant delays and cost escalations. As on 31 
January 2026, th e physical progress of the project stood at 70.94 per cent, and the 
revised commissioning timeline has been pushed to December 2027. The total project 
cost has escalated from an initial estimate of approximately Rs. 13,500 crore to about 
Rs. 19,000 crore, representing an increase of over Rs. 5,500 crore. The delay has been 
attributed to COVID -related disruptions, challenges with the Chinese technology 
partner M/s Wuhuan Engineering Company Ltd. involving geopolitical complications, 
visa constraints, contractual disputes, and demands for cost escalation. The Committee 
recognize the transformative significance of this project as it would leverage India's vast 
reserves of low-grade coal to produce urea indigenously, saving an estimated Rs. 3,000 
to Rs. 4,000 crore per lakh tonne of domestic production, while also laying the 
foundation for similar investments in the future. However, the Committee are concerned 
that further delays could result in additional cost burden on the JV partners and lender 
banks, jeopardizing the financial viability of the project. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should closely monitor the 
project's progress on a monthly basis through a dedicated high -level oversight 
mechanism, resolve outstanding contractual, funding and technical issues on priority, 
and take all necessary steps to ensure that commissioning is completed by December 
2027 as committed. The Committee also recommend that once the project is 
successfully commissioned and the technology is validated, a structured policy 
framework for replicating coal gasification -based fertilizer manufacturing at other 
locations should be developed, so that India can progressively leverage its large coal 
reserves to reduce import dependence in the long run.” 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.12 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
 
   “TFL has undertaken sustained efforts to revive the project while ensuring no 
cost escalation and adherence to the committed timelines. Key initiatives include: 

23 
 
i. High-Level Monthly Review by DoF:  Monthly review meeting chaired by the 
Secretary Department of Fertilizers (DoF), is being held wherein the MD, TFL 
presents detailed project status through structured presentations. These reviews 
involve in-depth discussions on physical and financial prog ress, key challenges, 
and critical bottlenecks, with specific directions issued for timely resolution and 
corrective actions. 
ii. Continuous Engagement with LSTK Contractor (WECL): Multiple meetings 
were conducted with WECL at various levels to identify critical bottlenecks, resolve 
pending technical and contractual issues, and align on recovery plans. Timely 
payments against bills are ensured so that cash flow is maintained. 
iii. Issues requiring approvals from various dept are taken up through PMG 
portal for quick resolution. 
iv. Regular Review by JV Partners: Periodic review meetings by JV partners are 
being conducted to closely monitor project performance, address any coordination 
issues, and proactively resolve bottlenecks impacting execution.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.8 
 
Strengthening the Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy: Ensuring Farmer 
Affordability and Curbing Profiteering  
 
2.13 The Committee, in their Twenty -First Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: - 
            “The Committee note that the NBS Policy, operational since 2010 for P&K 
fertilizers, relies on a system of open Maximum Retail Prices (MRPs) with subsidy per 
nutrient fixed by the Government. While the flexibility in MRP helps respond to market 
dynamics, the Committee observe that it also creates room for manufacturers to charge 
unreasonable prices above their cost of production, effectively shifting the benefit of the 
NBS subsidy away from farmers. The Reasonability Guidelines issued on 18 Janu ary 
2024, which prescribe maximum permissible profit margins of 8 per cent for importers, 
10 per cent for manufacturers, and 12 per cent for integrated manufacturers represent 
a commendable initiative. The Committee also note that instances of unreasonable  
pricing were identified, and recovery notices were issued in 2023 -24; however, the 
companies challenged these notices in various High Courts, and recovery proceedings 
had to be kept on hold. Despite this, approximately Rs. 452.14 crore has been 
recovered as voluntary submissions. The Committee are of the view that the current 
enforcement mechanism is inadequate and needs to be strengthened. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should pursue the court cases relating to 
recovery of unreasonable profits with due diligence and ensure that the legal framework 
supporting the Reasonability Guidelines is robust enough to withstand judicial scrutiny. 
Further, a system of real-time cost data monitoring of P&K fertilizer companies should 
be put in place so that cases of unreasonable profit are detected and addressed within 

24 
 
the same financial year rather than retrospectively. The Committee also strongly 
recommend that the NBS rates should be revised periodically through the Inter -
Ministerial Committee (IMC) mechanism to reflect the actual cost structure of fertilizer 
inputs, especially in a highly volatile international commodity environment, so that 
farmers have access to P&K fertilizers at affordable and stable prices.” 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.14 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
 
“It is submitted that the Reasonability Guidelines issued on 18.01.2024 were a 
significant step towards ensuring fair pricing of P&K fertilizers. With regard to recovery 
proceedings currently under litigation, the Department is pursuing the matter vigorously 
in courts to safeguard Government interests.  
Further, it is mentioned that the NBS rates are revised on bi -annual basis.   The 
Government monitors international prices of key fertilizers and raw materials and 
fluctuations, if any, are subsumed while fixing NBS rates for P&K fertilizers annually / 
bi-annually to ensure affordable supply of P&K fertilizers to the farmers. Further, to 
make DAP which is a key fertilizer, available at affordable price of Rs. 1350 per 50 kg 
bag, special provisions like Rs. 3500 per MT to cover ‘Other Costs’ which includes costs 
incurred from factory gate to farm gate, advantage/ disadvantage due to increase/ 
decrease in international prices, provision for GST component included in the MRP and 
provision for reasonable return @ 4% of net MRP (MRP -GST) have been extended to 
both imported and domestic DAP and imported TSP over and above NBS subsidy for 
Kharif 2026 season to keep the prices of fertilizers stable.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.9 
 
Reducing Import Dependence in P&K Fertilizers: Building a Resilient and Self-
Reliant Fertilizer Supply Chain  
 
2.15 The Committee, in their Twenty-First Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: - 
            “The Committee observe that India's dependence on imports for critical fertilizer 
inputs remains a major structural vulnerability. Domestic production meets only about 
10 per cent of rock phosphate requirements, potash is almost entirely imported, and 
Sulphur also has limited domestic availability. This near -total import dependence 
exposes the country's fertilizer supply chain to the full brunt of geopolitical disruptions, 
global commodity price volatility, and foreign exchange risks. In particular, the ongoing 
geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and the consequent pressures on international 

25 
 
shipping routes underline the need for a proactive and forward -looking strategy to 
safeguard India's fertilizer supply chain. The acute shortage of Di -Ammonium 
Phosphate (DAP) during recent seasons, which necessitated a special additional 
support package o f Rs. 3,500 per MT over and above the NBS subsidy for DAP and 
imported TSP during Rabi 2025 -26 to keep farmer prices at Rs. 1,350 per 50 -kg bag, 
is a stark illustration of this vulnerability. The Committee note with some satisfaction 
that about 59.65 LMT of DAP/NPK plant capacity and 44.21 LMT of intermediate plant 
capacity (phosphoric and sulphuric acid) are under construction and are expected to be 
commissioned between 2028 and 2030. However, the Committee urge that the 
Government must not wait for a cris is to trigger corrective action. The Committee 
therefore recommend that a Fertilizer Supply Security Fund should be established to 
maintain strategic buffer stocks of critical P&K fertilizers and raw materials such as 
DAP, MOP, rock phosphate and phosphori c acid. Additionally, the Nutrient Based 
Subsidy (NBS) framework should incorporate automatic price -linked subsidy 
adjustment mechanisms, so that private importers retain incentives to import during 
periods of international price surge, thereby preventing supply disruptions. The 
department should also actively pursue backward integration through public -private 
partnerships, including investment in rock phosphate mines abroad, long -term supply 
agreements with potash -rich countries, and support for domestic S SP and PDM 
production. The Committee further recommend that the Department should set 
measurable targets for reducing import dependence in P&K fertilizers over the next five 
years, and periodically report progress to the Committee.” 
 
 REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.16 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
 
   “It is mentioned that the NBS rates are revised on bi -annual basis.   The 
Government monitors international prices of key fertilizers and raw materials and 
fluctuations, if any, are subsumed while fixing NBS rates for P&K fertilizers annually / 
bi-annually t o ensure affordable supply of P&K fertilizers to the farmers. Further, to 
make DAP which is a key fertilizer, available at affordable price of Rs. 1350 per 50 kg 
bag, special provisions like Rs. 3500 per MT to cover ‘Other Costs’ which includes costs 
incurred from factory gate to farm gate, advantage/ disadvantage due to increase/ 
decrease in international prices, provision for GST component included in the MRP and 
provision for reasonable return @ 4% of net MRP (MRP -GST) have been extended to 
both imported and domestic DAP and imported TSP over and above NBS subsidy for 
Kharif 2026 season to keep the prices of fertilizers stable. 

26 
 
The Government has approved Freight Subsidy on SSP, which is an indigenously 
manufactured fertilizer, since Kharif, 2022 to promote SSP usage for providing 
Phosphatic i.e. 'P' nutrient to the soil. 
Further, to address India’s significant import dependence on Potash, the Department 
has undertaken a multi -pronged strategy focused on promoting indigenous and 
alternative fertilizers such as PDM. A Joint Working Group (JWG) comprising 
representatives from the Department of Food & Public Distribution and the Department 
of Fertilizers has been constituted to streamline issues related to quality and pricing of 
PDM. As a result of these concerted efforts, sales of PDM have shown a steady 
increase - from 3.03 LMT in 2023-24, 3.91 LMT in 2024-25 & 5.35 LMT in 2025-26. 
Further, it is to submit that P&K fertilizer consumption is around 300 LMT annually, with 
a gradual shift from DAP to NPK complexes and SSP, indicating preference for more 
balanced fertilizers. The existing domestic production capacity of P&K fertilizers i s 
about 225 LMT, which will get augmented by 59 LMT by 2030 along with 44 LMT of raw 
materials/intermediates capacities. These augmented capacities will supplement 
domestic production and reduce import dependence.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.10 
 
PM-PRANAM Scheme: Need for Urgent Course Correction  
 
2.17 The Committee, in their Twenty -First Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: - 
          “The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the PM Programme for 
Restoration, Awareness Generation, Nourishment and Amelioration of Mother Earth 
(PM-PRANAM), approved for three years from 2023 -24 to 2025-26 with a provision to 
incentivize States and UTs for reducing chemical fertilizer consumption, has effectively 
been a non -starter in terms of financial disbursement. As of the time of examination, 
not a single rupee has been released as incentive to any State or UT under this scheme. 
Only 9 States/UTs were found eligible during 2023 -24 with a total reduction of 14.59 
LMT, while just 3 States/UTs were eligible in 2024 -25 with a much lower reduction of 
0.42 LMT. The scheme was designed with the laudable objective of promoting balanced 
and susta inable fertilizer use and reducing the nation's chemical fertilizer subsidy 
burden. However, the Committee observe that the incentive structure and the eligibility 
criteria of the scheme appear to be too complex and restrictive, with adjustments for 
natural calamities and consumption of neighbouring districts significantly limiting the 
pool of eligible States. With the scheme in its final year (2025 -26), the window for 
meaningful impact is rapidly closing. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that t he Government undertake an urgent review of the PM -PRANAM scheme to 
simplify eligibility conditions, reduce bureaucratic hurdles in disbursement, and process 
and release the incentives due to eligible States/UTs without further delay. Beyond the 
current scheme period, the Committee recommend that a revamped and more effective 

27 
 
successor scheme should be designed, in active consultation with State Governments, 
to genuinely incentivize a sustainable transition towards organic, nano, and biofertilizers 
and away from excess chemical fertilizer use. The scheme should also be backed b y 
adequate budgetary support commensurate with the scale of the targeted 
transformation.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.18 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
“The Department of Fertilizers acknowledges the concerns expressed by the 
Committee regarding the implementation of the PM-PRANAM scheme, particularly with 
respect to the non -disbursement of incentives and the limited number of eligible 
States/UTs.  
The scheme, approved on 28 June 2023, aims to promote balanced and sustainable 
fertilizer use by incentivizing States/UTs to reduce consumption of chemical 
fertilizers.  Under PM -PRANAM scheme, 14 States/UTs have shown a reduction of 
15.14 Lakh Metric Tons of chemical fertilizer (Urea, DAP, NPKs & MoP) usage, in the 
year 2023-24 as compared to the average consumption during the previous 3 financial 
years. However, only 9 States/UTs are found eligible with a total combined reduction of 
14.59 Lakh Metric Tons  of chemical fertilizer usage, after accounting for increase in 
fertilizer consumption in adjoining districts of neighbouring States and area affected due 
to natural calamities. During 2024-25, 6 States/UTs shown reduction, but only 3 States 
are found eligible under the scheme with a total combined reduction of 0.42 Lakh Metric 
Tons of chemical fertilizer usage under the scheme. The assessment process for the 
year 2025-26 is currently underway. 
The PM-PRANAM Scheme is currently under review by NITI Aayog for continuation 
beyond 2025-26. 
The Committee’s recommendation has been noted and will be considered while 
designing a more effective and streamlined framework to promote the use of organic, 
nano, and bio -fertilizers, with adequate budgetary support along with the 
recommendations of the NITI Aayog.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 11 
 
Market Development Assistance (MDA) Scheme: Addressing Chronic 
Underutilization  
 
2.19 The Committee, in their Twenty -First Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: - 
           “The Committee note that the Market Development Assistance (MDA) scheme, 
approved with a total corpus of Rs. 1,451.84 crore for the three-year period 2023-24 to 

28 
 
2025-26 to promote organic fertilizers (FOM, LFOM, PROM) produced at GOBARdhan 
initiative plants, has consistently underperformed in financial terms. Against an RE of 
Rs. 5 crores in 2023-24, expenditure was nil. In 2024-25, expenditure was Rs. 28 crores 
against RE of Rs. 35 crores. In 2025 -26, the BE of Rs. 100 crores proposed by the 
Department was reduced by the Ministry of Finance to a nominal allocation, and for 
2026-27, the BE of Rs. 75 crore was approved against a proposal of Rs. 200 crores. 
The Committee acknowledge that there has been some improvement in utilization, the 
overall expenditure on MDA rising sharply from 56,058 MT of organic fertilizers sold in 
2023-24 to 10,92,803 MT by 2025 -26 (up to December 2025), indicating growing 
participation. However, the cumulative expenditure as a proportion of the total corpus 
remains far below target, and the scheme is entering its final year without having 
achieved its full potential. The Committee also note with concern that the scheme is 
being transferred to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, with the Department of 
Fertilizers retaining only a residual provision for carry -over liabilities. The Committee 
desire that this transition should be managed seamlessly and without disruption to 
ongoing CBG pl ant operations and MDA claimants. The Committee recommend that 
the Department should proactively reach out to all registered and eligible CBG/biogas 
plants to ensure pending claims are submitted and processed before the end of the 
scheme period. A comprehe nsive assessment of the scheme's outcomes, including 
company-wise registration, production, sales, and subsidy disbursement should be 
done to enable informed evaluation of whether the GOBARdhan vision is being 
adequately served.” 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.20 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
 
   “The Government has approved the Market Development Assistance (MDA) 
@ W 1500/MT to promote soil carbon enhancers like Fermented Organic Manure 
(FOM), Liquid Fermented Organic Manure (LFOM) and Phosphate Rich Organic 
Manure (PROM) organic fertilizers produc ed at plants under GOBARdhan 
initiative   covering   different   biogas/CBG support schemes/programmes of 
stakeholders Ministries/ Departments at the total outlay of T1451.84 crore (FY2023-24 
to 2025-26), which includes a corpus of 1360 crore for research gap funding etc. 
Marketing of Fermented Organic Manure (FOM) / Liquid Fermented Organic Manure 
(LFOM) and Phosphate Rich Organic Manure (PROM) has been initiated by 137 CBG 
plants under MDA programme. To promote the sale 44 MoUs have been signed by 
FMCs with CBG units for marketing of FOM/LFOM/PROM. 
The sale of FOM/LFOM/PROM has registered a significant increase from 56058.62 
MTs in 2023 -24 to 25,22,851.31 MTs (cumulative) in 2026 -27, as on 8.4.2026. The 

29 
 
expenditure on sale of FOM/LFOM/PROM which was 28.00 crore against RE of Rs. 
35.00 crore in 2024-25 has increased to Rs. 100.00 crore in 2025-26, as on 31.3.2026 
against RE of Rs. 100.00 crore. There has been 100% utilization of fuds during the 
year 2025-26. 
The scheme is presently evaluated by NITI Aayog as a sub scheme of the Urea Subsidy 
Scheme. Since, there would be committed liability towards clearing claims beyond 
31.3.2026 till the new scheme is proposed and operated by Ministry of Petroleum and 
Natural Gas (MoPNG), the Department of Expenditure has been requested for 
extension of the scheme for a further period of six months with the existing outlay to 
meet the committed liabilities in respect of claims for sale of FOM/LFOM/PROM 
received from CBG/BG operators and Fertilizer Marketing Companies. 
As per the direction of PMO in a meeting held on 22.10.2025, MoPNG is preparing a 
new scheme named “Sustainable Advancement of Bio Methane Production and 
Utilization in Regional Networks (SAMPURN)” and it is also proposed to subsume the 
MDA scheme in the new scheme.” 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.13 
 
Curbing Black Marketing, Hoarding and Diversion of Subsidized Fertilizers  
 
2.21 The Committee, in their Twenty -First Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: - 
           “The Committee observe that despite the existence of the Direct Benefit Transfer 
framework with Aadhaar based biometric authentication, the cap of 50 bags per buyer 
per month, and the availability of purchase history data on PoS devices, diversion of 
subsidized fertilizers particularly urea for use in non -agricultural sectors such as resin, 
adhesives, plastics, textiles and leather industries continue to remain a matter of serious 
concern. The Committee note that the present system operates on a no denial ba sis 
across all States except Haryana, which makes it difficult to prevent over purchasing by 
genuine farmers or purchases by non-farmers using borrowed Aadhaar identities. The 
Committee acknowledge the initiative of launching the Dharti Mata Bachao Abhiyan in 
August 2025 under which 1,69,153 Gram level committees, 2,247 Sub Divisional level 
committees and 462 District level committees have been constituted. However, the 
Committee observe that the effectiveness of these bodies can only be assessed 
through sy stematic monitoring and periodic evaluation of their functioning. The 
Committee further note that while certain States such as Maharashtra have 
demonstrated higher detection rates due to extensive enforcement machinery including 
354 block level inspectors, many other States report very low punitive action despite a 
large number of inspections conducted. In view of these concerns, the Committee 
recommend that the Government should introduce a national level benchmarking 
framework to ensure greater uniformity , transparency and credibility in fertilizer 

30 
 
enforcement across States. The Committee further recommend that monthly data on 
buyers purchasing more than 40 bags, which is presently shared only at the district 
level, should be made available to State enforcement agencies in real time through a 
dedicated monitoring dashboard. The Committee also emphasize that the powers 
available to State Governments under the Essential Commodities Act and the Fertilizer 
Control Order should be exercised more proactively to prosecute cases of diversion 
and black marketing rather than restricting action primarily to issuance of show cause 
notices.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.22 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
  “The Government of India in consultation with the State Government is 
regularly monitoring the enforcement action taken by State Government against the 
cases of Black marketing, Hoarding, Sub -standard and Diversion on weekly basis. 
Since April 2025, 4,84,663 raids have been conducted with 17,392 show cause notices 
issued, 6,941 licenses suspended/cancelled and 847 FIRS registered against 
defaulters across the country. This Ministry regularly pursue with the State Government 
to strictly implement the enforcement action against the defaulters. Further, since April 
2026 till date, 84,860 raids have been conducted with 6,975 show cause notices issued, 
1,837 licenses suspended/cancelled and 108 FIRS registered against defaulters across 
the country. 
Further, a comprehensive multilevel mechanism with Committees constituted at Village 
level, Sub Division (taluka/ tehsil) & District Level was initiated in the Month of August, 
2025. Under the programme, Committees are being constituted at Village level headed 
by Gram Pradhan, Sub Division Level Committee headed by Sub Divisional Magistrate 
and District level Committee headed by District Magistrate. The Committees are 
monitoring excessive sale of fertilizers to particular individuals or group of individuals in 
panchayat, ascertaining the reasons for the same and informing district and sub -
division authorities in case of diversion for non agricultural use / cross border smuggling. 
Such surveillance mechanism keep vigil on any illegal diversion of fertilizers as well as 
on production/distribution of spurious or fake fertilizers. As on date, 2, 19,452 Gram 
level panchayat Committees, 2,615 Sub Divisional Level Committee and 537 District 
level Committee have been formed across the country. As on date, total 70,827 Gram 
Panchayat level meeting has been held, 4,841 cases reported to authorities and in i 50 
cases action taken by authorities. 
The Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), in collaboration with ICAR, 
has launched a special Fertilizer Awareness Campaign to educate farmers on the 
judicious and balanced use of fertilizers and to sensitize them to remain vigilant against 
the diversion and misuse of fertilizers. Under this initiative, a total of 1,41 ,276 


31 
 
awareness programmes have been conducted so far, reaching and benefiting 
37,65,449 farmers across the country." 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.14 
 
Nano Fertilizers: Scaling Up Production, Removing Regulatory Delays and 
Strengthening Adoption 
 
2.23 The Committee, in their Twenty -First Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: - 
            “The Committee note the encouraging progress made in the Nano fertilizer 
ecosystem in India. Findings of the National Productivity Council study indicate that the 
combined use of conventional urea with Nano Urea results in yield improvements 
ranging from 1. 65 per cent to 14.82 per cent across crops. Several variants of Nano 
Urea with higher nitrogen concentrations have been notified, while field trials suggest 
that Nano DAP can reduce the requirement of conventional DAP by up to 50 per cent 
with yield gains of over 5 per cent. Sales of Nano DAP have already reached 368.88 
lakh bottles, indicating growing farmer acceptance. However, the Committee note with 
concern that the Nano Urea plant of RCF at Trombay, commissioned in February 2025 
with an investment of Rs. 120.90 crore, is yet to commence commercial production due 
to the pending notification under the Fertilizer Control Order. The Committee also 
observe that while ongoing studies by the National Productivity Council and ICAR are 
examining agronomic impacts, long term evidence on soil health and ecological effects 
of Nano fertilizers remains limited. The Committee recommend that the Department of 
Fertilizers should expedite the pending regulatory approvals for the Trombay Nano 
Urea plant, prepare and disseminate standard application guidelines for Nano Urea and 
Nano DAP, and support long term multi location research through ICAR and agricultural 
universities to assess soil health impacts. The Committee further recommend that the 
Government should examine the feasibility of providing targeted support for Nano DAP 
to accelerate farmer adoption, subject to confirmation of agronomic efficacy, and 
establish a national monitoring framework to track region wise adoption, yield outcomes 
and long-term agronomic effects of Nano fertilizers.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.24 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
 
          “M/s Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF) has successfully 
commissioned Nano Urea plant on 4th February 2025 and subsequently requested 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DoA&FW) for inclusion of its Nano 

32 
 
Urea (based on IFFCO technology) under the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), Clause 
20-D, through letters dated 13.02.2025, 13.03.2025, 19.03.2025 & 22.01.2026. 
Department of Fertilizers (DoF) vide O.M. No. 34 -10/2023-FI, dated 25th March, 2025 
has also recommended to DoA&FW for issuance of the necessary notification.   
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DoA&FW), vide its communication 
dated 2nd March 2026, informed the Department of Fertilizers (DoF) that Rashtriya 
Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF) had not conducted the mandatory bio-efficacy 
and biosafety trials as required under Clause 20 -D of FCO, and had instead relied on 
the already notified product of IFFCO. DoA&FW informed that, while earlier policy did 
not permit notification without such trials, the 83rd CFC meeting allowed consideration 
of technology transfer cases subject to certain conditions, including submission of a 
duly signed MoU between the transferor and transferee, an undertaking to manufacture 
the product using the same technology and specifications, and submission of a product 
analysis report from National Test House (NTH) or Tamil Nadu Agricultural University 
(TNAU).   
Previously, RCF vide email dated 28th January 2026 had submitted to DoA&FW an 
analysis report from Tamil Nadu Agricultural University (excluding Transmission 
Electron Microscopy (TEM)), along with the required undertaking on 
technology/specifications and the MoU signed with IFFCO. 
Subsequently, DoA&FW vide letter dated 19th March 2026 has requested RCF to 
submit the complete analytical report including TEM. RCF has submitted samples to 
National Test House Ghaziabad on 2nd April 2026, and report of TEM analysis will be 
submitted as soon as it is received from NTH Ghaziabad to DA&FW.   
To ensure that nano urea are safe and beneficial for soil health, DoF has signed a 
tripartite MoU with Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) and National 
Fertilizers Limited (NFL), Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL), Fertilizers and Chemicals 
Travancore Limited (FACT), IFFCO and Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd (RCF) 
on 03.11.2025 for undertaking a Network Project on “Evaluation of nanourea on crop 
productivity and nitrogen use efficiency in diverse Agro-Ecological Zones of India”. The 
project is jointly funded by fertilizer PSUs and cooperatives and is being implemented 
through multiple collaborating agricultural institutions over a period of five years. This 
long-term, multi-location research initiative is designed to generate scientific evid ence 
on the impact of nano fertilizers on crop productivity, nitrogen use efficiency, and soil 
health, including their uptake mechanisms, recovery efficiency, and long -term effects 
on soil biological activity and nutrient balance. 
Fertilizer Companies have reported encouraging feedback from farmers on the use of 
Nano DAP, applied as seed treatment and foliar spray, with improvements observed in 
both crop yield and quality. Field trials and demonstrations conducted across various 
states indicate that Nano DAP can reduce the requirement of conventional DAP by up 
to 50%, while maintaining or enhancing productivity. Continuous farmer outreach and 
promotional activities have also led to increased adoption of Nano DAP across the 
country. Field trial results further show that Nano DAP application consistently enables 

33 
 
up to 50% reduction in conventional DAP usage, along with an average yield increase 
of over 5% in most crops. These findings are supported by trials conducted at farmers’ 
fields as well as by research institutions and State Agricultural Universities.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.16 
 
Revival and Financial Restructuring of Fertilizer Public Sector Undertakings 
 
2.25 The Committee, in their Twenty -First Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under:- 
            “The Committee observe that the financial position of several fertilizer Public 
Sector Undertakings under the Department of Fertilizers remains a matter of concern. 
The total arrears of Government loans as on 31 March 2025 from loanee entities alone 
amount to Rs. 7,09,043.14 lakh (about Rs. 7,090 crore) across MFL, FACT, BVFCL 
and HURL. FACT has an outstanding loan of Rs. 3,682.61 crore, for which a 
restructuring proposal involving annual repayment of Rs. 400 crore without further 
interest from January 2026 has been referred to the Department of Expenditure. MFL 
carries an outstanding loan of Rs. 554.24 crore originating from 1987 –88 and is yet to 
submit a revised revival proposal under the new PSE policy. BVFCL has an outstanding 
loan of Rs. 572 .75 crore, which has been converted into an interest free loan, while 
proposals for conversion into equity or waiver are under consideration. The Committee 
are constrained to note that persistent financial stress in these PSUs not only burdens 
the exchequer but also creates operational risks for the national fertilizer supply chain, 
as these units contribute significantly to domestic production, particularly in regions with 
limited private sector presence. The Committee therefore strongly recommend that the 
Department of Fertilizers, in close coordination with the Department of Expenditure and 
the Department of Public Enterprises, should finalize the financial restructuring of 
FACT, MFL and BVFCL within a clearly defined and time bound framework. The 
Committee further emphasize that restructuring must be accompanied by a 
comprehensive revival strategy for each PSU, incorporating measurable targets for 
operational efficiency, capital investment planning, compliance with energy norms and 
rationalization of workforce structures so that these units can transition from recurrent 
financial dependence to sustainable operational viability.” 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.26 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
 
   “With respect to FACT, the following  financial restructuring proposal was 
submitted by FACT: 

34 
 
i. Repayment of Rs.3,862.69 Crore (Principal and Interest as on 31.12.2025) in 
installment @ Rs.400 Crore per year (Rs.100 Crore per quarter) for a period of nine 
and a half years, starting from 01.01.2026; 
ii. (No further interest liability on Government Loan shall be charged to FACT effective 
from 01.01.2026; and 
iii. The amount shall be adjusted from the subsidy bills of the company, i.e., Rs.100 
Crore every quarter. 
Department of Fertilizers has submitted the following proposal of Financial 
Restructuring of FACT to Department of Expenditure (DoE) for concurrence: 
i. Repayment of Rs. 3,862.69 Crore (Principal amount of Rs. 1282.73 Crore 
plus Interest of Rs. 2579.96 Crore as on 31.12.2025) in installment @Rs. 400 Crore 
per year (or, Rs. 100 Crore per quarter) starting from 01.01.2026. The repayments 
shall be accounted exclusively against the Principal amount till the Principal amount 
is repaid fully. 
ii. No further interest liability on Government Loan shall be charged to FACT effective 
from 01.01.2026. 
Vide O.M. No. 6(02)/PFC -I/2026 (e.300767855) , dated 16.03.2026, Department of 
Expenditure conveyed that the matter was examined and the request of FACT for the 
proposed financial restructuring cannot be acceded to. 
Subsequently, FACT has forwarded a proposal on rationalization of interest rate for  the 
period 2016 -17 to 2025 -26, to enable proper accounting of interest, financial 
restructuring, and initiation of repayment of principal and interest to Government of 
India. With the concurrence of IFD,  DoF vide OM dated 12.05.2026 has forwarded the 
proposal of FACT to Budget Division, DEA, MoF for revision of interest rate. 
With respect to MFL, it is submitted that  DoF vide  O.M. No. 19055/05/2023 -PSU 
(e.35436), dated 18.02.2025  sent replies of List of Points to Lok Sabha Secretariat, 
Standing Committee of Chemicals and Fertilizers (refer Q. No. 75) wherein it was 
conveyed that Madras Fertilizers Limited had submitted a financial revival package for 
the consideration of Department of Fertilizers as under: 
I. 100% waiver of outstanding interest on GoI loans along with penal interest. 
II. Conversion of Principal amount in GoI loans of Rs. 554.24 crores to Zero 
interest loan repayable in 15 years annual equal instalments. 
Meanwhile, the New Public Sector Enterprise (PSE) Policy for Atmanirbhar Bharat, as 
notified by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Investment and Public Asset 
Management, vide  O.M. No. 3/3/2020 -DIPAM-II-B (E), dated 04.02.2021, was 
introduced.  
Subsequently, a meeting of Committee of Group of Officers (CGO) was held on 
12.08.2022 under the chairmanship of CEO, NITI Aayog  for the identification of CPSEs 
for privatization or closure in non -strategic sector. The Committee had recommended 
that the D oF may consult Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) due to stake held by the 
foreign company in the equity of the MFL, before taking a decision on 
closure/disinvestment of CPSE. In this regard, this Department vide letter, dated 

35 
 
01.11.2022, and reminder letter, dated 01.12.2022 had requested the Foreign 
Secretary, MEA to provide comments on the CGO recommendations in respect of MFL. 
Thereafter, a DO letter, dated 08.11.2023 from then Additional Secretary, DoF was also 
sent to MEA on the same matter and the recent communication vide DO letter dated 
14.02.2024. However, no response has been received from MEA to date, and the 
Department is still awaiting their comments. Meanwhile, the Iranian company, National 
Iranian Oil Company (NIO C), vide email, dated 18.05.2022 had submitted its views, 
stating that it considers itself obliged to continue operations and retain its shareholding 
in MFL.  
In view of the above position explained,  DoF vide  email dated  19.03.2025 has 
requested MFL for furnishing the revised updated proposal for Financial Restructuring. 
Further, DoF vide  letter dated 27.10.2025 and reminder letter, dated  22.12.2025 has 
requested MFL for furnishing the revised updated proposal. 
MFL vide letter, dated  24.12.2025 has stated that Energy norms for Urea from 
01.04.2025 yet to notified by DoF and MFL is not able to update that projected financial 
data in the new proposal. The matter is under consideration. 
A VC meeting was held on 04.05.2026 under the chairmanship of Sr.EA with regard to 
Financial Restructuring if MFL. MFL has submitted an interim proposal of Financial 
Restructuring to DoF. The same is under active examination. 
With respect to BVFCL, it is submitted that Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation 
Limited (BVFCL) has an outstanding Government of India loan of ₹572.75 crore. The 
CCEA in its meeting held on 21.05.2015 on financial restructuring of BVFCL has 
approved the conversion of GoI loan as Interest free loan and on attaining profit the 
company will service the GoI loan. Furthermore, it is submitted that with the approval 
of CCEA, grants-in-aid of Rs.100 Crore was sanctioned to the BVFCL in the year 2021 
to ensure sustained operation of the plants. The full amount of grants -in-aid has been 
utilized by the BVFCL by the F.Y. 2025-26. Recently, BVFCL has requested to consider 
further sanction and release of ₹300 crore as grants-in-aid in the current FY 2026-27 to 
safeguard the operational viability and safety of the Namrup-III plant, which is currently 
under examination in this Department.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.17 
 
Capital Investment and Diversification of Fertilizer PSUs for Long -Term 
Competitiveness  
 
2.27 The Committee, in their Twenty -First Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under:- 
            “The Committee note that RCF is undertaking a capital investment of about Rs. 
2,949 crore for energy efficiency improvements at its Thal unit and for establishing a 
new NPK plant of 4 LMTPA capacity without budgetary support, which is commendable. 
RCF has also sought an interest free loan of Rs. 600 crore for a proposed Phosphoric 

36 
 
Acid Plant, which is under examination. FACT has submitted a capital investment 
proposal of Rs. 6,350 crore that includes a Phosphoric Acid Plant, a Sulphuric Acid 
Plant, a new Urea Plant and an ammonia storage facility. These investments have the 
potential to strengthen domestic production capacity and reduce India’s dependence 
on imported fertilizer raw materials. However, the Committee observe that FACT’s 
proposals are yet to receive clear approval in terms of timelines or funding framework, 
creating uncertainty over their implementation. The Committee therefore recommend 
that the Department of Fertilizers should examine and approve the capital investment 
proposals of FACT and RCF on priority and put in place an appropriate financing 
framework, including interest free loans or equity support where required. The 
Committee further recommend that fertilizer PSUs should be encouraged to diversify 
into specialty fertilizers such as Nano Urea, Nano DAP, bio fertilizers and fortified NPK 
grades and explore export  opportunities to reduce long term dependence on subsidy 
driven domestic demand.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.28 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
 
   “With respect to FACT, it is submitted that Board of Directors of the Company, 
at its meeting held on 31.10.2025, has accorded in -principle approval for the capital 
projects with a total estimated outlay of ₹6,350 crore consisting of – 700 MTPD 
Phosphoric Acid Plant, 2,200 MTPD  Sulphuric Acid Plant, 1,500 MTPD Urea Plant, 
20,000 MT Ammonia Storage Tank, and Augmentation of bulk handling facilities. The 
funding pattern of the project cost is envisaged as 30% through internal resources and 
70% through external sources. The proposal is currently under examination in 
Department of Fertilizers. 
With respect to RCF, it is submitted that Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited 
(RCF) is undertaking significant capital investments of about ₹2,500 crore to strengthen 
its operational efficiency and future growth. Key projects include energy efficie ncy 
improvements in ammonia production at its Thal unit and the establishment of a new 
NPK fertilizer plant. As part of India’s push for self -sufficiency in the phosphatic and 
potassic (P&K) sector, RCF is implementing a 1200 MTPD (DAP basis) NPK plant at 
Thal with an estimated cost of ₹1,494.33 crore, scheduled for commissioning by 
January 2027. 
To ensure a reliable supply of critical raw material, RCF also plans to set up a captive 
300 MTPD phosphoric acid plant at Thal, costing ₹865.25 crore. The company has 
sought government support in the form of an interest -free loan of ₹600 crore to help 
meet its substantial capital expenditure requirements, and has provided detailed 

37 
 
clarifications to the Department of Fertilizers. With the concurrence of IFD vide OM 
dated 08.04.2026, DoF has forwarded the proposal to Department of Expenditure.  
Alongside capacity expansion, RCF is actively diversifying into specialty and innovative 
fertilizers through its  advanced R&D capabilities. It produces products such as bio -
fertilizers (Biola), micronutrients (Microla), water -soluble fertilizers (Sujala), organic 
growth stimulants, and phosphate-rich organic manure. It has also developed Sulphur-
coated “Urea Gold,” for which it has secured a 20-year patent. 
RCF has commissioned a Nano Urea plant and received approval for its sale in 
Maharashtra. It has also developed Nano DAP, now included under the Fertilizer 
Control Order, and Nano NPK, which is undergoing regulatory approval. These 
initiatives highlight RC F’s focus on innovation, sustainability, and reducing import 
dependence. 
The Government of India is not directly involved in setting up of Nano Urea Plants. As 
on 21.04.2026, 10 Nano Urea plants have been setup by Fertilizer Companies, out of 
which one plant at Trombay has been setup by Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers 
Limited (RCF).  As on 21.04.2026, 4 Nano DAP plants have been setup by Fertilizer 
Companies.  No fertilizer PSU has set up Nano DAP manufacturing plant.  
The Department of Fertilizers has granted export permissions to fertilizer companies for 
export of Nano Fertilizers. However, RCF is expected to commence production of Nano 
DAP very soon. These export initiatives are expected to promote global market access 
for Nano Fertilizers and support the long -term objective of reducing reliance on 
domestic subsidy regimes.”  
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO.20 
 
Integration of Green Ammonia into Domestic Fertilizer Production 
2.29  The Committee, in their Twenty -First Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: - 
            “The Committee note that the National Green Hydrogen Mission, with an outlay 
of Rs. 19,744 crore up to 2029–30, presents a major opportunity for the fertilizer sector 
to reduce its dependence on imported natural gas and transition towards low carbon 
production. India currently consumes about 17 to 19 million tonnes of ammonia 
annually, largely produced from natural gas, exposing the fertilizer sector to global gas 
price volatility and contributing to a sharp rise in subsidy expenditure during 
international p rice shocks. The Committee welcome the progress made under the 
Strategic Interventions for Green Hydrogen Transition programme, under which 7.24 
lakh tonnes of green ammonia annually have been contracted for supply to 13 fertilizer 
plants through competitive bidding, supported by a viability gap subsidy to bridge the 
cost difference with conventional ammonia. While these developments represent an 
important step towards decarbonizing the fertilizer sector and strengthening energy 
security, the Committee obse rve that a clear long -term roadmap for integrating green 
ammonia into fertilizer production has not yet been finalized. The Committee therefore 

38 
 
recommend that the Department of Fertilizers, in coordination with the Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy and other stakeholders, should prepare a comprehensive 
roadmap for phased adoption of green ammonia in urea, DAP and NPK production, 
including plant wise targets, investment plans, technology partnerships, infrastructure 
development and the quantum of subsidy support required. Such a strategy would 
reduce exposure to volatile LNG imports, support India’s climate commitments and 
contribute to the broad er objective of Atmanirbhar Bharat in the fertilizer and energy 
sectors.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
2.30 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
 
“To promote the adoption of green ammonia in the fertilizer sector, five fertilizer 
companies have signed an agreement with Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) 
on 30.03.2026 for the procurement of approximately 7 lakh metric tonnes (LMT) of 
green ammonia per annum for a period of 10 years. The green ammonia will be utilized 
for manufacturing of P&K fertilizers, including DAP & NPKs fertilizers. In parallel, SECI 
have also entered into Green Ammonia Purchase Agreements (GAPAs) with green 
ammonia producers on 30.03.2026 to ensure a reliable long -term supply of green 
ammonia for period of 10 years. The long-term procurement and supply arrangements 
are expected to facilitate the phased adoption of green ammonia in DAP & NPKs 
fertilizer production. Further, to support the adoption of green ammonia, Department of 
Fertilizers will provide a differential subsidy to SECI. The subsidy will cover the cost 
differential between green ammonia and grey ammonia for a period of 10 years, 
enabling a smoother transition for the P&K fertilizer sector.” 
 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-  NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 6 
 
Strengthening Research and Development in the Fertilizer Sector and Indigenous Coal 
Gasification Technology 
4.1 Noting with concern the inadequate investment in research and development and the 
need to strengthen indigenous technological capabilities in the fertilizer sector, the 
Committee recommended as under: – 
 
“The Committee observe with serious concern that research and development 
expenditure in the fertilizer sector remains extremely low and has been repeatedly curtailed 
despite the sector accounting for one of the largest components of Central Government 
subsidy expenditure. Against a proposal of Rs. 50 crores for FY 2026–27, only Rs. 15 crore 
was approved, while actual R and D expenditure in recent years has remained negligible. 
The Committee are of the view that a sector facing major challenges such as impo rt 
dependence for raw materials, technological gaps in fertilizer production and mining, and 
rising subsidy burdens cannot afford such minimal investment in innovation. The Committee 
therefore recommend the creation of a dedicated Fertilizer Technology and Innovation Fund 
with an annual allocation of at least Rs. 500 crores to support research in fertilizer 
technologies, mineral exploration, alternative feedstocks and sustainable nutrient 
management. The Committee further note that despite possessing one of the world’s largest 
coal reserves, India continues to depend heavily on imported natural gas for urea production. 
Coal gasification offers a major opportunity to convert domestic coal into syngas for fertilizer 
manufacturing and reduce energy import depen dence. While the Talcher coal -gasification 
based urea project in Odisha represents an important milestone, India currently relies largely 
on imported gasification technologies that are not fully suited to high ash Indian coal. The 
Committee therefore stron gly recommend launching a mission mode programme for 
development of indigenous coal gasification technology, focusing on high ash coal, pilot scale 
demonstration plants and integration with carbon capture and urea production. Strengthening 
domestic capability in coal gasification could significantly reduce natural gas imports, lower 
fertilizer subsidy exposure to global energy price volatility and contribute to long term fertilizer 
and energy security.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.2 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated as under: - 

41 
 
“Government mandated revival of Talcher unit of M/s FCIL, located in Angul district, 
Odisha. Accordingly, a Joint Venture Company named M/s. Talcher Fertilizers Ltd. (TFL) has 
been incorporated for setting up Coal Gasification -based Ammonia Urea Plant of 1 2.7 
LMTPA capacity, which is first of its kind in India. The proposed TFL project has been 
envisaged for utilizing the abundantly available domestic coal for Urea production as it has 
emerged as the best possible option since the country is endowed with rich reserves of coal. 
On completion of the project, the production of urea in the country will increase by 12.7 
LMTPA and will assist in maximizing the indigenous production of Urea and provide security 
in feedstock supply as coal would be sourced domestica lly and providing alternate route of 
urea production to diversify the feedstock risk in the sector.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation SL. No. 12 
 
Strengthening the DBT Framework, Scaling Haryana Model Nationally, and Deploying 
Artificial Intelligence for Fertilizer Subsidy Management 
 
4.3 Taking note of the successful pilot integration of the Meri Fasal Mera Byora (MFMB) 
portal with the Integrated Fertilizer Management System (iFMS)/Point of Sale (PoS) system 
in Haryana, the Committee underscored the need to accelerate digital transformati on in 
fertilizer subsidy management and recommended as under: – 
 
“The Committee note with considerable appreciation the results of the pilot integration 
of the Meri Fasal Mera Byora (MFMB) portal of the Government of Haryana with the 
iFMS/PoS system for targeted and authenticated sale of subsidized fertilizers. The pilo t, 
implemented across Haryana from October 2025, has produced tangible outcomes within a 
very short period: urea consumption declined by about 10 per cent, P&K fertilizer sales fell 
by about 26 per cent indicating reduction in excess use, and estimated subsidy savings have 
reached Rs. 700.53 crore in just four months from October 2025 to February 2026. The share 
of small buyers purchasing fewer than 10 bags increased by over 50 per cent, suggesting 
improved access for marginal and small farmers. Maharashtra  has achieved 100 per cent 
AgriStack seeding, which makes it ready for a similar integration exercise. The Committee 
further note that the Integrated Fertilizer Management System (iFMS) has achieved full 
integration with the Public Financial Management Sys tem (PFMS) from January 2026, 
enabling real -time audit trails of subsidy payments to companies and consumers, a 
significant transparency milestone. However, the Committee observe that the DBT 
framework still lacks a comprehensive digital database of identi fied farmer-beneficiaries at 
the national level, making it difficult to deploy AI -based analytics for purchase pattern 
detection in the manner used in other welfare schemes such as PDS. The Committee are of 
the strong view that the Department has considera ble untapped potential in deploying 

42 
 
advanced Artificial Intelligence and data analytics to further improve the efficiency, accuracy, 
and fraud-detection capability of the fertilizer subsidy system. The success of AI -enabled 
reforms in the Public Distribution System, where identification and elimination of ghost and 
duplicate beneficiaries is estimated to have saved Rs. 3.48 lakh crore between 2009 and 
2024; demonstrates the transformative potential of this approach. The Haryana pilot itself, 
saving Rs. 700 crore in just four months, offers a compelling proof of concept. The Committee 
recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should develop a time bound national roadmap 
for the integration of iFMS with the AgriStack platform, including a State wise implementation 
schedule, technical support from NIC, and an independent evaluation framework. The 
Department should also actively coordinate with the Department of Agriculture and Farmers' 
Welfare to expedite completion of the Farmers' Registry under AgriStack and prepare a 
roadmap for the use of AI enabled analytics within the iFMS system. Pending full integration 
with Agri Stack, the Committee further recommend that the Department should initiate a pilot 
project for AI based anomaly detection in at least five States with high urea consumption, 
with the objective of identifying suspicious purchase patterns, unusually large repeat buyers, 
and possible diversion of subsidized fertilizers at the PoS level. The Committee also 
recommend that a dedicated annual allocation of Rs. 100 crores should be earmarked within 
the Department's budget for deployment of artificial intelligence and digital analytics tools in 
the fertilizer subsidy management system, so as to strengthen monitoring, improve targeting 
of subsidies and minimize diversion.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.4 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
“As per the recommendations of the Standing Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers, in close coordination and consultation with the Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), has been undertaking continuous efforts towards strengthening 
and imp lementing Farmer's registry and GFR integration -based sale mechanisms in a 
phased and systematic manner. Various technical, operational, and procedural aspects 
related to the integration process are being examined and simultaneously being addressed 
in cons ultation with the concerned stakeholders to ensure smooth implementation and 
effective monitoring of fertilizer sales and distribution. In this regard, the recommendations 
of the Standing Committee have been duly noted and shall be taken into consideration  by 
the Department while undertaking further policy decisions, system enhancements, and 
implementation-related measures in the matter.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 

43 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 15 
 
Integrating Soil Health Card Recommendations with the Fertilizer Distribution System 
 
4.5 Noting the importance of scientific nutrient management and the need to leverage 
digital platforms for promoting balanced fertilizer use, the Committee recommended as 
under: – 
“The Committee note that the Soil Health and Fertility Scheme, implemented since 
2014–15, has issued 25.85 crore Soil Health Cards and established 8,313 soil testing 
laboratories. Studies show that 62 to 68 per cent of farmers follow SHC recommendations, 
leading to 4 to 10 per cent reduction in input costs, 5 to 10 per cent lower chemical fertilizer 
use, and moderate yield gains. However, integration of SHC based recommendations with 
the iFMS Point of Sale system, which could guide farmers towards soil spec ific fertilizer 
purchases, has not yet been implemented. The Department of Fertilizers has indicated that 
action will be taken after receiving a proposal from the Department of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare. The Committee believe that limited inter depar tmental coordination has 
delayed this important reform. The Committee recommend that the Department of Fertilizers 
should proactively coordinate with the Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare to 
integrate General Fertilizer Recommendations and Soil  Health Card advisories with the 
iFMS-PoS system within a defined timeline. A monitoring mechanism should also be 
established to assess its impact on improving soil health practices and reducing unnecessary 
fertilizer consumption and subsidy expenditure.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.6 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated as under: - 
 
“As per the recommendations of the Standing Committee, the Department of 
Fertilizers, in close coordination and consultation with the Department of Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), has been undertaking continuous efforts towards strengthening 
and imp lementing Farmer’s registry and GFR integration -based sale mechanisms in a 
phased and systematic manner. Various technical, operational, and procedural aspects 
related to the integration process are being examined and simultaneously being addressed 
in cons ultation with the concerned stakeholders to ensure smooth implementation and 
effective monitoring of fertilizer sales and distribution. Integration of Soil Health Card based 
recommendation with iFMS-POS system is useful for farmers. This promotes the Balan ced 
and judicious use of fertilizer, which may lead to increase in productivity. Integration further 
provides the exact quantity of nutrient required in particular soil and in particular crop. Further, 
the soil Health Card recommendation is based on Genera l Fertilizer recommendation. 
However, it is pertinent to mention that Digital Agriculture Division of DA&FW is already 

44 
 
working on GFR based recommendation on use of fertilizer under National Fertilizer 
Framework.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation SL. No. 18 
 
Effective Utilization of Land and Assets of Closed Fertilizer Units 
4.7 Noting the need for effective management and productive utilization of surplus land 
assets held by closed fertilizer Public Sector Undertakings, the Committee recommended as 
under: – 
“The Committee note that Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited and Hindustan 
Fertilizer Corporation Limited, both closed Public Sector Undertakings, continue to hold 
substantial land assets across locations such as Sindri, Gorakhpur, Durgapur, Haldia and  
Barauni. While parts of these lands have been utilized for joint venture projects under HURL, 
RFCL and TFL, significant portions remain underutilized or are locked in disputes. For 
instance, 268.335 acres of FCIL land at Gorakhpur has been placed under the control of the 
District Magistrate by the Government of Uttar Pradesh without FCIL’s consent, and HFCL’s 
land at Durgapur is subject to a regularization claim of Rs. 526.63 crore by the Government 
of West Bengal. The Committee are concerned that prolonged inaction on these strategically 
located land parcels reflects weak asset management and represents a significant loss of 
productive economic potential. Such lands could support fertilizer production, allied industries 
and other industrial infrastructure.  The Committee also recommend that the Department 
should examine the feasibility of restarting the fertilizer plant at Durgapur, given its strategic 
industrial location and potential cost advantages in logistics and infrastructure. The 
Committee therefore strongly recommend that the Department of Fertilizers adopt a time 
bound and proactive approach to resolve land disputes with State Governments through 
negotiation or legal action where necessary, and formulate a clear asset utilization strategy 
for surplu s land held by FCIL and HFCL. The Committee further recommend that a 
comprehensive plan should be drawn up for optimal utilization of these land assets, taking 
into account the need for revamping old and vintage urea plants and establishing additional 
urea capacity to move towards national self -sufficiency, particularly in view of the likely 
increase in natural gas prices arising from geopolitical tensions and conflicts in key energy 
regions. Such a strategy would contribute to strengthening domestic fertil izer security and 
advancing the broader objective of Atmanirbhar Bharat.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.8 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated as under: - 

45 
 
“With regard to urea, the Government had announced New Investment Policy (NIP) – 
2012 on 2nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7th October, 2014 to facilitate fresh 
investment in the urea sector andto make India self-sufficient in the urea sector. Total 6 new 
urea units have been set up under NIP-2012 which includes 4 urea units set up through Joint 
Venture Companies (JVC) of nominated PSUs and 2 urea units set up by the private 
companies. The units set up through JVC are Ramagundam urea unit of Ramagundam  
Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd (RFCL) in Telangana and 3 urea units namely Gorakhpur, 
Sindri and Barauni of Hindustan Urvarak&Rasayan Limited (HURL) at Gorakhpur in Uttar 
Pradesh Sindri in Jharkhand and Barauni in Bihar, respectively. The units set up by p rivate 
companies are Panagarh urea unit of Matix Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. (Matix) in West 
Bengal; and Gadepan -III urea unit of Chambal Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. (CFCL) in 
Rajasthan. Each of these units has installed capacity of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonne per annum 
(LMTPA). These units are highly energy efficient as they are based on latest technology. 
Ramagundam, Gorakhpur, Barauni and Sindri units have started Urea production on 
22.03.2021, 07.12.2021, 18.10.2022 05.11.2022 respectively. Therefore, these units have 
together added urea production capacity of 50.8 LMTPA. These revived units have been 
constructed on land of FCIL & HFCL.The land utilization status of Fertilizer Corporation of 
India Limited (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFCL) highlights ongoing 
efforts to optimize surplus land holdings. In FCIL, at Sindri, around 1,375 acres remained 
after leasing land to HURL, out of which 390 acres have been leased to SAIL and ACC, 
leaving about 985 acres available for further leas ing as per government policy. At 
Ramagundam and Talcher, no surplus land is available following leasing to RFCL and TFL. 
At Korba, 587 acres of leasehold land (without a formal lease deed) and 36 acres of freehold 
land remain vacant.In HFCL, at Haldia, the process of surrendering land to Kolkata Port Trust 
was decided in consultation with Ministry of Shipping. HFCL has surrendered 183.94 acres 
of Land to Kolkata Port Trust and the surrender of Township land measuring 65.694 acres is 
in process. At Durgapur, 830.17 acres of land provided by the Government of West Bengal 
remains without a formal lease deed, and a claim of ₹526.63 crore has been raised for its 
regularization. At Barauni, approximately 90 acres of land remains available for leasing after 
allotment to HURL. Overall, efforts are being made to monetize, regularize, or optimally utilize 
surplus land in line with policy guidelines.It is mentioned that in the previous submissions to 
the Standing Committee included land details and revival possibilities  for Haldia and 
Durgapur plants vide DoF's letter dated 18.02.2025 and 05.06.2025. Revival decisions are 
contingent to urea supply demand dynamics in the country; however, the recommendations 
of the Committee have been noted. Towards this direction, a VC m eeting was held on 
04.09.2025 between CMD HFCL -cum-Addl. Secretary, DoF and CEO, ADDA confirming 
payment position on part of HFCL with the request to execute the lease deed in favour of 
HFCL in Durgapur. This has been followed by a request dated 04.11.2025  to the State 
Government of West Bengal for early finalization of the matter. Senior Economic Adviser, 
DoF wrote to Additional Chief Secretary, Department of Urban Development and Municipal 
Affairs (Government of West Bengal) on 18th May, 2026 requesting f or early finalization of 

46 
 
the lease deed in favour of HFCL in Durgapur, in reference to the earlier letter dated 
04.11.2025.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation Sl. No. 19 
 
Achieving Self Reliance in Potash and Phosphate Mineral Exploration 
4.9  Recognizing the need to enhance India's self -reliance in potash and phosphate 
resources through indigenous exploration and technological innovation, the Committee 
recommended as under: – 
 
“The Committee note with serious concern that India remains almost entirely import 
dependent for potash and heavily dependent for rock phosphate, importing nearly 100 per 
cent of potash and about 90 per cent of rock phosphate requirements. This exposes the  
country to major strategic and economic vulnerabilities, as disruptions in global supply chains 
or price volatility in supplier countries can directly affect fertilizer availability, subsidy 
expenditure and ultimately national food security. At the same time, the Committee note that 
substantial potash resources have been identified in the Nagaur Ganganagar Evaporite 
Basin in Rajasthan, with estimated resources of over 23,000 MT, while other potential 
occurrences of potash and phosphate minerals have been r eported in Rajasthan, Gujarat, 
Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya and Andhra Pradesh. However, 
only a small portion of these deposits has been systematically explored and India still lacks 
indigenous technology for deep solution mining of potash and for efficient beneficiation of 
low-grade phosphate ores. Although the recent auction of potash blocks in Hanumangarh 
district marks an important step, the Committee observe that exploration and technology 
development remain far below the scale required to achieve meaningful import substitution. 
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that the Government launch a mission mode 
National Programme for Potash and Phosphate Mineral Development, led by the Department 
of Fertilizers in coordination wi th the Ministry of Mines, Geological Survey of India, Mineral 
Exploration and Consultancy Limited (MECL) and scientific institutions. This programme 
should focus on accelerated exploration of the Nagaur-Ganganagar Basin and other potential 
regions, development of indigenous solution mining technology for deep potash deposits, 
research on beneficiation of low-grade rock phosphate and evaluation of alternative potassic 
minerals such as glauconite. The Committee further recommend the creation of a dedicated 
research and exploration framework with adequate annual funding, as even modest 
investments in domestic mineral exploration and technology development could significantly 
reduce India’s long -term dependence on imported fertilizer raw materials and strengthen  
national fertilizer security.” 
 

47 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.10 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated as under: - 
“Department of Fertilizers (DoF) is actively taking up the matter with the Ministry of 
Mines to expedite exploration and development of potash and phosphate resources in the 
country. In this regard, it is submitted that the Ministry of Mines, vide Order dated 09.04.2026, 
has approved extension of the period for execution of the mining lease for the Birmania Rock 
Phosphate Block (400 hectares) in favour of M/s FAGMIL under sub -section (4) of Section 
17A of the MMDR Act, for a further period of two years. Thi s step is expected to facilitate 
early operationalization of the block, augment domestic production of rock phosphate and 
reduce import dependence.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation SL. No. 21 
 
Formulating a Long -Term National Strategy for Sustainable and Balanced Fertilizer 
Use 
4.11 Noting the need to promote balanced, efficient and sustainable fertilizer use through 
a coordinated national approach, the Committee recommended as under: – 
 
“The Committee observe that India's fertilizer ecosystem is currently caught in a 
structural tension: on one hand, the country must ensure adequate and affordable supply of 
fertilizers to sustain agricultural productivity and food security; on the other, u nchecked 
dependence on chemical fertilizers, particularly urea, is contributing to soil degradation, 
nutrient imbalance, groundwater contamination, and growing greenhouse gas emissions 
from the agricultural sector. The NPK use ratio, which ideally should b e close to 4:2:1, has 
been badly distorted by the differential subsidy structure that makes urea disproportionately 
cheap relative to phosphatic and potassic fertilizers, incentivizing over-application of nitrogen 
and under -application of phosphorus and po tassium. The Committee note that the 
Government initiatives like expanding Nano Urea and Nano DAP, issuing Soil Health Cards, 
promoting organic fertilizers through the MDA scheme and the GOBARdhan initiative, 
integrating PM-PRANAM for chemical fertilizer r eduction incentives, remain siloed without 
cohering into a unified national strategy for sustainable fertilizer use. The Committee further 
note that bio -fertilizers and precision agriculture technologies remain largely outside the 
existing policy and subsi dy framework despite their potential to reduce chemical fertilizer 
dependence. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Department of Fertilizers, in 
coordination with relevant ministries and ICAR, formulate a time-bound National Sustainable 
Fertilizer Use Strategy that links subsidized fertilizer dispensation to soil -specific 
recommendations, corrects the skewed NPK consumption ratio, establishes a Bio -Fertilizer 

48 
 
Development Mission, integrates drone -based and technology -driven tools into farmer 
outreach, and introduces a mandatory annual Fertilizer Sustainability Report to track 
progress on soil health, consumption trends, and greenhouse gas emissions.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
4.12 In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the Committee, 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated as under: - 
“The Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is actively promoting 
the judicious use of fertilizers to ensure balanced nutrient management, improve soil health, 
enhance fertilizer use efficiency, and reduce the environmental impact of excessive fertilizer 
application. A key initiative in this direction is the Soil Health Card (SHC) Scheme, under 
which more than 26 crore Soil Health Cards have been generated since 2014 -15. These 
cards provide farmers with crop-wise recommendations on the appropriate type and quantity 
of fertilizers based on the nutrient status of their soils, thereby enabling need -based and 
scientific fertilizer application. To further encourage balanced fertilization and reduce 
dependence on imported fertilizers, the Government  is promoting the use of alternative 
nutrient sources. Farmers are being encouraged to adopt NPK fertilizers and Single Super 
Phosphate (SSP) as suitable alternatives to excessive dependence on DAP. Similarly, the 
use of Ammonium Sulphate is being promoted  as an alternative source of nitrogen and 
sulphur to reduce over-reliance on urea. The Government is also advocating the adoption of 
green manuring practices, which help improve soil organic matter content and naturally 
supplement nitrogen requirements, th ereby lowering the need for chemical fertilizers. In 
addition, a National Fertilizer Framework has been developed to guide farmers and 
stakeholders on the judicious and balanced use of fertilizers based on general fertilizer 
recommendations. Complementing these efforts, DA&FW and ICAR have jointly undertaken 
extensive awareness campaigns on the scientific use of fertilizers. During this year, 1,76,527 
awareness campaigns programmes have been conducted, benefiting approximately 47.48 
lakh farmers, thereby st rengthening farmers' capacity to adopt sustainable nutrient 
management practices.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
 
 
- NIL -  
 
 
 
 
 
    NEW DELHI; AZAD KIRTI JHA, 
03 August, 2026 Chairperson, 
12 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
APPENDIX I  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2025-26) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-sixth Sitting of the Committee 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 03 rd August, 2026 from 1500 hrs to 1530 hrs  in 
Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
       LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman 
7. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
8. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
9. Shri Praveen Patel 
10. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
11. Shri Eatala Rajender 
12. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
13. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
  
RAJYA SABHA  
 
14. Shri Naresh Bansal 
15. Shri Subhash Barala 
16. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
17. Shri Arun Singh 
18. Shri Tejveer Singh 
19. Shri L. K. Sudhish 
SECRETARIAT  
4.   Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
5.   Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
6. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
7. Shri Abhishek Kumar  - Joint Director 

51 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for consideration and adoption of the following seven draft Reports: 
 
i.       XXXX    XXXX XXXX  XXXX  XXXX; 
ii.       XXXX    XXXX XXXX  XXXX  XXXX; 
iii. Thirtieth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-first Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers on ‘Demands 
for Grants  
2026-27’ (Department of Fertilizers); 
iv.       XXXX    XXXX XXXX  XXXX  XXXX;  
v.       XXXX    XXXX XXXX  XXXX  XXXX; 
vi.       XXXX    XXXX XXXX  XXXX  XXXX; and 
vii.       XXXX    XXXX XXXX  XXXX  XXXX; 
3. After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee  
with slight amendments. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and  
present/lay them in both the Houses of Parliament in the ongoing Monsoon Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX Not related to the Report. 
 
 
  

52 
 
APPENDIX II  
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIRST REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2025-26) ON 'DEMANDS 
FOR GRANTS (2026 -27)’ PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total No. of Recommendations 21 
I. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
(Rec. Sl. No. 1, 2, 3,4, 5,7, 8, 9, 10,11, 13, 14,16, 17and 20) 
 
15 
Percentage: 71% 
II. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
like to pursue in view of the replies received from the 
Government: 
NIL 
 
00 
Percentage: 0% 
III. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and which require reiteration:  
(Rec. Sl. No.  6, 12, 15,18, 19 and 21)  
 
 
06 
Percentage: 29% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies 
of the Government are interim in nature:  
NIL  
 
00 
Percentage:  0% 