i 
 
 
 
 
 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
           MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
          (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Fourteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘ Price Rise of medicines in the Pharmaceutical Sector 
impacting the lives of ordinary citizens adversely - A Review’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
  JULY, 2026 / SRAVANA 1948 (Saka) 
 
27 
 


ii 
 
 
CC&F NO. 207 
 
TWENTY SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fourteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘ Price Rise of medicines in the Pharmaceutical Sector impacting the lives of 
ordinary citizens adversely- A Review’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27 July, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27 July, 2026 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  JULY, 2026 / SRAVANA 1948 (SAKA) 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26) iv 
Introduction v 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
16 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
20 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration 
21 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
31 
 
APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2025-26) held on 29th June, 2026 
32 
II Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth 
Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Price Rise of medicines in the 
Pharmaceutical Sector impacting the lives of ordinary citizens 
adversely- A Review’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
34 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
21. Vacant* 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
25. Shri Manmohan Samal& 
26. Shri Arun Singh 
27. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
28. Shri Tejveer Singh 
29. Shri L. K. Sudhish%  
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Smt. Preeti Negi  - Committee Officer 
 
* Vacant vice Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon, MP(LS), passed away on 19.02.2026 vide LS Table Office Notification No.21/4(8)/2026/TO(B) dated 20.02.2026. 
& Nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 04.06.2026 Para No. 5267.  
% Nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 04.06.2026 Para No. 5267. 
 Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli, MP(RS) retired from the membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 21.06.2026 vide RS Bulletin Part II No. 66058 dtd 09.01.2026   
 Dr. Bhagwat Karad, MP(RS) retired on 02.04.2026 vide RS Bulletin Part II No. 66058 dtd 09.01.2026   
 Shri G.K. Vasan, MP(RS) retired on 02.04.2026 vide RS Bulletin Part II No. 66058 dtd 09.01.2026   

v 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Twenty-seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report of the Standing Committee 
on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Price Rise of medicines in the 
Pharmaceutical Sector impacting the lives  of ordinary citizens adversely - A Review’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
2.  The Fourteenth Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 4th October, 2025, 
presented to Lok Sabha on 1 st December, 2025, and laid in Rajya Sabha on 21 st August, 2025. 
The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers , Department of Pharmaceuticals, furnished their replies 
in February, 2026 indicating Action Taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fourteenth Report. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 29th 
June, 2026. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-
II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed 
in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                                Azad Kirti Jha 
29 June, 2026                                                                                         Chairperson 
8 Ashadha, 1948(Saka)                                                                    Standing Committee on 
                                                                    Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
  
CHAPTER – I 
  
This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with Action Taken 
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) of the Committee on ‘Price Rise of medicines in the Pharmaceutical Sector 
impacting the lives of ordinary citizens adversely- A Review’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) . This Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker, 
Lok Sabha on 4 October, 2025, laid in Rajya Sabha on 21 August, 2025 and presented in Lok 
Sabha on 1 December, 2025.  
  
1.2        The Fourteenth Report (18 th Lok Sabha) of the Committee contained 11 Observations/ 
Recommendations. The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect 
of all Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report in February, 2026. The replies to 
these Observations/Recommendations have been examined and categorized as follows:- 
  
(i)        Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II): 
  
Para Nos. 6,8,9 and 10 
 (Total - 4) 
  
(ii)        Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies received from the Government (Chapter III): 
  
Para No.   Nil 
(Total - 0) 
  
(iii)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration (Chapter IV): 
  
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 11 
(Total - 7) 
  
(iv)      Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
  
            Para No.  Nil 
 (Total - 0) 
   
1.3        The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes in respect of comments of the 
Committee contained in Chapter I of the Report should be furnished to them at the earliest 
and in any case, not later than six months of the presentation of this Report.   

2 
 
  
1.4        The Committee, in the succeeding paragraphs, will now deal with the action taken 
by the Government on some of the Observations/Recommendations made in the Eighth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) which either require reiteration or merit further comments. 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 1 
 
NEED FOR REVIEW IN THE PRICE REGULATION FRAMEWORK OF MEDICINES 
 
1.5.   The Committee made the following recommendation regarding undertaking a 
comprehensive review of the extant price regulation framework: 
 
“The Committee note that a wide range of frequently prescribed medicines, used for 
common ailments and chronic conditions are being sold at a high prices with unjustified 
trade margin. When asked about the huge differential in price to supplier viz-a-viz MRPs of 
the medicines, the Department has cited reasons such as distribution cost, etc which was 
not found convincing. When asked about the Departments inaction to curb the trade margins 
to the tune of 600% to 1100% in common medications, the Department’s reply appears 
unsatisfactory as it relied heavily on a general explanation of the Drugs (Prices Control) 
Order, 2013 (DPCO, 2013). The apparent lack of any control over trade margins, especially 
in the case of non-scheduled drugs, leaves the door open for widespread profiteering at the 
cost of patients.  The Committee desire that the Department undertake a comprehensive 
review of the extant price regulation framework to plug the existing loopholes in the pricing 
mechanism effecting the ordinary citizen.” 
 
 
1.6    In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
 
“The National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy (NPPP), 2012, provides the regulatory 
framework for price of drugs and is given effect through the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 
2013 (DPCO, 2013).  The key principles of regulation of pricing of drugs under NPPP, 2012 
are essentiality of drugs, market-based pricing and control of formulation prices only.  Based 
on the provisions of DPCO 2013, the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
fixes the ceiling prices of scheduled formulations listed in Schedule -I of the DPCO, 2013; 
retail price of new drugs as defined under para 2(1)(u) of the DPCO, 2013 and monitors the 
increase in the maximum retail price (MRP) of non-scheduled drugs which are not permitted 
to increase their MRP by more than 10% of their MRP during the preceding twelve months. 
 
As per Pharmarack database for financial year 2024-2025, which covers about 98000 SKUs, 
the market share of the scheduled formulations is approximately 18% of the total value and 
the market share of the non -scheduled formulations is approximately 82% of to tal value. 
Further, analysis of Pharmarack database shows that majority (approximately 87%) of the 
non-scheduled market is availing weighted average markup (margin for distributor & retailer 
as a percentage of price to distributor) up to 45%. Out of total non-scheduled market, 
approximately 4% are having the weighted average markup more than 100% of the price to 
distributor. Thus, the high margin is not the industry norm but is observed only in case of 

3 
 
small fraction of the market.   NPPA has taken steps, from time -to-time, to rationalise high 
trade margin which are as follows: 
 
(i) The MRP of 106 non -scheduled drug formulations were capped in 2014, which includes 
22 diabetic and 84 cardiovascular drugs. 
(ii) A cap on Trade Margin @ 30% on 42 selected non-scheduled anti-cancer medicines was 
put under ‘Trade Margin Rationalisation’ approach  in February, 2019. Under this, price of 
526 brands of medicines were reduced by an average of around 50% leading to annual 
savings of ₹984 crore to the patients. 
(iii) During COVID-19, the price of Oxygen Concentrators, Pulse Oximeter, Blood Pressure 
Monitoring Machine, Nebulizer, Digital Thermometer and Glucometer were regulated under 
“Trade Margin Rationalisation” approach by fixing trade margins on these devices in 
June/July 2021 under paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013. 
 
Trade margin rationalisation (TMR) approach for regulating prices is undertaken under 
paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013 which provides for fixation of prices under extraordinary 
circumstances in public interest for a limited period. The Department has held extens ive 
consultations with all stakeholders on various issues concerning the existing pricing 
framework including, inter alia, incorporation of a suitable enabling provision in DPCO, 2013 
for a TMR approach.” 
 
 
  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
1.7 Noting that a wide range of frequently prescribed medicines used for common 
ailments and chronic conditions are being sold at high prices with unjustified trade margin, 
the Committee in their Fourteenth Report had desired that the Department undertake a 
comprehensive review of the extant price regulation framework to plug the existing 
loopholes in the pricing mechanism effecting the ordinary citizen. The Department in its 
Action Taken Reply has submitted that as per Pharmarack database for financial year 2024-
2025, which covers about 98000 Store Keeping Units ( SKUs), the market share of the 
scheduled formulations is approximately 18% of the total value and the market share of the 
non-scheduled formulations is approximately 82% of total value. The reply seems to be 
inadequate and not does not address the concerns of the Committee  regarding apparent 
lack of any control over trade margins, especially in the case of non-scheduled drugs, which 
leaves the door open for widespread profiteering at the cost of patient s. The Committee 
note with concern that a significant portion of the pharmaceutical market, approximately 
82%, comprises non -scheduled drugs and thus, around 70,000 SKUs  remain outside the 
ambit of direct price control. The Committee therefore reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that existing mechanism of monitoring only annual MRP 
increase up to 10% in respect of non-scheduled drugs be revisited to mitigate any adverse 

4 
 
impact on patients, particularly in respect of chronic -care and life -saving medicines. The 
Committee also desire to be apprised regarding the details of the non-scheduled drugs, 
which as admitted by the Department, are having the weighted average markup more than 
100% of the price to distributor.  
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 2 
 
REGULATORY BLIND SPOTS IN DPCO, 2013: THE URGENT NEED TO EMPOWER NPPA 
  
1.8 The Committee made the following recommendation regarding curbing pricing malpractices 
in India’s pharmaceutical sector: 
 
“The Committee note that the existing Drugs (Prices Control) Order 2013 (DPCO) is 
structurally inadequate to curb pricing malpractices in India’s pharmaceutical sector. 
Whereas the DPCO empowers the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) to fix 
ceiling prices for drugs listed under the National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM), but it 
fails to extend this regulatory authority to the unscheduled drugs. As such the NPPA is not 
empowered to regulate trade margins for non NLEM drugs in cases where excessive 
markups are evident on widely used and lifesaving medicines. This regulatory gap allows 
manufacturers to launch non-scheduled formulations, both branded and generic, at arbitrary 
points. Although they are technically restricted from increasing the maximum retail price 
(MRP) by more than 10 percent annually, the absence of initial price fixation renders this 
control largely meaningless.  This loophole requires to be corrected. The  Price to Stockist 
(PTS) data also remains undisclosed to the public, as platforms like Pharma Sahi Daam and 
Sugam App shows only MRPs and failed to reveal the true extent of profiteering. Fixed dose 
combination (FDC) drugs, which account for a substantial  share of prescriptions in India, 
also remain outside the ambit of price regulation despite their widespread use and potential 
for irrational combinations.  The Committee therefore, recommend that the Department 
should look into the matter and initiate ame liorative steps in this regard.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised by the steps taken by the department.” 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
 
“The National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012 (NPPP, 2012), envisages putting in 
place a regulatory framework for the pricing of drugs that would not only ensure availability 
of essential medicines at reasonable price but also provide suﬃcient opportun ity for 
innovation and competition, supporting industry growth; and meeting goals of employment 
and shared economic well-being for all.   The objective of ensuring availability of essential 
medicines at reasonable price is met by controlling the prices of  medicines specified in 
National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM) released and revised by Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare from time to time. NLEM contains such medicine which satisfy the priority 
health needs of the country’s population and are req uired to be made available within the 
context of functioning health system at all times in adequate quantity to serve the general 
public.    
 
In addition, the existing policy and regulatory regime has also given impetus to the sustained 
growth of the sector while balancing it with the objective of facilitating availability and 
accessibility of drugs in the country at reasonable price.  This is s ubstantiated by the fact 
that India is third largest producer of drugs in volume terms; that the prices of both scheduled 

5 
 
and non-scheduled formulations in India are comparatively lower as indicated in a study by 
IQVIA, a leading global life sciences consulting firm, which compared the top-selling dosage 
forms (tablets, liquids, capsules and injections) of top -selling therapeutic categories (anti -
infective, anti -cancer, cardiovascular and hormonal drugs) in India with select other 
countries; and, that India is one of the few countries which is net exporter of medicines in 
the world indicating to cost competitiveness of the dru gs in India.  The relatively lower 
prevailing prices in India and the market competition affects the business decision regarding 
launch price of manufacturers of non -scheduled formulations, both branded and generic.   
Further, ceiling price of fixed dose c ombination (FDC) drugs, that are considered essential 
for priority health need and hence included in NLEM, is fixed as per the provision of DPCO, 
2013 while increase in prices of non -scheduled FDCs are regulated as per the extant 
provision of DPCO, 2013 in this regard. Accordingly, the prices of FDCs are not outside the 
ambit of DPCO, 2013. 
 
Also, analysis of Pharmarack database for financial year 2024 -2025, which covers about 
98000 SKUs, shows that majority (approximately 87%) of the non -scheduled market is 
availing weighted average markup (margin for distributor & retailer as a percentage of price 
to distributor) up to 45%. Out of total non -scheduled market, approximately 4% are having 
the weighted average markup more than 100% of the price to distributor.  Thus, the high 
margin is not the industry norm but is observed only in case of small fraction of the market.  
However, Government is seized of the matter regarding high trade margin in some cases in 
some of the drugs and have taken measures to address the same from time -to-time by 
regulating their prices under trade margin rationalisation (TMR) approach using the 
provision under paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013. The Department has held extensive 
consultations with all stakeholders on various issues concerning the existing pricing 
framework including, inter alia, incorporation of a suitable enabling provision in DPCO, 2013 
for a TMR approach and the issue is presently under consideration of the Department.”  
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
1.10 The Committee, in their Original Report, had highlighted inadequacy of the current 
DPCO, 2013 framework in curbing pricing malpractices  in India’s pharmaceutical sector , 
regulatory gap which allowed manufacturers to launch non -scheduled formulations at 
arbitrary points , lack of transparency in Price to Stockist (PTS) data on platforms like 
Pharma Sahi Daam and Sugam App and exclusion of Fixed Dose Combinations (FDCs) from 
ambit of price regulation. However, the Committee find that Department’s Action Taken 
Reply is silent with respect to most of these  issues pointed out by the Committee.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Department furnish their reply to these specific issues 
highlighted by the Committee at the earliest. 
The Committee, in their Original Report, has observed that Fixed dose combination 
(FDC) drugs, which accounted for a substantial share of prescriptions in India, also 
remained outside the ambit of price regulation despite their widespread use and potential  

6 
 
for irrational combinations.  The Committee note t he Department's clarification in this 
regard that ceiling price of fixed dose combination (FDC) drugs, that are considered 
essential for priority health need and hence included in NLEM, is fixed as per the provision 
of DPCO, 2013 while increase in prices of non -scheduled FDCs are regulated as per the 
extant provision of DPCO, 2013 in this regard. However, the Committee are of the view that 
the pricing of non-scheduled FDC drugs require closer regulatory scrutiny. The Committee 
therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Department should look into the 
matter and initiate ameliorative steps in this regard. 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 3 
 
TRADE MARGIN RATIONALIZATION 
 
1.11        The Committee made the following recommendation highlighting need for policy review 
in the matter regarding Trade Margin Rationalization (TMR): 
 
 
“The Committee note that, a Trade Margin Rationalization (TMR) approach of capping Trade 
Margin was implemented as a pilot in respect of 42 high price anti -cancer medicines and 
during the pandemic, on six COVID related devices by exercising extraordinary powers 
available under paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013, under which such capping can be done only 
for a limited period. In the light of experience of TMR and feedback gathered, the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) and NPPA have undertaken stakeholder 
consultations regarding incorporation of a suitable enabling provision for applying a TMR 
approach on DPCO, 2013. The feedbac k gathered from the consultations is under 
examination for formulating an appropriate policy view in the matter. A perusal of these 
events reveals that TMR approach was implemented during the pandemic i.e. way back in 
the year 2019-2020 and a considerable time period of about five years have elapsed and in 
order to control the prices of medicines in the country the Department and NPPA is trying to 
incorporate suitable enabling provision for applying a TMR approach on DPCO, 2013 such 
delays unnecessarily imp ending on the provision for applying a TMR approach in DPCO, 
2013. The Committee therefore, desire that the Department of Pharmaceuticals in 
consultation with NPPA should come forward for a policy review in the matter at the earliest 
so that medicines are available to the ordinary citizens at affordable prices.”  
 
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
 
“As per the existing framework, the mandate of NPPA is to fix the prices based on market 
data. The methodology provides for fixing the ceiling price of scheduled drugs, retail prices 
of new drugs and monitoring the increase in prices of non -scheduled drugs. Trade margin 
rationalisation (TMR) approach for regulating prices is undertaken under parag raph 19 of 
DPCO, 2013 which provides for fixation of price of any drug under extraordinary 
circumstance and in public interest for a limited period. Implementation of TMR would affect 
different stakeholders differently and hence require extensive consultat ion with all 
stakeholders and a well -calibrated approach. Accordingly, the Department held extensive 

7 
 
consultations with all stakeholders on various issues concerning the existing pricing 
framework including, inter alia, incorporation of a suitable enabling provision in DPCO, 2013 
for a TMR approach. 
  
The proposal for a TMR approach for drugs/formulations is supported by number of 
pharmaceutical industry associations and consumer groups.  However, some stakeholders 
have also flagged issues and given feedback/suggestions on various aspects related to 
implementation of TMR which, inter alia, include the following: 
i. Extent/level of trade margin –  
a. Currently, TMR capping is done at different levels in different notifications on 
anti-cancer drugs, oxygen concentrators and medical devices - the TMR was 
capped differently at 30%, 70% and 70%, respectively. There has been 
request for a higher Trade margi n for generic drugs than the 43.2% 
recommended in last pilot with cancer drugs 
ii. Methodology for implementing the trade margin –  
a. TMR should be applied to only non -scheduled formulations priced above Rs 
100 per unit (tablet /capsule/vial/bottle etc.) excluding GST. 
b. Government supply, Para 19 drugs and free drugs provided under Patient 
Assistance Programs (PAPs) should not be included for calculating ‘net sales’ 
and should be kept outside the scope of the TMR 
c. TMR products should be allowed to take price increase as per Para 20, on the 
preceding 12 months’ basis. 
d. No separate data submission for TMR, only upload Form V on IPDMS. 
e. All TMR should be implemented from prospective batch after notification. 
f. Monitor trade margins half -yearly rather than fixing prices one -time for 
continuous adherence 
g. Under TMR, the pricing dataset should be taken for the last three months as 
against the usual practice of the last six months. 
iii. Request by MSME: margin in percentage term on low priced drugs would result in 
relatively lower margin in absolute terms.  Accordingly, they have sought exemption 
for Tablet/Capsule, Ointment & Powder, Liquids and Injections priced below certain 
levels specific to these categories for imposition of TMR.  They have expressed the 
concern that TMR approach will be detrimental to MSMEs, resulting in loss of 
employment, and will affect the outreach of medicines to remote areas 
iv. Request by the associations of large manufacturers and MNCs  
a. exclude supplies made to patients under ‘Patient Assistance 
Programme’(PAP) from TMR calculation. The industry indicated that 
inclusion of PAP supplies under TMR may adversely affect their viability and 
availability of such drugs in the Indian market.   
b. Phase TMR implementation by therapeutic area (prioritising high channel 
margin), starting with high-impact products over Rs 100 per unit (tab / capsule 
/ vials / dose). 
The department is in the process of examining the issue of TMR holistically so as to optimally 
address the concerns of stakeholders.” 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
1.13 The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report, had desired that the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals in consultation with National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority  (NPPA) 
should come forward for a policy review in the matter regarding Trade Marin Rationalization 
(TMR) at the earliest so that medicines can be made  available to the ordinary citizens at 
affordable prices. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted that the proposal 
for a TMR approach for drugs/formulations is supported by number of pharm aceutical 
industry associations and consumer groups.  However, some stakeholders have also 
flagged issues and given feedback/suggestions on various aspects related to 
implementation of TMR and the Department is in the process of examining the issue of TMR 
holistically so as to optimally address the concerns of stakeholders. In view of the 
Committee, the matter has been delayed as it is under consideration of the Department 
since the COVID outbreak. The Committee express concern over this inordinate delay in 
institutionalising the TMR framework . The Committee are of the firm view that while it is 
important to address the concerns of MSMEs and pharmaceutical manufacturers, but the 
objective of providing medicines at affordable prices for the common man, must remain 
paramount and should not suffer due to prolonged deliberations. The Committee therefore 
recommend that the Department should expedite the issue and implement the same at the 
earliest. 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 4 
 
UNDUE PROFITS/BENEFITS ACCRUING TO DRUGS MANUFACTURING COMPANIES 
 
1.14.   The Committee made the following recommendation regarding making medicines 
available to the common man at justifiable rate: 
 
“The Committee note that the objective of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy (NPPP), 
2012 is to put in place a regulatory framework for pricing of drugs with a view to ensure the 
availability of required medicines at affordable prices while providing sufficient opportunity 
for innovation and competition to support the growth of industry, thereby meeting the goals 
of employment and shared economic well-being for all. To ensure the availability of essential 
medicines at affordable prices, NPPA, fixes the c eiling price of essential medicines and 
monitors the prices of non-scheduled drugs in accordance with provisions of DPCO, 2013.  
The Committee note that the PTS of Ciprofloxin 500 mg and Tinidazole 600 mg which came 
to notice of the Committee, is Rs. 450/ - but its MRP is Rs. 3500/ - hence a whopping 
difference of Rs. 3050. Similarly PTS of Ibrufin and Labocof is Rs. 831/ - and Rs.316/- but 
their MRP is Rs.4560/- and Rs.2850/- respectively hence again a big difference of Rs.3729/- 
and Rs.2534/ -. Against this b ackdrop the Committee desire that the Department should 
review the matter, so that medicines to the common man should be made available at 
justifiable rate.  The Committee may be apprised of the decision taken in the matter.” 

9 
 
 
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
 
“The formulations mentioned in the question are non -scheduled. However, these 
formulations also fall under the definition of ‘New drugs’ as defined under Para 2(1) (u) of 
DPCO, 2013 and all existing manufacturers are required to apply for fixation of retail  price 
of these formulations. In this case it is observed that M/s Laborate Pharmaceuticals India 
Ltd. is not an existing manufacturer. Hence, NPPA has not fixed the retail price of these 
formulations for M/s Laborate Pharmaceuticals India Ltd. Further, as per the price list shared 
by the Committee, the details of the brands, PTS and MRP as under: 
 
SN Brand Composition PTS No. of 
tablets in 
the pack 
MRP of 
the 
pack 
MRP 
per 
unit 
1 CEFLOX-TZ 
1100 Tablets 
Ciprofloxacin 500 mg + 
Tinidazole 600 mg 450 200 3500 17.50 
2 CIP-TZ Tablets 
3 Ibuflam Tablets* Ibuprofen 400mg + 
Paracetamol 325mg  
831 960 4560 4.75 
4 Labocof DMR 
Tablets 
Paracetamol 500mg + 
Loratidine 5mg + 
Phenylepherine 5mg + 
Dextromethorphan 
10mg 
316 300 2850 9.50 
 
* Brand ‘Ibrufin’ is not available in the price list shared by the Committee. However, it appears that the Brand 
‘Ibuflam’ having the same PTS and MRP was referred to as ‘Ibrufin’. 
 
The above-mentioned brands appear to fall under the category of Trade Generics. Trade 
Generics as per the industry inputs refer to generic pharmaceutical formulations that are 
primarily distributed through a separate marketing channel focused on remote, rural, and 
low-volume markets. It is understood that trade channel of trade generics has  more trade 
partners compared to the partners in the trade channel of branded generics. The distributors 
and retailers in the trade -generic channel bear significant additional cost, including higher 
logistics expenses, greater inventory carrying costs, slower offtake, increased risk of expired 
stock, and higher financing costs due to smaller retail balance sheets and weaker credit 
access.” 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.16 The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report, had presented documented evidence of 
PTS and MRP of medicines i.e. a detailed price list of medicines of certain common and very 
popular brands as Annexures. The Committee note that the reply of the Department 
primarily attributes the high difference between Price to Stockist (PTS) and Maximum Retail 
Price (MRP) with regard to cited examples of medicines to their categorisation as non -
scheduled drugs and ‘trade ge nerics’. As per the Ministry, the distributors and retailers in 

10 
 
the trade -generic channel bear significant additional cost, including higher logistics 
expenses, greater inventory carrying costs, slower offtake, increased risk of expired stock, 
and higher financing costs due to smaller retail balance sheets and weaker c redit access. 
The Committee find that instead of controlling certain unethical practices, the Department 
in its reply appears to justify markups in respect of medicines which fall under the category 
of Trade Generics. The Committee also find it somewhat ironical that medicines which fall 
under the category of ‘Trade Generics’ and are primarily distributed through a separate 
marketing channel focused on remote and rural markets, where the consumers will have 
lower purchasing power, incur additional cost due to certain logistics. In this regard, the 
Committee recommend that the Departmen t should look into the matter and take urgent 
action for price regulation of medicines falling under the category of ‘trade generics’ to 
safeguard the interests of patients in rural and remote areas. 
 
Observation/Recommendation Nos. 5 and 7  
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 5 
 
FIXATION OF PRICES OF SCHEDULED/NON-SCHEDULED FORMULATIONS BY NPPA 
 
1.17.   The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) fixes the ceiling 
prices of scheduled medicines and the prices so fixed by NPPA are applicable to all 
manufacturer and marketers selling the specified formulation, whether generic or branded. 
At the initial stage, non -scheduled drugs are not subject to price regulations/fixations. 
However, as regard non -scheduled formulation (both branded and generic) manufacturer 
are required not to increase t he maximum retail price by more than 10% per annum. 
However, the Committee fails to understand the distinction made by NPPA regarding 
scheduled and non-scheduled formulations. It seems evident that NPPA needs to put more 
control on prices of non-scheduled formulation to obviate scope for abuse by   manufacturers 
and marketers. The Committee therefore, desire that NPPA should consider some 
appropriate control over prices of non-scheduled formulations which are more in use as has 
been done in the case of sche duled formulations where prices are under check with more 
effective control. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Department as well as NPPA in this regard.” 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 7 
 
PHARMACEUTICAL POLICY 
 
1.18.    The Committee made following Recommendation regarding a pharmaceutical policy 
providing both scheduled as well as non -scheduled formulations to the people at affordable 
prices: 
 
“As regard pharmaceutical policy under consideration of the Department, the Committee 
has been apprised that it has held stakeholder consultations regarding various provisions of 

11 
 
DPCO, 2013. Further, various stakeholder groups and associations were also invited to 
make presentations and submissions and give their recommendations in the course of 
interactive deliberations. Presently, the matter was statedly under examination in the 
Department, where the suggestions and recommendations from stakeholders were being 
scrutinised. The Committee are of view that immediate steps should be taken to come forth 
with a pharmaceutical policy where the thrust should be to provide both scheduled a s well 
as non-scheduled formulations to the people at affordable prices.” 
 
 
1.19 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals), in respect of both Observations/Recommendations, submitted as under: 
 
“The National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012 (NPPP, 2012) strives to achieve a 
balance between affordability and availability of drugs on the one hand and promotion of 
growth of industry on the other . One of the key principles for regulation of prices of drugs 
under NPPP , 2012 is the essentiality of the drug. The “Essentiality” criteria for drugs under 
the NPPP -2012 is met by considering the medicines specified in the National List of 
Essential Medici nes (NLEM) as released and revised by Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare from time to time. NLEM contains such medicine which satisfy the priority health 
needs of the country’s population and are required to be made available within the context 
of functioning health system at all times in adequate quantity to serve the general public. 
The drugs under NLEM are included in the Scheduled-I of DPCO, 2013 and are referred to 
as scheduled drugs for which NPPA fixes the ceiling prices as per the provisions of DPCO, 
2013. The drugs not included in the NLEM and hence the Schedule -I of DPCO, 2013 are 
referred as non-scheduled drug. With a view to keep a check on overall drugs prices, the 
prices of non-scheduled drugs are monitored as per provisions of paragraph 20 of DPCO, 
2013 which requires manufacturers of non -scheduled drug to not increase the maximum 
retail price by more than 10% per annum.   
The NPPP , 2012 also envisages putting in place a regulatory framework for the pricing 
of drugs that would provide suﬃcient opportunity for innovation and competition, supporting 
industry growth; and meeting goals of employment and shared economic well -being for all.  
Increasing the span of price control may not be consistent with these objectives.  The NPPP , 
2012 also recognises control over drug prices as only one element of an overall strategy for 
provision of affordable healthcare, with programmes of aff ordable healthcare to a majority 
of the population in the form of direct Government healthcare, insurance and a well spread-
out, low-cost Janaushadhi pharmacy chain programme being other elements of the strategy. 
Thus, the policy approach has been to compl ement price control with affordable health 
programmes, with a view to simultaneously achieve multiplicity of policy objectives.  In this 
context, various measures taken by the Government to improve the access of medicines at 
reasonable rates to the common man are as follows:  
(i) The Government has launched the Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana 
scheme with the objective of making quality generic medicines available at affordable 
prices to all. Under the scheme, dedicated outlets known as Jan Aushadhi Kendras 
(JAKs) hav e been opened to provide quality generic medicines at rates that are 
typically 50% to 80% cheaper than branded medicines.  
(ii)  Under Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB -PMJAY) of the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare, health assurance/insurance cover of ₹5 
lakh per family per year is provided for secondary or tertiary care hospitalisation, 
including for medicines.  

12 
 
(iii)  Under the Free Drugs Service Initiative of the National Health Mission, essential 
drugs are provided free of cost in public health facilities.  
(iv)  Under the Amrit (Affordable Medicines and Reliable Implants for Treatment) initiative 
of the Department of Health and Family Welfare, affordable medicines are provided 
for the treatment of cancer, cardiovascular and other diseases, implants, surgical 
disposables and other consumables etc., at a significant discount of up to 50% on 
market rates through AMRIT Pharmacy stores set up in number of hospitals and 
healthcare institutions.  
(v) Financial assistance is provided to poor patients belonging to families living below 
the poverty line, who suffer from major life -threatening diseases including cancer, 
under the umbrella scheme of Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi and the Health Minister’s 
Discretionary Grant. 
The existing framework and interventions have thus given impetus to the sustained growth 
of the sector that has made India the third largest producer of drugs in volume terms; and 
also ensured that prices of drugs in India are one of the lowest globally.  However, the 
Department and NPPA remain engaged with stakeholders with a view to understanding 
issues and resolving them either under extant mechanism or by making appropriate 
provision.”     
 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.20 The Committee in their Fourteenth Report had observed that as regard 
pharmaceutical policy under consideration of the Department, the Department had held 
stakeholder consultations regarding various provisions of DPCO, 2013. Further, various 
stakeholder gro ups and associations were also invited to make presentations and 
submissions and give their recommendations in the course of interactive deliberations. The 
Committee were of view that immediate steps be taken to come forth with a pharmaceutical 
policy wher e the thrust should be to provide both scheduled as well as non -scheduled 
formulations to the people at affordable prices. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department 
has submitted that the existing framework and interventions , have given impetus to the 
sustained growth of the sector that has made India the third largest producer of drugs in 
volume terms; and also ensured that prices of drugs in India are one of the lowest globally.  
However, the Department and NPPA remain engag ed with stakeholders with a vie w to 
understanding issues and resolving them either under extant mechanism or by making 
appropriate provision. However, the Committee remain concerned about the regulatory gap 
between prices of scheduled and non -scheduled formulations. Hence, in this regar d, the 
Committee desire to be apprised of the details regarding various stakeholders i.e. industry 
associations, NGOs, health experts and medical practitioners etc. with whom consultations 
were held by the Department in the last three years and the specifi c recommendations 
provided by each, especially regarding the pricing of non -scheduled formulations. The 

13 
 
Committee would also like to know as to how the issues raised by the stakeholders , were 
resolved/going to be resolved by the Department under extant mechanism or by making 
appropriate provision. 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 11 
 
STRENGTHENING OF PRICE REGULATION OF ANTI-CANCER DRUGS 
 
1.21       The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee observe that the absence of a legal provision to audit drug costs under the 
existing law limits the ability to check whether MRPs of cancer medicines are truly justified. 
The Committee find that although NPPA is endowed with exceptional powers to cap prices 
and margins, the lack of a permanent, legal mechanism for trade margin control remains to 
weaken long-term price regulation and transparency and needs to be addressed with top 
priority and urgency. The Committee therefore, strongly recommend that the Department 
urgently introduce a clear legal provisio n in the Drug Price Control Orders (DPCO), 2013, 
by way of appropriate amendments for effective implementation of Trade Margin 
Rationalisation (TMR). The Committee feel that relying only on exceptional power clauses 
may not be sufficient to protect public interest in the long term and a permanent, transparent 
system must be put in place at the earliest to regularly monitor MRPs and trade margins for 
life-saving drugs like anti-cancer medicines. The Committee therefore desire that in order to 
ensure fair pri cing, prevent unjustified markups, and make essential treatments more 
affordable for patients, the policy formulation process must be expedited to be followed by 
earnest implementation process. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the 
matter.” 
 
 
 
1.22 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
 
“As per the existing framework, the mandate of NPPA is to fix the prices based on market 
data. The methodology provides for fixing the ceiling price of scheduled drugs, retail prices 
of new drugs and monitoring the increase in prices of non -scheduled drugs. Trade margin 
rationalisation (TMR) approach for regulating prices is undertaken under parag raph 19 of 
DPCO, 2013 which provides for fixation of price of any drug under extraordinary 
circumstance and in public interest for a limited period. Implementation of TMR would affect 
different stakeholders differently and hence require extensive consultation with all 
stakeholders and a well -calibrated approach. Accordingly, the Department held extensive 
consultations with all stakeholders on various issues concerni ng the existing pricing 
framework including, inter alia, incorporation of a suitable enabling provision in DPCO, 2013 
for a TMR approach. 
  
The proposal for a TMR approach for drugs/formulations is supported by number of 
pharmaceutical industry associations and consumer groups.  However, some stakeholders 
have also flagged issues and given feedback/suggestions on various aspects related to 
implementation of TMR which, inter alia, include the following: 
i. Extent/level of trade margin –  

14 
 
a. Currently, TMR capping is done at different levels in different notifications on 
anti-cancer drugs, oxygen concentrators and medical devices - the TMR was 
capped differently at 30%, 70% and 70%, respectively. There has been 
request for a higher Trade margin for generic drugs than the 43.2% 
recommended in last pilot with cancer drugs 
ii. Methodology for implementing the trade margin –  
a. TMR should be applied to only non -scheduled formulations priced above Rs 
100 per unit (tablet /capsule/vial/bottle etc.) excluding GST. 
b. Government supply, Para 19 drugs and free drugs provided under Patient 
Assistance Programs (PAPs) should not be included for calculating ‘net sales’ 
and should be kept outside the scope of the TMR 
c. TMR products should be allowed to take price increase as per Para 20, on the 
preceding 12 months’ basis. 
d. No separate data submission for TMR, only upload Form V on IPDMS. 
e. All TMR should be implemented from prospective batch after notification. 
f. Monitor trade margins half -yearly rather than fixing prices one -time for 
continuous adherence 
g. Under TMR, the pricing dataset should be taken for the last three months as 
against the usual practice of the last six months. 
iii. Request by MSME: margin in percentage term on low priced drugs would result in 
relatively lower margin in absolute terms.  Accordingly, they have sought exemption 
for Tablet/Capsule, Ointment & Powder, Liquids and Injections priced below certain 
levels specific to these categories for imposition of TMR.  They have expressed the 
concern that TMR approach will be detrimental to MSMEs, resulting in loss of 
employment, and will affect the outreach of medicines to remote areas 
iv. Request by the associations of large manufacturers and MNCs  
a. exclude supplies made to patients under ‘Patient Assistance 
Programme’(PAP) from TMR calculation. The industry indicated that inclusion 
of PAP supplies under TMR may adversely affect their viability and availability 
of such drugs in the Indian market.   
b. Phase TMR implementation by therapeutic area (prioritising high channel 
margin), starting with high-impact products over Rs 100 per unit (tab / capsule 
/ vials / dose). 
The department is in the process of examining the issue of TMR holistically so as to optimally 
address the concerns of stakeholders.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
1.23 The Committee note the submission of the Department that extensive consultations 
were held with all stakeholders on various issues concerning the existing pricing framework 
including, inter alia, incorporation of a suitable enabling provision in DPCO, 2013 for a Trade 
Margin Rationalisation (TMR) approach and the Department is in the process of examining 
the issue of TMR holistically so as to optimally address the concerns of stakeholders . The 
Committee are of the considered view that anti -cancer drugs belong to a critical category 
of life-saving drugs where unjustified markups can lead to huge financial burden on patients 

15 
 
and their families; therefore, any delay in finalisation of TMR approach in this segment is a 
matter of serious concern.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that highest priority 
should be accorded to introducing an enabling provision in DPCO, 2013 for Trade Margin 
Rationalisation for life-saving drugs like anti-cancer medicines. 

16 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 6 
 
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE PRICE TO STOCKIST (PTS) AND MAXIMUM RETAILS PRICE 
(MRP) 
2.1 The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as under: 
 
 
“The Committee note that as regard undertaking any study regarding difference between 
the Price to Stockist (PTS) and Maximum Retails Price (MRP) printed on the medicine, the 
Department has submitted that it has not undertaken any such study. The Committee are of the 
view that by undertaking such a study the difference between the PTS and MRP would be 
highlighted and reasons for the difference would also emerge besides other benefits to the end 
consumer by way of reduction in the prices of medicines. The Com mittee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department should initiate a ‘study’ in this regard at the earliest and they be apprised of 
the findings of the study. “ 
 
2.2 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
 
“The data of PTS and MRP is available in Pharmarack database as obtained and analysed 
by NPPA. The analysis of Pharmarack database for financial year 2024-2025, which covers about 
98000 SKUs, indicates that the market share of the scheduled formulations is approximately 18% 
of the total value and the market share of the non-scheduled formulations is approximately 82% of 
total value. Further, analysis of Pharmarack database also shows that majority (approximately 
87%) of the non -scheduled market is availing weighted average markup (margin for distributor & 
retailer as a percentage of price to distributor) up to 45%. Out of the total non -scheduled market, 
approximately 4% are having weighted average markup of more than 100% of the price to 
distributor.”   
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 8 
 
SUPPLY OF MEDICINES BY MULTINATIONAL PHARMA COMPANIES AT THE SAME PRICE 
AS GIVEN UNDER PMJAY 
 
2.3 The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as under: 
 
 “The Committee note that the issue of Trade Margin Rationalisation (TMR) was under 
consideration of the Department for a long time with no final decision taken by the Department so 
far. In the meanwhile, the prices of essential medicines/formulations have b een rising and have 
become out of the reach of the common man. Against this backdrop, the Committee are of the view 
that the multinational pharma companies need more control and a mechanism be evolved to 
provide medicines to the people at the prevailing Price to Stockist (PTS) under the Pradhan Mantri 

17 
 
Jan Aushadhi Yojana (PMJAY). The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this 
regard. “ 
 
2.4 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
 
 “The National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012 (NPPP, 2012), does not discriminate 
between multi-national pharma companies and domestic pharma companies. The provisions of 
DPCO, 2013 are equally applicable to both, thereby encouraging the competition an d availability 
of medicine at competitive rates to the companies.  As per extant provisions, NPPA fixes the ceiling 
prices of scheduled medicines based on average price to retailer (PTR) as per market data. These 
are revised annually on the basis of Wholesale Price Index (WPI) (all commodities). Further, ceiling 
prices are also revised every five years based on Moving Annual Turnover (MAT) value. There is 
an average reduction of 16.82% in ceiling prices on account of revision of prices under NLEM, 
2022. Accordingly, the average growth rate (CAGR) in last 5 year is around 1.10%.  
 
Further, the Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) has been launched 
with the objective of making quality generic medicines available at affordable prices to all through 
Jan Aushadhi Kendras (JAKs) operated by entrepreneurs and other eligible categories of 
applicants. Under PMBJP, quality medicines are provided at prices that are cheaper at least by 
50% and in some cases by 80% to 90% of market price of the branded medicines.” 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 9 
 
HIGH PRICES OF BARE METAL STENT AND DRUG ELUTING STENT 
 
2.5 The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as under: 
 
 
 “As regard the prices of stents available in the market, the Committee note that the NPPA 
initially fixed and notified ceiling prices for coronary stents on 13 February, 2017 at Rs. 7,260/- for 
Bare Metal Stent (BMS) and Rs.29,600/- for Drug Eluting Stents (DES).  Subsequently, the prices 
of Bare Metal Stents and Drug Eluting Stents were revised from time to time. The ceiling price of 
Bare Metal Stent as fixed on 1 April, 2024 is Rs. 10,509.79 and the price of Drug Eluting Stent is 
fixed Rs.39,267.18.  It may be seen that the prices of Bare Metal Stent and Drug Eluting Stent has 
increased by Rs.3,249.79 and Rs.9,667.18 respectively.  In addition to this, the patients have to 
pay the applicable Goods and Service Tax as fixed by NPPA and charges of Hospital etc .  The 
Committee note the increase in the prices of Bare Metal Stent and Drug Eluting Stent which comes 
to around 44 percent and around 29 percent respectively.  The Committee therefore, recommend 
that the NPPA as well as the Department should look into th e matter to bring down the prices of 
stents in our Country. The Committee also recommend that the NPPA should strictly monitor and 
ensure that the stents are not made available to the patients over and above the prices fixed by it 
and cases over charging, if any, may be dealt with strictly.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the steps taken in this regard. “ 
 
2.6 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
 
“Bare Metal Stents and Drug Eluting Stents are classified as scheduled drugs, and their 
ceiling prices have been duly fixed by the Government in accordance with the provisions of the 

18 
 
DPCO, 2013. No manufacturer or marketer is permitted to sell these scheduled products at a price 
exceeding the notified ceiling price. NPPA initially fixed and notified ceiling prices for coronary 
stents on 13.2.2017 at ₹7,260 for BMS and ₹29,600 for DES, including metallic DES and 
BVS/Biodegradable stents. 
 
 On 12.2.2018, NPPA revised the ceiling prices of coronary stents to ₹7,660 for BMS and 
₹27,890 for DES, including metallic DES and BVS/Biodegradable stents. Subsequently, the ceiling 
prices were revised every year based on the annual WPI. The present applicable ceiling price for 
BMS is Rs.10692.69 and DES is Rs.38933.14. It is pertinent to mention here that WPI increase is 
the maximum permissible increase that may or may not be availed by the manufacturers depending 
on the business considerations. The CAGR of the ceiling prices of stents for the period of 8 years 
(effective from 1.04.2018 to 1.04.2025) is 4.26% in line with other schedule formulations. 
 
 NPPA continuously monitors the pricing data submitted by companies to detect any 
violations, and appropriate action is taken wherever violations are observed or complaints are 
received, strictly in line with the enforcement mechanisms laid down under the DPCO, 2013.” 
 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 10 
 
TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN ONCOLOGY DRUG PRICING  
 
2.7 The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as under: 
 
 
 
 “The Committee find gaps in clarity and consistency in so far as pricing mechanism of cancer 
drugs are concerned. While the Department of Pharmaceuticals and NPPA acknowledges the need 
for detailed analysis to assess trade margins on specific formulations, they also conceded that 
such data was not available with the Department or NPPA. The Committee feels that this raises 
serious questions about how policy oversight is exercised in the absence of critical information.  
The Committee are of the considered vie w that the reliance on inputs from the Indian 
Pharmaceutical Alliance (IPA), an industry body with inherent commercial interests, is bound to 
affect objectivity.  Admittedly, the IPA justifies higher trade margins for oncology products citing 
increased hospital infrastructure costs and comprehensive care requirements.  The Committee, 
however, find this explanation lacks quantitative backing and does not directly address concerns 
of pricing transparency or affordability. Additionally, the Committee find that  IPA’s claim that most 
leading companies do not supply to OncoHealthMart.com and therefore cannot comment on the 
authenticity of products being sold at deep discounts appears to skirt the core issue of regulatory 
oversight over online drug sales. The Committee note that the Department's response, appears to 
dilute accountability in so far as a concrete mechanism for ensuring pricing fairness or product 
authenticity in the market is still lacking in the present system. The Committee therefore 
recommend that the Department take immediate and concrete steps to put in a robust mechanism 
to ensure full transparency in trade margins and pricing of cancer drugs. To this extent, the 
Committee desire that the Department and NPPA to come up with a robust mechanism to collect 
real time data on pricing information directly from manufacturers, hospitals, and distributors and 
establish a regulatory framework for online drug sales, including strict monitoring of platforms like 

19 
 
OncoHealthMart.com, to ensure that only authentic and approved products are sold in the market. 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that without these steps, patient safety and 
affordability remain at serious risk, and regulatory oversight will rem ain weak and ineffective. The 
Committee therefore recommend that requisite action plan with strict timelines be put in place at 
the earliest.  The Committee may be apprised of the action taken of the matter. “ 
 
2.8 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
 
 
           “NPPA in collaboration with the Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
(CDAC)has developed  Integrated Pharmaceutical Database Management System (IPDMS), a 
comprehensive online system that provides a platform to the pharmaceutical manufacturer/ 
marketing/ importer/ distributor companies to file mandatory returns prescribed in Form I - VI, of 
DPCO, 2013 which includes data on price parameters as well.  The IPDMS is envisaged to replace 
Pharmarack so as to facilitate streamlined, transparent, updated and wider coverage of drug price 
data. NPPA is making earnest eﬀorts by holding consultation, discussion sessions, workshops with 
stakeholders like Industry Associations, pharma companies to resolve the issues, if any, being 
faced by them in submis sion of data through IPDMS 2.0. As on dated, 2344 companies are 
registered on IPDMS 2.0 and further efforts are being made to onboard more companies on this 
platform.  
 
As regards online pharmacies, it is submitted that all retailer including online pharmacies 
have to ensure compliance of the provisions of DPCO, 2013 and no overcharging by online 
pharmacies has been noticed by NPPA.  Further the matters concerning regulation of hospitals and 
online pharmacies are not within the ambit of the Department of Pharmaceuticals.  As per the 
information provided by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), with reference to the 
establishment of a regulatory framework for onlin e sale of cancer drugs, including monitoring of 
platforms such as Oncohealthmart.com to ensure sale of authentic and approved products, it is 
stated that:  
(i) The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Drugs Rules, 1945 govern the import, 
manufacture, distribution and sale of drugs and cosmetics. Part VI of the said Rules 
deals with sale of drugs other than homoeopathic medicines. Rule 65 prescribes the 
conditions of a licence to sell drugs. No drug can be sold in the country without complying 
with these requirements. 
(ii) Drugs are required to be manufactured, distributed and sold under a valid licence. 
Stringent penalties have been prescribed under the Act for sale of spurious and 
adulterated drugs. State Licensing Authorities (SLAs) are responsible for implementation 
and monitoring under the Act/Rules, and may take action in cases of violations. 
(iii) To comprehensively regulate online sale of medicines, the Government of India 
published draft rules vide G.S.R. 817(E) dated 28.08.2018, proposing amendments to 
the Drugs Rules, 1945 to incorporate provisions relating to e -pharmacies. These draft 
provisions cover registration, periodic inspection, and procedures for online 
sale/distribution, prohibition of advertisements, complaint redressal mechanisms, and 
monitoring of e-pharmacies.” 
   
 
 
 
 

20 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 

21 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 1 
 
NEED FOR REVIEW IN THE PRICE REGULATION FRAMEWORK OF MEDICINES 
4.1 The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as under: 
 
 
 “The Committee note that a wide range of frequently prescribed medicines, used for 
common ailments and chronic conditions are being sold at a high prices with unjustified trade 
margin. When asked about the huge differential in price to supplier viz-a-viz MRPs of the 
medicines, the Department has cited reasons such as distribution cost, etc which was not found 
convincing. When asked about the Departments inaction to curb the trade margins to the tune of 
600% to 1100% in common medications, the Department’s reply appears unsatisfactory as it relied 
heavily on a general explanation of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 2013 (DPCO, 2013). The 
apparent lack of any control over trade margins, especially in the case of non -scheduled drugs, 
leaves the door open for widespread profiteering at the cost of patients.  The Committee desire 
that the Department undertake a comprehensive review of the extant price regulation framework 
to plug the existing loopholes in the pricing mechanism effecting the ordinary citizen.”  
 
4.2 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
 
 “The National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy (NPPP), 2012, provides the regulatory 
framework for price of drugs and is given effect through the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 2013 
(DPCO, 2013).  The key principles of regulation of pricing of drugs under NPPP,  2012 are 
essentiality of drugs, market -based pricing and control of formulation prices only.  Based on the 
provisions of DPCO 2013, the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) fixes the ceiling 
prices of scheduled formulations listed in Schedule-I of the DPCO, 2013; retail price of new drugs 
as defined under para 2(1)(u) of the DPCO, 2013 and monitors the increase in the maximum retail 
price (MRP) of non-scheduled drugs which are not permitted to increase their MRP by more than 
10% of their MRP during the preceding twelve months. 
 
 As per Pharmarack database for financial year 2024-2025, which covers about 98000 SKUs, 
the market share of the scheduled formulations is approximately 18% of the total value and the 
market share of the non -scheduled formulations is approximately 82% of to tal value. Further, 
analysis of Pharmarack database shows that majority (approximately 87%) of the non -scheduled 
market is availing weighted average markup (margin for distributor & retailer as a percentage of 
price to distributor) up to 45%. Out of total non-scheduled market, approximately 4% are having 
the weighted average markup more than 100% of the price to distributor. Thus, the high margin is 
not the industry norm but is observed only in case of small fraction of the market.   NPPA has taken 
steps, from time-to-time, to rationalise high trade margin which are as follows: 
 

22 
 
(iv) The MRP of 106 non -scheduled drug formulations were capped in 2014, which includes 
22 diabetic and 84 cardiovascular drugs. 
(v) A cap on Trade Margin @ 30% on 42 selected non-scheduled anti-cancer medicines was 
put under ‘Trade Margin Rationalisation’ approach  in February, 2019. Under this, price of 
526 brands of medicines were reduced by an average of around 50% leading to annual 
savings of ₹984 crore to the patients. 
(vi) During COVID-19, the price of Oxygen Concentrators, Pulse Oximeter, Blood Pressure 
Monitoring Machine, Nebulizer, Digital Thermometer and Glucometer were regulated under 
“Trade Margin Rationalisation” approach by fixing trade margins on these devices in 
June/July 2021 under paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013. 
 
 Trade margin rationalisation (TMR) approach for regulating prices is undertaken under 
paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013 which provides for fixation of prices under extraordinary 
circumstances in public interest for a limited period. The Department has held extens ive 
consultations with all stakeholders on various issues concerning the existing pricing framework 
including, inter alia,  incorporation of a suitable enabling provision in DPCO, 2013 for a TMR 
approach.” 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 2 
 
REGULATORY BLIND SPOTS IN DPCO, 2013: THE URGENT NEED TO EMPOWER NPPA 
4.3 The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as under: 
 
 
 “The Committee note that the existing Drugs (Prices Control) Order 2013 (DPCO) is 
structurally inadequate to curb pricing malpractices in India’s pharmaceutical sector. Whereas the 
DPCO empowers the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) to fix ceiling prices for 
drugs listed under the National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM), but it fails to extend this 
regulatory authority to the unscheduled drugs. As such the NPPA is not empowered to regulate 
trade margins for non NLEM drugs in cases where excessive markups are evident on widely used 
and lifesaving medicines. This regulatory gap allows manufacturers to launch n on-scheduled 
formulations, both branded and generic, at arbitrary points. Although they are technically restricted 
from increasing the maximum retail price (MRP) by more than 10 percent annually, the absence of 
initial price fixation renders this control largely meaningless.  This loophole requires to be corrected. 
The Price to Stockist (PTS) data also remains undisclosed to the public, as platforms like Pharma 
Sahi Daam and Sugam App shows only MRPs and failed to reveal the true extent of profiteering. 
Fixed dose combination (FDC) drugs, which account for a substantial share of prescriptions in 
India, also remain outside the ambit of price regulation despite their widespread use and potential 
for irrational combinations.  The Committee therefore, recommend that the Department should look 
into the matter and initiate ameliorative steps in this regard.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised by the steps taken by the department.” 
 
 

23 
 
4.4 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
 
“The National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012 (NPPP, 2012), envisages putting in 
place a regulatory framework for the pricing of drugs that would not only ensure availability of 
essential medicines at reasonable price but also provide suﬃcient opportun ity for innovation and 
competition, supporting industry growth; and meeting goals of employment and shared economic 
well-being for all.   The objective of ensuring availability of essential medicines at reasonable price 
is met by controlling the prices of medicines specified in National List of Essential Medicines 
(NLEM) released and revised by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare from time to time. NLEM 
contains such medicine which satisfy the priority health needs of the country’s population and are 
required to be made available within the context of functioning health system at all times in 
adequate quantity to serve the general public.    
 
In addition, the existing policy and regulatory regime has also given impetus to the sustained 
growth of the sector while balancing it with the objective of facilitating availability and accessibility 
of drugs in the country at reasonable price.  This is s ubstantiated by the fact that India is third 
largest producer of drugs in volume terms; that the prices of both scheduled and non -scheduled 
formulations in India are comparatively lower as indicated in a study by IQVIA, a leading global life 
sciences consulting firm, which compared the top -selling dosage forms (tablets, liquids, capsules 
and injections) of top-selling therapeutic categories (anti-infective, anti-cancer, cardiovascular and 
hormonal drugs) in India with select other countries; and, that India  is one of the few countries 
which is net exporter of medicines in the world indicating to cost competitiveness of the drugs in 
India.  The relatively lower prevailing prices in India and the market competition affects the business 
decision regarding launch price of manufacturers of non-scheduled formulations, both branded and 
generic.   Further, ceiling price of fixed dose combination (FDC) drugs, that are considered 
essential for priority health need and hence included in NLEM, is fixed as per the provisi on of 
DPCO, 2013 while increase in prices of non -scheduled FDCs are regulated as per the extant 
provision of DPCO, 2013 in this regard. Accordingly, the prices of FDCs are not outside the ambit 
of DPCO, 2013. 
 
Also, analysis of Pharmarack database for financial year 2024 -2025, which covers about 
98000 SKUs, shows that majority (approximately 87%) of the non -scheduled market is availing 
weighted average markup (margin for distributor & retailer as a percentage of  price to distributor) 
up to 45%. Out of total non-scheduled market, approximately 4% are having the weighted average 
markup more than 100% of the price to distributor.  Thus, the high margin is not the industry norm 
but is observed only in case of small fraction of the market.  However, Government is seized of the 
matter regarding high trade margin in some cases in some of the drugs and have taken measures 
to address the same from time-to-time by regulating their prices under trade margin rationalisation 
(TMR) approach using the provision under paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013. The Department has held 
extensive consultations with all stakeholders on various issues concerning the existing pricing 
framework including, inter alia, incorporation of a suitable enabling provision in DPCO, 2013 for a 
TMR approach and the issue is presently under consideration of the Department.”   
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 3 
 
TRADE MARGIN RATIONALIZATION 
 
4.5 The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as under: 
 
 
 “The Committee note that, a Trade Margin Rationalization (TMR) approach of capping Trade 
Margin was implemented as a pilot in respect of 42 high price anti -cancer medicines and during 
the pandemic, on six COVID related devices by exercising extraordinary powers available under 
paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013, under which such capping can be done only for a limited period. In 
the light of experience of TMR and feedback gathered, the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) 
and NPPA have undertaken stakeholder consultations regarding incorporation of a suitab le 
enabling provision for applying a TMR approach on DPCO, 2013. The feedback gathered from the 
consultations is under examination for formulating an appropriate policy view in the matter. A 
perusal of these events reveals that TMR approach was implemented during the pandemic i.e. way 
back in the year 2019-2020 and a considerable time period of about five years have elapsed and 
in order to control the prices of medicines in the country the Department and NPPA is trying to 
incorporate suitable enabling provision for applying a TMR approach on DPCO, 2013 such delays 
unnecessarily impending on the provision for applying a TMR approach in DPCO, 2013. The 
Committee therefore, desire that the Department of Pharmaceuticals in consultation with NPPA 
should come forward for a policy review in the matter at the earliest so that medicines are available 
to the ordinary citizens at affordable prices. “ 
 
4.6 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
 
 “As per the existing framework, the mandate of NPPA is to fix the prices based on market 
data. The methodology provides for fixing the ceiling price of scheduled drugs, retail prices of new 
drugs and monitoring the increase in prices of non -scheduled drugs. Trade margin rationalisation 
(TMR) approach for regulating prices is undertaken under parag raph 19 of DPCO, 2013 which 
provides for fixation of price of any drug under extraordinary circumstance and in public interest for 
a limited period. Implementation of TMR would affect different stakeholders differently and hence 
require extensive consultat ion with all stakeholders and a well -calibrated approach. Accordingly, 
the Department held extensive consultations with all stakeholders on various issues concerning 
the existing pricing framework including, inter alia, incorporation of a suitable enabling provision in 
DPCO, 2013 for a TMR approach. 
  
The proposal for a TMR approach for drugs/formulations is supported by number of pharmaceutical 
industry associations and consumer groups.  However, some stakeholders have also flagged 
issues and given feedback/suggestions on various aspects related to imp lementation of TMR 
which, inter alia, include the following: 
v. Extent/level of trade margin –  
a. Currently, TMR capping is done at different levels in different notifications on anti -
cancer drugs, oxygen concentrators and medical devices - the TMR was capped 
differently at 30%, 70% and 70%, respectively. There has been request for a higher 
Trade margin for generic drugs than the 43.2% recommended in last pilot with cancer 
drugs 
vi. Methodology for implementing the trade margin –  

25 
 
a. TMR should be applied to only non-scheduled formulations priced above Rs 100 per 
unit (tablet /capsule/vial/bottle etc.) excluding GST. 
b. Government supply, Para 19 drugs and free drugs provided under Patient Assistance 
Programs (PAPs) should not be included for calculating ‘net sales’ and should be 
kept outside the scope of the TMR 
c. TMR products should be allowed to take price increase as per Para 20, on the 
preceding 12 months’ basis. 
d. No separate data submission for TMR, only upload Form V on IPDMS. 
e. All TMR should be implemented from prospective batch after notification. 
f. Monitor trade margins half -yearly rather than fixing prices one -time for continuous 
adherence 
g. Under TMR, the pricing dataset should be taken for the last three months as against 
the usual practice of the last six months. 
vii. Request by MSME: margin in percentage term on low priced drugs would result in relatively 
lower margin in absolute terms.  Accordingly, they have sought exemption for 
Tablet/Capsule, Ointment & Powder, Liquids and Injections priced below certain levels 
specific to these categories for imposition of TMR.  They have expressed the concern that 
TMR approach will be detrimental to MSMEs, resulting in loss of employment, and will affect 
the outreach of medicines to remote areas 
viii. Request by the associations of large manufacturers and MNCs  
a. exclude supplies made to patients under ‘Patient Assistance Programme’(PAP) 
from TMR calculation. The industry indicated that inclusion of PAP supplies under 
TMR may adversely affect their viability and availability of such drugs in the Indian 
market.   
b. Phase TMR implementation by therapeutic area (prioritising high channel margin), 
starting with high-impact products over Rs 100 per unit (tab / capsule / vials / dose). 
The department is in the process of examining the issue of TMR holistically so as to optimally 
address the concerns of stakeholders.” 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 4 
 
UNDUE PROFITS/BENEFITS ACCRUING TO DRUGS MANUFACTURING COMPANIES 
 
4.7 The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as under: 
 
 
 “The Committee note that the objective of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy (NPPP), 
2012 is to put in place a regulatory framework for pricing of drugs with a view to ensure the 
availability of required medicines at affordable prices while providing sufficient opportunity for 
innovation and competition to support the growth of industry, thereb y meeting the goals of 
employment and shared economic well -being for all. To ensure the availability of essential 
medicines at affordable prices, NPPA, fixes the c eiling price of essential medicines and monitors 

26 
 
the prices of non-scheduled drugs in accordance with provisions of DPCO, 2013.  The Committee 
note that the PTS of Ciprofloxin 500 mg and Tinidazole 600 mg which came to notice of the 
Committee, is Rs. 450/ - but its MRP is Rs. 3500/ - hence a whopping diffe rence of Rs. 3050. 
Similarly PTS of Ibrufin and Labocof is Rs. 831/ - and Rs.316/- but their MRP is Rs.4560/ - and 
Rs.2850/- respectively hence again a big difference of Rs.3729/ - and Rs.2534/ -. Against this 
backdrop the Committee desire that the Department should review the matter, so that medicines 
to the common man should be made available at justifiable rate.  The Committee may be apprised 
of the decision taken in the matter.” 
 
4.8 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
“The formulations mentioned in the question are non -scheduled. However, these 
formulations also fall under the definition of ‘New drugs’ as defined under Para 2(1) (u) of DPCO, 
2013 and all existing manufacturers are required to apply for fixation of retail  price of these 
formulations. In this case it is observed that M/s Laborate Pharmaceuticals India Ltd. is not an 
existing manufacturer. Hence, NPPA has not fixed the retail price of these formulations for M/s 
Laborate Pharmaceuticals India Ltd. Further, a s per the price list shared by the Committee, the 
details of the brands, PTS and MRP as under: 
 
SN Brand Composition PTS No. of tablets 
in the pack 
MRP of 
the pack 
MRP per 
unit 
1 CEFLOX-TZ 
1100 Tablets 
Ciprofloxacin 500 mg + 
Tinidazole 600 mg 450 200 3500 17.50 
2 CIP-TZ Tablets 
3 Ibuflam Tablets* Ibuprofen 400mg + 
Paracetamol 325mg  
831 960 4560 4.75 
4 Labocof DMR 
Tablets 
Paracetamol 500mg + 
Loratidine 5mg + 
Phenylepherine 5mg + 
Dextromethorphan 
10mg 
316 300 2850 9.50 
 
* Brand ‘Ibrufin’ is not available in the price list shared by the Committee. However, it appears that 
the Brand ‘Ibuflam’ having the same PTS and MRP was referred to as ‘Ibrufin’. 
 
The above-mentioned brands appear to fall under the category of Trade Generics. Trade 
Generics as per the industry inputs refer to generic pharmaceutical formulations that are primarily 
distributed through a separate marketing channel focused on remote, ru ral, and low -volume 
markets. It is understood that trade channel of trade generics has more trade partners compared 
to the partners in the trade channel of branded generics. The distributors and retailers in the trade-
generic channel bear significant addit ional cost, including higher logistics expenses, greater 
inventory carrying costs, slower offtake, increased risk of expired stock, and higher financing costs 
due to smaller retail balance sheets and weaker credit access.” 
 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 

27 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 5 
 
FIXATION OF PRICES OF SCHEDULED/NON-SCHEDULED FORMULATIONS BY NPPA 
 
4.9 The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as under: 
 
 
 “The Committee note that National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) fixes the ceiling 
prices of scheduled medicines and the prices so fixed by NPPA are applicable to all manufacturer 
and marketers selling the specified formulation, whether generic or branded. At the initial stage, 
non-scheduled drugs are not subject to price regulations/fixations. However, as regard non -
scheduled formulation (both branded and generic) manufacturer are required not t o increase the 
maximum retail price by more than 10% per annum. However, the Committee fails to understand 
the distinction made by NPPA regarding scheduled and non -scheduled formulations.   It seems 
evident that NPPA needs to put more control on prices of non-scheduled formulation to obviate 
scope for abuse by   manufacturers and marketers. The Committee therefore, desire that NPPA 
should consider some appropriate control over prices of non -scheduled formulations which are 
more in use as has been done in th e case of scheduled formulations. Where prices are under 
check with more effective control. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by 
the Department as well as NPPA in this regard.” 
 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 7 
 
PHARMACEUTICAL POLICY 
 
4.10 The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as under: 
 
 
 “As regard pharmaceutical policy under consideration of the Department, the Committee 
has been apprised that it has held stakeholder consultations regarding various provisions of DPCO, 
2013. Further, various stakeholder groups and associations were also invited to make 
presentations and submissions and give their recommendations in the course of interactive 
deliberations. Presently, the matter was statedly under examination in the Department, where the 
suggestions and recommendations from stakeholders were being scrutinised. The Committee are 
of view that immediate steps should be taken to come forth with a pharmaceutical policy where the 
thrust should be to provide both scheduled as well as non-scheduled formulations to the people at 
affordable prices.” 
 
4.11 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
 
 “The National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012 (NPPP, 2012) strives to achieve a 
balance between affordability and availability of drugs on the one hand and promotion of growth of 
industry on the other. One of the key principles for regulation of prices of drugs under NPPP, 2012 
is the essentiality of the drug. The “Essentiality” criteria for drugs under the NPPP -2012 is met by 
considering the medicines specified in the National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM) as released 
and revised by Ministry of Health and Family Welfare from time to time. NLEM contains such 
medicine which satisfy the priority health needs of the country’s population and are required to be 
made available within the context of functioning health system at all times in adequate quan tity to 
serve the general public. The drugs under NLEM are included in the Scheduled -I of DPCO, 2013 

28 
 
and are referred to as scheduled drugs for which NPPA fixes the ceiling prices as per the provisions 
of DPCO, 2013. The drugs not included in the NLEM and hence the Schedule -I of DPCO, 2013 
are referred as non-scheduled drug. With a view to keep a check on overall drugs prices, the prices 
of non-scheduled drugs are monitored as per provisions of paragraph 20 of DPCO, 2013 which 
requires manufacturers of non -scheduled drug to not increase the maximum retail price by more 
than 10% per annum.   
The NPPP, 2012 also envisages putting in place a regulatory framework for the pricing of drugs 
that would provide suﬃcient opportunity for innovation and competition, supporting industry growth; 
and meeting goals of employment and shared economic well-being for all.  Increasing the span of 
price control may not be consistent with these objectives.  The NPPP , 2012 also recognises control 
over drug prices as only one element of an overall strategy for provision of affordable healthcare, 
with programmes of aff ordable healthcare to a majority of the population in the form of direct 
Government healthcare, insurance and a well spread -out, low-cost Janaushadhi pharmacy chain 
programme being other elements of the strategy. Thus, the policy approach has been to 
complement price control with affordable health programmes, with a view to simultaneously 
achieve multiplicity of policy objectives.  In this context, various measures taken by the Government 
to improve the access of medicines at reasonable rates to the common man are as follows:  
(vi) The Government has launched the Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana  
scheme with the objective of making quality generic medicines available at affordable prices 
to all. Under the scheme, dedicated outlets known as Jan Aushadhi Kendras (JAKs) have 
been opened to provide quality generic medicines at rates that are typically  50% to 80% 
cheaper than branded medicines.  
(vii)  Under Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (AB -PMJAY) of the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare, health assurance/insurance cover of ₹5 lakh per 
family per year is provided for secondary or tertiary care hospitalisation, including for 
medicines.  
(viii)  Under the Free Drugs Service Initiative of the National Health Mission, essential 
drugs are provided free of cost in public health facilities.  
(ix)  Under the Amrit (Affordable Medicines and Reliable Implants for Treatment) initiative of the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare, affordable medicines are provided for the 
treatment of cancer, cardiovascular and other diseases, implants, surgical disposables and 
other consumables etc., at a significant discount of up to 50% on market rates through 
AMRIT Pharmacy stores set up in number of hospitals and healthcare institutions.  
(x) Financial assistance is provided to poor patients belonging to families living below the 
poverty line, who suffer from major life -threatening diseases including cancer, under the 
umbrella scheme of Rashtriya Arogya Nidhi and the Health Minister’s Discretionary Grant. 
The existing framework and interventions have thus given impetus to the sustained growth of the 
sector that has made India the third largest producer of drugs in volume terms; and also ensured 
that prices of drugs in India are one of the lowest globally.  However, the Department and NPPA 
remain engaged with stakeholders with a view to understanding issues and resolving them either 
under extant mechanism or by making appropriate provision. “     
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.20 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
Observation/Recommendation No. 11 
 
STRENGTHENING OF PRICE REGULATION OF ANTI-CANCER DRUGS 
 
4.12 The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as under: 
 
 
 “The Committee observe that the absence of a legal provision to audit drug costs under the 
existing law limits the ability to check whether MRPs of cancer medicines are truly justified. The 
Committee find that although NPPA is endowed with exceptional powers to cap prices and margins, 
the lack of a permanent, legal mechanism for trade margin control remains to weaken long -term 
price regulation and transparency and needs to be addressed with top priority and urgency. The 
Committee therefore, strongly recomm end that the Department urgently introduce a clear legal 
provision in the Drug Price Control Orders (DPCO), 2013, by way of appropriate amendments for 
effective implementation of Trade Margin Rationalisation (TMR). The Committee feel that relying 
only on exceptional power clauses may not be sufficient to protect public interest in the long term 
and a permanent, transparent system must be put in place at the earliest to regularly monitor MRPs 
and trade margins for life-saving drugs like anti-cancer medicines. The Committee therefore desire 
that in order to ensure fair pricing, prevent unjustified markups, and make essential treatments 
more affordable for patients, the policy formulation process must be expedited to be followed by 
earnest implementation process. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
“ 
 
4.13 In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) submitted as under: 
 
 “As per the existing framework, the mandate of NPPA is to fix the prices based on market 
data. The methodology provides for fixing the ceiling price of scheduled drugs, retail prices of new 
drugs and monitoring the increase in prices of non -scheduled drugs. Trade margin rationalisation 
(TMR) approach for regulating prices is undertaken under parag raph 19 of DPCO, 2013 which 
provides for fixation of price of any drug under extraordinary circumstance and in public interest for 
a limited period. Implementation of TMR would affect different stakeholders differently and hence 
require extensive consultation with all stakeholders and a well -calibrated approach. Accordingly, 
the Department held extensive consultations with all stakeholders on various issues concern ing 
the existing pricing framework including, inter alia, incorporation of a suitable enabling provision in 
DPCO, 2013 for a TMR approach. 
  
The proposal for a TMR approach for drugs/formulations is supported by number of pharmaceutical 
industry associations and consumer groups.  However, some stakeholders have also flagged 
issues and given feedback/suggestions on various aspects related to imp lementation of TMR 
which, inter alia, include the following: 
i. Extent/level of trade margin –  
a. Currently, TMR capping is done at different levels in different notifications on anti -
cancer drugs, oxygen concentrators and medical devices - the TMR was capped 
differently at 30%, 70% and 70%, respectively. There has been request for a higher 
Trade margin for generic drugs than the 43.2% recommended in last pilot with cancer 
drugs 
ii. Methodology for implementing the trade margin –  
a. TMR should be applied to only non-scheduled formulations priced above Rs 100 per 
unit (tablet /capsule/vial/bottle etc.) excluding GST. 

30 
 
b. Government supply, Para 19 drugs and free drugs provided under Patient Assistance 
Programs (PAPs) should not be included for calculating ‘net sales’ and should be 
kept outside the scope of the TMR 
c. TMR products should be allowed to take price increase as per Para 20, on the 
preceding 12 months’ basis. 
d. No separate data submission for TMR, only upload Form V on IPDMS. 
e. All TMR should be implemented from prospective batch after notification. 
f. Monitor trade margins half -yearly rather than fixing prices one -time for continuous 
adherence 
g. Under TMR, the pricing dataset should be taken for the last three months as against 
the usual practice of the last six months. 
iii. Request by MSME: margin in percentage term on low priced drugs would result in relatively 
lower margin in absolute terms.  Accordingly, they have sought exemption for 
Tablet/Capsule, Ointment & Powder, Liquids and Injections priced below certain levels 
specific to these categories for imposition of TMR.  They have expressed the concern that 
TMR approach will be detrimental to MSMEs, resulting in loss of employment, and will affect 
the outreach of medicines to remote areas 
iv. Request by the associations of large manufacturers and MNCs  
a. exclude supplies made to patients under ‘Patient Assistance Programme’(PAP) 
from TMR calculation. The industry indicated that inclusion of PAP supplies under 
TMR may adversely affect their viability and availability of such drugs in the Indian 
market.   
b. Phase TMR implementation by therapeutic area (prioritising high channel margin), 
starting with high-impact products over Rs 100 per unit (tab / capsule / vials / dose). 
The department is in the process of examining the issue of TMR holistically so as to optimally 
address the concerns of stakeholders.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.23 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
- Nil - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                                Azad Kirti Jha 
29 June, 2026                                                                                         Chairperson 
8 Ashadha, 1948(Saka)                                                                    Standing Committee on 
                                                                    Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
              APPENDIX I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2025-26) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-second Sitting of the Committee 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 29th June, 2026 from 1100 hrs to 1130 hrs in Committee 
Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
                                     PRESENT 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
4. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
5. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
6. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
7. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
8. Shri Praveen Patel  
9. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
10. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
11. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Naresh Bansal 
13. Shri Subhash Barala 
14. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
15. Shri Arun Singh 
16. Shri Tejveer Singh 
17. Shri L. K. Sudhish  
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
5.   Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
6.   Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
7. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
8. Shri Abhishek Kumar  - Joint Director 
   

33 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the  
Committee convened to consider and adopt four draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee. The 
Chairperson, on behalf of the Committee, also welcomed  Shri Manmohan Samal, MP (RS) and 
Shri L.K. Sudhish, MP (RS) who had been newly nominated to the Committee w.e.f 3rd June, 2026. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
 
(i) XXXX   XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX; 
(ii) XXXX   XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX;  
(iii) XXXX   XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX; and 
(iv) Twenty-seventh Report (18th Lok Sabha ) on Action Taken by the Government  on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the  Fourteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha ) of the 
Standing Committee on  Chemicals and Fertilizers on ‘Price Rise of medicines in  the 
Pharmaceutical Sector impacting the lives of ordinary  citizens adversely- A Review’ pertaining to 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Pharmaceuticals. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee  
without any amendments. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and  
present/lay them in both the Houses of Parliament in the upcoming Monsoon Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX Not related to the Report. 

34 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE FOURTEENTH  REPORT (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2025-26) ON ‘PRICE RISE OF 
MEDICINES IN THE PHARMACEUTICAL SECTOR IMPACTING THE LIVES OF ORDINARY 
CITIZENS ADVERSELY- A REVIEW’ PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total No. of Recommendations 11 
I. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government: 
(Sl. Nos. 6,8,9 and 10)  
 
04 
Percentage: 36 % 
II. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not like 
to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government: 
NIL 
 
00 
Percentage:  0% 
III. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:  
(Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3,4,5,7 and 11)  
 
 
07 
Percentage: 64 %  
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited:  
NIL 
 
00 
Percentage:  100%  