i 
 
 
 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
  
           MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
           (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2025-26’ of the Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
FEBRUARY, 2026/ MAGHA, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
 
16
  

ii 
 
CC&F NO. 196 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2025-26’ of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10 February, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10 February, 2026 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
FEBRUARY, 2026/ MAGHA, 1947 (SAKA) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies  
 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2025-26) held on 06th January, 2026. 
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘ Demands for Grants 202 5-26’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS 
(2025-2026) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
21. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
25. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
26. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
29. Shri Tejveer Singh 
30. Shri G.K. Vasan 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Director  
3.  Shri Abhishek Kumar - Deputy Director 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Sixteenth Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Sixth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2025-26’ pertaining to the Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
2.  The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 19th March, 202 5. The Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers furnished their replies on 18th June, 2025 indicating Action Taken on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report. The Committee 
considered and adopted the Draft Report at their Sitting held on 06th January, 2026. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report ( Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
06 January, 2026 CHAIRPERSON, 
16 Pausa, 1947 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
   CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 

1 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
REPORT 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on Demands for Grants (202 5-26), pertaining to the Ministry of 
Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
1.2  The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
19.03.2025. It contained 20 Observations / Recommendations. Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as follows: 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the                                                           
Government: 
           Rec. Sl. No. 1,2,3,4,5, 6,7,10,14,15,16,17,19 and 20    
           (Total =14) 
           These may be included in Chapter II of the Draft Report. 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
            Rec. Sl. No.8,11 and 13     
            (Total-03)                                         
            These may be included in Chapter III of the Draft Report.  
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
              Rec. Sl. No. 9,12 and 18                                      
              (Total-02)     
              These may be included in Chapter IV of the Draft Report.  
 (iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are of interim nature: 
                 Nil        
                (Total-00)  
                These may be included in Chapter V of the Draft Report. 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the Observations 
/ Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and the final replies 
in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter IV for 

2 
 
which interim reply has been furnished by the Ministry may be furnished to 
them at the earliest.  
1.4 The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further 
comments. 
RECOMMENDATION SL. No. 9 
 
 Ensuring Balanced Fertilizer Supply and Sustainable Soil Health 
1.5  Highlighting the severe shortage of NPK 10:26:26 in West Bengal and the 
need for stricter compliance from fertilizer companies, the Committee recommended 
as under: - 
        “The Committee during interaction with farmers of West Bengal during the study 
visit in January 2025, observed a significant and alarming shortfall in the supply of 
NPK 10:26:26, a fertilizer crucial for potato cultivation in the state. As the second -
largest potato producer in India, with 4.96 lakh hectares under cultivation and an 
estimated production of 127 lakh MT in 2023-24, West Bengal has a critical demand 
for NPK 10:26:26 due to its suitability for the region’s acidic soils. However, despite 
an approved requirement of 4.50 Lakh MT in 2023 -24, only 2.27 Lakh MT was 
supplied. The situation has worsened in 2024 -25, with only 1.33 Lakh MT provided 
till December 2024 against an approved requirement of 5.05 Lakh MT. This persistent 
shortage has forc ed farmers to substitute NPK 10:26:26 with other NP grades, 
leading to a sharp rise in cultivation costs. The cost per bigha has escalated from 
₹2,530 (using NPK 10:26:26) to as high as ₹3,400 (using NP 20:20:0:13) or ₹3,348 
(using NPK 16:16:16). This incr eased financial burden is directly impacting farmer 
profitability and the overall agricultural economy of the region. Additionally, the 
Committee noted that certain companies routinely fail to supply their allocated 
quantity of NPK 10:26:26 during the peak season, causing severe market disruptions 
and hampering farmer access. To address this issue, the Committee strongly 
recommends that the Department of Fertilizers enforce strict compliance 
mechanisms to ensure companies fulfill their allocated supply comm itments, well in 
advance, particularly during the peak season to enable timely supply to the Farmers. 
Companies failing to meet their obligations should face appropriate penalties, while 
those ensuring timely supply should be incentivized. Furthermore, to reduce 
dependency on specific fertilizer grades, the Department should actively support 
research and development in region-specific soil nutrition management and promote 
the use of bio -fertilizers and customized fertilizers tailored to States’ agro -climatic 
conditions. It is also imperative that the Department ensures equitable and timely 
distribution of fertilizers by implementing a robust monitoring system to track supply 
and address any disruptions or delays promptly besides addressing the issue of in -
sufficient availability of Rake Points all over the Country. Given that West Bengal has 

3 
 
two functional ports, efforts should also be made to leverage these facilities for 
improved fertilizer import and distribution, thereby reducing logistical delays and 
costs. The Committee further stresses that the Department of Fertilizers must 
prioritize the supply of fertilizers based on the specific soil requirements of each state 
and the cropping patterns, rather than continuing with the traditional approach that 
has led to an over-reliance on urea. The excessive use of nitrogen due to the overuse 
of urea has resulted in the consistent decline of the ideal NPK ratio of 4:2:1, leading 
to soil degradation and reduced long-term agricultural productivity. A more balanced 
approach to fertilizer distribution, aligned with scientific soil testing and regional crop 
needs, is essential to restore soil health and ensure sustainable agricultural practices. 
The Committee strongly recommend that the Department of Fertilizers to take 
immediate action on these aspects to safeguard farmer interests, stabilize fertilizer 
availability, and support sustainable agricultural growth across the country.” 
1.6  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
“The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA has approved the 
“PM Programme for Restoration, Awareness Generation, Nourishment, 
and Amelioration of Mother -Earth (PM -PRANAM)” on 28th June, 2023. The 
initiative aims to complement the efforts initiated by States/UTs to save the 
health of Mother Earth by promoting sustainable and balanced use of 
fertilizers, adopting alternate fertilizers, promoting organic & natural 
farming etc.  
Under PM -PRANAM, 14 states have shown a reduction of 15.14 
LMT in consumption of chemical fertilizers during FY 2023 -24 as compared 
to the average consumption of previous 3 financial years.  
DoF ensures availability of fertilizers against the requirement. On the 
basis of requirement sufficient/ adequate quantities of fertilizers are 
allocated to States by issuing monthly supply plan and continuously 
monitors the availability.  
 Before the commencement of each cropping season, Department 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), in consultation with all the 
State Governments, assesses the state -wise& month -wise requirement of 
fertilizers viz. Urea, DAP, MOP and NPKS.  This requ irement is assessed 
taking into account the projected gross cropped area, irrigated area, last 
three seasons’ consumption pattern and crop wise recommended dose of 
fertilizers as per soil health fertility status etc.   
On the basis of requirement projected, Department of Fertilizers 
allocates adequate quantities of fertilizers to States by issuing monthly 
supply plan and continuously monitors the availability. The movement of all 
major subsidized fertilizers is monitored  throughout the country by an on -

4 
 
line web based monitoring system called integrated Fertilizer Monitoring 
System (iFMS). In this regard, requirement, availability, sales and closing 
stock of NPKS in the State of West Bengal during the Rabi 2024 -25 season 
(From 01.10.2024 to 31.03.2025) is  7.00 LMT, 9.95 LMT, 6.96 LMT and 
2.99 LMT respectively. Accordingly, the availability of fertilizers has 
remained adequate in state of West Bengal.  
It is pertinent to mention that DA&FW has never provided the grade -
wise requirement of NPKS fertilizers for any State during earlier seasons. 
However, during ongoing Kharif 2025, DA&FW has provided the specific 
requirement of NPK 10:26:26 for the State of West Bengal in Kharif 2025 
season. Accordingly, the concerned fertilizer companies have been given 
necessary directions for taking action as appropriate. Further, D/o 
Fertilizers open new rake points on the requests of State Governments by 
taking due appro val of their operational status from Ministry of Railways.  
Government has approved the Market Development Assistance 
(MDA) @ Rs.1500/MT to promote Fermented Organic Manure (FOM)/ 
Liquid Fermented Organic Manure (LFOM)/ Phosphate Rich Organic 
Manure (PROM), produced by Compressed Bio Gas (CBG)/Bio -Gas plants 
under GOBARdhan scheme with total outlay of Rs.1451.84 Crore (FY2023 -
24to2025 -26), which includes a corpus of Rs.360 Crore for research gap 
funding, etc.  
These initiatives of the Government are expected to address the 
imbalanced use of chemical fertilizers thereby reducing overuse  of 
chemical fertilizers. ” 
    
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.7 The Committee note the steps taken by the Government under PM -
PRANAM and monitoring of fertilizer availability through iFMS. Though data has 
been provided regarding the availability of NPKS in West Bengal during the Rabi 
2024-25 season, the specific issue of the severe shortfall of NPK 10:26:26 during 
the peak potato cultivation season which led to farmers incurring higher costs 
by using substitute fertilizers  has not been adequately addressed. The 
Committee are particularly concerned over the silence of the Department on the 
specific recommendation regarding enforcement of a compliance mechanism by 
penalizing companies failing to supply the allocated quantities. Merely issuing 
"necessary directions" to companies without a robust penalty framework for 
non-compliance does not ensure accountability. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation that the Department shoul d enforce strict 

5 
 
compliance mechanisms with provision for penalties for companies failing to 
meet their supply obligations and incentivize those ensuring timely supply. The 
Committee also desire that the Department should ensure that the specific 
requirement of NPK 10:26:26 for West Bengal, is timely met to avoid any distress 
to the farmers. Similar steps should be taken to fulfill the  specific grade-wise 
fertilizer requirements of other States based on scientific assessment of soil 
type, climatic conditions and crops cultivated 
RECOMMENDATION SL. No. 12 
  
Direct Benefit Transfer 
1.8   Expressing concern over the identification of beneficiaries under the DBT 
system and the potential for diversion of fertilizers, the Committee recommended as 
under: - 
      “The Committee finds it concerning that buyer identification under the Direct 
Benefit Transfer (DBT) in Fertilizer Subsidy Scheme is established only through 
Aadhaar authentication on a ‘no denial basis,’ without a well -defined mechanism to 
ascertain the ac tual beneficiary. As a result, subsidized fertilizers, particularly urea, 
are susceptible to diversion for stocking, black -marketing, and use in industrial 
sectors such as resin/adhesives, plastics/foams, textiles/leather, and paper/pulp 
industries. It is apparent that different syndicates might be functional in this field to 
benefit from the shortcomings of the DBT system in place allowing purchase of 
subsidized fertilizers in connivance of implementing agencies creating shortages and 
black-marketing. The current provision, which allows each beneficiary to purchase up 
to 50 bags per month, further exacerbates this issue, contributing to demand -supply 
gaps and increasing the subsidy burden on the exchequer. The Committee observe 
that the Integrated Fe rtilizer Management System (iFMS) Portal has identified 
approximately 18.7 crore unique buyers identified till date under the DBT system and 
6.25 crore buyers have availed the fertilizer subsidy till January, 2025 which 
contradicts the farmer population wh en compared with the PM -KISAN database of 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare(DA&FW), which records 9.8 crore 
farmers, highlighting the need for further scrutiny of genuine beneficiaries. The  
Committee, therefore, appreciates the initiative to expl ore the use of the PM -KISAN 
database and integration of the Farmers’ Registry with the digital platform of 
Department of Fertilizers and desire that all necessary measures shall be taken for 
early integration of the iFMS platform with the Farmers’ Registry  incorporating 
landholding, cropping patterns, and soil health data besides broadening the  Direct 
Cash Transfer Scheme to select districts of different regions to correctly understand 
the fertilizer purchase behaviors of the farmers for a comprehensive un derstanding 
of the constraints in the DBT. In light of these concerns, the Committee strongly 

6 
 
recommends expediting the integration of Aadhaar authentication with a 
comprehensive Farmer’s Registry to ensure better targeting of fertilizer subsidies and 
prevent unauthorized buyers from exploiting the system. Furthermore, necessary 
modifications should be made to the DBT system to ensure that benefits percolate 
directly to both landowners and landless farmers who cultivate leased land.” 
 
1.9  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
“DoF is engaged with DA&FW to integrate the Farmers’ data with IFMS.  The 
updation of Farmer’s Registry is underway by Agristack.  It has been agreed 
by DA&FW that Agristack will share the available data with DoF to facilitate 
integration between Agristack and IFMS data sets.” 
 
 OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.10  The Committee find the response of the Department to be  lacking in 
specific details. While the Committee are aware that the Department is engaged 
with DA&FW for integrating the Farmers’ data with iFMS, the reply does not 
provide any concrete timeline for the completion of this integration. The 
Committee are also dismayed to note that the Government has not responded 
to the specific recommendation regarding broadening the Direct Cash Transfer 
Scheme to select Districts of different regions to understand the fertilizer 
purchase behaviors of farmers and constraints in the DBT system.   The 
Committee opine that in the absence of a pilot study on Direct Cash Transfer 
and without fixing the loopholes in the present adhaar based identification" no 
denial" policy, the issues of diversion and leakage of subsidy cannot be 
effectively addressed. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation that the Department, in coordination with the DA&FW, should 
expedite updation of the Farmers’ Registry  Agristack and its integration with 
the iFMS with a definite timeline and initiate more pilot projects to study Direct 
Cash Transfer in other select districts to move towards a more transparent and 
efficient subsidy regime. 
 
 
 

7 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. No. 18 
  
Focus on Revival and Modernization of Fertilizer Plants:  
1.11   Highlighting the financial distress of Fertilizer PSUs and the need for their 
revival, the Committee recommended as under: - 
 
      “The Committee examined the loan liabilities of fertilizer PSUs and found 
significant financial distress. MFL owes ₹1,486.3 crore, FACT ₹3,443.59 crore, and 
BVFCL ₹572.75 crore in government loans. Ageing plants and high-interest burdens 
on these PSUs risk debt traps. The Committee recommends financial restructuring, 
including loan -to-equity conversion, interest write -offs, and installment -based 
repayment plans. Additionally, the Government should explore subsidized credit 
access and a working capital guarantee scheme to ease financial strain on these 
PSUs. Given the outdated infrastructure, reassessment of PSU assets, particularly 
land holdings, is crucial. The Committee desires that the Government should make 
escalated efforts so that these PSUs remain financially viable to ensure fertilizer 
sufficiency.” 
 
1.12  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has 
stated as under: - 
“The loan details of BVFCL, FACT and MFL are as following: 
1. Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL) 
GOI Loans as on 31/03/2024 
Particulars Amount  
(Rs. in Crores) 
Total Principal 572.75 
Total Interest Interest free 
 
The CCEA in its meeting held on 21.05.2015 on financial restructuring of 
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited has approved the conversion 
of GoI loan as Interest free loan and on attaining profit the company will service 
the GoI loan. 
  
2. The Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) 
Details of Govt. of India loan, year-wise sanctioned to FACT are given below: 
 

8 
 
S. No. Year Amount 
(Rs. in Crores) 
1. 2005-06 40.00 
2. 2006-07 30.00 
3. 2007-08 15.00 
4. 2008-09 13.00 
5. 2009-10 34.00 
6. 2010-11 89.99 
7. 2011-12 60.74 
8. 2015-16 1000.00 
Total 1282.73 
 The plan loan of Rs.1000.00 Crore released by the Government of India in 2016 
along with the earlier loan and interest outstanding, has been converted into a 
single loan carrying interest @ 13.50% per annum with one -year moratorium for 
payment of interest. The loan amount was reconciled and loan outstanding has 
been arrived at Rs.1770.48 Crore as on 31.03.2017. 
 The total loan outstanding including interest as on 31.03.2024 is Rs.3443.59 
crores.   
3. Madras Fertilizers Limited  
GOI Loans as on 31/03/2024: 
Particulars Amount  
(Rs. in Crores) 
Total Principal 554.24 
Total Interest 848.38 
 
MFL had submitted a financial restructuring proposal for consideration. 
Meanwhile, the New Public Sector Enterprise (PSE) Policy for Atmanirbhar 
Bharat, as notified by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Investment and 
Public Asset Management, vide OM No. 3/3/2020 -DIPAM-II-B (E), dated 
04.02.2021, was introduced. MFL has to submit the revised proposal for financial 
restructuring.” 
 
 

9 
 
 OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1.13  The Committee observe that the Department has merely furnished the 
details of the outstanding loans and interest liabilities of the Fertilizer PSUs 
without offering any concrete solution for their financial restructuring. The 
increased loan burden due to high interest rates leading FACT into a precarious 
financial situation and MFL pending loan re -structuring proposal consequent 
to policy changes is apparent from the submission.  The Committee are  
therefore dismayed to note that the Government has not respo nded to the 
specific suggestions regarding loan -to-equity conversion, interest write -offs, 
and working capital guarantee schemes to make these PSUs financially viable. 
The Committee feel that merely stating the loan status or citing policy changes 
will not resolve the deepening financial crisis of these PSUs, which are crucial 
for the country's fertilizer security. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation that the Government must take immediate and proactive 
steps for the financial restructuring of FACT and MFL, including waiver of penal 
interest and conversion of loans into equity, to save them from a debt trap and 
ensure their sustainable operation. 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 1 
 
Fertilizer Planning and vision ahead 
 
2.1 The Committee observe that the Government though facilitates Indian 
fertilizer companies to sign agreements, Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) 
and establish joint ventures with fertilizer companies in resource rich countries 
to ensure sufficiency of raw ma terials/intermediates/finished fertilizers, no 
efforts have been made towards entering into mining lease agreements with 
raw material resource rich for either extraction, exploration or for refining or 
for production and India is yet to sign such an ag reement till date.   The 
Department of Fertilizers is currently facilitating discussions for MoU between 
and Indian Fertilizer PSU (M/s FACT) and a Togolese fertilizer company (M/s 
SNPT) as well as discussions between M/s Rastriya Chemical & Fertilizers Ltd 
(RFCL) and M/s At lantic Mineral SARL, Mauritania for supply of Rock 
Phosphate. The Committee, desire that planned time -lines may be drawn for 
materialization of the discussions underway for MoUs with the two foreign 
companies for supply of required raw ma terials and explore all available 
options to facilitate other Indian fertilizer companies to sign agreements, 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU), establish joint ventures with fertilizer 
companies in resource rich countries to ensure sufficiency of raw 
materials/intermediates/finished fertilizers besides exploring options of 
entering into mining lease agreements with resource rich countries to spruce 
up the domestic needs and emerge a major producer in the field of fertilizers. 
 
2.2 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under : 
 
“The Department of Fertilizers is committed to enhance global cooperation in 
fertilizer sector by facilitating Indian fertilizer companies to sign agreements, 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) and establish joint ventures with 
fertilizer companies in resour ce rich countries. These efforts are aimed at 
ensuring the adequate and uninterrupted supply of essential raw materials, 
intermediates, and finished fertilizers required to meet the domestic demand. 
Additionally, the Department recognizes the importance of diversifying supply 
sources and is actively supporting and facilitating Indian fertilizer companies 

11 
 
in exploring opportunities for entering into mining lease agreements in 
resource-rich countries. 
In line with this objective, Indian Fertilizer PSU, M/s FACT has signed a long -
term agreement with M/s SNPT, Togo for the procurement of Rock Phosphate. 
This agreement entails an annual supply of approximately 240,000 MT (non -
binding) of Rock Phosphate ove r a period of three years. Additionally, 
Department of Fertilizers is expediting ongoing discussions between M/s 
Rastriya Chemical & Fertilizers Ltd (RFCL) and M/s Atlantic Mineral SARL, 
Mauritania, for a similar supply arrangement of Rock Phosphate. These  
agreements are finalized and signed once both the Indian and foreign 
company comes to mutually acceptable arrangements after thorough 
discussions and deliberations on the issues/observations/concerns of each 
side. Further, these agreements are Company-to-Company (C-2-C) and thus, 
finalizing a fixed timeline would be difficult. However, D/o Fertilizers along with 
M/o External Affairs has been trying to facilitate the early resolutions of each 
side concerns/observation and signing of Agreements at the earlie st. With 
these efforts, the agreements between M/s FACT and M/s. SNPT, Togo and 
the agreement between M/s. RCF and M/s. Atlantic Mineral SARL, Mauritania 
for the procurement of Rock Phosphate have been entered into.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 2 
 
2.3 The Committee observe that out of the seven mining  leases of Rock 
Phosphate only six are presently working in the Country, in which mining is 
being done through the conventional open cast method used for comparatively 
shallow mining.  It is intriguing that Country lacks cutting edge drilling and 
solution mining technology and skilled manpower for drilling and exploration 
for long, and import dependence nothing has been done to address this area 
except for bringing a policy incorporating phosphate, potash and Glauconite 
(Potassic mineral) under “The Mines & Minerals (Development and Regulation) 
Amendment (MMDR) Act, 2023”. Despite all these factors, concerted efforts are 
not being made to either explore new locations for exploration within the 
Country or upgrade technology, equipment and train manpower to exploration, 
mining and use of by -products of other industries in pl ace of fertilizers.   
Without introducing physical measures, and pumping in Government , Public 
and Private investment, the goal of achieving self -sufficiency in the field of 
fertilizers is difficult to achieve.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
escalated efforts are made in the field of attaining technological advancements, 
producing skilled manpower and exploring new mining locations for extraction 
of essential ingredients required in fertilizer production through Government, 
Public and Private investment besides exploring use of steel slag, waste from 

12 
 
power plants and by -products of other industries in place of fertilizers for 
meeting agricultural needs of the Country. 
2.4 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“Department of Fertilizers in consultation of M/o Mines  will attain technological 
advancements, producing skilled manpower and exploring new mining 
locations for extraction of essential ingredients required in fertilizer production 
through Government, Public and Private investment.  
Further, India is import dependent in raw materials of both phosphatic and 
potassic fertilizers. The Government of India has actively engaged with 
countries rich in fertilizer raw materials and facilitated the establishment of 
several Long -Term Agreements (LTAs) be tween Indian companies and 
foreign companies in fertilizer rich countries. Additionally, the Indian fertilizer 
companies have also formed Joint Ventures (JVs) in fertilizer -rich nations, 
such as Oman India Fertilizers Company (OMIFCO) in Oman, Ind ustries 
Chimiques Du Senegal (ICS) in Senegal, and Jordan India Fertilizers 
Company (JIFCO) in Jordan to ensure a steady supply of raw materials, 
intermediates and finished fertilizers and strengthen cooperation in the global 
fertilizer sector.  
Potash and Glauconite (Potassic mineral) have been classified as Critical and 
Strategic Minerals under “The Mines & Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned 
recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers has stated as under:  
Amendment (MMDR) Act, 2023” by Ministry of Mines which aims to enhance 
domestic production and achieve self -sufficiency in critical minerals. MMDR 
Act, 1957 ensure that critical minerals are produced, processed, and recycled 
by catalyzing investments from governments and the private sector across the 
full value chain, emphasizing the importance of sustainable and responsible 
mineral management practices. The Central Government has also 
commenced the auction of mineral blocks for critical & strategic mineral s as 
per provisions of MMDR Act, 1957. As on 10.12.2024, Ministry of Mines have 
successfully auctioned 5 mineral blocks of Glauconite (Potassic mineral). 
The country has 7 mining leases for Rock Phosphate. However, most of the 
reserves are low grade reserves and needs beneficiation. Currently, only 6 
mines are operational and are using the conventional opencast method for 
shallow deposits. Potash deposits i n India are deep -seated, requiring either 
conventional underground mining or solution mining, where water or brine 
dissolves the potash for extraction. There are many challenges involved in 
mining such as resource loss due to water inflow dissolving minera ls, roof 

13 
 
collapse leading to expensive maintenance, operational complexities, lack of 
skilled labour and technology etc.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 3 
 
2.5 The Committee understand that the position of preferential allotment of 
mineral mines in favour of fertilizer PSUs for exploration  of raw materials 
required within the Country has changed after the recent notification of the 
Ministry of Mines incorporating phosphatic and potassic minerals in the list of 
“Critical and Strategic Minerals” opening them for auction to maximize revenue 
for the State.  As such, the fertilizer companies are left to particip ate in the 
auction process to acquire any new mines.  The Committee feel that since the 
Fertilizer PSUs play a major role in the production of fertilizers for the Country, 
they may be given preference in allotment of mineral mines as they hold the 
infrastructure and the expertise for serving the sector for more t han half the 
century.  The Committee, desire that the Department of Fertilizers should 
accordingly impress upon the Ministry of Mines to consider giving preference 
to fertilizer PSUs besides guiding Fertilizer PSUs to actively participate in 
auction of mines.   
 
2.6 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“Department of Fertilizer has taken up the matter of preferential allotment to 
fertilizer PSUs with Ministry of Mines. M/o Mines has informed that Section 
17A of ‘The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) (MMDR) Act 
provides for reservation of areas in favor of PSUs. The said provision 
continues and is equally applicable for ‘Critical and Strategic Minerals’ as well. 
However, the reservation of any area in favor of a PSU depends on several 
factors such the capability of the PSU for mine development and the consent 
of the State Government for allocat ion of mine to PSU through reservation 
route.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 4 
 
2.7 The Committee observe that coal gasification-based fertilizer plants use 
coal as the primary feedstock, where coal is gasified to produce synthesis gas 
(syngas) containing hydrogen and carbon monoxide, utilizing hydrogen for 
ammonia production whereas nat ural gas -based plants use methane as 
feedstock, converting it into hydrogen through steam methane reforming 
(SMR) for ammonia synthesis. Though coal -based plants are less energy -
efficient with higher capital cost as compared to natural gas -based based 

14 
 
plants, they have lower operating costs due to the stable and lower price of 
coal, making them competitive. Conversely, natural gas -based plants have 
lower capital costs but higher operating expenses due to the volatile and higher 
cost of natural gas. Furt hermore, the efficiency of coal increases on 
gasification and proven all over the world with US, China and Australia leading 
in a big way.  The Committee feels that coal gasification accepted world over 
offers a strategic solution towards achieving self -sufficiency in view of the 
huge coal reserves within the Country and removing import dependence on 
natural gas. The Committee, therefore, recommend that coal -gasification may 
be promoted in a big way so as to fully exploit the domestically available coal-
reserves and the government policies may be accordingly tweaked in a manner 
to suit the coal-gasification plants. 
2.8 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
 
“As per inputs received from Ministry of Coal on the above observations, the 
policy initiatives undertaken by them to promote Coal Gasification are as 
under: - 
i. National Coal Gasification Mission : M/o Coal aims to achieve coal 
gasification and liquefaction of 100 MT of coal by 2030.  
ii. Incentives in Commercial Coal Auctions: -  A 50% rebate in the 
revenue share for coal used in gasification has been introduced in 
commercial coal block auctions, provided that at least 10% of the total 
coal production is used for gasification purposes.  
iii. New Sub-sector for Syngas Production: In 2022, a new sub -sector, 
"Production of Syngas leading to coal gasification ," was created under 
the Non -Regulated Sector (NRS) linkage auctions to support this 
initiative.  
iv. Equity Investment Approval:  On January 24, 2024, the CCEA 
approved CIL equity investment exceeding the 50% limit in its joint 
ventures with GAIL and BHEL for setting up coal gasification projects. 
v. Financial Assistance: On January 24, 2024, the Cabinet approved an 
outlay of 8.500 crore as financial assistance for promoting coal and 
lignite gasification projects. The scheme towards financial incentives is 
grouped under 3 categories:  
a. Category I (for Government PSU or JV of PSU)  A total outlay of 
₹4050 crore, with a maximum allocation of ₹1,350 crore per project 
or 15% of capex, whichever is lower. 
b. Category II (for Private Sector & Government PSU): A total outlay 
of ₹ 3850 crore, with a maximum allocation of ₹1000 crore per 
project or 15% of capex, whichever is lower. 

15 
 
c. Category III (for Demonstration projects and/or Small -scale 
product-based plants):  A total outlay of ₹ 600 crore, with a 
maximum allocation of ₹ 100 crore per project or 15% of capex, 
whichever is lower.  
vi.        As of now, the list of Selected Applicants is annexed below:- 
Particulars Company End Product 
  
Category-I 
Bharat Coal Gasification and Chemicals 
Ltd. 
  
Ammonium Nitrate 
  
CIL - GAIL JV Project 
  
Synthetic Natural Gas (SNG) 
  
CIL Project 
  
Synthetic Natural Gas (SNG) 
  
Category-II Jindal Steel & Power Ltd. 
  
Direct Reduced Iron (DRI) 
  
Greta Energy Ltd. 
  
Direct Reduced Iron (DRI) 
  
New Era Cleantech Solution Pvt. Ltd. 
  
Ammonium Nitrate & 
Hydrogen 
  
Category-III New Era Cleantech Solution Pvt. Ltd. 
  
Ethanol 
  
  
vii. Long Term Coal Supply to Gasification Projects:- On December 16, 
2024, the Government has allowed coal auction to gasification projects 
under the NRS auction with a floor price at the notified price of the 
regulated sector, for the projects commissioning within the next seven 
years. 
viii. Through various policy initiatives and financial support, significant 
progress is being made to establish coal gasification as a cleaner use 
of coal in India's energy landscape and industrial sectors. These efforts 
will enhance energy security, foster economic growth, and contribute to 
a more sustainable future for the country. 
ix.  Further, as Department of Fertilizers is concerned, Government 
mandated revival of Talcher unit of M/s FCIL, located in Angul district, 
Odisha. Accordingly, a Joint Venture Company named M/s. Talcher 
Fertilizers Ltd. (TFL) has been incorporated for settin g up Coal 
Gasification-based Ammonia Urea Plant of 12.7 LMTPA capacity, 
which is first of its kind in India.    The under implementation TFL project 
has been envisaged for utilizing the abundantly available domestic coal 
for Urea production. On completion of the project, the production of urea 

16 
 
in the country will increase by 12.7 LMTPA and will assist in maximizing 
the indigenous production of Urea and provide security in feedstock 
supply as coal would be sourced domestically and providing alternate 
route of urea production to diversify the feedstock risk in the sector. 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 5 
 
Examination of Demands for Grants No. 6 
 
2.9 The Committee note that the Department of Fertilizers (DoF) had 
projected an outlay of Rs. 1,84,704.63 crore for its various schemes and other 
requirements during the year 2025 -26. However, this outlay has been reduced 
by 7.38% to Rs. 1,71,082.44 crore by the Ministry of Finance(MoF).  The 
reduction has been made in both Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Scheme and 
Urea Subsidy Scheme of the Department. On further scrutiny, it has been found 
that the BE allocation for Major Head 2401 Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy which 
includes payments for both indigenous and imported P&K Fertilizers has been 
reduced by Rs. 6665 Crore which is 11.97 % less than the projected 
requirement. For Major Head 2852 Urea Subsidy (MH 2852 -Industries) which 
include payment for both indigenous and imported urea, MDA subsidy, R&D for 
MDA, DBT in Fertil izer Subsidy and subsidy support to Indian Shipping 
Companies the BE allocation has been reduced by Rs. 6954.06 Crore which is 
5.4% less than the projected requirement. On the reduction in allocation the 
Department has contended that the budget proposals a re sent to M/o Finance 
in September-October of every year are just an estimate of the expenditure to 
be incurred on Fertilizer subsidy, which is estimated on factors like previous 
year’s consumption, rate of gas and other commodities etc. The actual 
requirement of funds is assessed based on the actual consumption and rates 
of commodities and accordingly additional funds are sought from M/o Finance 
during the FY, as and when required. Further, the funds provided by M/o 
Finance at BE stage are increased by th em at RE stage and by the means of 
supplementary as per the requirement of the D/o Fertilizers. The Committee are 
however, dismayed to note 9.64% reduction in the allocation at BE stage for 
2025-26 from the proposed budget despite the fact that the Departm ent of 
Fertilizers has utilized 94%of the funds against RE 2024 -25 and contended to 
likely utilize the remaining funds during remaining period. It is definite that 
curtailment of allocation will impact the smooth execution of the different 
subsidy schemes, the Committee, therefore, stress that the Department seeks 
stepping of the funds at RE stage so that the subsidy schemes meant for the 
farmers for their agricultural requirements do not suffer. 

17 
 
2.10 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“The estimation of Budget for subsidy depends upon several factors like the 
price of international Gas price etc.   As recommended by the Committee, the 
Department will seek additional funds at RE 2025 -26 Stage depending upon 
the requirements so as to ensure that there is no impact on the release of 
subsidy payments.”  
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 6 
 
Under-utlilization of funds / Targets and Achievements 
 
2.11 On scrutiny of utilization of funds under different components of the 
schemes, underutilization to tune of 20% under Indigenous PK, 12% under 
Imported PK, 14.76% under indigenous Urea and 59.57% under Market 
Development Assistance (MDA) has been observed during 2024-25, as on date.  
As for targets and shortfall their achievement, it has been observed that under 
Urea against the target of 239.49 LMT only 232 LMT has been achieved during 
the year 2024 -25 with a shortfall 3.13% and under P&K against the t arget of 
210.79 LMT only 159.62 LMT has been achieved with a shortfall 24.28%.  It has 
been observed that production target under Urea is likely to be achieved 
whereas target under P&K may not be achieved. The low production of urea 
has been attributed to technical/operational issues and (ii) due to selling out of 
Nagarjuna Fertilizers and Chemicals Limited leading to non-supply of Urea and 
shortfall in of P&K production has been attributed to price volatility and 
geopolitical constraints besides Companies being free to import /produce 
fertilizer raw materials, intermediaries and finished fertilizers as per their 
market dynamics under Open General License (OGL).  The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Department should make all efforts in utilizing the full 
allocations under the various heads in a planned manner and see that the 
targets laid are duly achieved in all circumstances.  In order to achieve their 
targets under the NBS, the Committee impress upon the Department to 
accordingly tweak the NBS policy to address the constraints mentioned. 
 
2.12 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“The position of utilization of funds as given in the Recommendation was as 
on 17/01/2025.  The Department has, however, utilized 100% of the funds at 
the close of FY 2024 -25 in respect of Indigenous P&K , Imported P&K, 

18 
 
Indigenous Urea, Imported Urea Schemes and 98.67% in respect of MDA 
Shceme. 
In case of Phosphatic and Potassic (P & K) fertilizers, under existing NBS 
Policy, subsidy is applicable uniformly across all fertilizer companies i.e. 
importers/manufacturers for making available subsidized fertilizers available 
to the farmers.   For Khari f, 2025 Cabinet has approved subsidy of Rs 
37,216.15 crores and subsidy on all fertilizer grades including SSP has 
increased.  Further, to boost domestic production of SSP all units whose unit 
-wise production capacity is below  50,000 MT continue under the scheme and 
fright subsidy continues to be extended on SSP on pilot basis.   In past one 
year, 3 new SSP manufacturing units have been included and permission for 
capacity enhancement was granted to 6 SSP plants under the NBS.” 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 7 
 
Re-appropriation/Surrender of Funds 
2.13 The Committee observe re-appropriation to the tune of Rs. 666.50 crore 
under Urea Subsidy Scheme attributed to lesser imports than the anticipated 
requirement at BE stage, Rs. 55 Crore under Market Development Assistance 
(MDA) for the reason of lesser numb er of claims at BE stage and Rs .96 Crore 
under the Secretariat Expenditure due to vacancies in Gazetted and Non -
gazetted posts in the Department specifically need further scrutiny. Re -
appropriation under Urea Subsidy to the tune of Rs. 666.50 crore becaus e of 
lesser imports at BE and recoveries of Rs. 3980 crore in BE 2024-25 along with 
recoveries of Rs. 2980 Crore during 2025 -26 for higher imports in anticipation 
is disturbing. The Committee observe apparent gaps in inputs, assessments 
and demand for impo rts vis-à-vis indigenous production. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the strategy for assessing the requirements in 
combination with production targets and imports may be tweaked to avoid 
such recurrences.  The Committee also desire that the Ministry should impress 
upon the Department of Personnel and Training for filling up of the Gazetted 
and Non-Gazetted vacancies in the Department of Fertilizers for their seamless 
functioning, at the earliest.  
 
2.14 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“In order to meet the demand of Urea from the indigenous production and to 
reduce the dependency of Imported Urea, additional funds were required 
under the  Indigenous Urea scheme, which were Re -appropriated from the 
Imported Urea Scheme.  
The recoveries in Imported urea Scheme were estimated on Pool Issue 
Price(PIP) value @ ₹ 4974/MT as per the anticipation of 80 LMT import of Urea 

19 
 
for the year 2024-25 and 60 LMT for the year 2025-26.  These recoveries are 
budgeted recoveries and actual recoveries vary upon the actual quantity of 
Imported Urea.    
The Department regularly reports the vacancies of Gazetted and Non -
Gazetted posts to DoPT as and when they arise. The Department has been 
consistently following up with the Department of Personnel and Training 
(DoPT) to expedite the filling of the the vaca nt Gazetted and Non -Gazetted 
posts in the Department of Fertilizers and reminders are also sent to DoPT in 
case the vacancies are not filled timely, highlighting the impact of vacant 
positions on the efficiency and operations of the Department. Thus, this 
Department sends regular communication / reminders to DoPT for filling the 
vacant posts to ensure smooth functioning of the Department.” 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 10 
 
Strengthening Fertilizer Security  
 
2.15 The recent shortfall in supply of P&K fertilizers, particularly Di -
Ammonium Phosphate (DAP), has exposed critical weaknesses in India’s 
fertilizer supply chain. During examination of Demands for Grants, the 
Department stated that the crisis was aggravated by geopolitical disruptions, 
price volatility, and the reluctance of private players to import DAP when 
international prices surged. This led to an extreme shortage, causing severe 
distress in the agricultural sector. Despite widespread reports in newspape rs 
and evident ground realities, the Department of Fertilizers did not acknowledge 
the severity of the situation. The government’s eventual response —a special 
package of ₹3,500 per MT beyond NBS rates, initially applicable from 01.04.2024 
to 31.12.2024 and later extended to 31.03.2025—was a delayed measure. By the 
time it was implemented, the entire country was already reeling under the 
crisis, and farmers were struggling without access to essential fertilizers. This 
response appeared more like post -operative dressing rather than a proactive 
policy intervention. To prevent such crises in the future, The Committee 
strongly recommends that the government must explore establishment of a 
Fertilizer Crisis Early Warning System (FCEWS) or a similar mechanism which 
would act as think -tank to predict shortages and take preemptive action. The 
Committee also recommends that strategic reserves of essential fertilizers 
should be maintained to ensure supply continuity. Additionally, the Nutrient -
Based Subsidy (NBS) framew ork must be revised to include real -time market-
linked adjustments, ensuring that subsidies automatically adjust 
(increase/decrease) to the fluctuations of the international prices crossing a 
certain threshold. Private players should be mandated to import a minimum 

20 
 
quantity of NPK/DAP based on projected demand, with penalties for non -
compliance, to prevent hoarding or reluctance to import during price surges. 
Furthermore, The Committee are of the opinion that the Government must 
prioritize domestic fertilizer product ion by encouraging the establishment of 
Phosphatic Fertilizer Plants through incentives and public -private 
partnerships, reducing India’s dependence on imports.  
 
2.16 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“Government has made provisions for advantage/disadvantage on 
upward/downward trend in the international prices of imported and 
domestically produced DAP and imported TSP to the importers/Manufacturers 
beyond the NBS rates for Kharif 2025 (01.04.2025 to 30.09.2025).    
To prioritize domestic fertilizer production, measures proposed both by public 
and private enterprises are as under: 
i. RCF, Thal is setting up a new DAP/NPK plant with a capacity of 1200 
MTPD. The proposed plant has capability to produce various grades of 
NPK including DAP thereby augmenting domestic production. 
Completion is expected by January 2027. After completion of t his 
project, RCF’s NPK production capacity will increase from @ 6LMT to 
10 LMT per annuum. 
ii. FACT, Kochi has planned a new 1650 MTPD NPK Plant at Cochin, 
Ambalamedu at a cost Rs 411 Crore. With the completion of this project, 
Company can enhance fertilizer production capacity from 1 Million MT 
to 1.5 Million MT per year. 
iii. CIL will get from Senegal around 2 LMT of Rock Phosphate. This will 
help in strengthening CIL’s backward integration and will ensure long 
term supply security of the key raw material. CIL is strengthening its 
Phosphoric acid capacities by augmenting its ca ptive production and 
leveraging its overseas partnerships in Tunisia and South Africa. 
iv. PPL’s installed capacity of phosphoric acid plant at Paradeep to 
increase from 0.30 million MT to 0.50 million MT in FY 2023-24 with an 
investment of about 450 crores. 
The Department has constituted a Fertilizer Management Task Force on 
26.07.2024 to perform following functions: 
a) Expediting the timely procurement of fertilizers to meet the requirement 
of the States. 
b) Planning for promotion of the usage of Alternate fertilizers viz. NPKS, 
SSP, Urea+SSP& Nano fertilizers in the States and monitoring its 
execution. 

21 
 
c) Monitoring the State specific demand & supply of fertilizers on priority 
basis.”  
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 14 
 
2.17 Market Development Assistance (MDA) and Research & Development 
under In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
MDA 
 
14. The Scheme Market Development Assistance (MDA) @ Rs. 1500/MT to 
promote organic fertilizers, viz., FOM/LFOM/PROM produced at plants under 
GOBARdhan initiative covering different Biogas/CBG support 
schemes/programmes of different stakeholder Ministries/ Departments i.e., (i) 
Sustainable Alternative Towards Affordable Transportation (SATAT) scheme of 
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoPNG); (ii) ‘Waste to Energy’ programme 
of Ministry of New & Renewable Energy (MNRE); (iii) Swachh Bharat Mission 
(Rural) of the Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation (DDWS) has been 
introduced  with total outlay of Rs. 1451.84 Crore for FY 2023 -24 to 2025 -26 
which includes a corpus of Rs. 360 Crore for research gap funding. The under -
performance in the scheme has been attributed to delay in incorporation of the 
Scheme under the Public Financial Management System(PFMS) for 
administrative reasons at the end of FY 2023-24. The Department have admitted 
to the possibility of fully utilizing the funds in the event of receipt of claims from 
the registered companies. It has further been pointed out that the Department 
of Fertilizers is continuously working towards promotion of organic fertilizers 
by enhancing the ease of doing business of CBG/BG plants. Numerous 
meetings have been organized with all stakeholders to explore ways to increase 
participation of CBG/BG plants. It is expected that in the coming year more 
funds will be utilized.  The Committee, are of the view that the scheme launched 
with the corpus of 1451.84 crores including funds for research has been under-
utilised for various reasons and the Ministry of Finance accordingly curtailed 
the budget provisions during the years.  A very less expenditure has been 
incurred on the scheme as a whole till date with only one more year i.e. 2025-26 
available to accomplish the goal. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Department should strength their coordination mechanism among the various 
stake holders and arrive at time-lines to achieve targets during the year besides 
avoiding March rush by scattering the expenditure on proposals throughout the 
year with fixing a 60% slab for the total targets to be achieved by the end of six 
months during a financial year so that the remained 40% of target to be achieved 
can be easily plan ned in the remaining period of that year.  The Department 

22 
 
should instead of waiting for the bills for re -imbursement from the Companies 
should adopt the policy of obtaining them through the departmental 
intervention.  
 
2.18 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“Department of Fertilizers is taking all possible steps to resolve the issue being 
faced by CBG/BG plants from registration of CBG/BG plants in iFMS to 
disbursement of MDA. Based on the feedbacks received from various 
stakeholders in physical/VC meetings, t he Standard      Operating 
Procedure(s) (SOPs) have been revised to streamline the MDA disbursement 
process. 
The project on promoting FOM and LFOM is being implemented by ICAR 
through 125 Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) across five ATARIs,covering12 
States/UTs.  
These 125 KVKs are collaborating with nearby CBG plants to ensure farmers 
have access to information    about FOM/LFOM and to facilitate the availability 
of FOM for awareness and demonstration activities.  
DoF vide letter dated 31.01.2025, has issued guidelines for conduct of 
camps/Kisan Sangosh this, requiring each chemical fertilizer company to 
conduct extensive field level interaction with farmers, local farmer coops 
ratives, farmers’ SHGs, panchayats etc . every month by holding day 
camps/Kisan Sangosh this. Fertilizer       Companies conducted approx. 4000 
PM- Kisan Sangoshthis on Pan India level (1.2.2025 to 31.03.2025). 
 D/o Fertilizers has entrusted HURL and RCF with responsibility of conducting 
survey for feedback from CBG operators. 67 face to face interviews conducted 
with CBG operators during first fortnight of January2025. 
Four full working day’s MDA workshops where held in DoF, Attended by 32 
CBGs, Technical issues where addresses on spot. 
Budget allocated for the FY 2025 -26 in respects of Market Development as 
Assistance (MDA) scheme to promote organic fertilizer as under: 
 
 
S.No. 
Components BE-2025-26 
(Rs. in Crore) 
1. MDA 100.00 
2. 
R&D 
50.00 
3. Total 150.00 
  

23 
 
There are two components of the Scheme called MDA (Policy for Promotion 
of Organic Fertilizers) with total budget outlay of Rs. 1451.84 Crore for F.Y. 
2023-24 to 2025-26. These are:   
a. Research and Development for Organic fertilizers - Rs. 360 Crore (for 
F.Y. 2023-24 to 2025-26). 
b.  MDA @ Rs. 1500/MT on sale of FOM/LFOM/PROM to the farmers 
through PoS- Rs. 1091.84 Crore (for F.Y. 2023-24 to 2025-26).  
Further, it is to state that for R & D activities,  the funds  are transferred as per 
the requirement and approval of the Competent Authority to the Nodal Agency 
i.e. PDIL from the budget allocated for Research and Development for Organic 
fertilizers.  As regards fund releases to the fertilizer companies/ firms against 
their MDA claims, such payment are released   based upon receipt of claims 
from the concerned firms/companies in line with extant policy guidelines.   
The details of amount released for R&D and demonstration activities and funds 
released against MDA claims during the last 2 years is as under:” 
  
Year Amount released for R&D and 
Demonstration activities  
Amount of subsidy 
released as MDA 
2023-24 0.25 Cr. - 
2024-25 4.57 Cr. 28.00 Cr. 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 15 
Nano Fertilizers 
 
2.19  The Committee are pleased to note that increase in the crop yield on 
combination Nano Urea for foliar application with conventional urea as basal 
dose by 1.65% to 14.82%, with the highest yield improvement observed in peas 
(6.14% to 14.82%) and the lowest in sugarcane (1.65% to 4%). It is good to learn 
that the Government of India has notified the specifications of Nano nitrogen 
under the Fertilizer Control Order, 1985. Nano Urea produced by IFFCO (4% 
Nitrogen), Zuari Farm Hub Limited (8% Nitrogen), Coroman del International 
Limited (12% Nitrogen), and Ray Nano & Research Centre (4.4% Nitrogen) have 
been approved by the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW). 
Recently, Nano Urea Plus produced by IFFCO, containing 16% Nitrogen, has 
also been notif ied by the DA&FW. Further, on commencement of commercial 
production by M/s Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Limited (RCF), Trombay 
Plant and M/s National Fertilizer Limited, Nangal, Punjab plant will increase the 
production capacity beyond 27.62 crore bottles (500ml each).   The farmers can 
benefit with increased crop yield on adoption of combined application of Nano 
Urea with conventional Urea. On the other hand, the total production capacity 
of Nano DAP of 7.64 crore bottles per year, with four operation al plants is 
expected to increase with additional commissioning of two more plants in the 

24 
 
future. Field trials on Nano DAP have revealed that its use for seed treatment 
and foliar application could potentially reduce the requirement for conventional 
granular DAP. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of 
Fertilizers should expand Nano Urea and Nano DAP production capacities by 
ensuring timely establishment of the units envisaged in future. The Committee 
further desire that an SOP on the knowledge a bout the use of the nano urea 
products with different nitrogen concentrations and use of nano DAP along 
with the application strategy of both the fertilizers may be widely percolated 
among farmers through pamphlets and the electronic and print media as also 
through KisanVikas Kendra (KVK).  
2.20 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“The Government of India is not directly involved in setting up of Nano Urea 
and Nano DAP Plants. 
Fertilizer companies have informed that three Nano Urea plants with 
production capacity of 17 crores bottles will be setup by 2025 -26. Fertilizer 
companies have also informed that two Nano DAP plants with production 
capacity of 12 crores bottles will be setup by 2025-26.  In order to promote the 
use of Nano Fertilizers amongst the farmers in rural areas, the following steps 
have been taken: 
i. Government of India has pursued with the states on use of Nano 
fertilizer at various forums. In the Zonal conference for assessment of 
fertilizers for Kharif 2024 season, held from 5th February to 9th 
February, 2024, Department of Agriculture and Farmers W elfare 
(DA&FW) requested the State Governments to promote the use of nano 
fertilizer in their states through their extension machinery. 
ii. DA&FW during the Rabi, 2024-25 season assessed the requirement of 
Nano Urea and Nano DAP. DA&FW vide letter dated 3rd July, 2023 
informed all the State Govt. / UTS /ICAR institutes to include FCO 
approved application of Nano-fertilizers as critical inputs in the cafeteria 
of interventions for demonstrations (Cluster Demonstrations/ Block 
Demonstrations/ Cluster Front Line Demonstrations/ Front Line 
Demonstrations) to be conducted under NFSM/ NMEO as per SAUs/ 
ICARs recommended package of practices.  
iii. Use of Nano Urea is promoted through different activities such as 
awareness camps, webinars, nukkadnataks, field demonstrations, 
KisanSammelans and films in regional languages etc.   
iv. Nano Urea and Nano DAP are made available at Pradhan 
MantriKisanSamridhiKendras (PMKSKs) by concerned companies. 
v. Nano Urea has been included under monthly supply plan issued by 
Department of Fertilizers regularly.   

25 
 
vi. ICAR through Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal recently organized 
National Campaign on “Efficient and Balanced Use of Fertilizer 
(including Nano-fertilizers)”.  
vii. For ease in application and utilization of Nano fertilizers like Nano Urea 
through foliar application, initiatives such as innovative spraying options 
like 'Kisan Drones' and distribution of battery operated sprayers at retail 
points are undertaken. For this purpose, pilot training and custom hiring 
spraying services through Village Level Entrepreneurs are actively 
promoted.  
viii. DoF in collaboration with fertilizer companies has initiated a 
MahaAbhiyan for adoption of Nano DAP in all 15 agro-climatic zones of 
the country through consultations and field level demonstrations. 
Further, DoF in collaboration with fertilizer companies h as also 
launched campaign for field level demonstrations and awareness 
programs of Nano Urea plus in 100 districts of the country.”  
  
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 16 
 
Expand Research on Long-Term Impact of Nano Fertilizers 
2.21  The Committee observed that the ICAR study (2024 -2026) on "Effect of 
Nano Urea and DAP and Popularization of Its Use in Crop Production" is 
assessing Crop growth, phenology, and yield; Soil health parameters; Nutrient 
uptake and quality of produce. The Committee recomme nds that the 
Department should consider funding additional multi -location and multi -crop 
trials to study the long -term impact on soil fertility and ecosystem 
sustainability. The Committee is of the view that there is a greater need for 
monitoring, adoption  besides addressing farmer concerns to simplify the 
methods of Nano Urea/ Nano DAP usage. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department should conduct regular surveys in 
collaboration with State Agricultural Universities and KVKs to collect farm er 
feedback on Nano Urea's performance. Concerns regarding cost-effectiveness, 
application methods, and long -term sustainability should be systematically 
addressed through policy interventions. 
2.22 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“The recommendations of the committee have been noted for compliance.” 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 17 
 
Scale Up Drone-Based Spraying Technology 
2.23  Regarding the distribution of drones to villages, the Committee noted 
that the Namo Drone Didi Scheme, administered by the Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), is a Central Sector Scheme aiming 
provision of 15,000 drones to Women Self-Help Groups (SHGs) over three years 
(2023-24 to 2025 -26). The objective is to create sustainable business and 
livelihood opportunities in rural areas. Under this initiative, the Department of 
Fertilizers, through fertilizer companies, has facilitated the distribution of 1,094 
drones to Namo Drone Didis, including 500 drones as part of a pilot program. 
However, the overall assessment of drone availability in villages falls under the 
purview of the DA&FW, which is responsible for nationwide implementation. 
Given the significant benefits of drone technology in agriculture —such as 
precision farming, reduced water consumption (from 65 -200 liters per acre to 
ultra-low volumes), and lower labor costs, drone -based farming needs to be 
introduced in the 6,40,000 villages across the Country requiring a large number 
of drones for coverage. However, the Committee observed that the 
implementation at the grassroots level remains significantly behind the target. 
To bridge this gap, the Committee recommends that the Departme nt of 
Fertilizers, the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, and the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation should work collaboratively to assess the demand and ensure 
the expedited deployment of drones to villages. Additionally, the Department 
of Fertilizers s hould coordinate with DA&FW to ensure the widespread 
availability and training for drone -assisted Nano Urea application, enabling 
farmers to maximize the benefits of this technology. 
 
2.24 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
 
“The Namo Drone Didi Scheme is administered by the Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW). Therefore, the recommendation of 
the committee regarding deployment of drones in villages falls under purview 
of DA&FW. DA&FW vide their OM dated 3rd  March, 2025 have allocated 
14,500 drones for 29 states to be delivered in 2025-26.  
Under the Namo Drone Didi Scheme, the training is included in the package 
of drone supplies. “ 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 19 
 
2.25 The Committee observe that with a view to Strengthening Revenue 

27 
 
Generation & Competitiveness, it is necessary that Department of Fertilizers 
explore the feasibility of diversification of PSUs into specialty fertilizers i.e., 
Nano Urea, Nano DAP, other similar products and bio -fertilizers, organic 
fertilizers to reduce dependency on urea and traditional fertilizers thereby 
reducing the subsidy burden on the exchequer. The PSUs may also identify 
potential international markets and the Department should incentivize PSUs to 
enhance exports, reducing reliance on domestic sub sidies. As part of 
Backward Integration Initiative, the Department should encourage PSUs to 
invest in raw material sourcing (e.g., phosphoric acid, potash) to reduce import 
dependency and mitigate international price volatility. The Department should 
also expedite the implementation of Nano Urea and Nano DAP projects by NFL 
and RCF to improve fertilizer efficiency and reduce costs. 
2.26 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
 
“RCF have signed a MoU  with IFFCO on 27.07.2021, to use IFFCO's 
proprietary Nano Urea Technology for setting up a Nano Urea manufacturing 
plant at RCF. Subsequent upon signing of MoU with IFFCO, RCF has initiated 
action for setting up a new Nano Urea (Liqui d) Fertilizer Plant. For the said 
plant, RCF have received MoEF&CC Environment Clearance on 11th August 
2023 and the Consent to Operate (CTO) issued by Maharashtra Pollution 
Control Board (MPCB) on 6th January 2025. RCF submitted its application on 
18.03.2025 to DA&FW and DoF for obtaining approval of Nano fertilizer under 
FCO 1985. Accordingly, DoF vide OM dated 25.03.2025 requested DA&FW to 
consider the RCF request.  
NFL has informed that it is implementing a new high -tech nano urea project 
with higher nitrogen content. However, the time line cannot be confirmed yet.”   
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 20 
 
2.27 The Committee observed that despite the presence of a Government  
nominated Director at the board level of Fertilizer PSUs, their financial 
condition has continued to deteriorate over time. This underscores the need 
for a more robust monitoring framework. In view of the financial status of these 
PSUs under the Department, the Committee recommends for establishment of 
an independent financial monitoring mechanism in the form of a “Fertilizer PSU 
Monitoring Authority” to systematically track their financial health and 
implement early intervention strategies. Additionally, the Committee 

28 
 
emphasizes the need to strengthen Performance-Linked Incentives to enhance 
profitability and operational efficiency. 
 
2.28 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“Department of Fertilizers periodically monitors the physical/financial 
performance of the PSUs under their control through Quarterly Review 
Meetings, Production Planning Meetings, Distribution and Movement Meetings 
and by appointing Directors on the Board of the respective PSUs for regular 
monitoring of the functioning. Monthly and Quarterly reports are submitted by 
PSUs.  Further, with respect to recommendation of the Committee regarding 
the establishment of an independent financial mechanism in the form of a 
"Fertilizer PSU Monitoring Authority", a considered view will be taken by the 
Department, as appropriate.” 
  

29 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENTS REPLIES 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 8 
 
Revision in Grades of NPKS fertilizers 
 
3.1 The Committee are happy to note that NBS policy formulated to meet the 
objective of promoting balance use of fertilizers, the Department of Fertilizers 
has helped in improving productivity in the farm land and multi -nutrient 
deficiency of the soil resultin g increase in major crop yield per hectare from 
1930 Kg/hectare in 2010 -11 to 2233 Kg/hectare in 2017 -18, an increase of 16% 
over a period of 7 years. This significantly proves that the NPKS fertilizers have 
been able to address the multi -deficiency of soi l of various regions.  The 
revision of grades of NPKS is done on the basis of appraisal of need by the 
Indian Council for Agricultural Research (ICAR), the DA&FW decides the 
inclusion/revision of grades of NPKS fertilizers in FCO. As a result, the number 
of grades under NBS has incr eased from 22 grades in 2021 to 28 grades at 
present. 06 new grades added are NPK 08-21-21, NPK 09-24-24, Potash Derived 
from Molasses(PDM) (0-0-14.5-0), NPK 11-30-14 fortified with Magnesium, Zinc, 
Boron and Sulphur, Urea -SSP Complex 5-15-0-10 and SSP 0 -16-0-11 fortified 
with Magnesium, Zinc and Boron.  The issue of low effectiveness of the grade 
of NPKS provided to the Southern States of India and West Bengal requiring 
immediate intervention, cropped up in the discussions during  the Study Visit 
of the Committee in January 2025 putting additional supplements burden on 
the farmers for crop yield. Against the requirement of NPK 10:26:26, other 
NPKS fertilizers are being provided to the Farmers of West Bengal. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizers impress 
upon ICAR to assess the grade of NPKS requirement of these regions and 
recommend the required grade of fertilizers to the Department of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare, to address the soil deficiency concerns there. 
 
3.2 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
 
“DoF ensures availability of fertilizers against the requirement. On the basis of 
requirement sufficient/ adequate quantities of fertilizers are allocated to States 
by issuing monthly supply plan and continuously monitors the availability. 

30 
 
Before the commencement of each cropping season, Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), in consultation with all the State 
Governments, assesses the state-wise& month-wise requirement of fertilizers 
viz. Urea, DAP, MOP and NPKS.   This requirement is assessed taking into 
account the projected gross crop ped area, irrigated area, last three seasons’ 
consumption pattern and crop wise recommended dose of fertilizers as per 
soil health fertility status etc.   
On the basis of requirement projected, Department of Fertilizers allocates 
adequate quantities of fertilizers to States by issuing monthly supply plan and 
continuously monitors the availability. The movement of all major subsidized 
fertilizers is monitored  throughout the country by an on -line web based 
monitoring system called integrated Fertilizer Monitoring System (iFMS). 
 It is pertinent to mention that DA&FW has never provided the grade -wise 
requirement of NPKS fertilizers for any State during earlier seasons. However, 
during ongoing Kharif 2025, DA&FW has provided the specific requirement of 
NPK 10:26:26 for the State of West Bengal in Kharif 2025 season. Accordingly, 
the concerned fertilizer companies have been given necessary directions for 
taking action as appropriate. Further, D/o Fertilizers open new rake points on 
the requests of State Governments by taking due approval of their operational 
status from Ministry of Railways.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 11 
Continuation of Urea Subsidy Scheme 
3.3 The Committee are aware that the Cabinet has approved continuation of 
NBS scheme till 31.03.2026 or till further review based on appraisal by 
Expenditure Finance Committee(EFC) on one hand whereas the continuation 
of the existing Urea Subsidy Scheme 01.04.2025 to 31.03.2026 is pending with 
the Department of Expenditure for taking up the appraisal of the EFC. Keeping 
in view the importance of urea in food-grain production of the  
 
Country,it is necessary that the Urea Subsidy Scheme continued further.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the appraisal of the EFC may be expedited for 
placing the Scheme for final decision of the Cabinet on extension beyond 31 st 
March, 2025.  
3.4 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) note for the continuation of the 
Urea Subsidy Scheme for a period of one year beyond 31.03.2025 i.e. 
01.04.2025 to 31.03.2026 has been sent to the Department of Expenditure on 
25.03.2025.  However,  Department of Expenditure has allowed payment of 
urea bills (Indigenous & Imported) on provisional basis for the period upto 

31 
 
30/06/2025 or till finalization of the recommendation of the EFC on 
continuation of Urea Subsidy Scheme for Financial Year 2025 -26, whichever 
is earlier vide their OM No. 6(12)/PFC -I/2024 dated 04th April 2025 and 05th 
May 2025.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 13 
 
Strengthening Fraud Detection and Capping Fertilizer Purchases to Prevent 
Diversion 
3.5 The committee are aware that a ceiling of 50 bags per month per buyer 
has been imposed to regulate subsidized fertilizer distribution. The Committee 
have been informed that the Department is in discussions with DA&FW to link 
farmer landholding data via API s (UFSI) to the iFMS platform, which would 
facilitate customized purchase limits. However, the Committee is of the view 
that pooling of fertilizer purchases among farmers is common. The Committee 
therefore recommends that the Department should introduc e a dynamic 
purchase cap based on landholding size (once integrated with Farmer’s 
Registry) rather than a blanket limit. This will ensure that genuine farmers are 
not disadvantaged while preventing excessive accumulation by non -genuine 
buyers.  Additionally, the existing system detects suspicious buyers based on 
sales data but does not specify how irregularities are investigated or resolved.  
Also, the Department currently relies on monthly data reports, which may delay 
action against fraudulent transaction s. As such, the Committee recommends 
that the Department may explore the possibility of implementing AI -based 
predictive analytics in the iFMS to flag unusual purchase patterns in real time, 
allowing immediate intervention. This will enhance the efficiency  of detecting 
and preventing subsidy misuse. 
 
3.6 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“The dynamic cap on purchase limit requires identification of the beneficiary 
and the entitlement of the beneficiary based on the land holding and other 
parameters such as soil health and cropping pattern etc. DoF is engaged with 
DA&FW to integrate the Farm ers’ data with IFMS. The updation of Farmer’s 
Registry is underway by Agristack. It has been agreed by DA&FW that 
Agristack will share the available data with DoF to facilitate integration between 
Agristack and IFMS data sets.       
As and when the farmers registry is completed and data is shared by DA&FW, 
further necessary action will be taken.   Department will explore the feasibility 
of deployment of AI based predictive analytics in the iFMS to flag unusual 
purchase patterns.”  

32 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 9 
 
Ensuring Balanced Fertilizer Supply and Sustainable Soil Health 
 
4.1 The Committee during interaction with farmers of West Bengal during 
the study visit in January 2025, observed a significant and alarming shortfall in 
the supply of NPK 10:26:26, a fertilizer crucial for potato cultivation in the state. 
As the second-largest potato producer in India, with 4.96 lakh hectares under 
cultivation and an estimated production of 127 lakh MT in 2023-24, West Bengal 
has a critical demand for NPK 10:26:26 due to its suitability for the region’s 
acidic soils. However, despite an approv ed requirement of 4.50 Lakh MT in 
2023-24, only 2.27 Lakh MT was supplied. The situation has worsened in 2024-
25, with only 1.33 Lakh MT provided till December 2024 against an approved 
requirement of 5.05 Lakh MT. This persistent shortage has forced farmer s to 
substitute NPK 10:26:26 with other NP grades, leading to a sharp rise in 
cultivation costs. The cost per bigha has escalated from ₹2,530 (using NPK 
10:26:26) to as high as ₹3,400 (using NP 20:20:0:13) or ₹3,348 (using NPK 
16:16:16). This increased fin ancial burden is directly impacting farmer 
profitability and the overall agricultural economy of the region. Additionally, the 
Committee noted that certain companies routinely fail to supply their allocated 
quantity of NPK 10:26:26 during the peak season, causing severe market 
disruptions and hampering farmer access. To address this issue, the 
Committee strongly recommends that the Department of Fertilizers enforce 
strict compliance mechanisms to ensure companies fulfill their allocated 
supply commitments, well in advance, particularly during the peak season to 
enable timely supply to the Farmers. Companies failing to meet their 
obligations should face appropriate penalties, while those ensuring timely 
supply should be incentivized. Furthermore, to reduce dependency on specific 
fertilizer grades, the Department should actively support research and 
development in region-specific soil nutrition management and promote the use 
of bio -fertilizers and customized fertilizers tailored to States’ agro -climatic 
conditions. It is also imperative that the Department ensures equitable and 
timely distribution of fertilizers by implementing a robust monitoring system to 
track supply and address any disruptions or delays promptly besides 
addressing the issue of in -sufficient availability of Rake Points all over the 
Country. Given that West Bengal has two functional ports, efforts should also 
be made to leverage these facilities for improved fertilizer import and 

33 
 
distribution, thereby reducing logistical delays and costs. The Committee 
further stresses that the Department of Fertilizers must prioritize the supply of 
fertilizers based on the specific soil requirements of each state and the 
cropping patterns, rather than continuing with the traditional approach that has 
led to an over -reliance on urea. The excessive use of nitrogen due to the 
overuse of urea has resulted in the consistent decline of the ideal NPK ratio of 
4:2:1, leading to soil degradation and reduced  long-term agricultural 
productivity. A more balanced approach to fertilizer distribution, aligned with 
scientific soil testing and regional crop needs, is essential to restore soil health 
and ensure sustainable agricultural practices. The Committee strong ly 
recommend that the Department of Fertilizers to take immediate action on these 
aspects to safeguard farmer interests, stabilize fertilizer availability, and 
support sustainable agricultural growth across the country. 
 
4.2 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA has approved the “PM 
Programme for Restoration, Awareness Generation, Nourishment, and 
Amelioration of Mother -Earth (PM -PRANAM)” on 28th June, 2023. The 
initiative aims to complement the efforts initiated by States/UTs to save the 
health of Mother Earth by promoting sustainable and balanced use of 
fertilizers, adopting alternate fertilizers, promoting organic & natural farming 
etc.  
Under PM -PRANAM, 14 states have shown a reduction of 15.14 LMT in 
consumption of chemical fertilizers during FY 2023 -24 as compared to the 
average consumption of previous 3 financial years. 
DoF ensures availability of fertilizers against the requirement. On the basis of 
requirement sufficient/ adequate quantities of fertilizers are allocated to States 
by issuing monthly supply plan and continuously monitors the availability. 
 Before the commencement of each cropping season, Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), in consultation with all the State 
Governments, assesses the state-wise& month-wise requirement of fertilizers 
viz. Urea, DAP, MOP and NPKS.   This requirement is assessed taking into 
account the projected gross cropped area, irrigated area, last three seasons’ 
consumption pattern and crop wise recommended dose of fertilizers as per 
soil health fertility status etc.   
On the basis of requirement projected, Department of Fertilizers allocates 
adequate quantities of fertilizers to States by issuing monthly supply plan and 
continuously monitors the availability. The movement of all major subsidized 
fertilizers is monitored  throughout the country by an on -line web based 
monitoring system called integrated Fertilizer Monitoring System (iFMS). In 

34 
 
this regard, requirement, availability, sales and closing stock of NPKS in the 
State of West Bengal during the Rabi 2024 -25 season (From 01.10.2024 to 
31.03.2025) is 7.00 LMT, 9.95 LMT, 6.96 LMT and 2.99 LMT respectively. 
Accordingly, the availability of f ertilizers has remained adequate in state of 
West Bengal.  
It is pertinent to mention that DA&FW has never provided the grade -wise 
requirement of NPKS fertilizers for any State during earlier seasons. However, 
during ongoing Kharif 2025, DA&FW has provided the specific requirement of 
NPK 10:26:26 for the State of West Bengal in Kharif 2025 season. Accordingly, 
the concerned fertilizer companies have been given necessary directions for 
taking action as appropriate. Further, D/o Fertilizers open new rake points on 
the requests of State Governments by taking due approval of their operational 
status from Ministry of Railways.  
Government has approved the Market Development Assistance (MDA) @ 
Rs.1500/MT to promote Fermented Organic Manure (FOM)/ Liquid Fermented 
Organic Manure (LFOM)/ Phosphate Rich Organic Manure (PROM), produced 
by Compressed Bio Gas (CBG)/Bio -Gas plants under GOBARdhan scheme 
with total outlay of Rs.1451.84 Crore (FY2023-24to2025-26), which includes a 
corpus of Rs.360 Crore for research gap funding, etc. 
These initiatives of the Government are expected to address the imbalanced 
use of chemical fertilizers thereby reducing over use of chemical fertilizers.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para No: 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report] 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 12 
 
Direct Benefit Transfer 
 
4.3 The Committee finds it concerning that buyer identification under the 
Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) in Fertilizer Subsidy Scheme is established only 
through Aadhaar authentication on a ‘no denial basis,’ without a well -defined 
mechanism to ascertain the ac tual beneficiary. As a result, subsidized 
fertilizers, particularly urea, are susceptible to diversion for stocking, black -
marketing, and use in industrial sectors such as resin/adhesives, 
plastics/foams, textiles/leather, and paper/pulp industries. It is apparent that 
different syndicates might be functional in this field to benefit from the 
shortcomings of the DBT system in place allowing purchase of subsidized 
fertilizers in connivance of implementing agencies creating shortages and 
black-marketing. The current provision, which allows each beneficiary to 
purchase up to 50 bags per month, further exacerbates this issue, contributing 

35 
 
to demand-supply gaps and increasing the subsidy burden on the exchequer. 
The Committee observe that the Integrated Fertilizer Management System 
(iFMS) Portal has identified approximately 18.7 crore unique buyers identified 
till date under the DBT system and 6.25 crore buyers have availed the fertilizer 
subsidy till January, 2025 which contradicts the farmer population when 
compared with the PM-KISAN database of Department of Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare(DA&FW), which records 9.8 crore farmers, highlightin g the need for 
further scrutiny of genuine beneficiaries.The Committee, therefore, appreciates 
the initiative to explore the use of the PM -KISAN database and integration of 
the Farmers’ Registry with the digital platform of Department of Fertilizers and 
desire that all necessary measures shall be taken for early integration of the 
iFMS platform with the Farmers’ Registry incorporating landholding, cropping 
patterns, and soil health data besides broadening the  Direct Cash Transfer 
Scheme to select districts  of different regions to correctly understand the 
fertilizer purchase behaviors of the farmers for a comprehensive 
understanding of the constraints in the DBT. In light of these concerns, the 
Committee strongly recommends expediting the integration of Aadh aar 
authentication with a comprehensive Farmer’s Registry to ensure better 
targeting of fertilizer subsidies and prevent unauthorized buyers from 
exploiting the system. Furthermore, necessary modifications should be made 
to the DBT system to ensure that benefits percolate directly to both landowners 
and landless farmers who cultivate leased land. 
 
4.4 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“DoF is engaged with DA&FW to integrate the Farmers’ data with IFMS.   The 
updation of Farmer’s Registry is underway by Agristack.   It has been agreed 
by DA&FW that Agristack will share the available data with DoF to facilitate 
integration between Agristack and IFMS data sets.“ 
 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para No:1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report] 
 
RECOMMENDATION Sl. NO. 18 
 
Focus on Revival and Modernization of Fertilizer Plants:  
 
4.5 The Committee examined the loan liabilities of fertilizer PSUs and found 
significant financial distress. MFL owes ₹1,486.3 crore, FACT ₹3,443.59 crore, 
and BVFCL ₹572.75 crore in government loans. Ageing plants and high-interest 

36 
 
burdens on these PSUs risk debt traps. The Committee recommends financial 
restructuring, including loan -to-equity conversion, interest write -offs, and 
installment-based repayment plans. Additionally, the Government should 
explore subsidized credit access a nd a working capital guarantee scheme to 
ease financial strain on these PSUs. Given the outdated infrastructure, 
reassessment of PSU assets, particularly land holdings, is crucial. The 
Committee desires that the Government should make escalated efforts so that 
these PSUs remain financially viable to ensure fertilizer sufficiency.  
4.6 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“The loan details of BVFCL, FACT and MFL are as following: 
2. Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL) 
GOI Loans as on 31/03/2024 
Particulars Amount  
(Rs. in Crores) 
Total Principal 572.75 
Total Interest Interest free 
 
The CCEA in its meeting held on 21.05.2015 on financial restructuring of 
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited has approved the conversion 
of GoI loan as Interest free loan and on attaining profit the company will service 
the GoI loan. 
  
3. The Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT) 
Details of Govt. of India loan, year-wise sanctioned to FACT are given below: 
S. No. Year Amount (Rs. in Crores) 
1. 2005-06 40.00 
2. 2006-07 30.00 
3. 2007-08 15.00 
4. 2008-09 13.00 
5. 2009-10 34.00 
6. 2010-11 89.99 
7. 2011-12 60.74 
8. 2015-16 1000.00 
Total 1282.73 
  
The plan loan of Rs.1000.00 Crore released by the Government of India in 2016 
along with the earlier loan and interest outstanding, has been converted into a 
single loan carrying interest @ 13.50% per annum with one -year moratorium for 

37 
 
payment of interest. The loan amount was reconciled and loan outstanding has 
been arrived at Rs.1770.48 Crore as on 31.03.2017. 
 The total loan outstanding including interest as on 31.03.2024 is Rs.3443.59 
crores. 
   
4. Madras Fertilizers Limited  
GOI Loans as on 31/03/2024: 
 
Particulars Amount  (Rs. in Crores) 
Total Principal 554.24 
Total Interest 848.38 
MFL had submitted a financial restructuring proposal for consideration. 
Meanwhile, the New Public Sector Enterprise (PSE) Policy for Atmanirbhar 
Bharat, as notified by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Investment and 
Public Asset Management, vide OM No. 3/3/2020 -DIPAM-II-B (E), dated 
04.02.2021, was introduced. MFL has to submit the revised proposal for financial 
restructuring.” 
Comments of the Committee 
[Please see Para No:1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report] 
 
  

38 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
06 JANUARY, 2026 CHAIRPERSON, 
16 PAUSA, 1947 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
  

39 
 
APPENDIX I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS BRANCH  
(2025-26) 
Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 06th January, 2026 from 1100 hrs. to 1130 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe (PHA), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha– Chairperson 
LOK SABHA MEMBERS 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C.  
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
7. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
8. Shri Praveen Patel 
9. Dr. Sambit Patra 
10. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
11. Shri Sachithannatham R. 
12.  Shri Eatala Rajender 
13. Shri Rajesh Ranjan  
14. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
15. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA MEMBERS 
 
16. Shri Subhash Barala 
17. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
18. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
19. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
20. Shri Tejveer Singh 
21. Shri G.K. Vasan 
 

40 
 
SECRETARIAT 
4. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam  - Director 
6. Shri Kulvinder Singh                      -         Deputy Secretary 
7. Shri Abhishek Kumar   - Deputy Director  
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following Draft 
Reports:  
i. Sixteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observation/Recommendation contained in the Sixth Report of the 
Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2025-26)’ pertaining to the Department of Fer tilizers, Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers. 
ii.            XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
iii.            XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
iv.            XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
3. Giving an overview of the important Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of the 
Members. 
4.      After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee 
without any amendment. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and 
present/lay the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament in the budget session of 
Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

41 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT  (EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2025-26) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-
26) PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF 
FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
 
Total No. of Recommendations: 20 
I. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19 and 20) 
14 
Percentage of Total: 70%  
II. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
(Recommendation Para No. 8, 11 and 13) 
03 
Percentage of Total: 15% 
III. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee which require 
reiteration: 
(Recommendation Para No. 9, 12  and 18) 
03 
Percentage of Total: 15% 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
-NIL- 
00 
Percentage of Total: 0% 