i 
 
 
15 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
    
                            MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
                              (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
SELF-SUFFICIENCY IN PRODUCTION OF FERTILIZERS WITH A VIEW TO CURB 
IMPORT OF FERTILIZERS-REVIEW OF CONSTRAINTS THEREOF 
  
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2025/   AGRAHAYANA, 1947 (SAKA) 
 


ii 
 
CC&F.No. 195 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
SELF-SUFFICIENCY IN PRODUCTION OF FERTILIZERS WITH A VIEW TO CURB 
IMPORT OF FERTILIZERS-REVIEW OF CONSTRAINTS THEREOF 
(2025-26) 
  
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 04th October, 2025 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 01st December, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21st August, 2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2025/   AGRAHAYANA, 1947 (SAKA) 


iii 
 
  
 
CONTENTS 
  Page Nos. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25)  
INTRODUCTION  
REPORT 
 
PART I Introduction  
PART-II Observations/Recommendations  
 
APPENDICES  
    I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 6th January, 2025. 
 
II. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 9th May, 2025.  
 
III Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
& Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 7th August, 2025. 
 
 
  

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS 
(2025-2026) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
21. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
25. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
26. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
29. Shri Tejveer Singh 
30. Shri G.K. Vasan 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Director 
 

v 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
21. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Subhash Barala 
23. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
24. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
25. Shri Sanjay Raut 
26. Shri Naresh Bansal 
27. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
28. Dr. Kalpana Saini 
29. Shri Arun Singh 
30. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
31. Shri Tejveer Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Director 
3.  Shri Panna Lal  - Deputy Secretary  
 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers  (2025-26) 
having been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf, this Fifteenth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Self-sufficiency in production of fertilizers with a view 
to curb import of fertilizers-review of constraints thereof’ pertaining to the Department of 
Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers.  
2. The Committee had a briefing by the representatives of the Department of  
Fertilizers on 06th January, 202 5 and took oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Department of Fertilizers at their sitting held on 9th May, 2025. 
3.  The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on   
19th August, 2025.  
 
 4.  The Committee wish to express their  thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India for tendering evidence and placing 
before the Committee all the requisite information sought for in connection with the 
examination of the subject.  
 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee.  
 
6. For ease of reference and convenience, the Observations/ Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; Azad Kirti Jha 
19 August, 2025 Chairperson, 
28 Shravan, 1947(Saka) Standing Committee on 
 Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
                                                                                                                  

1  
      
REPORT 
PART- I  
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 
I. Crucial Role of Fertilizers for the Country’s food security. 
 
 Fertilizer availability directly impacts food security in India by influencing crop yields, 
agricultural productivity and ultimately the affordability and accessibility of food. With substantial 
population dependent on agriculture for livelihood and a rapidly growing population to feed, 
consistent and affor dable access to key fertilizers -namely Urea, DAP  (Di-Ammonium 
Phosphate) and NPK (Nitrogen, Phosphorus, Potassium) complexes is vital to ensure that food 
production meets domestic demand.  
        
2. India imports a significant share of its fertilizer requirements, particularly potash and 
phosphate-based fertilizers and raw materials like natural gas (used in urea production). This 
dependence exposes the country to global market shocks, geopolitical risks and currency 
fluctuations. Achieving self -sufficiency through domestic production, diversified sourcing, and 
indigenous R&D reduces these vulnerabilities and enhances strategic autonomy, stabilizes 
subsidies, and ensures timely availability of fertilizers to farmers during critical crop seasons.  
 
Broad varieties of Fertilizes used by the farmers 
 
3. The broad varieties of chemicals fertilizers being used by the farmers in the Country 
are Urea, DAP, MOP, NPKS and SSP.  
 
4. In case of P&K fertilizers , Nutrient based subsidy (NBS) Policy is applicable on  
28 Grades including Di - Ammonium Phosphate (DAP), Mono Ammonium Phosphate (MAP), 
Muriate of Potash (MOP), Triple Super Phosphate (TSP), 03 grades of Single Super Phosphate 
(SSP), Ammonium Sulphate ( AS), produced by FACT and GSFC, Potash Derived from 
Molasses (PDM) and other 19 grades of NPKS Complex fertilizers.  
 
5. FOM/LFOM/PROM (categorized as soil carbon enhancers vide DA&FW Notification 
dated 27.3.2025) produced at CBG plants are used by farmers.  
 
6. Initiating the briefing before the Committee on the Subject , the representative  of the 
Ministry deposed as under:  
 
“I would like to present a picture in which we have to search for a pathway for  
self-sufficiency in the fertilizer sector. I believe that self-reliance and self-sufficiency have 
a thin line between them. Self-sufficiency is actually a kind of management of the deficit 
in terms of resources that we lack. But we are steadily progressing towards  achieving 
that status.” 
 

2  
7. Further, during the briefing, the Secretary, Department of Fertilizers , submitted before 
the Committee as under:  
,  
“I can submit confidently that in the last five years, the decisions which were taken earlier 
have been fructified to a great extent, mainly in terms of urea. And, in P&K, that is DAP, 
NPKS and MOP, we are also making progress, and a substantial addition to our internal 
capacity has already been finalized, the result of which will come in 18 months to 2 years.” 
 
 
8. Informing about its mandate, a representative of the Department , during the evidence, 
informed that based on requirement  of fertilizers  from concerned Departments and State 
Governments, etc.; the Department ensures its availability through the fertilizer produced by the 
companies or imported from abroad so that it reaches to every State according to a supply plan 
which is supplied at the last day of the season's commencement, that is, 30th of September for 
the Rabi and 31st of March for Kharif because Kharif starts from April. 
 
II. Fertilizers – An overview of Consumption/ Production and Import. 
 
 
9. During the course of evidence, the Committee was informed about the trend of fertilizer 
consumption in India through a Power Point Presentation by a representative of the Department 
of Fertilizers which is as under: - 
 
CONSUMPTION OF MAJOR FERTILIZERS (IN LMT) 
 
 
 
10. In this context, a representative of the Department submitted as under: 
 


3  
“I have actually used this slide to highlight the point that for the first time in the last 
financial year, 2024 -25, during Kharif and Rabi, India's consumption has crossed 
700 lakh tons for the first time. So, 7 crore tons of fertilizer has been used in a single 
year. Out of that 708, about 387 is the urea alone. Also, the MOP, NPK, DAP, and 
SSP, put together become 320 lakh tons.” 
 
 
11. The Committee was further informed that, out of the total fertilizer consumption; in terms 
of major nutrients, the share of Nitrogen is 221.5 LMT, Phosphate is 83.9 LMT and Potash is 
23.80 LMT. 
 
12. Informing about the present total production of various types of fertilizers (including Urea/ 
P&K/ Nano fertilizers/ Organic fertilizers, etc.) in the Country, the Department informed that  
since its inception, a cumulative total of 13.27crore bottles (500 ml each) of Nano Urea have 
been produced across the Country between 2021 to 31st May 2025. Similarly, 3.19 crore bottles 
(500 ml each) of Nano DAP have been produced across the Country between 2022 to 31st May 
2025. 
 
The details of total production of Urea and P&K is as under: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13. Regarding the quantity of fertilizers (in LMT) of various types (including Urea/ P&K, etc.) 
presently being imported by the Country, the Department informed as under: 
 
Import of fertilizers (Urea, DAP, MOP and NPK) from 2020-21 to 2024-25 
Qty in LMT 
Year Urea 
DAP MOP 
* NPK 
as reported by the companies 
2020-21 98.28 48.82 42.27 13.90 
2021-22 91.36 54.62 24.60 11.70 
2022-23 75.80 65.83 18.66 27.52 
2023-24 70.42 55.67 28.69 22.17 
2024-25 56.47 45.69 35.41 22.72 
* MOP includes Industrial use and agriculture use both. 
Year Production of 
Fertilizer (in ‘LMT) 
Production 
in lakh 
Bottles of 
500 ml 
Sale in LMT 
 Urea P&K Nano Organic 
2024-25 306.67 211.21 388.15 2.36 

4  
 
(A) Status regarding Urea 
 
14. Urea Fertilizer have played an important role in making the Country self-reliant in food 
grain production. It has provided a very vital input for the growth of Indian agriculture and in the 
attainment of the goal of self -sufficiency in food grains. Urea Subsidy Scheme, which is in 
existence since the year 1977, has been i nstrumental in ensuring timely availability of urea to 
the farmers at affordable price. 
 
15. At present, there are 33 urea units in the Country with a Re-assessed capacity (RAC) of 
269.40 LMT. Out of these 33 units, there are 9 units of PSUs with RAC of 60.69 LMT;  
6 units of Cooperatives with RAC of 54.19 LMT; 4 units of Joint Venture with RAC of  
50.80 LMT; and 14 units of Private companies wit h RAC of 103.72 LMT.  The list of urea units 
is at Annexure. Further, the Urea units are producing around 30-40 LMT of Urea Beyond RAC 
annually. As such, the present production capacity of indigenous Ur ea is around 305 LMT per 
annum.  
 
16. The Committee have been informed that against the Urea consumption of 388 LMT 
during the year 2024 -25 its indigenous production has been 307 LMT.   Moreover, the 
consumption of Urea is expected to be 444 LMT during the year 2035-36.  In this regard, when 
asked to furnish details of the plans/ policies/ schemes of the Government to enhance the 
production/ availability of Urea so as to fulfill the demands domestically, the Department has in  
its written reply informed as under: 
 
“With regard to Urea, the Government had announced New Investment Policy (NIP) – 
2012 on 2nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7th October, 2014 to facilitate fresh 
investment in the urea sector and to make India self-sufficient in the urea sector. Total 6 
new urea units have been set up under NIP -2012 which includes 4 urea units set up 
through Joint Venture Companies (JVC) of nominated PSUs and 2 urea units set up by 
the private companies. The units set up through JVC are Ramagundam urea unit of 
Ramagundam Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd (RFCL) in Telangana and  
3 urea units namely Gorakhpur, Sindri and Barauni of Hindustan Urvarak&Rasayan 
Limited (HURL) in Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and Bihar, respectively. The units set up by 
private companies are Panagarh urea unit of Matix Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. (Matix) 
in West Bengal; and Gadepan -III urea unit of Chambal Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. 
(CFCL) in Rajasthan. Each of these units has installed capacity of 12.7 Lakh Metric 
Tonne per annum (LMTPA). These units are highly energy efficient as they are based on 
latest technology. Therefore, these units have together added urea production capacity 
of 76.2 LMTPA, thereby total indigenous urea production capacity Reassessed Capacity, 
(RAC) has increased from 207.54 LMTPA during 2014-15 to 283.74 LMTPA during 2023-
24. Further, an exclusive policy for the revival of Talcher unit of FCIL through JVC of 
nominated PSUs namely Talcher Fertilizers Limited (TFL) by setting up a new Greenfield 
urea plant of 12.7 LMTPA at coal gasification route has also been approved. 
 
In addition, the Government also notified the New Urea Policy (NUP) – 2015 on 25th 
May, 2015 for the existing 25 gas -based urea units with the objectives of maximizing 
indigenous urea production beyond RAC and promoting energy efficiency in urea 
production.  The NUP-2015 has led to additional production of urea by 20 -25 LMT as 
compared to the production during 2014-15 annually. 

5  
 
Above steps together have facilitated increase of Urea production from level of 225 LMT 
per annum during 2014-15 to a Urea Production of 306.67 LMT during 2024-25. 
  
Further, an exclusive policy was notified on 28th April 2021 for the revival of Talcher unit 
of FCIL by setting up a new Greenfield urea plant of 12.7 LMT per annum at coal 
gasification route. TFL will be using Coal Gasification Technology for production o f 
Ammonia/Urea. Coal Gasification consists of converting solid coal to synthetic gas which 
is used as feedstock for synthesis of various chemical products such as ammonia and 
urea. For making Urea, carbon monoxide is converted into carbon dioxide through s hift 
gas reaction. CO2 which is commonly called greenhouse gas is emitted from coal. This 
is separated in closed loop process and is mainly being used as raw material for the 
manufacture of Urea. In this process, pollutants like CO 2 is recycled for production of 
Urea and other by products like Sulphur are recovered and marketed. Further, Ash 
containing harmful heavy metals is converted to iner t slag which is essentially non -
hazardous. 
 
The Union Cabinet has recently approved the proposal for setting up of a new Brownfield 
Ammonia-Urea Complex of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonnes (LMT) annual capacity of Urea 
production within the existing premises of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation 
Limited (BVFCL), Namrup , Assam through a Joint Venture (JV), under the New 
Investment Policy, 2012 read with its amendments on 7th October, 2014”.  
 
 
(B) Status regarding P&K fertilizers. 
17. During the evidence, a representative of the Department informed that the production 
of Urea in the Country has risen from 240 LMT in 2017 -18 which was 58% of the demand to 
314 LMT which is 62.4 percent during the FY 2023-24.  During the same period, the production 
of P&K fertilizers has risen from 173 LMT to 189 LMT which is  
37.6% of demand.  As the Country does not have reserves of raw Phosphate and Potash , 
therefore, every bag of DAP used is import based.  
18. The Committee was further informed that, due to this fundamental defi ciency of 
Phosphate and Potash raw materials, these are imported from Russia, Belarus, Germany, 
Israel, etc. Therefore, even though self -reliance in the sector may not be possible, but  
self-sufficiency is possible. For this, it is requisite that the Country manages its supply chain of 
fertilizers and raw materials at a good price on regular basis , especially in case of P&K 
fertilizers.  
19. Regarding the import dependency in the sector, the Committee have been informed that 
the Country imported 70 LMT of urea during 2023 -24 i.e. 39.7% of our requirement, as 
compared to 60 LMT during 2017-18.  As regards P&K fertilizers, our import has increased from 
95 LMT during 2017-18 to 106 LMT during 2023-24, which is 60.3 percent of our total demand. 
  
20. The Committee have been informed that the consumption of P&K fertilizers is expected 
to increase from 246 LMT during 2024-25 to 305 LMT during 2035 -36. In this regard, when 
asked to furnish details regarding the Policies/ schemes, etc. of the Government to facilitate 
enhancing the production/   availability of P&K fertilizers in the Country to meet the present and 

6  
future requirements, the Department in its written reply informed as under: 
“Under the NBS policy, P&K fertilizers are covered under Open General License (OGL) 
and companies are free to import/produce these fertilizers as per their business 
dynamics. Based on examination of requests received, permission is granted to the 
fertilizer companies for increasing their manufacturing capacity and for   induction of new 
P&K companies & their fertilizer products under NBS, with a view to boost manufacturing 
and make Country self-reliant in fertilizer production. The other measures taken are: 
  
i. Freight Subsidy on SSP, which is an indigenously manufactured fertilizer, has 
been approved on pilot basis from Kharif, 2022 and made applicable from Rabi, 2022 
onwards to help in promotion of SSP usage for providing Phosphatic or “P” nutrient to 
the soil. 
 
ii. Relaxation to the minimum production criteria of 50,000 MTPA for availing subsidy 
by SSP manufacturing units has been extended up to 31.3.2026. 
 
iii. Three new SSP Manufacturing units have been inducted under NBS Scheme with 
a capacity of 1,00,000 MTPA each (Total 3,00,000 LMTPA) to enhance the capacity of 
SSP. Approval to the existing SSP Manufacturing units have also been granted for 
capacity enhancement.  
 
iv. Increase in product basket of P&K fertilizers from 18 in 2010-11 to 28 in 2024-25. 
 
v. Further, in order to boost domestic production, special provisions like Rs. 3500 
per MT to cover ‘Other Costs’ which includes costs incurred from factory gate to farm 
gate, advantage / disadvantage due to increase / decrease of international prices, and 
other provision have been extended to both imports and domestic DAP manufacturers 
for Kharif, 2025 season.” 
 
21. A representative of the Department informed the Committee that the consumption of DAP 
is expected to increase from 109 LMT in 2023-2024 to 118 LMT in 2040 -41. Moreover, as per 
trend, the consumption of NPK fertilizers will increase from 116 LMT to 232 LMT by 2040-41.  
 
22.  It has further been informed that t he new manufacturing units or enhancement in 
manufacturing capacity of existing units have been recognized / taken on record under the NBS 
subsidy scheme, with a view to  boost manufacturing and make Country self-reliant in fertilizer 
production. Further, new units are being set up and production capacities enhanced both by 
public and private sector through active investment in Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizer 
sector to enhance domestic production, reduce import dependence, and ensure affordable 
supply for farmers. 
 
 
 
(C) Constraints being faced to achieve self sufficiency:  
 

7  
23. Informing about the major challenges in production of P&K fertilizers the Department 
stated as under: 
 
“Country is heavily dependent on imported raw materials for fertilizer production, 
particularly for P&K fertilizers. In case of P&K fertilizers, Country is deficit in sufficient 
reserves of rock phosphate and imports nearly 95% of its phosphate requirements  from 
countries like Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Morocco and Russia. India has no known 
commercial reserves of potash and is 100% dependent on imports from Canada, Russia, 
Israel and Jordan . There are  imports of raw materials/ intermediates such as, rock 
phosphate, sulphur, ammonia, phosphoric acid and potash (MOP) as essential inputs for 
producing phosphatic and potassic (P&K) fertilizers. Any increase in global prices of 
these materials raises the cost of production for the  fertilizer manufacturers. Besides, 
exchange rate  fluctuations and global supp ly chain disruptions due to geo -political 
reasons also impact the domestic cost of fertilizer production. 
Besides, India has limited domestic production capacity to produce P&K fertilizers. 
Overall P&K fertilizer production capabilities in India which includes DAP & NPK is 
approx. 160 LMT per annum against the total requirement of 240 LMT per annum of P&K 
fertilizers. India can produce only 45 LMT per annum of DAP and 115 LMT per annum of 
NPK in the Country. 
 
To meet the growing demand for fertilizers and reduce import dependency, the 
Government of India is actively promoting the production and adoption of innovative Nano 
Fertilizers.  
  
24. During the evidence, a representative of th e Department giving a brief of the major 
constraints and challenges faced in the fertilizers sector informed that the Country is presently 
importing 55 LMT of DAP which is 51 percent of total consumption;28 LMT of MOP which is 100 
per cent of the total consumption , 53 per cent of our requirement of Phosphoric acid and 89 
percent of our Rock Phosphate requirement. As regards Sulphur, we are deficient in it as we do 
not have Sulphur mines. So, we are importing 17,00,000 tonnes of Sulphur for the production 
of NPKs and SSP. As regards imported gas , it is 37 MMSCMD , which is 74 percent of our 
present total consumption.  
 
 25. When asked about the action taken on private companies which import lesser quantities 
of NPKS fertilizers considering their trade economics without taking into account the 
consumption requirements during the cropping seasons, it has been informed that under the 
NBS Policy, if any new company after induction into the subsidy scheme fails to import any 
subsidized P&K fertilizer continuously for 2 year or any existing company fails to import/does 
not import any subsidized P&K fertilizer during two continuo us financial years, the registration 
of the importer is deemed to be cancelled. Further, Subsidy is provided to the companies which 
are inducted under NBS only on PoS sale of P&K fertilizers. So, if there is no PoS sale, there is 
no release of subsidy to the company. 
 
III. Ways and means to increase the production of fertilizers. 
 

8  
(A) Revival/ upgradation of Fertilizer plants. 
 
26. On being asked about the revival of the closed fertilizer units in the Country, the 
Department informed that, two PSUs under administrative control of Department of Fertilizers 
namely Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Ltd 
(HFCL) were closed down since September, 2002 due to obsolete technology and high energy 
consumption of plants and economic unviability. FCIL had five units at Sindri (Jharkhand), 
Talcher (Odisha), Ramagundam (Telangana), Gorakhpur (Uttar Pradesh) and Korba 
(Chhattisgarh) while HFCL has three units viz Durgapur, Haldia and Barauni units. Union 
Cabinet in its meeting held on 04.08.2011 approved revival of Talcher and Ramagundam units 
of FCIL by forming a Joint Venture of nominated PSUs by setting up gas-based fertilizer plants 
of 1.27 MMTPA capacity.  Further, Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 13.07.2016 approved 
revival of Gorakhpur & Sindri units of FCIL and Barauni unit of HFCL by forming a Joint Venture 
of nominated PSUs by  setting up gas-based fertilizer plants of 1.27 MMTPA capacity each. 
Ramagundam, Gorakhpur, Barauni and Sindri fertilizer plants ha ve started urea production 
w.e.f. 22.03.2021, 07.12.2021, 18.10.2022 and 05.11.2022 respectively whereas Talcher plant 
is under execution phase.In the Union Budget 2025-26, Government had announced that, “For 
Atmanirbharta in Urea production, our Government had reopened three dormant Urea plants in 
the Eastern region. To further augment Urea supply, a plant with annual capacity of 12.7 lakh 
metric tons will be set up at Namrup, Assam.  The tentative overall time schedule for 
commissioning of Namrup-IV Project is 48 months. The energy efficiency and expected life shall 
be in line with the modern-day fertilizer plants. 
 
27. The Committee have been informed that out of the 33 Urea plants in the Country; 
27 units are over 25 years old and 07 units are over 50 years old.   As the fertilizer industry is 
capital intensive, when asked to furnish details of the Government support/ steps taken to 
revamp/ upgrade these plants technologically/ enhance their energy efficiency, the Department 
informed in its written reply as under: 
 
 
“With the objective of maximizing indigenous urea production and promoting energy 
efficiency in the urea units, Government also notified the New Urea Policy (NUP) – 2015 
on 25th May, 2015 for the existing 25 gas -based urea units. The NUP -2015 has led to 
additional production of urea by 20-25 LMT as compared to the production during 2014-
15 annually.  Consequent upon the introduction of NUP -2015, several units started 
implementing the Energy Savings Schemes (ESS) to increase their efficiency and 
achieving the Target Energy Norms.” 
  
28. When further asked by the Committee regarding the remaining life span of Urea plants 
which were over 25 years old and 50 years old  and about their timely replacement with new 
plants, a representative of the Department informed that these old plants are regularly upgrading 
and revamping themselves through the NUP-2015 which has enhanced their Energy efficiency 
and savings. However, the plants life is 35 years plus minus 5 years when it is prime and it goes 
down after that.  So, 50 years is well beyond that lifetime. But because of demand in the market 
and somehow, they are maintaining it well, it is working. In the next five years, our transition to 
new technology and replacement is the biggest need of this sector. 
 

9  
 
29. Regarding these 33 Urea plants, a representative of the Department further informed the 
Committee as follows: 
 
“Now, the replacement of these units is required as if it was to be done yesterday. That 
is the kind of urgency that we are facing now. I am happy to report, Sir, that this was 
raised in a recent analysis in the NITI Aayog, and we requested that we must have the 
financial strength to help the producers to go for this renewal with the best of technology. 
That is what the replacement will actually mean for us. We cannot have a run-of-the-mill 
plant. That is why the energy-saving scheme has to be embedded. The plants which are 
already operating have huge costs of operation and maintenance, which are making 
them, to some extent, unviable. So, sectoral challenges are not only for rising demand 
and continuous demand.” 
 
 
30. During the course of evidence, a representative of the Department informed the 
Committee that one new Urea plant costs about Rs. 10,000 crores with 12.70 lakh tonnes of 
production per year. The longevity of that plant is more than 35 years and it goes up to 40 years, 
but 35 years is the rated life of a chemical plant. So, they will have to take a lot of decisions in 
terms of adjusting to reality.  
 
31. During the course of evidence, when the Committee desired to know about the specific 
reasons for shortage of fertilizers especially DAP in the Country, a representative of the 
Department informed that it was due to international factors as a particular Country did not 
supply fertilizers to India.   
 
32. In this context, when t he Committee, further stressed the need for self -sufficiency in 
fertilizers through revival of the closed fertilizer units in the Country, which have sufficient land 
and other infra -structure facilities, a representative of the Department s ubmitted that we are 
constantly pursuing on these lines.  
 
 
33. On being asked to provide details of the factors affecting the operation of fertilizer plants 
to its installed capacity and the Government’s initiatives in this regard , the Department in its 
written reply informed that it conducts regular meetings  with the companies and addressing 
these issues from time to time to ensure that the operations of the plants are not  affected due 
to paucity of raw materials, their prices in the international market, exchange rate fluctuations, 
supply chain issues & geo-political situation, etc. 
34. In this regard, informing a bout the problems being faced by some of its fertilizer PSU’s, 
etc. which affects their production and energy efficiency , the Department further informed as 
under: 
 
“BVFCL’s production & energy performance has been affected due to ageing of the plants 
and obsolescence of equipment/ unavailability of the spares of the equipment. However, 
PDIL has been approached for Performance Study of Namrup -III plants of BVFCL, 

10  
identification of weak areas and recommendation for remedial measures so that Plants 
may become capable of operating optimally.   
 
As regards RCF, both of its units i.e., RCF Thal Unit and RCF Trombay are in operation 
for more than 40 years which results in some unforeseen breakdown leading to 
production interruption. However, regular preventive maintenance activities are planned 
to avoid any major breakdown. As availability of critical spare parts for maintenance of 
equipment is essential, replacement of this critical equipment like Urea reactors, stripper, 
carbamate condensers, compressors etc. is planned in a phase-wise manner in both the 
units. 
 
As regards NFL, all its plants are operating on more than installed capacity. However, 
NFL Vijaipur-I unit still could not meet the target energy norms of 5.5 Gcal/MT of Urea 
owing to inherent design limitation and intrinsic high energy which may require additional 
Capex to bring down the energy consumption below 5.5 Gcal/MT of Urea.” 
 
35. When asked about the plans/ proposals of the Ministry to render financial support to its 
PSUs through Capital Expenditure so as to facilitate their  modernization/ increase production 
capacity, the Department in its written reply informed as under: 
“PSUs such as NFL and RCF were given Navratna status which enabled them to have 
more flexibility in investment by adopting new technologies. Also, both RCF and FACT 
are planning capacity enhancement in P&K sector. RCF, Thal has planned a new 
DAP/NPK plant w ith annual capacity of 5 LMT and FACT, Kochi has also planned a 
DAP/NPK plant with annual capacity of 5.5 LMT. RCF has sourced mineral potash from 
Russia to produce NPK at competitive rate. Target Energy Norms of RCF and NFL have 
rationalized gas consumption which influences global prices to some extent. 
Further, NFL is in the progress of implementing Hi -Tech Nano Urea project (with more 
nitrogen content, which will give more benefit to the farmers) in Nangal Unit. Moreover, 
RCF has informed that their estimated total investment/expenditure in respect of N ano 
Urea is likely to be Rs. 238.30 crores whereas in respect of Nano DAP it is likely to be 
Rs. 4.89 crores.” 
36. As the Country is dependent on imports of different fertilizers (Urea, Phosphatic 
fertilizers, Potassic Fertilizers, etc.), when asked to inform about proposal for introducing 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme in fertilizers sector to incentivize/ augment domestic 
production of Fertilizers/ fertilizer implements which may curtail the expenditure on their imports 
and also help accomplish the goals of Aatmanirbhar Bharat the Department in its written reply 
stated that Government has implemented the  Nutrient Based Su bsidy (NBS) Policy for 
Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers, while under the Urea Subsidy Scheme, Urea is 
presently provided to the farmers at a statutorily notified Maximum Retail Price (MRP) of Rs.242 
per bag (exclusive of charges towards neem coating and taxes as applicable) per 45 kg bag of 
urea. The difference between the delivered cost of urea at farm gate and net market realization 
by the urea units is given as subsidy to the urea manufacturer/importer by the Government of 
India; therefore, the question of introducing PLI scheme does not arise.  
 
37. When asked about the plans to upgrade and modernize the old fertilizer PSUs with the 
latest technology to ensure better fertilizer production , the Department informed that the  

11  
Government of India mandated revival of Ramagundam (Telangana), Gorakhpur (Uttar 
Pradesh), Sindri (Jharkhand) and Talcher (Odisha) units of Fertilizer Corporation of India and 
Barauni (Bihar) unit of Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited through Joint Venture Company 
of nominated PSUs for setting up new ammonia-urea plants of 12.7 LMTPA capacity each. The 
revival of Talcher unit of FCIL is under execution stage and after operationalization of Talcher 
unit, a total of 63.5 LMTPA of domestic production would be added.   In addition, there is a 
proposal to set up a new fertilizer plant at Namrup, Assam of 12.7 LMTPA capacity. 
 
38.  On being asked about the  proposal for revival of Durgapur and Haldia Units of HFCL 
considering their strategic locations, the Department in its written reply informed as under: 
“At present, three units of FCIL viz. Ramagundam, Gorakhpur & Sindri plants and one 
unit of HFCL i.e. Barauni have been revived by setting up new Ammonia Urea plants of 
12.7 LMTPA capacity each by forming a Joint Venture Company of nominated PSUs. 
Further, another unit of FCIL at Talcher is under execution and has achieved an overall 
physical progress of 65.02 % as on 31st January, 2025. Therefore, decision on revival of 
other units of FCIL and HFCL would be taken based on the demand supply gap of urea 
after operationalization of all these five plants.” 
 
39. During the evidence, the Committee have been informed that the production of Urea in 
2023-24 was 314 LMT which has come down to 307 LMT during the year 2024 -25   because 
one private plant with an annual capacity of 12 LMT has been sold and is out of Urea.   In this 
regard, when asked if the Government is working on policies so as to regulate the sale/ 
disinvestment process of fertilizer units so that the purchaser(s) may be bound to continue with 
the production of Urea/ fertilizer, etc. so that the Country’s interests/ production capacity does 
not decline; the Department in its written reply informed as under: 
 
“There is no such proposal is under consideration in the Department.”  
   
40. Regarding the steps taken to reduce import dependence on P&K fertilizer products, the 
Department in its written reply informed that the Government has taken the following measures 
to boost domestic production:  
 
i) “Measures have been taken to increase the number of P&K fertilizers under NBS .  As 
a result, the number of P&K fertilizers covered under NBS policy has increased from 
22 grades in 2021 to 28 grades at present with a view to boost manufacturing and make 
Country self-reliant in fertilizer production. The 06 new grades added are NPK 08 -21-
21, NPK 09-24-24, Potash Derived from Molasses (PDM) (0-0-14.5-0), NPK 11-30-14 
fortified with Magnesium, Zinc, Boron and Sulphur, Urea-SSP Complex 5-15-0-10 and 
SSP 0-16-0-11 fortified with Magnesium, Zinc and Boron.  
  
ii) Further, new manufacturing units or increase in manufacturing capacity of existing units 
have been recognized / taken on record under the NBS subsidy scheme, with a view 
to boost manufacturing and make Country self-reliant in fertilizer production. These 
efforts have facilitated increase in installed capacity of P&K fertilizers from 146.24 LMT 

12  
during 2014 -15 to 177 LMT as on 31.01.2025. The installed capacity of SSP has 
increased from 96.07 LMT during 2014-15 to 126 LMT as on 31.01.2025.”   
 
  
41.     Giving details of new units/ capacity enhancement proposed both by Public and Private 
enterprises, the Department further informed as under: 
 
i. “RCF, Thal has planned a  new DAP/NPK plant with 1200 MTPD  capacity to 
produce various grades of NPK including DAP thereby augmenting domestic 
production. After completion of this project, RCF’s NPK production capacity will 
increase from @ 6LMT to 10 LMT per annuum. 
ii. FACT, Kochi has planned a new 1650 MTPD NPK Plant at Cochin, 
Ambalamedu. With the completion of this project, Company can enhance 
fertilizer production capacity from 10 LMT to 15 LMT per year. 
iii. CIL will get from Senegal around 2 LMT of Rock Phosphate. This will help in 
strengthening CIL’s backward integration and will ensure long term supply 
security of the key raw material. CIL is strengthening its Phosphoric acid 
capacities by augmenting its captive production and leveraging its overseas 
partnerships in Tunisia and South Africa. 
iv. PPL’s installed capacity of phosphoric acid plant at Paradeep to increase from 3 
LMT to 5 LMT.” 
 
42. About its efforts to increase the consumption of NPK fertilizers which is more balanced 
fertilizer with three or more nutrient content (Nitrogen, Phosphate, Potash, Sulphur)as compared 
to two nutrients (Nitrogen and Phosphate) in DAP and one nutrient (Nitrogen) in urea, the 
Department in its written reply informed that it is regularly ensuring adequate availability of NPKs 
in the States to increase its consumption. Presently, India produces approx. 100 LMT NPKs per 
annum. Three more new NPK plants are under construction with approx. capacity of 18 LMT 
per annum.  Due to continuous efforts, consumption of NPKs has increased to 140.69 LMT 
during the year 2024-25 as compared to 109.87 during 2023-24 i.e. an increase of 30.82 LMT. 
(B) Commissioning of new Fertilizer plants. 
 
43. About the commissioning of Talcher Fertilizers Ltd. (TFL) through coal gasification 
technology and revival of the closed Korba unit of Fertilizer Corporation of India Limited 
(FCIL)and Durgapur and Haldia units of Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation Limited (HFCL) which 
are strategically located and may augment indigenous production of fertilizers; the Department 
informed that Government mandated revival of Talcher unit of M/s FCIL, through a Joint Venture 
Company with production capacity of 12.7 LMTPA Urea. It is under execution phase and has 
achieved an overall physical progress of 67.06 % as on 30th May, 2025.  
The under implementation TFL project has been envisaged for utilizing the abundantly 
available domestic coal for Urea production as it has emerged as the best possible option since 

13  
the Country is endowed with rich reserves of coal. On completion of the project, the production 
of urea in the Country will increase by 12.7 LMTPA and will assist in maximizing the indigenous 
production of Urea and provide security in feedstock supply as coal would be sourced 
domestically and providing alternate route of urea production to diversify the feedstock risk in 
the sector. The decision on revival of other units of FCIL and HFCL would be taken based on 
the demand supply gap of urea and viability of the project. 
44. As the Coal gasification technology is stated to be environment friendly and cheaper; in 
this regard, when asked to specify as to whether the Ministry has any plans for transforming the 
fertilizer industries into coal gasification and revive old units with the technology to bring down 
dependence on natural gas; a representative of the Department submitted as under: 
 
“Definitely, Sir. We will be most interested to do it once our first plant, that is Talcher 
Fertilizer Limited, it is totally on coal gasification for the first time in India. The moment it 
becomes operational with the technology that we are importing because we do not have 
the technology. Once that is operational, then we can have all new plants in our orbit to 
actually go into coal gasification. It is so cheap and it eliminates import, thereby 
conserving the foreign exchange also. So, it has lots of positives and we have one billion 
tons of coal, according to my information, low quality coal. Low quality coal is good 
enough to give us the gas and it has many potentials for the downstream industry also. 
But at this moment, we do not know.” 
 
(C) Introduction and promotion of new varieties of indigenous fertilizers. 
 
45. The Committee have been  informed that  Potash Derived from Molasses  (PDM), a 
potassium rich fertilizer derived from ash in molasses-based distilleries is aby-product of sugar-
based ethanol industry. These distilleries produce a waste chemical called spent wash during 
production of ethanol which is burnt in Incineration Boiler (IB) generating Ash to achieve Zero 
Liquid Discharge (ZLD). The potash-rich ash can be processed to produce PDM having 14.5% 
potash content and is used by farmers in field as an alternative to MOP (Muriate of Potash 
with 60% potash content).  Currently, potash as a fertilizer is totally imported in the form of MOP. 
Therefore, domestically produced PDM will reduce import dependency. Presently about 5 LMT of 
Potash Ash generated from ethanol distilleries is being sold domestically whereas the current 
potential to produce this is about 10-12 LMT. 
46. It has further been informed that PDM can supplement/reduce the requirement of MOP 
in our Country. Considering the K2O content in PDM (14.5%) and MOP (60%) which is 
approximately in the ratio of 1:4. Technically, therefore, 4 bags of PDM or lesser no.   may 
be required per hectare as compared to one bag of MOP for providing equivalent potash to the 
soil and getting the similar yield. 
 
47. As Potash Derived from Molasses (PDM) is 100% domestically manufactured, therefore, 
on being asked about the policies to further boost its production so as to reduce import of  
Potash; the Department informed that PDM has been notified under the Nutrient Based Subsidy 
(NBS) scheme w.e.f. 13.10.2021 and till date, six units have been inducted under NBS scheme 
for PDM. To boost the production of PDM and make it amply available to the farmers, 

14  
Government has constituted a Joint Working Group of representatives from  
D/o Food and Public Distribution ,& D/o Fertilizers to resolve the issues of quality and price.  
A suggestive price of Rs. 4263/Ton (inclusive of bagging, loading and taxation) of PDM has 
been fixed which has been agreed by Indian Sugar Mills Association (ISMA) as well as Fertilizer 
Companies.  Moreover, Workshops were conducted by DoF for sugar units to familiarize sugar 
mills/distilleries with NBS subsidy claiming process under iFMS.   The Government is also 
encouraging promotion of PDM through regular publicity campaigns across various media 
platforms. As a result of sustained efforts for promotion, sales of PDM stood at 3.03 LMT during 
2023-24 and 3.91 LMT in 2024-25. In ongoing FY-2025-26, 45831.55 MTs PDM sales has been 
registered till 31.05.2025. 
48. In this regard, a representative of the Department of Fertilizers informed the Committee 
that presently Eleven big fertilizer companies/ Cooperatives have stated sourcing the Molasses 
from the Sugar Mills and are producing granulated PDM on commercial scale.  Since it is Biotic, 
the Potash content easily dissolves in the soil.  
49.       Further, Sulphur Coated Urea with the name of “Urea Gold” was launched during 2023-
24. It has been decided to keep the cost of 40Kg bag of Urea Gold exactly similar to cost of 45 
Kg bag of Neem Coated Urea. During 2024 -25, a total 26,085 MT of Urea Gold was produced 
in the Country. In addition to providing Sulphur, Urea Gold will also promote Nutrient Use 
Efficiency, and as a result it has potential to decrease Urea consumption to some extent and is 
expected to result in reduction of import dependence. 
 
50. The Committee have been further informed that, all Urea manufacturing companies 
were requested to explore the feasibility of starting production of Sulphur Coated Urea (SCU) 
vide DoF’s letter dated 6th  September 2023. Consequently, RCF-Trombay has commenced 
SCU production from October, 2023 and NFL -Panipat from July, 2024. The total production of 
SCU in FY 2024-25 (till 31.01.2025) was 20,947 MTs and total sales was 16,154 MTs. 
 51. Moreover, Single Super Phosphate (SSP) fertilizer is indigenously manufactured in the 
Country and provides Phosphorus and Sulphur nutrients to the soil.  In this regard, when asked 
about the long-term plans of the GoI regarding the continuance of freight subsidy on SSP without 
binding on the quantity produced, so as to promote its production and make it sufficiently 
available to the farmers as a replacement to DAP which is largely im ported; the Department in 
its written reply stated that Freight subsidy on SSP has been approved on pilot basis from Kharif, 
2022 and has been granted to the SSP manufacturing units based on guidelines dated 
01.09.2022 on the basis of monthly supply plan issued to the companies. SSP being an 
indigenously produced fertilizer would be encouraged as per approvals. 
 
(i) Nano fertilizers. 
 
52. On being asked about the advancements made in the field of Nano Fertilizers and study 
about its effectiveness on plant growth and production , the Department in its written reply 
informed as under: 

15  
“Nano Fertilizers hold great promise for application in plant nourishment because of the 
size-dependent qualities, high surface -volume ratio and unique optical properties. Nano 
Fertilizers viz Nano Urea & Nano DAP, which are available in bottles are at cheaper prices 
than conventional Urea & DAP.  
The Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) has provisionally notified 
Nano Urea as Nano Nitrogen Fertilizers under the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985, 
based on bio -efficacy trials conducted at multiple locations by Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR) institutions and State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), 
along with bio-safety test results. These trials, conducted on crops such as paddy, wheat, 
mustard, maize, tomato, cabbage, cucumber, capsicum, and onion across different agro-
climatic zones, demonstrated that two foliar sprays of Nano Urea, when applied as a top 
dressing along with the recommended basal dose of nitrogen, resulted in comparable 
yields to those obtained with a full recommended nitrogen dose. This led to a yield  
advantage of 3-8% and a urea saving of 25-50% in various crops. 
….. An MoU was signed on 5th March, 2024 between National Productivity Council 
(NPC) of India and Department of Fertilizers to undertake the study of Nano Urea so that 
its efficacy, impact and potential to replace the conventional Urea can be ascertained. 
Further, ICAR is conducting a study to evaluate the impact of Nano Urea and DAP on 
crop growth, soil health, and nutrient uptake across various agro -ecological zones in 
India.  
 
ICAR is undertaking the project titled "Effect of Nano Urea and DAP and Popularization 
of Its Use in Crop Production"  which has been approved by ICFFTR,  during the period 
from 2024 to 2026, at a cost of Rs.160 lakh to evaluate the impact of Nano Urea and DAP 
on crop growth, soil health, and nutrient uptake across various agro -ecological zones in 
India. According to the studies undertaken, a single 500ml bottle of Nano Urea can 
replace an entire 45kg bag of conventional urea, significantly reducing transportation and 
handling costs. It helps farmers lower input costs by 20 -25% while maintaining or even 
enhancing crop productivity.  
 
Cost analysis studies have further shown that while the initial price of nano fertilizers 
may be higher than subsidized conventional fertilizers like urea, but ultimately  they are 
more cost-effective due to better nutrient uptake and reduced wastage, leading to higher 
crop yields with lower overall fertilizer usage. Economic benefits of nano fertilizers 
application have to be seen in terms of extra yield achieved along with reduction in 
fertilizer usage as well as direct – indirect benefits in terms of reduction of soil -air-water 
pollution level.” 
53. When further asked about the different varieties of Nano fertilizers (both Urea and P&K) 
developed in the Country and their efficacy compared to conventional fertilizer, the Department 
stated as under:  
“As per the information received from Fertilizer Companies, so far only Nano Urea 
and Nano DAP are being commercially produced. 
The Government of India has notified the specifications of Nano Nitrogen under the 
Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985. IFFCO’s Nano Urea containing 4% nitrogen was 
the first to be notified on 24th February 2021. Subsequently, Nano Urea products with 
varying nitrogen content were approved, including Nano Urea (8%) by Zuari Farm Hub 
Ltd. on 2nd March 2023, Nano Urea (4.4%) by Ray Nano & Research Centre, and the 
most recent Nano Urea Plus (16%) by IFFCO, notified by the Department of Agriculture 

16  
& Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) on 15th April 2024 (S.O. 1718(E)). 
As of 31st May 2025, a total of 13.27 crore bottles (500 ml each) of Nano Urea have been 
produced, which is approximately equivalent to 60.32 lakh metric tons of conventional 
urea. 
In the case of Nano DAP, DA&FW, through Notifications S.O. 1025(E) and 1026(E) dated 
2nd March 2023, authorized IFFCO and CIL to manufacture Nano DAP for a period of 
three years. As per the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), preliminary field 
trials conducted on select crops at ICAR institutes indicated that Nano DAP, when used 
as a seed treatment and foliar spray, can significantly reduce the requirement for 
conventional granular DAP. 
Furthermore, Nano DAP developed by Zuari Farm Hub Ltd. has been notified under the 
FCO through Gazette Notification dated 29th November 2023 (S.O. 5077(E)).  
As of 31st May 2025, around 3.19 crore bottles (500 ml each) of Nano DAP have been 
sold, equivalent to approximately 15.97 lakh metric tons of conventional DAP. 
54. Regarding the prices of Nano Urea /Nano DAP and subsidy component, if any , the 
Department further informed as under: 
 
“The price of Nano Urea and Nano DAP (Company- wise) is as below: 
 
MRP of Nano Urea 
Sr. 
No Company Name 
MRP per bottle 
1 Indian Farmers Fertilizers Cooperative Limited Rs 225 per 500 ml bottle 
2 Ray Nano Science & Research Centre Rs 225 per 500 ml bottle 
3 Meghmani Crop Nutrition Limited Rs 225 per 500 ml bottle 
4 Zuari Farm Hub Ltd Rs 265 per 500 ml bottle 
5 Coromandel International Limited Rs 325 per 500 ml bottle 
 
MRP of Nano DAP 
Sr. No. Company Name MRP per bottle 
1 Indian Farmers Fertilizers Cooperative Limited Rs 600 per 500 ml bottle 
2 Coromandel International Limited Rs 600 per 1 litre bottle 
3 Zuari Farm Hub Limited Rs 625 per 500 ml bottle 
  
At present, there is no subsidy component in Nano Fertilizers.” 
 
55. When asked about the merits and demerits of use of Nano fertilizers in terms of crop 
productivity, nutritional quality of crop produced, soil health, etc.; compared  to the use of 
conventional fertilizers based on its user trials/ research ; the Department in its written reply 
informed as under: 
“As per the study undertaken by National Productivity Council (NPC) of India during 

17  
2024 for “Evaluating efficacy, utility and impact of Nano Urea in comparison to 
Conventional Urea” in various States its provisional findings on use of Nano Urea are 
as under: 
 
i) Percentage increase in yield for combined application of conventional 
 urea (basal dose) and nano urea (foliar application) as compared to 
 conventional urea alone is 1.65 -14.82% depending upon the crop based 
 on feedback from farmers. 
 
ii) The crop growth is better if seed treatment is done with Nano DAP. 
 
iii) Conventional urea harms the population of earthworms which are 
 beneficial for the health of soil and the crops. Hence conventional urea 
 may be used to a minimum extent and the use of nano urea has to be 
 promoted for better soil and crop health. 
 
iv) Nano urea does not degrade soil health as it is applied as a foliar 
 application. 
 
v)   Study has found Average increase in farmer’s income based on combined 
  application of Nano Urea and Conventional urea as compared to  
  Conventional urea alone. 
 
56. On being asked a bout the present production capacity and future plans to scale up 
production of different varieties of Nano  fertilizers as replacement to conventional Urea/ P&K 
fertilizers over the years and the extent to which it may contribute to attaining self-sufficiency in 
fertilizers sector, the Department in its written reply informed as under: 
 
“As per the information provided by the Fertilizer Companies, the present production 
capacity of Nano Urea and Nano DAP Plants are as below: 
 
S 
No 
Location Capacity Addition in 
Crore Bottles of 500 
ml each. 
Start of 
Production 
FCO notification dated and 
Nano Urea (along with % 
of Nutrients) 
1 IFFCO Kalol 
Gujarat 
5.0 August, 2021 24th February, 2021 – 
N (1% - 5 %) ; 
11th March, 2024  - 
N (1 % -5 %) ; 
15th April, 2024 – 
 N (16%) 
2 IFFCO Phulpur 6.0  January, 2023 
3 IFFCO Aonla 6.0  January, 2023 
4 Ray Nano Science 
& Research Centre  
4.50  December, 
2023 
3rd March, 2023 –  
N (1% - 5 %) 
5 Meghmani Crop 
Nutrition Ltd 
5.00 February, 
2024 
Signed MoU with IFFCO for 
Technology Transfer 
6 Zuari Farm Hub Ltd 
Bathinda 
0.12 June, 2024 29th November, 2023 – 
N (8 %) 
7 Coromandel 
International Ltd 
0.60 September, 
2024 
22nd April, 202 4 –  
N (10 % -12%) 
Total 22 Crore Bottles Per Year (equivalent to 123.73 lakh tons 

18  
(approx.) of conventional urea) 
  
 The upcoming Nano Fertilizers plants are as under: 
 
S. 
No. 
Nano plant Location Capacity Addition in 
lakhs Bottles of 500 ml 
each. 
Start of Production 
1 IFFCO Bengaluru 
(Nano Urea & Nano DAP) 
600 (#) 2025 
2 IFFCO Deoghar 
 (Nano Urea & Nano DAP) 
600 (#) 2026 
3 RCF Trombay 
(Nano Urea) 
500  2026 
  
The expected reduction in requirement of conventional Urea/ P&K fertilizers due to 
use/application of Nano fertilizers cannot be ascertained at this point of time.”  
57. During the oral evi dence, a representative of the Department informed the Committee 
that Nano Urea is rising as a very important supplement of the chemical fertilizer .  During the 
last 2 ½ years, 9 crore 32 lakh bottles of Nano Urea have been sold  which is equivalent to 42 
lakh tonnes of conventional Urea. Similarly, Nano DAP has found excellent acceptance by the 
farmers. By the end of 2024, more than 3 crore bottles of Nano DAP have been produced and 
out of them 2.16 crore bottles have been sold which is equivalent to 10.82 LMT of conventional 
DAP which would have been imported.  The difference in price is actually alluring and it is very 
promising for the farmers because one bag of DAP costs Rs. 1,350 but one bottle of Nano DAP 
costs only Rs. 600. So, it is half of the cost. Two plants with 12 crore bottles capacity are coming 
up in 2025-2026 and our PSUs are  also entering into the field.   Moreover, the production of 
Nano fertilizers requires very little of raw material because of its Nano size.  
58. When further asked about the initiatives taken by the Ministry to facilitate technology 
transfer for production of Nano  fertilizers to other fertilizer PSUs / Cooperatives/Private sector 
entities so as to boost its indigenous production capacity; it has been informed that two Central 
Public Sector Undertaking (CPSU ) namely National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) and Rashtriya  
Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF), under administrative control of Department of 
Fertilizers, have signed Non-Disclosure Agreement (NDA) & Memorandum of Understan ding 
(MoU) with Indian Farmers Fertilizer Cooperative (IFFCO) to transfer the technology of Nano 
Urea from IFFCO. 
59. As the liquid Nano fertilizers have to be applied on crops through spray, when asked 
about the different schemes of the Government so as to provide/ make    available sufficient 
number of agricultural drones/ other sprayers to the farmers at  subsidized/ convenient rates in 
each village/ Block level so as to facilitate the    farmers to switc h over to its use ; it has been 
informed that to facilitate the effective application and utilization of Nano fertilizers such as Nano 
Urea through foliar spraying, various initiatives have been undertaken  which include the 
promotion of innovative spraying solutions like ‘Kisan Drones’ and the distribution of battery -
operated sprayers at retail outlets. Moreover, pilot training and custom hiring services through 

19  
Village Level Entrepreneurs (VLEs) are being actively encouraged to support last-mile delivery. 
It has further been informed that the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is 
implementing the Namo Drone Didi Scheme, a Central Sector initiative approved by the Cabinet 
which aims to provide 15,000 drones to Women Self Help Groups (SHGs) over a three -year 
period (2023–24 to 2025 –26).Supporting this initiative, the Dep artment of Fertilizers, through 
fertilizer companies, has facilitated the distri bution of 1,094 drones to SHGs under the Namo 
Drone Didi Scheme. Of these, 500 drones have been distributed as part of a pilot initiative. So 
far, 909 Drone Didi’s have actively deployed these drones for spraying nano fertilizers. 
60.  About the measures being taken by the Ministry to popularize the features/ benefits/ 
mode of application, etc. for use of Nano fertilizers amongst the farmers throughout the Country, 
the Department in its written reply has stated that in order to promote the use of Nano Fertilizers 
amongst the farmers in rural areas, the Government of India has pursued with the States on use 
of Nano fertilizer at various forums. DA&FW during the Rabi, 2024 -25 season assessed the 
requirement of Nano Urea and Nano DAP. Use o f Nano Urea is promoted through different 
activities such as awareness camps, webinars, Nukkad-Nataks, field demonstrations, Kisan 
Sammelans and films in regional languages etc. Moreover, Nano Urea and Nano DAP are made 
available at Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samridhi Kendras (PMKSKs) by concerned companies .  
Further, Nano Urea has been included under monthly supply plan issued by Department of 
Fertilizers, regularly. DoF in collaboration with fertilizer companies has initiated a Maha Abhiyan 
for adoption of Nano DAP in all 15 agro-climatic zones of the Country through consultations and 
field level demonstrations.  
61. When asked about the Budgetary provisions made/ proposed to support the fertilizer 
PSUs in the production of Nano fertilizers and also incentivize the farmers through subsidy, etc. 
to use it conveniently, the Department in its written reply informed as under: 
 
“There are no budgetary provisions made/ proposed for the fertilizer PSUs in the 
production of Nano fertilizers.” 
ii) Promotion of production and use of Organic & bio-fertilizers. 
 
62. On being  asked about the steps being taken to make fertilizer production more 
environmentally sustainable in India, the Department in its written reply has stated that two new 
additional components have also been introduced along with the Urea subsidy scheme from 
2023-24, with a view to save the health of soil by way of promoting natural farming, 
balanced/sustainable use of chemical fertilizers, reducing the use of chemical fertilizers and 
proactively promote alternate fertilizers, which are  a) PM Programme for Restoration, 
awareness Generation, Nourishment  and Amelioration of Mother Earth (PMPRANAM)  and  
b) Market Development Assistance (MDA) to promote organic Fertilizers. 
           
63. Government has approved Market Development Assistance to promote organic fertilizers 
produced at plants under the umbrella GOBARdhan initiative covering different Biogas/ CBG 
support schemes/ programs to promote sale of soil organic Carbon enhancers like F ermented 
Organic Manure (FOM), Liquid Fermented Organic Manure (LFOM) and Phosphate rich FOM, 
etc.  In this regard, when asked about the budgetary provisions made and outcomes of the 

20  
scheme and its future prospects over the years , the Department informed that the policy on 
promotion of organic fertilizers is a new scheme  approved by the CCEA in its meeting held on 
28th June, 2023 wherein MDA @ Rs.1500/MT has been provided to promote organic fertilizers 
with total outlay of Rs. 1451.84 crore (FY-2023-24 to 2025-26), which includes a corpus of Rs. 
360 Crore for research gap  funding, etc.  Total sale of FOM/LFOM/PROM is continuously 
increasing during the period. Fertilizers Marketing Companies have been trying to increase the 
awareness of FOM/LFOM/PROM amongst farmers. The exercise is underway for evaluation of 
the scheme for extension beyond 31.3.2026.  These initiatives of the Government are expected 
to address the imbalanced use of chemical fertilizers and improve soil health by encouraging 
use of soil carbon enhancers.   
64. Regarding the steps taken to promote/ incentivize the production and use of Organic and 
alternative fertilizers throughout the Country; the Department in its written reply stated that to 
promote use of organic fertilizers in the Country, Government is promoting organic farming 
through the scheme of Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) in all the States/UTs (except 
North Eastern States). For North Eastern States, Mission Organic Value Chain Development for 
North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) scheme is being implemented. Both the schemes stress 
on end-to-end support to farmers engaged in organic farming i.e. from production to processing, 
certification & marketing and post -harvest management training and capacity building. Under 
MOVCDNER, as sistance of Rs. 46,500/ha for 3 years is provided for creation of Farmer 
Producer Organizations, support to farmers for organic inputs, etc. 
65. When asked about the difference in results due to use of natural farming and chemical 
fertilizer farming, the Department in its written reply stated that the adoption of organic farming 
practices has been evolved from safeguarding the harmful effects on natural resources and 
health of the soil from mainstream farming practices which have been using chemical fertilizers 
and pesticides without any bounds in order to increase the productivity. MOVCDNER also takes 
into its ambit creation of awareness among the farmers and the consumers the positive aspects 
linked with organic farming and the associated environmen tal benefits which come along.  
Further, Indian Council of Agricultural Research studies on yield and soil health impact of 
organic farming that most of the studies report lower crop yields with organic management vis -
à-vis conventional management and the subsequent improvement over the years of adoption of 
organic farming. However, organic farming performed better than natural farming . Soil with 
organic farming practices has higher biotic abundance, biotic richness and soil carbon.  
          
66. On being asked about the measures taken to restrict the excessive use of fertilizers in 
crop production, the Department in its written reply informed that t he Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA), on June 28, 2023, approved the “PM Programme for Restoration, 
Awareness Generation, Nourishment and Amelioration of Mother -Earth (PM PRANAM)”.  This 
initiative aims to support the mass movement initiated by States and Union Territories (UTs) to 
preserve the health of Mother Earth through the promotion of sustainable and balanced fertilizer 
use, adoption of alternative fertilizers, promotion of organic farming and implementation of 
resource conservation technologies. The incentives to States/UTs for reduction of consumption 
of chemical fertilizers (Urea, DAP, NPK, MOP) in a given financial year, compared to the 
average consumption over the previous three years, under the Scheme is equivalent to 50% of 
the fertilizer subsidy saved by the State.  The incentives can be utilized for promotional activities 
and R&D relating to agricultural infrastructure and increase in the yield.  The remaining 50% of 
the subsidy is retained by Government of India.  The Department is also actively working on 

21  
promoting MDA scheme resulting in release of MDA to the tune of Rs. 17.74 Crore till date in 
FY 2024-25.  Further, Rs. 4.81 Crore have been utilized as R&D fund so far.  These initiatives 
of the Government are expected to address the imbalanced use of chemical fertilizers thereby 
reducing chemical fertilizer use. 
         
 
67. The Committee has further been informed that Market Development Assistance 
(MDA) @ 1500/M.T. is provided to promote soil enhancer produced by CBG/BG plants under 
GOBARdhan initiatives.   As on date, 93 plants have been registered for sale of 
FOM/LFOM/PROM in iFMS portal. 
 
D) Promotion of Research & Development in fertilizers - Need for sufficient Budgetary 
allocation/ support. 
68. On being asked to furnish the details of the R&D activities sponsored/ facilitated by the 
Ministry through its PSUs, institutions, etc. for introduction of new efficient fertilizer varieties and 
technologies in the Country and annual budgetary allocation for R&D in fertilizers during the last 
05 years, and outcomes thereto; the Department in its written reply informed that to promote 
and facilitate research and development in the field of fertilizers, the Department of Fertilizers 
has established a dedicated national-level think tank, Indian Council for Fertilizers and Fertilizer 
Technology Research (ICFFTR). The ICFFTR is fu nded by the member companies, mostly 
PSUs. Under this endeavor, RCF has actively contributed by successful ly developing and 
commercializing two innovative fertilizers i.e., Organic Fertilizer (PROM) and Bio -stimulant 
fertilizer. The products developed are eco -friendly and align with the Government’s emphasis 
on sustainable agricultural practices.  Moreover, NFL is setting up Sulphur Coated Urea (Gold 
Urea) plant having annual capacity of 5000 MT at its Panipat and Nangal Units under R&D 
Project. 
 69. In this regard, informing about the ongoing and planned R&D activities being facilitated 
in the field of fertilizers, for developing more efficient and cost -effective fertilizers including 
various varieties of Nano fertilizers, bio-fertilizers, organic fertilizers, etc. the Department, further 
informed that Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR), research institutes (20), KVKs (30) 
and State Agricultural Universities (25) have carried out Nano Urea (liquid) and Nano DAP trials 
on different crops (> 20 crops) covering 15 agro-climatic zones. Impact of nano urea varies with 
the crops. On an average it saved upto 8 -12 % fertilizer nitrogen along with recommended 
package of practices.   
 70. During the Evidence, the Committee expressed their concern about the non -availability 
of fertilizer raw materials in the Country, and stressed the need for R&D in the sector so that 
indigenous alternative materials  could be used . To this , a representative of the Department 
responded in affirmative. 
  
E) Technology for fertilizer manufacturing industry 
71. During the evidence, a representative of the Department informed the Committee that, 
‘despite having such a long career of  engineers and managers in Urea plants, we still depend 

22  
upon foreign companies for the basic license of running, repairing and making the 
plant.  Everything is in the hands of the licensor’.  In this regard, when asked about the reasons 
due to which the Country could not develop the technical know-how and technology for fertilizer 
manufacturing industry over the years, the Department in its written reply informed as under: 
“The indigenous ‘Chemical Process Technology Development for fertilizers’ 
encompasses various stages, from initial laboratory research to pilot testing to scale up 
and finally full-scale plant operation, often involving iterative cycles of refinement & scale-
up. It involves a massive investment in R&D in the field of synchronized pipe -based 
technology based on advance metallurgy, design, and fabrication all connected to overall 
objective to achieve better energy efficiency to minimize production costs.  This 
integrated approach requires multiple institutional participation as Individual companies 
on their own may not be suitable to develop end -to-end solution having competitive 
advantage and energy savings.  However, the time has come to ensure a proper 
ecosystem with the help of relevant institution to develop a process technology for urea 
and complex fertilizers.” 
 
72. In this context, when further asked to explain the position, a representative of the 
Department submitted as under: 
“Sir, there is a process by which urea is made. That process is licensed by certain 
companies. There are various ways of slight differences in how to make urea. If I am not 
wrong, four companies have the license to give us the means to make urea, and we have 
to pay for that license. …..These companies are from the Netherlands, the US, Italy and 
Japan. So, what I have requested now is that we should have a task force.” 
 
IV.  Fertilizer Subsidy Policy – A review. 
 
A) Urea Subsidy Scheme. 
73. Urea Subsidy Scheme which is a Central Sector Scheme of the Ministry of Chemicals & 
Fertilizers is wholly financed by the Government of India through Budgetary Support.  
Urea Subsidy Scheme has three components, i.e., Indigenous Urea, Imported Urea and Uniform 
Freight Subsidy. Indigenous urea subsidy is administered to the urea units towards indigenous 
urea production. Imported Urea subsidy is directed towards imports made  to bridge the gap 
between assessed demand and indigenous production of urea in the Country. Both components 
also include freight subsidy for movement of urea across the Country under the Uniform Freight 
Subsidy Policy. 
74. The objectives of Urea Subsidy Scheme are as follows: 
i. To ensure timely availability of adequate quantity of urea at statutory controlled 
price to the farmers across the Country. 
ii. To optimize indigenous urea production. 
iii. To rationalize the subsidy outgo of the Government. 
iv. To enable urea units in sustaining their operations and energy efficiency. 

23  
v. To fill up the gap between assessed demand and estimated production through 
imports. 
75. Under Urea Subsidy Scheme, Urea is presently provided to the farmers at a statutorily 
notified Maximum Retail Price (MRP)of Rs.242 per bag of 45 kg urea (exclusive of charges 
towards neem coating and taxes as applicable). Accordingly, all farmers of the Country are 
being supplied urea at the subsidized rates and thereby are beneficiaries of this scheme. 
 
76. When asked to provide a gist of the Third-party evaluation got conducted by the Ministry 
regarding the need for continuance of Urea Subsidy Scheme  and action taken thereon, the 
Department in its reply has stated that  M/s Centre for Market Research & Social Development 
Pvt. Ltd. (CMSD) conducted the study during the year 2020 .  As per the Report, due to the 
scheme under New Urea Policy 2015 (NUP-2015), the production of urea increased from 225.8 
LMT in 2014-15 to 244.75 LMT in 2015 -16.  Moreover, after the implementation of NUP-2015, 
there is improvement in Energy efficiency of urea industries at par with global standards.  The 
study observed that urea subsidy scheme has increased crop yield and reduced the expenditure 
of farmers for cultivation and 50% farmers are using less amount of urea in cultivation. The study 
recommended that five manufacturing units under Public sector viz. Ramagundam, Talcher, 
Sindri, Gorakhpur and Barauni be commissioned within the stipulated time period so as to attain 
self-sufficiency. Thus, there is the necessity for continuation of the urea subsidy scheme to help 
the urea industries, farmers, and the agriculture sector. Accordingly, a proposal for continuation 
of Urea Subsidy Scheme was placed for the appraisal of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) 
to continue the scheme till 31st March 2025. For review the continuation of Urea Subsidy 
Scheme beyond 31.03.2025, the  evaluation on the same is under consideration in the 
Department. 
 
B) Nutrient Based Subsidy policy – P&K fertilizers 
 
77. On being asked about the salient features, aims and objectives of Nutrient Based Subsidy 
(NBS) Policy, it has been informed that  the Government has implemented Nutrient Based 
Subsidy (NBS) Policy w.e.f. 01.04.2010 for Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers. Under the 
policy, a fixed amount of subsidy, decided on annual/bi -annual basis, is provided to 
manufacturer/ importer on notified P&K fertilizers depending on their nutrient content i.e. 
Nitrogen (N), Phosphorus (P), Potassium (K) and Sulphur (S) to improve availability of fertilizers 
to farmers. As a result of steps taken by the Government, production of DAP has increased to 
37.69 LMT in 2024-25. Similarly, the production of NPKs has increased from 89.98 LMT in 2018-
19 to 113.28 LMT in 2024 -25 by 22 P&K fertilizer manufacturing units and production of SSP 
has increased from 40.72 LMT in 2018 -19 to 52.44 LMT in 2024 -25 by  
104 SSP manufacturing units. 
 The main objectives of NBS Scheme are as under: 
i. To promote balanced use of fertilizers. 
ii. To rationalize impact of subsidy on the Government. 
iii. To improve availability of fertilizers to farmers. 
iv. To encourage competition among fertilizer companies. 
78. The Department has informed that a Third-party evaluation of the Nutrient Based 

24  
Subsidy scheme was got conducted by M/s SANTEK on impact of NBS policy  in 2020.It has 
shown that use of Phosphatic & Potassic (P&K) fertilizers helped in improving productivity in 
the farm land and multi-nutrient deficiency of the soil. The consumption of NPK fertilizers rose 
from 281.22 LMT in 2010-11 to 290.39 LMT in 2019-20. As per the Report, there is a substantial 
increase in production of major crops since inception of NBS scheme.  Food grain yield per 
hectare increased from 1930 Kg/hectare in 2010-11 to 2233 Kg/hectare in 2017-18, an increase 
of 16% over a period of 7 years. 
79. During the evidence, the Committee expressed its concern to the import of only  
19.7 LMT of P&K fertilizers against the targeted import of 30 LMT during the year by the 
companies under Open General License , due to their financial compulsions’. The Committee 
therefore, desired to know about the remedial measures taken to overcome such emergent 
situations and actions taken thereto, as the shortage of DAP inter-alia led to its black marketing 
in the Country. 
80. In this regard, when asked if the Government envisage reviewing its fertilizer subsidy 
policy through introduction of similar subsidy scheme for P&K fertilizers as in case of Urea 
so as to cushion the effect due to international price fluctuations, etc. and ensure adequate 
and timely availability of P&K fertilizers to the farmers at affordable prices, which may 
encourage balanced use of N:P:K in the Country, the Department informed that under the 
NBS policy, MRP is fixed by fertilizer companies as per market dynamics at reasonable level 
which is monitored by the Government. In view of price volatility in international prices of key 
fertilizers and raw materials, the Government subsumes fluctuations, if any, while fixing NBS 
rates for P&K fertilizers bi-annually and the subsidy is made applicable uniformly across all 
stakeholders i.e. importers/ manufacturers. 
V. Way forward - Efforts for self-sufficiency in Fertilizers/ Raw material. 
 
A) Urea/ P&K Fertilizers/ RLNG. 
 
81. During the evidence, informing about the limitations of the Country due to dependence on import of fertilizers and raw 
materials, a representative of the Department submitted before the Committee as under: 
“Sir, I have already mentioned these figures about the non-availability of raw material that shows how much planning 
is to be done to bring a non-volatile availability at a price that is competitive. The global market is now suffering for the 
last one-and-a-half years due to geopolitical even ts, fluctuating crude oil and natural gas prices, and international  
trade policies and sanctions. These things actually influence us on a day -to-day basis 
regarding how the shifts are coming. But this has not abated. It has become a factor. We 
have the plant utilization deficiency because of this disruption.” 
82. In this context, a representative of the Department informed the Committee that the raw 
material for production of urea or the feedstock is basically Natural Gas, which constitutes 90 
percent of the cost of Urea. The remaining 10 percent is the cost like bagging cost, water cost, 
fixed cost, etc. Therefore, the price of natural gas is very important for us. We ensure that the 
required gas is imported through long -term agreements. All the 33 plants operating presently 
for the production of urea  are Natural Gas based. Out of the total requirement, 74 per cent of 
the gas is imported through long-term agreements and the remaining 26 per cent of the gas we 
get from the domestic sources  which is cheaper. Since the gas market depends upon a lot of 

25  
geopolitical factors , international relations, etc. volatility of gas price affects the cost of 
production of Urea. 
 
83. On being asked about the steps being taken to ensure constant and interrupted supply 
of natural gas including other raw materials used in fertilizer production and for exploration of oil 
and natural gas reserves within the Country, the Department informed that it has been actively 
engaged in exploring possibility of signing long term agreements between Indian Fertilizer 
companies and companies of other resource rich countries for ensuring constant and 
uninterrupted supply of raw materials used in fertilizer production. 
84. In this context, it has been added that the Department of Fertilizers consistently promotes 
and facilitates establishment of new long/ medium term agreements and joint venture projects 
abroad in countries rich in fertilizer resources with buy back agreements between Indian fertilizer 
companies and foreign suppliers. Indian fertilizer companies have also entered into joint venture 
collaborations with foreign entities for the production and procurement of fertilizers/ raw 
materials in the Country.  
85. During the course of evidence, a representative of the Department, informed  the 
Committee through power point presentation regarding the concrete steps being taken through 
new units & capacity enhancement initiatives in the P&K Sector, which is as under: 
Organization Project Name Capacity Cost (₹ Cr) Status Expected 
Completion 
HURL 
Ammonium Sulphate – 
Barauni 450 MTPD 85 
Feasibility study 
completed Dec 2026 
NPK Plant – Sindri 1000–1200 MTPD 1000 
Consultant 
appointment 
ongoing Mar 2028 
PPL 
Phosphoric Acid Plant-
II Revamp 
Expand to 400 
MTPD 300 
CTE in place, 
feasibility ongoing H1 FY27 
Sulphuric Acid Plant 1500 MTPD 500 Under construction H1 FY26 
New Phosphoric Acid 
Plant 1000 MTPD 800 
Environmental 
clearance pending H1 FY29 
New Sulphuric Acid 
Plant 3000 MTPD 1000 Planning phase H1 FY29 
Infrastructure 
Augmentation — 400 Work in progress FY26 onwards 
CFCL 
Phosphoric Acid 
Expansion (Morocco) 4.9 → 6.9 LMT/yr 1500 To be operational Early 2027 
Sulfuric Acid Plant 
Expansion — — Feasibility in progress — 
RCF NPK Plant – Thal 1200 MTPD 1000.27 Work order awarded Jan 2027 
FACT 
NPK Plant – Cochin 1650 MTPD 411 Under construction 
End of 2025 
 
  
Energy & Capacity 
Improvement 
(Ammonia) — 140 Under planning +24 months 
Sulphuric Acid Plant 
Expansion — 600 Under planning +36 months 
IFFCO 
Nano NPK Granule 
Units (Kandla, 
Paradeep) — — Planning stage — 

26  
CIL NPK Plant – Kakinada 7.5 LMT — Setup in progress — 
 
86. In this regard, the Committee has been informed that there has been record production 
of fertilizers during the FY, 2024 -25.  Elaborating in this regard, it was submitted that t he 
production of P&K fertilizers  (NPKS + DAP) has increased from 138.28 LMT in 20 20-21 to 
158.78 LMT in 2024-25; which is a record. The SSP production has increased from 49.35 LMT 
to 52.44 LMT during the period. The total overall domestic production of fertilizers (Urea + P&K 
+ SSP) has increased to 517.89 LMT which is the highest ever. 
B) Explore availability of raw materials in the Country. 
 
87. When asked regarding the steps taken, for exploration of raw materials for fertilizers the 
Department in its written reply informed that the Country is import dependent in raw materials of 
both Phosphatic and Potassic fertilizers. India has relatively low reserves of economically 
extractable potash and phosphate rock compared to global standards. Most of the Country’s 
rock phosphate is low grade which requires benefaction before use.  
88. In case of Rock Phosphate,  as informed by Indian Bureau of Mines, M/o Mines has 
informed that there are 7 mining leases of Rock Phosphate out of which only 6 are working.  
In all 6 mines, mining is done through opencast method i.e. conventional mining for 
comparatively shallow deposits. In case of potash, the potash blocks  in India are deep seated 
for which 2 methods could be used – conventional underground mining and solution mining.  
89. Ministry of Mines with an objective of increasing production of fertilizer minerals    under 
'Critical and Strategic Minerals' category, has included  Phosphate, Potash and Glauconite 
(Potassic mineral) under “The Mines & Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment 
(MMDR) Act, 2023”. It aims to enhance domestic production and achieve self - sufficiency in 
critical minerals  to ensure that critical minerals are produced, processed, and recycled by 
catalyzing investments from governments and the private sector across the full value chain, 
emphasizing the importance of sustainable and responsible mineral management practices. M/o 
Mines has further established National Critical Mineral Mission (NCCM) on 29.01.2025.  
 
90. In this context, about securing mining lease agreements in raw material rich countries, it 
has been informed that the Department of Fertilizers supports and facilitates Indian fertilizer 
companies for exploring the opportunities of entering into mining lease agreement with the raw 
material rich countries for extraction for refining / manufacturing of fertilizers. 
 
 
  

27  
C) Strengthen the Fertilizers distribution system. 
91.      On being asked regarding the efficacy of its Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) and 
integrated Fertilizer Management System (iFMS) and plans to strengthen the same to 
prevent pilferage and assure its timely supply to the farmers, the Department in i ts written 
reply stated that the Integrated Fertilizer Management System (iFMS) is a comprehensive, 
all-integrated system covering all functionalities in the fertilizer supply chain. This system 
covers the entire supply chain, meticulously capturing transa ctional data from raw material 
procurement, imports to fertilizer production and transportation via rail or road from plants, 
rake houses, ports to district warehouses, and finally sale at PoS enabled retailers. 
Everything is aligned with monthly supply pl ans at district level and the movement of 
fertilizers is being captured in real time. Various modules under iFMS have been developed 
to ensure capture and maintain the fertilizers movement and sale data accurately in a 
secured manner. 
 
92. In this context,  the Department further informed  that the following steps are taken by 
the Government every season for ensuring timely and adequate availability of fertilizers to the 
farmers in the Country: 
  
i.      Before the commencement of each cropping season, Department of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), in consultation with all the State Governments, 
assesses the state-wise & month-wise requirement of fertilizers viz. Urea, DAP, MOP 
and NPKS.  
  
ii.     On the basis of this requirement, Department of Fertilizers allocates adequate 
quantities of fertilizers to States by issuing monthly supply plan and continuously 
monitors the availability. 
  
iv.    The movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is monitored throughout the 
Country by an on -line web -based monitoring system called integrated Fertilizer 
Monitoring System (iFMS); 
       
v.     Regular Weekly Video Conference is conducted jointly by DA&FW and  
D/o Fertilizers with State Agriculture Officials and corrective actions are taken to 
dispatch fertilizers as indicated by the State Governments. 
  
     However, the distribution of fertilizers within the State at district level is done by the 
respective State government. 
  
93. It has been added that, in  order to ensure the adequate and timely availability of good 
quality of fertilizers to the farmers, Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare assess the 
requirement of major fertilizers, namely Urea, DAP, MOP, complexes and SSP fertilizers, before 
each cropping season (viz.  Rabi and Kharif).  INM Division, DA&FW organizes Zonal 
Conference before each cropping season to assess the requirement in consultation with  DOF, 
State Governments/UTs.  Data is sought from the State Governments in the prescribed formats 

28  
relating to cropped area, Soil Health Status, requirement of Chemical fertilizers on the basis of 
Soil Health Card Data, requirement and consumption of NPK  and chemical fertilizers, Quality 
control reports of organic and chemical fertilizers, etc. The requirement of fertilizers is assessed 
taking into account the factors like  the projected gross cropped area,  irrigated area, last three 
seasons’ consumption pattern and crop wise recommended dose of fertilizers as per soil Health 
fertility status, etc. The requirement of fertilizers finally assessed is intimated to the States for 
providing month -wise break up of fertilizer.  The assessed requirement and month wise 
requirement as provided by State Governments is provided  well in advance to the Department 
of Fertilizers to ensure seamless availability of fertilizers. In order to make the appropriate supply 
plan by DoF, the final month wise assessed requirement is also uploaded by DA&FW in the 
iFMS portal and the State Governments also upload the final district wise data in the iFMS portal. 
94. When asked about the arrangements made for storage of fertilizers, etc. so that 
sufficient quantity of buffer stock is maintained in all regions/ States of the Country, the 
Department in its written reply informed that the storage arrangements and capacities in 
respect of fertilizers are overseen by the respective State Governments and the fertilizer 
companies. Further, Department of Fertilizers ensures suitable supply of fertilizers in the 
States through indigenous production as well as imports. As a result, sufficient stocks get 
pre-positioned in the States before the start of each cropping season.  
95. Regarding the reasons for criss-cross allocation/ movement of fertilizers and Natural Gas 
to far-off State/ regions of the Country, the Department in its reply informed that the Government 
of India, vide notification dated 24th August, 2022, has decided to implement One Nation One 
Fertilizers (ONOF) by introducing Single Bharat Brand for Fertilizers and Logo under Fertilizer 
subsidy scheme namely “Pradhanmantri Bhartiya Janurvarak Pariyojna” (PMBJP).  The 
objective of the scheme is to increase the availability basket of fertilizers; take care of dilemma 
among farmers in choosing from plethora of brands available in the markets, to reduce the criss-
cross movement and further ensure  timely supply of fert ilizers. Based on the requirement of 
fertilizers as assessed by DA&FW for various States, DoF issues monthly supply plan for Urea, 
DAP, MOP and NPK and ensures adequate quantities through indigenous production and 
imports. While issuing the supply plan,  supplies to States are ensured from nearest possible 
plants/ports as per the available material produced in the plants/ imported at the ports according 
to the extant guidelines.  
D) Promote balanced use of Fertilizers. 
96. During the evidence, explaining about the need for use of fertilizers in agriculture, a 
representative of the Department informed that urea is the most dominant element in fertilizers. 
To control its over-use, and save the soil, different kinds of biotic inputs, better soil practices, 
better way of cultivation in the natural application of organic fertilizer  have to be utilized. 
However, since productivity cannot be compromised because India should have sufficient food, 
for its huge population and there should also be value addition  for the farmer's income, 
productivity has to be maintained through balanced use of soil nutrients.  
97. Regarding the efforts made by the Ministry to promote balanced/ appropriate use of 
fertilizers in the Country as per crop and soil type , the Department stated that there are no 
harmful effects of fertilizers on soil fertility, if applied in a balanced and judicious manner. 

29  
However, indiscriminate and imbalanced use of chemical fertilizers coupled with low addition 
of organic matter and neglect of micro and secondary nutrients, over the years, may cause 
multi-nutrient deficiencies and deterioration of soil health. The Governm ent of India is 
implementing Soil Health & Fertility Scheme since 2014-15. Under the Scheme, the Soil Health 
Cards are issued to farmers for providing information on fertility status of soils and recommends 
crop specific dosage of fertilizers, micro -nutrients, and macro -nutrients.  
Based on the soil health cards generated, advisories are issued to farmers through Agricultural 
Technology Management Agency (ATMA) and Krishi  Vigyan Kendra (KVK). Further, t he 
National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) was approved on 25th November 2024 as a 
centrally sponsored scheme to encourage farmers to promote Natural Farming (NF) across the 
Country. Natural Farming is a chemical free farming, involving livestock integrated natural 
farming methods and diversified crop systems. It is aimed towards improving soil health, 
restoring ecosystems and reducing input cost to the farmer to achieve greater climate resilience 
through the use of on-farm inputs, multi-cropping systems, Pre-monsoon dry sowing, biomass-
based mulching, etc. The scheme envisages the formation of 15 ,000 NF clusters in 7.5 lakh 
Ha area in various States/ Union Territories. For easy availability of natural farming inputs to 
the farmers, 10,000 need -based Bio-Input Resource Centre ( BRCs)are envisaged under the 
Mission. 
98. Expressing their concern to the over-use of chemical fertilizers in certain pockets of the 
Country leading to depletion of soil health, the Committee stressed the need for constituting a 
task force to organize awareness programs amongst the farmers for soil/ crop specific use of 
fertilizers.   
 
E) Efforts to stop mal-practices in the sale of Fertilizers. 
 
99. During the evidence, the Committee pointed out that since a huge amount of subsidy is 
being provided on fertilizers, concrete measures betaken to ensure proper sale/ distribution of 
fertilizers in the Country to completely stop the mal -practices, at all stages. In response, a 
representative of the Department informed that Fertilizers are declared as an essential 
commodity under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and notified under Fertilizer Control 
Order, 1985. State Governments are empowered to take acti on against persons involved in 
black-marketing/diversion/smuggling as per provisions of EC Act. Any complaint received at 
Department of Fertilizers level regarding such cases is sent to concerned State Government to 
take appropriate action under Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and Fertilizer Control Order, 
1985. 
100. In this regard, the Committee has further been informed that the quality of fertilizers is 
governed under the provision of the Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985. Clause 19 of the Order 
strictly prohibits the sale of fertilizers which are not of prescribed standards.   The State 
Governments are the actual enforcement agency and are adequately empowered to enforce 
the provision of FCO, 1985. 
 101. When asked about the initiatives taken to ensure sale of fertilizers (Urea/ P&K fertilizers, 
etc.)at the Retail/ Wholesale points , only after proper biometric authentication  through PoS 
devices, etc. ; it has been stated that the Department of Fertilizers vide Circular dated 

30  
21.10.2016 notified that under Section 7 of Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other 
Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016, the individuals desirous of availing subsidized 
Fertilizers are required to furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar au thentication or undergo 
Aadhaar authentication. In December, 2023 on pan India saturation of Aadhaar database for 
adult population, as per the suggestion of Cabinet Secretariat, the Aadhaar authentication is 
mandatory in all States and UTs. 
102. Replying to the concerns expressed by the Committee regarding steps take n to stop 
Black marketing and diversion of fertilizers, a representative of the Department informed that as 
per the provisions of Essential Commodities Act, the States have been em powered to take 
immediate action in cases of sale of sub -standard fertilizers or its sale above the prescribed 
price or withholding the stock, etc.  The Gover nment has developed a digital tool for effective 
real-time monitoring of fertilizer movement and sale, throughout the Country.   
  

31  
 
 
List of urea units in the Country 
Annexure 
 
SI. 
No. NAME OF PLANTS 
Location Reassessed 
Capacity (MT) Policy covered under 
Public Sector 
1 National Fertilizers 
Limited (NFL): Nangal 
Punjab 478500 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015  
2 National Fertilizers 
Limited (NFL): 
Bhatinda 
Punjab 511500 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
3 National Fertilizers 
Limited (NFL): Panipat 
Haryana 511500 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
4 National Fertilizers 
Limited (NFL): 
Vijaipur-I 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
864600 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
5 National Fertilizers 
Limited (NFL): Vijaipur 
-II 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
864600 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
6 Rashtriya Chemicals & 
Fertilizers Limited 
(RCF):Trombay-V 
Maharashtra 330000 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
7 Rashtriya Chemicals & 
Fertilizers Limited 
(RCF):Thal 
Maharashtra 1706897 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
8 Madras Fertilizers 
Limited (MFL)-Manali 
Tamil Nadu 486750 Naphtha converted unit 
under policy notification 
dated 17th June 2015 
9 Brahmaputra Valley 
Fertilizers Corporation 
Limited (BVFCL) 
:Namrup-III 
Assam 315000 Stage-III of New Pricing 
Scheme notified on 8th 
March 2007 
Joint Venture 
10 Ramagundam 
Fertilizers and 
Chemicals Limited 
(RFCL)  
Telangana 1270000 Revival Unit  under 
New Investment Policy-
2012  notified on 2nd 
January, 2013 
  
11 Hindustan 
Urvarak&Rasayan 
Ltd.: Gorakhpur 
Uttar Pradesh 1270000 Revival Unit  under 
New Investment Policy-
2012  notified on 
2ndJanuary, 2013 
12 Hindustan 
Urvarak&Rasayan 
Ltd.: Sindri 
Jharkhand 1270000 Revival Unit  under 
New Investment Policy-
2012  notified on 2nd 

32  
  January, 2013 
  
13 Hindustan 
Urvarak&RasayanLtd.: 
Barauni  
Bihar 1270000 Revival Unit  under 
New Investment Policy-
2012  notified on 2nd 
January, 2013 
Cooperatives  
14 Indian Farmers 
Fertilizer Cooperative 
(IFFCO):Kalol 
Gujarat 544500 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
15 Indian Farmers 
Fertilizer Cooperative 
(IFFCO):Phulpur 
Uttar Pradesh 551100 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
16 Indian Farmers 
Fertilizer Cooperative 
(IFFCO):PhulpurExpn. 
Uttar Pradesh 864600 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
17 Indian Farmers 
Fertilizer Cooperative 
(IFFCO):Aonla 
Uttar Pradesh 864600 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
18 Indian Farmers 
Fertilizer Cooperative 
(IFFCO): AonlaExpn. 
Uttar Pradesh 864600 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
19 KrishakBharati 
Cooperative 
(Kribhco):Hazira 
Gujarat 1729200 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
Private Sector 
20 Gujarat State 
Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited 
(GSFC):Vadodara 
Gujarat 370590 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
21 Shriram Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited 
(SFC) :Kota 
Rajasthan 379500 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
22 Kanpur Fertilizers & 
Cement Limited 
(KFCL): Kanpur 
Uttar Pradesh 722700 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
23 Paradeep Phosphates 
Limited : Goa 
(Earlier ZACL) 
 
Goa 
399300 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
24 Southern 
Petrochemicals 
Industries Limited 
(SPIC):Tuticorin 
Tamil Nadu 620400 Naphtha converted unit 
under policy notification 
dated 17th June 2015 
25 Mangalore Chemicals 
& Fertilizers Limited 
(MCFL):Mangalore 
Karnataka 379500 Naphtha converted unit 
under policy notification 
dated 17th June 2015 
26 Gujarat Narmada 
Valley Fertilizers 
Company Limited 
(GNVFC):Bharuch 
Gujarat 636900 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 

33  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
27 Grasim Industries 
Limited/Indorama 
Industries 
Limited:Jagdishpur 
Uttar Pradesh 864600 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
28 Chambal Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited 
(CFCL):Gadepan-I 
Rajasthan 864600 
New Urea Policy-2015 
29 Chambal Fertilizers 
&Chemicals Limited 
(CFCL):Gadepan-II 
Rajasthan 864600 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
30 Chambal Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited 
(CFCL):Gadepan-III 
Rajasthan 1270000 Brownfield Unit under 
New Investment Policy-
2012  notified on 2nd 
January, 2013 
31 YARA Fertilizers India 
Pvt. Ltd./ TCL: Babrala 
Uttar Pradesh  864600 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
32 Kribhco Fertilizers 
Limited (KFL): 
Shajahanpur 
Uttar Pradesh 864600 New Urea Policy-2015 
notified on 25th May, 
2015 
33 Matix Fertilizers & 
Chemicals Limited, 
Panagarh 
West Bengal 1270000 Greenfield unit under 
New Investment Policy-
2012 notified on 2nd 
January, 2013 
 

34  
 
PART-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Introductory 
          The Committee are happy to find record production of fertilizers during the FY 2024-
25 viz production of P&K fertilizers (NPKS + DAP) increased from 138 LMT in 2021 to 
158.78 LMT in 2024 -25; SSP production increased from 49.35 LMT to 52.44 LMT ; with a 
record total overall domestic production of fertilizers (Urea + P&K + SSP) increased to 
517.89 LMT which is statedly the highest ever. The Committee note that against the Urea 
consumption of 388 LMT during the year 2024 -25 the indigenous production has been  
only 307 LMT. The consumption of Urea is projected to be 444 LMT during the year 2035-
36. The Committee further find that while the consumption of P&K fertilizers is projected 
to increase from 246 LMT during 2024-25 to 305 LMT during 2035-36 . Admittedly, to meet 
the requirements, India currently imports a significant share of its fertilizers, particularly 
potash and phosphate-based fertilizers along with raw materials like Natural gas used in 
urea production , thereby,  exposing the Country to global market shocks, geopolitical 
risks and currency fluctuations . The Committee, are of the view that achieving self-
sufficiency through domestic production, diversified sourcing and indigenous R&D  can 
only help reduce these vulnerabilities and enhance strategic autonomy, while stabilizing 
subsidies and ensure timely availability of fertilizers to farmers during critical crop 
seasons. In view of the foregoing, the Committee are , therefore, of the considered view 
that the Government need to augment capabilities in this sector to increase indigenous 
production of fertilizers in the Country through promotion of R&D in fertilizer sector and 
also plugging the present deficiencies in this sector through a holistic review of all inter 
related sectors with a view to attain  self-sufficiency. The Committee also desire that , 
keeping in view of the import dependence of fertilizer raw materials, the Government 
must further diversify its sources of import so as to offset the geopolitical compulsions.  
Promotion of fertilizers production : Need for Enhancing Domestic Production Capacity 
(Urea, DAP, NPK, SSP) 
 
2. The Committee note that during the last financial year, 2024-25, during Kharif and 
Rabi, India's consumption of fertilizers has reached 708 LMT for the first time. Out of this, 
about 387 LMT is Urea, and the consumption of MOP, NPK, DAP, and SSP, put together 
is 320 LMT. The Committee further note that during the year 2024-25, the total production 
of Urea is 306.67 while that of P &K Fertilizers is 211.21  LMT.  Therefore, t o ensure 
consistent and affordable access to key fertilizers - namely Urea, DAP (Di -Ammonium 
Phosphate) and NPK (Nitrogen, Phosphorus, Potassium) Complexes, the Country has to 
resort to import of these fertilizers which are vital to ensure that food production meets 
the domestic demand . The Committee note that there is a  gap between domestic 
consumption and production of fertilizers in the Country. The Committee, therefore, urge 
the Department of Fertilizers to constitute a Task force to chalk out a time bound targeted 
strategy with required budgetary support so as to enhance domestic Urea production 
through proactive implementation and promotion of the New Investment Policy (NIP) –
2012 and its amendments; New Urea Policy, 2015 and also expand production capacity 

35  
of P&K fertilizers through fiscal and tax incentives for setting up of new units  and 
securing long term agreements with the resource rich countries to ensure secure supply 
chain, at most competitive rates. The Committee trust that the Department would take 
concrete measures in this direction.   
 
Ensure timely Commissioning of New Urea Plants:  
3. The Committee are happy to note that in the Union Budget 2025 -26, the 
Government had announced  targets for attaining Atmanirbharat in Urea production. 
Accordingly, to further augment Urea supply, a plant with annual capacity of 12.7 lakh 
metric tons was to be set up at Namrup, Assam  with tentative overall time schedule for 
commissioning of  the proposed  Namrup-IV Project kept at 48 months. Statedly, t he 
energy efficiency and expected life shall be in line with the modern -day fertilizer plants. 
The Committee have also been informed that Government have mandated revival of 
Talcher unit of M/s FCIL, through a Joint Venture Company with production capacity of 
12.7 LMTPA Urea by using coal gasification technology which is under execution phase 
and has achieved an overall physical progress of 67.06 % as on 30th May, 2025. The 
Committee find that on completion of the projects, it was projected that  the production 
of urea in the Country will subsequently increase and help maximizing indigenous 
production of Urea .  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government take 
concrete steps and provide support at all levels for the commissioning of the Namrup-IV 
Plant and Talcher Unit within the stipulated time period  without cost overruns, so as to 
meet the urea demand s of the Country and help reduc e the  subsidy burden . T he 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
4. The Committee find that five units of Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd (FCIL)  at 
Sindri (Jharkhand), Talcher (Odisha), Ramagundam (Telangana), Gorakhpur  (Uttar 
Pradesh) and Korba (Chhattisgarh) and three units of Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation 
Ltd (HFCL) at Durgapur, Haldia (both in West Bengal) and Barauni (Bihar) were closed 
down since September, 2002 due to obsolete technology and high energy consumption 
of plants and economic unviability. However, to increase Urea production in the Country, 
the Government, approved revival of Talcher and Ramagundam units of FCIL in 2011 by 
setting up gas-based fertilizer plants of 1.27 MMTPA capacity.  Further, the Government, 
in Year 2016, approved revival of Gorakhpur & Sindri units of FCIL and Barauni unit of 
HFCL by setting up gas -based fertilizer plants of 1.27 MMTPA capacity each. The 
Committee are happy to note that the Ramagundam, Gorakhpur, Barauni and Sindri 
fertilizer plants have started urea production whereas the Talcher plant is under 
execution phase.  The Committee, further find that the Talcher project was being set up 
as a greenfield urea plant through coal gasification technology, utilizing the abundantly 
available domestic coal for Urea production. Statedly, on completion of the project, the 
production of urea in the Country will increase and it will also provide security in 
feedstock supply as coal would be sourced domestically and provide alternate route for 
urea production. The Committee note that against the urea consumption of 388 LMT, the 
indigenous production of Urea was 307 LMT during 2024-25 and the demand is expected 
to increase to 444 LMT by 2035 -36. With a view t o enhance the Urea production in the 

36  
Country and achieve self -reliance in its production, the Committee, strongly, 
recommends for taking timely effective policy initiatives to facilitate early revival of 
Durgapur and Haldia units of HFCL and Korba unit of FCIL by leveraging their strategic 
locations and existing infrastructure, and utilizing the coal-gasification route, etc. which 
would reduce the demand supply gap of urea and enhance domestic production capacity. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made by the Department in this 
regard.  
5. The Committee note that the production of Urea during 2023-24 was 314 LMT and 
it has come down to 307 LMT during the year 2024 -25.  
The Committee were further note that the decrease in production capacity was because 
one private plant with an annual capacity of 12 LMT has been sold and is out of Urea.  As 
the Country is dependent on imports in the sector, the Committee are of the opinion that 
the Government may formulate its policies to regulate the sale/ disinvestment process of 
fertilizer units, etc. so as to mandate production continuity clause(s) which may require 
the purchaser(s) to continue with the production of Urea/ other fertilizer, so that the 
production capacity of the Country remains maintained and the import burden gets 
reduced. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this matter. 
 
Urgent need for upgradation/ modernization/ revival of aging Urea plants.  
6. The Committee note that out of the 33 Urea plants in the Country; 27 units are over 
25 years old and 07 units are over 50 years old.   The Committee further note that these 
old plants are regularly upgrading and revamping themselves through the NUP -2015 
which has enhanced their Energy efficiency and savings. Admittedly, even though the 
life of a Urea plant is 35 years, Plants with  50 years are still working  beyond that lifetime 
due to good maintenance. However, as admitted by the Department during evidence, in 
the next five years, transition to new technology and replacement  would be the biggest 
need of this Sector. The Committee observe that the fertilizer industry is capital intensive 
and one new Urea plant costs about Rs. 10,000 crores with production capacity of 12.7 
LMT per annum and has rated life of more than 35 years . Statedly, the plants presently 
operating have huge costs of operation and maintenance, which mak e them, to some 
extent, unviable. Keeping in view the urgent need to augment the domestic production 
of fertilizers in the Country to meet the growing requirements over the years , the 
Committee recommend that a special task force be constitute d for up-gradation/ 
modernization/ revival of these aging Urea plants with the latest state of art technology, 
in a time bound manner, focusing on enhancing their energy efficiency and production 
capacity and make them globally competitive. The Committee further desire that in order 
to meet the ever-increasing demand for fertilizers, Government may come up with new 
Green field and brown field fertilizer projects  to minimize import requirements  so that 
requisite fertilizers may be supplied well ahead of time and a buffer stock also 
maintained.  
7. The Committee were apprised that keeping in view the need for  urgent need for  
replacement/ modernization/ revival of the aging 33 Ur ea Plants in the Country, the NITI 
Aayog has endorsed  sufficient Bu dgetary support to help the producers go for 

37  
modernisation with the best of technology which may have an embedded energy-saving 
Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that for full-filling the ever -increasing 
demand for fertilizers  in the Country, the Department may earnestly work out the 
budgetary requirements and project the same before the Ministry of Finance to provide 
fiscal support and incentives to the aging urea manufacturing units to ensure their 
immediate revival and modernization , so as to successfully accomplish the goals of 
Aatmanirbhar Bharat in the sector. 
 
8. The Committee have been apprised that BVFCL’s production and  energy 
performance has been affected due to ageing of the plants and obsolescence of 
equipment/ unavailability of spare  parts of the equipment. However, PDIL has been 
approached for Performance Study of Namrup-III plants of BVFCL, identification of weak 
areas and recommendation for remedial measures so that Plants may become capable 
of operating optimally .  Further , both the units of RCF, i.e., RCF Thal Unit and RCF, 
Trombay are in operation for more than 40 years which results in some unforeseen 
breakdown leading to production interruption. However, regular preventive maintenance 
activities are planned to avoid any major breakdown. The Committee,  therefore, desire 
that the Department of Fertilizers take cogent  measures for effective action after the 
completion of the Per formance Study of Namrup -III P lant of BVFCL  and steps for the 
comprehensive upgradation of RCF Thal and RCF, Trombay  Units, so that these plants 
becomes operational at optimum efficiency within the timelines stipulated. 
 
Need to develop Technology for fertilizer manufacturing industry 
9. The Committee find that despite having an excellent pool  of engineers 
and managers in Urea plants, the Country still depend upon foreign companies for the 
basic license of running, repairing and making the plant with everything kept in the hands 
of the licensor. Admittedly, the indigenous ‘Chemical Process Technology Development 
for fertilizers’ encompasses various stages, from initial laboratory research to pilot 
testing to scale up and finally full -scale plant operation, often involving iterative cycles 
of refinement  entailing involvement of  a massive investment in R&D in the field of 
synchronized pipe -based technology based on advance metallurgy, design and 
fabrication of all connected to overall objective to achieve better energy efficiency to 
minimize production costs. This integrated approach requires multiple institutional 
participation as Individual Companies on their own may not be suitable to develop end -
to-end solution having competitive advantage and energy savings. Keeping in view the 
present constraints, the Committee feels the need to develop a self-sufficient indigenous 
eco system with integration of institutions to develop a process technology for urea and 
complex fertilizers.  The Committee were apprised by the Department’s representative 
during oral evidence that there were four Companies from the Netherlands, the USA, Italy 
and Japan which have authority to grant the license in India. The Committee, therefore, 
feel the urgent need for development of indigenous technology for setting up fertilizer 
plants and maintaining them , through an integrated approach by engaging the best of 
institutions and technical experts in the field, backed by suitable Budgetary support and 
Government patronage, which will remove the technical constraints and dependence and 
speed up self-reliance in the sector. The Committee recommend that a special high power 

38  
task force be constituted for this purpose at the earliest.  
Need to increase indigenous Production of P&K Fertilizers: 
 
10. The Committee note that the Country is heavily dependent on imported raw 
materials for production  of Phosphatic and Potassic  (P&K) fertilizers; and it imports 
nearly 95% of its phosphate requirements and is 100% dependent on imports of Potash. 
The Committee observe that any increase in global prices of these raw materials 
exchange rate fluctuations and global supply chain disruptions due to geo -political 
reasons, impact the domestic cost of fertilizer production.   Admittedly, t he domestic 
production capacity  of P&K fertiliz ers (which includes DAP & NPK)  in the Country is 
approx. 160 LMT per annum against the total requirement of 240 LMT per annum . The 
Committee have been apprised that the consumption of P&K fertilizers was expected to 
increase to 305 LMT during 2035 -36. The Committee , however, find that work for 
commissioning of some new units & capacity enhancement initiatives are planned/ in 
progress in the P&K Sector  which include the RCF, Thal , DAP/NPK plant with annual 
capacity of 5 LMT and FACT, Kochi, DAP/NPK plant with annual capacity of 5.5 LMT. The 
Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department to intensify the measures to facilitate 
timely completion of the projects initiated and capacity e xpansion of the other existing 
plants by resorting to a coordinated, integrated approach; embracing  perspective of the 
whole industry , which will enhance domestic production  of P&K fertilizers  and thus 
reduce import dependence and ensure affordable supply to the farmers. 
Secure Long-Term Overseas Agreements 
11. The Committee further note that, due to fundamental deficiency of Phosphate and 
Potash raw material in the C ountry, these are imported making self-reliance in the P&K 
fertilizers a far cry. Regarding the import dependency in the Sector, the Committee have 
been informed that the Country imported 70 LMT of urea during 2023-24 i.e. 39.7 percent  
of requirement, while  imported 106 LMT of P&K fertilizers during 2023-24, which is 60.3 
percent of total demand. As India imports a significant share of its fertilizer requirements 
and raw material, the Committee find that the dependence exposes the Country to global 
market shocks, exchange rate fluctuations and delicate geo political situation which also 
affects the optimal operation of fertilizer plants to their installed capacity .  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should consider facilitating 
establishment of long term agreements and joint venture projects with Countries rich in 
fertilizer resources, especially in case of P&K fertilizers; for establishment of production 
facilities with buy back arrangements; access to acquisition of fertilizer raw materials 
abroad and for supply of fertilizers  and their raw materials  so as to secure regular 
resource access and supply chain stability for timely supply of requirements at  most 
competitive rates  and to avoid price volatility . The Committee are of the considered 
opinion that this will also facilitate the fertilizer units to operate at optimum capacity 
without supply hindrances  and effectively reduce the subsidy burden. The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
Introduction and promotion of new varieties of indigenous fertilizers, viz Sulphur Coated 
Urea “Urea Gold”. 

39  
 
12.       The Committee note that Sulphur Coated Urea (SCU) with the name of “Urea Gold” 
was launched during 2023-24 and the cost of its 40Kg bag is similar to the cost of 45 Kg 
bag of Neem Coated Urea. During 2024-25, a total 26,085 MT of Urea Gold was produced 
in the Country. The Committee were apprised that all the Urea manufacturing companies 
were requested to explore the feasibility of starting production of Sulphur Coated Urea 
vide DoF’s L etter dated 6th  September, 2023. Subsequently, RCF-Trombay has 
commenced SCU production from October, 2023 and NFL -Panipat from July, 2024.  The 
total production of SCU in FY 2024-25 (till 31.01.2025) was 20,947 MTs and total sales was 
16,154 MTs. The Committee observe that Urea Gold will also promote Nutrient Use 
Efficiency with  potential to decrease Urea consumption to some extent and is expected 
to result in reduction of import dependence.  The Committee are , therefore,  of the 
considered view that the Government should further promote its production and use as 
an alternative fertilizer to Urea, through effective its policy initiatives.  
 
Support production of indigenous Single Super Phosphate (SSP) fertilizer. 
13. The Committee note that Single Super Phosphate (SSP) fertilizer is indigenously 
manufactured in the Country and provides Phosphorus and Sulphur nutrients to the soil. 
Statedly, the production of SSP in the Country has increased from 49.35 LMT in 2021 to 
52.44 LMT in 2024-25 by 104 SSP manufacturing units.  Further, the installed capacity of 
SSP has increased from 96.07 LMT during 2014 -15 to 126 LMT as on 31.01.2025.  The 
Committee are happy to note that  to increase the manufacturing capacity of new P&K 
products and make the  Country self-reliant, Freight Subsidy on SSP has been approved 
on pilot basis from Kharif, 2022 and made applicable from Rabi, 2022 onwards to help in 
promotion of SSP usage for providing Phosphatic or “P” nutrient to the soil.  Relaxation 
to the minimum production criteria of 50,000 MTPA for availing subsidy by SSP 
manufacturing units has also been extended up to 31.3.2026.  Three new SSP 
Manufacturing units have been inducted under NBS Scheme with a capacity of 1,00,000 
MTPA each (Total 3,00,000 LMTPA) to enhance the capacity of SSP. Approval to the 
existing SSP Manufacturing units have also been granted for capacity enhancement . The 
Committee were apprised during evidence that, as the Country does not have reserves 
of raw Phosphate and Potash,  therefore, every bag of DAP was imported. Appreciating 
the measures taken by the Department to increase the production and use of SSP in the 
Country, the Committee call upon the Department to intensify their efforts to support 
setting up of new SSP units by extending the freight subsidy on SSP and other policy 
measures, with a view to enhance Phosphate availability for the farmers and reduce its 
import. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter.  
 
 
Encourage production and use of PDM. 
 
14. The Committee note that Potash Derived from Molasses  (PDM), a 100% 
domestically manufactured fertilizer, is rich in potassium and derived from ash in 
molasses-based distilleries as a by-product of sugar-based ethanol industry. The potash-
rich ash generated when burnt can be processed to produce PDM having 14.5% potash 

40  
content and is used by farmers as an alternative to MOP (Muriate of Potash with 60% 
potash content).  Currently, potash as a fertilizer is totally imported in the form of MOP. 
Presently about 5 LMT of Potash Ash generated from ethanol distilleries is being sold 
domestically whereas the current potential to produce this is about 10 -12 LMT.  
Technically, 4 bags of PDM or lesser n umber may be required per hectare as compared 
to one bag of MOP for providing equivalent potash to the soil and getting the similar 
yield. The Committee are happy to learn that the Department has notified PDM under the 
Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) scheme w.e.f. 13.10.2021 .  Moreover, six units have been 
inducted under NBS scheme for PDM. The Joint Working Group constituted by the 
Government consisting of representatives from the D/o Food and Public Distribution  & 
D/o Fertilizers have fixed a suggestive price of Rs. 4263/Ton (inclusive of bagging, 
loading and taxation) of PDM which has been agreed by the Indian Sugar Mills 
Association (ISMA) as well as Fertilizer Companies. Moreover, Workshops were 
conducted by DoF for sugar units to familiarize sugar mills/distilleries with NBS subsidy 
claiming process under iFMS. Statedly, the Government was also encouraging promotion 
of PDM through regular publicity campaigns across various media platforms. As a result 
of sustained efforts for promotion, sales of PDM stood at 3.03 LMT during 202 3-24 and 
3.91 LMT in 2024-25. During the ongoing FY-2025-26, 45831.55 MTs PDM sales has been 
registered till 31.05.2025 .  Keeping in view that PDM has come up as an alter native to 
MOP and is biotic, the Committee, hope that the Department will further encourage  Sugar 
mills and fertilizer companies throughout the Country to make concerted efforts to 
increase its production  capacity upto 10 -12 LMT  per annum . The Committee, further, 
desire that the Department should facilitate inclusion of many more Units under NBS for 
production of PDM  which will reduce import dependency  and make it domestically 
available to the farmers.  
Enhance production of Nano fertilizers: 
 
15. The Committee were informed that Nano Fertilizers hold great promise for 
application in plant nourishment  with Nano Urea & Nano DAP  available in bottles at 
cheaper prices than conventional Urea & DAP. The  Committee find that  Department of 
Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) has provisionally notified Nano Urea as Nano 
Nitrogen Fertilizers under the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985, based on bio-efficacy 
trials conducted at multiple locations, along with bio -safety test results. These trials, 
conducted on various crops demonstrated that two foliar sprays of Nano Urea, when 
applied as a top dressing along with the recommended basal dose of nitrogen, resulted 
in comparable yields to those obtained with a full recommended nitrogen dose  and led 
to a yield advantage of 3-8% and a urea saving of 25-50% in various crops. Cost analysis 
studies have further shown that while the initial price of nano fertilizers may be higher 
than subsidized conventional fertilizers like urea, but ultimately, they are more cost -
effective due to better nutrient uptake and reduced wastage, leading to higher crop yields 
with lower overall fertilizer usage and also indirect benefits in terms of reduction of soil-
air-water pollution level.  Nano Urea is rising as a very important supplement of the 
chemical fertilizer and during the last 2 ½ years, 9 crore 32 lakh bottles of Nano Urea have 
been sold which is equivalent to 42 lakh tonnes of conventional Urea. Similarly, Nano 

41  
DAP has found excellent acceptance by the farmers.  By the end of 2024, more than 3 
crore bottles of Nano DAP have been produced and out of them 2.16 crore bottles have 
been sold which is equivalent to 10.82 LMT of conventional DAP which would have been 
imported.  The difference in price is very promising for the farmers because one bag of 
DAP costs Rs. 1,350 but one bottle of Nano DAP costs only Rs. 600. Two plants with 12 
crore bottles capacity are coming up in 2025 -2026 and our PSUs are also entering int o 
the field. Moreover, the production of Nano fertilizers requires very little of raw material 
because of its Nano size. The Committee were apprised that, to meet the growing demand 
for fertilizers and reduce import dependency, the Government of India is actively 
promoting the production and adoption of innovative Nano Fertilizers. The Committee 
are of the view that as production of Nano fertilizers require little quantity of raw 
materials, the Department may extend full support through its policies and programs to 
expand the production capacity of Nano fertilizers including Nano Urea and Nano DAP , 
many fold so that it could significantly replace the use of conventional Urea/ P&K 
fertilizers over the years and contribute to attaining self -sufficiency in fertilizers sector. 
The Committee trust that DoF would take concrete time bound and sincere steps in this 
direction, for meeting the fertilizers requirement, domestically. 
 
Conduct long-term trials on Nano fertilizers to establish their efficacy, etc. 
 
16. The Committee were informed that an MoU was signed on 5th March, 2024 between 
National Productivity Council (NPC) of India and Department of Fertilizers to undertake 
the study of Nano Urea so that its efficacy, impact and potential to replace the 
conventional Urea can be as certained. Further, ICAR is undertaking the project titled 
"Effect of Nano Urea and DAP and Popularization of its Use in Crop Production" which 
has been approved by ICFFTR, during the period from 2024 to 2026, at a cost of Rs.160 
lakh to evaluate the impac t of Nano Urea and DAP on crop growth, soil health, and 
nutrient uptake across various agro -ecological zones in India. As Nano Urea has been 
Notified recently in year 2021 and subsequent Nano fertilizer products are being 
developed by the fertilizer companies through research, the Committee desire that long-
term field trials of application of nano fertilizers may be got conducted by the Department 
on various crops throughout the Country in coordination with various research 
organizations, KVK’s, etc. to thoroughly assess and validate  the merits and demerits of 
use of Nano fertilizers in terms of crop productivity, nutritional quality of crop produced, 
soil health, etc.; so that it may be optimally adopted by the farmers  as replacement to 
conventional fertilizers.  
 
 
 
 Vigorous R&D in nano fertilizers for introduction of more variants. 
 
17. The Committee note that the broad varieties of chemicals fertilizers being used by 
the farmers in the Country are Urea, DAP, MOP, NPKS and SSP . During evidence  a 
representative of the Department admitted about the limitations of the Country due to 
dependence on import of fertilizers and raw materials  because of which lot of planning 
is to be done to bring a non -volatile availability at a price that is competitive.  Any 

42  
disruption in supply may lead to plant utilization deficiency. Against this background, it 
is satisfying to note that Nano Fertilizers hold great promise for application in plant 
nourishment because of the size -dependent qualities, high surface -volume ratio and 
unique optical properties. Nano Fertilizers viz Nano Urea & Nano DAP, which are 
available in bottles are at cheaper prices than conventional Urea & DAP . Studies 
undertaken by ICAR have shown that a single 500 ml bottle of Nano Urea can replace an 
entire 45 kg bag of conventional urea, significantly reducing transportation and handling 
costs. It helps farmers lower input costs by 20-25% while maintaining or even enhancing 
crop productivity.  Moreover, it’s use reduces the soil-air-water pollution level. As per the 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), preliminary field trials conducted on 
select crops indicated that Nano DAP, when used as a seed treatment and foliar spray, 
can significantly reduce the requirement for conventional granular DAP.  Further, field 
trials have shown that Nano DAP, when used as a seed treatment and foliar spray, can 
significantly reduce the requirement for conventional granular DAP . Due to ongoing 
research in the field , the Government of India has notified Nano Urea with varying 
specifications and nitrogen content during the last few years . In view of the numerous 
benefits and advantages of Nano fertilizers, the Committee, strongly recommend that the 
Government may encourage vigorous Research in the field to promote development of 
more such Nano fertilizers variants (Macro and Micro nutrient grades)through 
coordinated approach involving both the Public and Private sector companies, in order 
to ensure self-sufficiency in fertilizers for sustainable agriculture.  The Committee further 
desire that the Department of Fertili zers may work-out and seek for allocation of 
sufficient funds for developing innovative nano fertilizers so that it gets focused attention 
and ensure regular supply of various fertilizers at reasonable rates, ease subsidy burden 
and help save precious foreign exchange by reducing the import burden of the Country. 
Provision of sufficient number of Drones for application of Nano fertilizers18. The 
Committee note that for the ease of application and utilization of Nano fertilizers such 
as Nano Urea through foliar spraying, various initiatives have been undertaken which 
include the promotion of ‘Kisan Drones’ and the distribution of battery-operated 
sprayers at retail outlets. Moreover, pilot training and custom hiring services through 
Village Level Entrepreneurs (VLEs) are being actively encouraged to support last-mile 
delivery.  In this direction, the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is 
implementing the Namo Drone Didi Scheme, a Central Sector initiative approved by the 
Cabinet which aims to provide 15,000 drones to Women Self Help Groups (SHGs) over a 
three-year period (2023-24 to 2025-26). Supporting this initiative, the Department of 
Fertilizers, has also through fertilizer companies, facilitated the distribution of 1,094 
drones to SHGs under the Namo Drone Didi Scheme. Of these,  
500 drones have been distributed as part of a pilot initiative. So far, 909 Drone Didi’s have 
actively deployed these drones for spraying Nano fertilizers. Taking note of the measures 
taken, the Committee urge the Government to provide/ make   available sufficient number 
of agricultural drones/ other sprayers to the farmers at  subsidized/ convenient rates in 
each village/ Block level through SFGs, etc. so as to facilitate and encourage the   farmers 
to switch over to use  Nano fertilizers, on large scale . The Committee feels that more 
drone should be introduced at war footing. 

43  
19. The Committee are apprised that the Government and the Department of Fertilizers 
are supporting and promoting the use of drones and other agricultural spray ers for 
application of Nano fertilizers but they appear to be too less when compared to the vast 
requirement of the Country. The Committee are therefore, of the considered opinion that 
the Government may introduce  Production Linked Incentive (PLI) scheme in fertilizers 
sector to incentivize/ augment domestic production of drones and fertilizer implements 
which may enable the farmers to purchase them at a reasonable price and thus enhance 
the use of Nano fertilizers which will reduce demand for chemical fertilizers.   
Popularization of the features/ benefits of use of Nano fertilizers. 
20. The Committee note the measures being taken by the Department of Fertilizers to 
popularize the features/ benefits/ mode of application, etc. for use of Nano fertilizers 
amongst the farmers throughout the Country which include awareness camps, webinars, 
Nukkad-Nataks, field demonstrations, Kisan Sammelans and films in regional languages, 
etc. Admittedly, the Government of India has pursued with the States on use of Nano 
fertilizer at various forums. DA&FW during the Rabi, 2024 -25 season assessed the 
requirement of Nano Urea and Nano DAP. Further, Nano Urea has been included under 
monthly supply plan issued by Department of Fertilizers.  While appreciating the efforts 
being made by the Department of Fertilizers to promote the use of Nano fertilizers 
amongst the farmers, the Committee feel that a lot of work still need to be done in this 
direction by popul arizing the ir benefits on account of added income through more 
produce, less transportation cost, eco-friendly product, precise spray in less time, etc. 
 
Promotion of Research & Development in fertilizers - Need for sufficient Budgetary 
allocation/ support. 
  21. The Committee note that to promote and facilitate research and development in 
the field of fertilizers, the Department of Fertilizers has established a dedicated national-
level think tank, Indian Council for Fertilizers and Fertilizer Technology Research 
(ICFFTR) which was funded by the member companies, mostly PSUs. Under this 
endeavor, RCF has actively contributed by successfully developing and commercializing 
two innovative fertilizers i.e., Organic Fertilizer (PROM) and Bio -stimulant fertilizer. The 
products developed ar e eco -friendly and align with the Government’s emphasis on 
sustainable agricultural practices.  Moreover, NFL is setting up Sulphur Coated Urea 
(Gold Urea) plant having annual capacity of 5000 MT at its Panipat and Nangal Units under 
R&D Project. Further, as part of planned R&D activities , Indian Council of Agriculture 
Research (ICAR) and other research institutes, etc. have carried out Nano Urea (liquid) 
and Nano DAP trials on different crops covering  
15 agro-climatic zones.  In view of the non-availability of fertilizer raw materials in the 
Country the Committee stressed the need for R&D in the sector so that indigenous 
alternative materials  could be developed which was  already agreed to  by the 
representatives of the Department during oral evidence .  The Committee therefore, 
recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should work in unison with the Fertilizer 
PSUs, Private and Cooperative sector and research institutes to promote and patronize 
targeted R&D activities in the field of Fertilizers for development of alternative 

44  
indigenous, efficient, eco-friendly, varieties of nano fertilizers (Urea/ P&K/ macro &micro 
nutrient grades), bio-fertilizers, organic fertilizers, compost, bio-stimulants, etc, so as to 
facilitate achievement of the objective of self-sufficiency in the sector.  The Committee, 
also strongly desire that the results of R&D activities be shared amongst the fertilizer 
companies with a view to enhance the production of fertilizers, to meet the increasing 
demand of farmers. 
 
Promotion of production and use of Organic & bio-fertilizers. 
 
22. The Committee lear n that to make fertilizer production more environmentally 
sustainable in India, two new additional components viz. PM Programme for Restoration, 
awareness Generation, Nourishment  and Amelioration of Mother Earth (PMPRANAM) 
and Market Development Assistance (MDA) have been introduced to promote organic 
Fertilizers with a view to save the health of soil by way of promoting natural farming, 
balanced/sustainable use of chemical fertilizers, and proactively promote alternate 
fertilizers.  Further, the Government has a pproved Market Development Assistance to 
promote organic fertilizers produced at plants under the umbrella GOBARdhan initiative 
covering different Biogas/ CBG support schemes/ programs to promote sale of soil 
organic Carbon enhancers like Fermented Organic  Manure (FOM),  Liquid Fermented 
Organic Manure (LFOM) and Phosphate rich FOM, etc.   As submitted,  the policy on 
promotion of organic fertilizers is a new scheme approved by the CCEA in its meeting 
held on 28th June, 2023 wherein MDA @ Rs.1500/MT has been p rovided to promote 
organic fertilizers with total outlay of Rs. 1451.84 crore (FY -2023-24 to 2025 -26), which 
includes a corpus of Rs. 360 Crore for research gap funding, etc. The Committee further 
learnt that an exercise is underway for evaluation of the scheme for extension beyond 
31.03.2026.  Moreover, to promote use of organic fertilizers in the Country, Government 
is promoting organic farming through the scheme of Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana 
(PKVY) in all the States/UTs (except North Eastern States). For North Eastern States, 
Mission Organic Value Chain Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNE R) 
scheme is being implemented. Both the Schemes stress on end -to-end support to 
farmers engaged in organic farming i.e. from productio n to processing, certification & 
marketing and post -harvest management training and capacity building.   While 
appreciating the efforts of the Government for promotion of Organic and bio-fertilizers in 
the Country, the Committee desire that Government may prioritize their production and 
use at each village and block level through enhanced rates of Market Development 
assistance/special incentive s, etc. as this will reduce the use of Chemical fertilizers , 
improve the soil health  and stren gthen the rural economy. The Committee are also 
optimistic that the Department would pursue with the concerned Ministry for the 
continuance of the Schemes for promotion of manufacturing and sale of Organic 
fertilizers beyond March, 2026. 
 
Need for continuance of Urea Subsidy Scheme. 
23. The Committee note that Urea Subsidy Scheme is a Central Sector Scheme of the 

45  
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers is wholly financed by the Government of India through 
Budgetary Support. Urea Subsidy Scheme has three components, i.e., Indigenous Urea, 
Imported Urea and Uniform Freight Subsidy. Indigenous urea subsidy is administered to 
the urea units towards indigenous urea production. Admittedly, Imported Urea subsidy 
is directed towards imports made to bridge the gap between assessed demand and 
indigenous production of urea in the Country. Both components also include freight 
subsidy for movement of urea across the Country under the Uniform Freight Subsidy 
Policy. The objectives of Urea Subsidy Scheme are to ensure timely availability of 
adequate quantity of urea at statutory controlled price to the farmers across the Country; 
to optimize indigenous urea production  and to rationalize the subsidy outgo of the 
Government.  The Scheme also enables the urea units in sustaining their operations and 
energy efficiency.  Under the Scheme, Urea is presently provided to the farmers at a 
statutorily notified Maximum Retail Price (MRP) of Rs.242 per bag of 45 kg urea (exclusive 
of charges towards neem coating and taxes as applicable). Admittedly, all farmers of the 
Country are beneficiaries of this Scheme. According to the Report of the Third -party 
evaluation got conducted by the Ministry regarding the need for continuance of Urea 
Subsidy Scheme ; due to the scheme , under New Urea Policy 2015 (NUP -2015), the 
production of urea increased from 225.8 LMT in 2014 -15 to 244.75 LMT in 2015-16 and it 
also led to improvement in Energy efficiency of urea industries at par with global 
standards. It resulted in increased crop yield and reduced the expenditure of farmers for 
cultivation due to use of less amount of urea in cultivation. The study recommended for 
commissioning of five manufacturing units under Public sector so as to attain self -
sufficiency and the necessity for continuation of the urea subsidy scheme to help the 
urea industries, farmers, and the agriculture sector. The Committee were apprised that 
the evaluation for review of the continuation of Urea Subsidy Scheme beyond 31.03.2025, 
is under consideration in the Department.  The Committee, therefore, impress upon the 
Department to take a holistic view for continuance of the Urea subsidy policy, in view of 
its numerous benefits to all stakeholders  including the farmers ; and further aiming to 
promote the use of desired proportion of Nitrogen, Phosphate and Potash (4:2:1)  in 
farming, in our Country. 
 
Nutrient Based Subsidy policy – P&K fertilizers 
 
24. The Committee note that the Government has implemented Nutrient Based 
Subsidy (NBS) Policy w.e.f. 01.04.2010 for Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers. 
Under the policy, a fixed amount of subsidy, decided on annual/bi -annual basis, is 
provided to manufacturer/ importer on notified P&K fertilizers depending on their nutrient 
content i.e. Nitrogen (N), Phosphorus (P), Potassium (K) and Sulphur (S) to improve 
availability of fertilizers to farmers. As a result of steps taken by the Government, 
production of DAP has increased to 37.69 LMT in 2024 -25. Similarly, the production  of 
NPKs has increased to 113.28 LMT in 2024 -25 by 22 P&K fertilizer manufacturing units 
and production of SSP has increased to 52.44 LMT in 2024-25 by 104 SSP manufacturing 
units. The main objectives of NBS Scheme are as to promote balanced use of fertilizers; 
rationalize impact of subsidy  on the Government ; improve availability of fertilizers to 

46  
farmers and to encourage competition amongst the fertilizer companies.The Committee 
are satisfied to note that a Third-party evaluation of the Nutrient Based Subsidy scheme 
has shown that use of Phosphatic & Potassic (P&K) fertilizers helped in improving 
productivity in the farm land and multi-nutrient deficiency of the soil. Further, the product 
basket under NBS has increased from 22 grades in 2021 to 28 grades at present .  The 
Committee, therefore, recomm end that the present system of Nutrient Based Subsidy 
(NBS) Policy in P&K fertilizers may be continued and measures be taken to make it more 
effective by increasing the number of P&K fertilizers under NBS policy with the approval 
of FCO, rationalization of prices of P&K fertilizers, etc. with a view to boost manufacturing 
and encourage its use by the farmers.  
 
25. The Committee note that only 19.7 LMT of P&K fertilizers were imported du ring 
the year against the targeted import of 30 LMT by the companies under Open General 
License, due to their financial compulsions. This resulted in the shortage of DAP in the 
Country and led to its black marketing .  Moreover, there was shortage of fertilizers 
especially, DAP in the Country, due to international factors, as a particular Country did 
not supply fertilizers to India. Keeping in view that the matter is of serious concern, the 
Committee desir e that a Cent ral monitoring mechanism be developed to take timely 
effective actions during such emergent situations and a policy be framed for suitable 
action against the defaulting agencies, etc.  
 
26. The Committee find that the raw material for production of urea or the feedstock is 
basically Natural Gas, which constitutes 90 percent of the cost of Urea and the remaining 
10 percent is the cost like bagging cost, water cost, fixed cost, etc. All the 33 plants 
operating presently are Natural Gas  based. Out of the total requirement, 74 per cent of 
the gas is imported through long -term agreements and the remaining 26 per cent of the 
gas is from the domestic sources which is cheaper. Since the import of gas depends 
upon a lot of geopolitical factors, i nternational relations, etc. , the Committee 
recommends that policy reforms be made in the Gas procurement mechanism so as to 
ensure its constant and uninterrupted supply at most competitive prices which will also 
result in reduction in subsidy outgo.  The Committee, further, desire that the Department 
may pursue with the concerned Ministries  to expedite the exploration and extraction of 
oil and natural gas within the Country and for prioritizing allocation of domestic Natural 
gas to the urea manufacturing companies , which will reduce import burden and also 
decrease the cost of production.  
 
Explore availability of raw materials in the Country, need to diversify sources of import, 
etc. 
 
27. The Committee note that India has relatively low reserves of economically 
extractable potash and phosphate rock , and is therefore, import dependent to meet its 
requirements. Most of the Country’s rock phosphate is low grade which requires 
benefaction before use.  Admittedly, as submitted, there are 7 mining leases of Rock 
Phosphate out of which only 6 are working .  In case of potash, the blocks  in India are 

47  
deep seated.  The Committee are satisfied to note that, the Ministry of Mines with an 
objective of increasing production of fertilizer minerals under  'Critical and Strategic 
Minerals' category, has included Phosphate, Potash and Glauconite (Potassic mineral) 
under “The Mines & Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment (MMDR) Act, 
2023”. The Committee are of the considered opinion that concrete measures be taken in 
collaboration with all concerned Ministries and agencies for the exploration and mining 
of fertilizer raw materials in the Country, to enhance domestic production and achieve 
self- sufficiency in these minerals.  In view of the dependence on raw materials, the 
Committee also exhorts the Ministry to further diversify its sources of import and secure 
mining lease agreements with raw material rich  countries for extraction / refining/ 
manufacturing of fertilizers  to ensure their stable supply at competitive prices, 
cushioning the cost fluctuations. 
 Strengthening   Fertilizers supply, allocation  and distribution system. 
 
28.  The Committee find it encouraging that the Integrated Fertilizer Management 
System (iFMS) is a comprehensive, all -integrated system covering all functionalities in 
the fertilizer supply chain. This system covers the entire supply chain, meticulously 
capturing transactional data from raw material procurement, imports to fertilizer 
production and transportation via rail or road from plants, rake houses, ports to district 
warehouses, and finally sale at PoS enabled retailers. Everything is aligned with monthly 
supply plans at district level and the movement of fertilizers is being captured in real 
time. Various modules under iFMS have been developed to ensure capture and maintain 
the fertilizers movement and sale data accurately in a secured manner.  The C ommittee, 
observe that in order to ensure the adequate and timely availability of good quality of 
fertilizers to the farmers, Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare assess the 
requirement of major fertilizers, namely Urea, DAP, MOP, complexes and SSP fertilizers, 
before each cropping season (viz.  Rabi and Kharif)  in consultation with  DOF, State 
Governments/UTs.  The Committee feel  that the Department should  further strengthen 
their iFMS System through upgrading the digital tool so that the farmers may also get 
access to the real-time movement/ availability of fertilizers in their respective States/UTs 
so as to curb pilferages and ensure timely availability , as per the requirements and 
supply plan put in place. Besides, it is imperative that the mechanism for assessment of 
requirement of fertilizers by the States and UTs should be made more accurate so that 
the allocation of State specific Fertilizers was realistic and they get adequate and timely 
supply. 
Ensuring sufficient buffer stock in all regions. 
29. The Committee have been informed that the storage arrangements and capacities 
in respect of fertilizers are overseen by the respective State Government s and the 
fertilizer companies; w hile the Department of Fertilizers ensures suitable supply of 
fertilizers in the States through indigenous production as well as imports. As a result, 
sufficient stocks get pre -positioned in the States before the start of each cropping 
season. The Committee desire that the Department should develop a  fool-proof 

48  
mechanism to constantly monitor on a real time basis, the buffer stock and availability of 
various types of fertilizers as per their specific requirements, well before the start of each 
cropping season , in all the States/UTs  of the Country to guarantee that affordable 
fertilizers reaches the last farmer in the Country. The Committee may be apprised of 
the action taken in the matter.  
 
Need to Promote balanced use of Fertilizers. 
30. The Committee find that Urea was the most dominant element in fertilizers and in 
order to control its over-use and save the soil, different kinds of biotic inputs, better soil 
practices, better way of cultivation in the natural application of organic fertilizer have to 
be put in place . The Committee find that the indiscriminate and imbalanced use of 
chemical fertilizers coupled with low addition of organic matter and neglect of micro and 
secondary nutrients, over the years  is causing multi-nutrient deficiencies and 
deterioration of soil health. Admittedly, the Government of India was  implementing the 
Soil Health & Fertility Scheme since 2014 -15. Under the Scheme, the Soil Health Cards 
are issued to farmers for providing information on fertility status of soils and 
recommends crop specific dosage of fertilizers.  Further, the National Mission on Natural 
Farming (NMNF) was approved on 25th November 2024 as a Centrally sponsored scheme 
to encourage farmers to promote Natural Farming (NF) across the Country. While 
appreciating these steps, the Committee desire that the Department also take concrete 
requisite measures to train the farmers about balanced/ appropriate use of fert ilizers as 
per crop and soil type , crop rotation, use of different kinds of biotic inputs, Natural 
farming, organic farming, etc. which will maintain soil health and reduce fertilizers 
dependency. 
  

49  
Efforts to stop mal-practices in the sale of Fertilizers. 
31. The Committee find that Fertilizers were declared as an essential commodity under 
the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and notified under Fertilizer Control Order, 1985. 
State Governments are empowered to take action against persons involved in black -
marketing/diversion/smuggling as per provision s of EC Act. Admittedly, complaints 
received at  Department of  Fertilizers   level regarding such cases is sent to concerned 
State Government to take appropriate action under Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and 
Fertilizer Control Order, 1985.   It has furt her been submitted that the Department of 
Fertilizers vide Circular dated 21.10.2016 notified that under Section 7 of Aadhaar 
(Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016, the 
individuals desirous of availing subsid ized Fertilizers are required to furnish proof of 
possession of Aadhaar authentication or undergo Aadhaar authentication. Since, 
December, 2023 as per the suggestion of Cabinet Secretariat, the Aadhaar authentication 
is mandatory in all States and UTs.  The Committee expressed their concern to the  
reported cases of Black marketing and diversion of fertilizers , etc. since a huge amount 
of subsidy is being provided on fertilizers by the Government. The Committee, therefore, 
trust that more stringent policies and guidelines be devised in consultation with all 
stakeholders and the State Governments to ensure proper sale/ distribution of fertilizers 
in the Country to completely stop the mal-practices such as black-marketing/ smuggling/ 
pilferage, at all stages and conduct random checks to ensure the quality and quantity. 
The Committee, further desire that a feasibility of establishing a network of labs 
throughout the Country to check the quality of fertilizers being sold  and further desires 
that a grievance redressal mechanism be established for prompt action and resolution of 
complaints in this regard . The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the 
matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;    AZAD KIRTI JHA 
19 AUGUST, 2025 CHAIRPERSON, 
28 SHRAVAN, 1947 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(2024-25) 
 
Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 06 January, 2025 from 1100 hrs. to 1330 
hrs. in Committee Room 074, Parliament Library Building (PLB), House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
1.  Shri Ajay Bhatt 
2.  Shri Robert Bruce C. 
3.  Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
4.  Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
5.  Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
6.  Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
7.  Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
8.  Shri Praveen Patel 
9.  Dr. Sambit Patra 
10.  Shri Balram Naik Porika 
11.  Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12.  Shri Subhash Barala 
13.  Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
14.  Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
15.  Shri Tejveer Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1.  Smt. Suman Arora  - Additional Secretary 
2.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
3. Shri Nagendra Suman  - Deputy Secretary 
 
WITNESSES 
 
I. Representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of Fertilizers) 
 
1. RAJAT KUMAR MISHRA, Secretary (Fert.) 
2. MS. ANEETA C MESHRAM, Addl.  Secretary 
3. MANOJ SETHI, Joint Secy. & FA 
4. MS. APARNA SHARMA, Joint Secretary 
5. DR.PRATIBHA A., Eco Advisor, Eco. Advisor 
6. Shri MANOJ KUMAR, Dy. Secretary 

2 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Department 
of Fertilizers (DoF), Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for briefing on the subject ‘Self-sufficiency in production of fertilizers with a 
view to curb imports  – Review of constraints thereof’ . Their attention was drawn to  
Direction 5 5(I) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding con fidentiality of the 
proceedings of the Committee before seeking inputs on country’s position in terms of 
production both Urea and NPK fertilizers and availability of raw material, their import 
dependence besides steps that can be initiated to address the constraints in the way 
of attaining self-suﬃciency. The Committee also wanted to be apprised on the eﬃcacy 
of the present policy framework in curbing imports, scaling up domestic production and 
ensuring balanced fertilizer  use to promote soil health as also laying stress on the 
emerging technologies and alternative inputs, such as nano -urea, organic fertilizers, 
and bio -based solutions that may help in achieving self -sufficiency in the fertilizer 
sector. 
 
3. The Secretary, Department of Fertilizers then briefed the Committee on the 
issues raised by the Committee by way of a power -point presentation on the 
background of the Fertilizer Subsidy, the initiatives underway and the challenges that 
needed to be addressed in order to achieve self-sufficiency in the fertilizer sector. The 
Secretary apprised that the steps taken in the direction have fructified mainly in terms 
of Urea.  Progress has also been made under P&K i.e. DAP, NPKS and MOP leading 
to substantial add ition in the internal capacity, results of which may be visible in the 
near future. The Secretary also responded to the queries raised by the members.  
 4. The Committee, thereafter, sought clarifications on certain issues related to the 
fertilizer sector which were replied to by the representatives of the Department besides 
highlighting the major issue of limited reserves in respect of N,P&K  in the country. 
5. The Chairperson on conclusion thanked the Secretary, DoF and accompanying 
officers for briefing the Committee on the important aspects related to the subject and 
clarifications thereto and asked them to furnish written replies to the points raised by 
the Members that remained unanswered for consideration of the Committee.  
 
4. A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
(The witness then withdrew). 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
  

3 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(2024-25) 
 
Minutes of the Nineteenth Sitting of the Committee 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 09 May, 2025 from 1145 hrs. to 1310 hrs. in 
Committee Room 02, EPHA, A Block, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
16.  Shri Robert Bruce C. 
17.  Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
18.  Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
19.  Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
20.  Shri Praveen Patel 
21.  Shri Balram Naik Porika 
22.  Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
23.  Shri Nalin Soren 
24.  Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
25.  Shri Subhash Barala 
26.  Dr. Kalpana Saini 
27.  Shri Arun Singh 
28.  Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
29.  Shri Tejveer Singh 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
5.  Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
6.  Shri Nagendra Suman  - Deputy Secretary 
7.  Shri Abhishek Kumar  - Deputy Director  
8.  Ms. Neelam Bhave  - Committee Officer 
 
WITNESSES 
 
 Representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department 
of Fertilizers) 
 
1. Shri Rajat Kumar Mishra, Secretary (Fertilizers) 
2. Ms. Aneeta Meshram, Addl.  Secretary 

4 
 
3. Ms. Aparna Sharma, Addl. Secretary 
4. Shri Bharat Bhushan, Sr. Eco. Advisor 
5. Shri Anurag Rohtagi, JS 
6. Dr. Prathibha A., Eco. Advisor 
7. Shri Anil Phulwari, Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Department 
of Fertilizers (DoF), Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for evidence on the subject ‘Self-sufficiency in production of fertilizers with 
a view to curb imports  – Review of constraints thereof’. Their attention was drawn to 
Direction 5 5(I) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ , regarding con fidentiality of the 
proceedings of the Committee before seeking inputs on Country’s position in terms of 
production both Urea and NPK fertilizers and availability of raw material, their import 
dependence besides steps that can be initiated to address the constraints in the way 
of attaining self-suﬃciency. The Committee also wanted to be apprised on the eﬃcacy 
of present policy for scaling up domestic production and laying stress on the emerging 
technologies and alternative inputs, such as nano  fertilizers, organic fertilizers, and 
bio-based solutions that may help in achieving self-sufficiency in the fertilizer sector  
besides adopting the innovative coal gasification technology to cut down dependence 
on natural gas. 
 
3. The Secretary, Department of Fertilizers apprised the Committee by way of a 
power-point presentation on the background of the Fertilizer Sector, the initiatives 
underway and the steps required attain sufficiency.  While replying to the queries, the 
Secretary apprised that the Country still depends upon foreign companies for the basic 
license for running, repair and maintenance of the plants manufacturing Urea besides 
pointing out the challenges and the steps required to address the future increase in 
demand of P&K fertilizers and the technological advancements required in the fertilizer 
sector.  Clarifications on certain issues related to the fertilizer sector were also given 
by the representatives of the Department besides  highlighting the limited reserves in 
respect of N, P & K in the country.  
4. The Chairperson on conclusion thanked the Secretary, DoF and accompanying 
officers for providing valuable inputs to the Committee on the important aspects related 
to the subject and asked them to furnish written replies to the points that remained 
unanswered for consideration of the Committee.  
 
(The witness then withdrew). 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
(A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept.) 
 
  

5 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2024-25) 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th August, 202 5 from 1 600 hrs.  
to 1700 hrs. in the Committee Room ‘D’, PHA, New Delhi. 
  
PRESENT 
 
     SHRI AZAD KIRTI JHA -    CHAIRPERSON 
 
     MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
6. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
7. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
8. Shri Praveen Patel  
9. Dr. Sambit Patra  
10. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
11. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
12. Shri Eatala Rajender 
13. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
14. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
15 Shri Tharaniventham M. S. 
16 Shri Nalin Soren 
17 Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
18 Shri Subhash Barala 
19 Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
20 Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
21 Shri Naresh Bansal 
22 Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
23 Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
24 Shri Tejveer Singh 
SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Nagendra Suman  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Panna Lal   - Deputy Secretary 
6. Shri Abhishek Kumar  -  Deputy Director 

6 
 
7. Ms. Neelam Bhave   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the  
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following Draft  
Reports:  
(i)      XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
(ii) Fifteenth Report on the subject ‘Self-sufficiency in Production of Fertilizers 
with a view to curb import of fertilizers – Review of constraints thereof’ 
pertaining to the Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers. 
 
3. Giving an overview of the important Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of the Members. 
 
4.      After some deliberations the Committee decided to Adopt two  (02) Draft Reports 
14th and 15th with minor modification. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson 
to finalize the Reports and present/lay the Reports in the ongoing Session in both the 
Houses of Parliament. The Committee also authorize the Chairperson to present/lay 
the reports to the Hon’ble Speaker in case the House is adjourned sine-die. 
 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
   