i 
 
 
31 
  
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS 
 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
  MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
‘REVIEW OF NATIONAL POLICY ON PETROCHEMICALS, 2007’ 
 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
AUGUST, 2026/ SRAVANA, 1948 (SAKA) 
 
  


ii 
 
CC&F. No. 211 
 
 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
REVIEW OF NATIONAL POLICY ON PETROCHEMICALS, 
2007 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06th August, 2026 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06th August, 2026 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2026/ SRAVANA, 1948 (SAKA) 
 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) (iv)  
INTRODUCTION (v) 
REPORT 
 
PART – I                   
 
I Introduction 1-41 
A.        National Policy on Petrochemicals, 2007 1 
B. Aim Of the National Policy on Petrochemicals, 2007  1 
C. The National Policy on Petrochemicals, 2007 4 
D. Plastic Development Council 6 
E. Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Regions 
(PCPIRS) 
10 
F. Centres of Excellence (CoEs) 12 
G. Plastic Parks 16 
H. Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering Technology (CIPET) 24 
I. Plastic Waste Management Centres (PWMC)  26 
J. Synthetic Fiber 28 
K. Minimizing the ill Effects of Plastics 29 
L. Jute Bags 37 
PART- II OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 41-55 
 
APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2025-26) held on 4th November, 2025.  
56 
II. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2025-26) held on 07th May, 2026.  
59 
III. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2025-26) held on 03rd August, 2026. 
62 
 

iv 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (2025-2026) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
21. Vacant* 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Shri Ramesh Lingamaneni$ 
25. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
26. Shri Manmohan Samal& 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
29. Shri Tejveer Singh 
30. Shri L. K. Sudhish%  
31. Vacant 
*Vacant vice Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon, MP(LS), passed away on 19.02.2026 vide LS Table Office Notification 
No.21/4(8)/2026/TO(B) dated 20.02.2026. 
& Nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 04.06.2026 Para No. 5267.  
% Nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 04.06.2026 Para No. 5267. 
$ Nominated w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 24.07.2026 Para No. 5724. 
Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli, MP(RS) retired from the membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 21.06.2026 vide Committee Branch 
note dated 19.02.2026.  
Dr. Bhagwat Karad, MP(RS) retired on 02.04.2026 vide Committee Branch note dated 19.02.2026.  
Shri G.K. Vasan, MP(RS) retired on 02.04.2026 vide Committee Branch note dated 19.02.2026. 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi   — Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam  —  Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  — Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Vandana Rawat  — Assistant Executive Officer 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2025 -26) 
having been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf, this Thirty -First 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of National Policy on Petrochemicals, 2007’ 
pertaining to th e Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers , Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals.  
2. The Committee had a briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals on 04 th November, 2025 
and took oral evidence of the representatives of the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals at their sitting held on 07th May, 2026. 
 
3.  The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 03rd   
August, 2026.  
 
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals for tendering 
evidence and placing before the Committee all the requisite information related to 
examination of the subject.  
 
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance 
rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.  
 
6. For ease of reference and convenience, the Observations/ Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
03 August, 2026  Chairperson, 
12 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
    Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
  
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER - I 
REPORT 
 
A. Introductory 
 National Policy on Petrochemicals, 2007 
        A Policy Resolution for Petrochemicals was notified in April 2007 which recognized 
the gradual rise in demand and production of petrochemicals in Asia and the sector’s 
potential for further growth.  This National Vision in the form of a Policy document was 
issued to bring substantial investments in this sector to support the increased demand 
and to use the growth in this sector as a "force multiplier" for the overall GDP growth.  
 
B.  Aim of the National Policy on Petrochemicals, 2007  
a. Increase investments in the sector, both upstream and downstream by ensuring 
availability of raw materials at internationally competitive prices, creating quality 
infrastructure and other facilitation to ensure value addition and increase exports;  
b. Increase the domestic demand and per capita consumption of plastics and synthetic 
fibres;  
c. To increase the use of petrochemicals in thrust areas;  
d. Increase the competitiveness, polymer absorption capacity and value addition in the 
domestic downstream plastic processing industry through modernization, R & D 
measures and freeing it from structural constraints;  
e. Facilitating investment in the emerging areas of petrochemicals and achieve 
environmentally sustainable growth in the petrochemical sector through innovative 
methods of plastic waste management, recycling and development of bio -, photo 
degradable polymers and plastics;  
f. Promote Research and Development in Petrochemicals and promote Human Resource 
Development  
 
Strategies: Major issues and strategies identified in the policy document in order to 
achieve the desired objectives in the petrochemical sector are as follows: 
 
I. Infrastructure:  
 
       In order to address the issue of quality infrastructures the following 
initiatives were proposed in the policy document: -  
 
• The Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs) will 
be set up to promote investment in this sector;  
• For existing industries; issues of common effluent treatment, transport linkages 
including roads etc., power supply, water and facilities the DCPC would set up 
facilitation mechanism in consultations with the Concerned Ministries.  
• To enhance exports Plastic Export Parks would be considered to be developed as 
an integral part of the PCPIR.  
•  In order to boost export of value added petrochemical products the existing 
petrochemicals export promotion bodies will be involved in formulating appropriate 
strategies in Market Access Initiatives and market development assistance. 

2 
 
 
II. Technology and Research and Development:  
 
          The policy emphasized the need to modernize and upgrade the existing 
manufacturing process, improve the quality of existing products, making it safe 
for environment and human health. The areas could cover pipes used in 
irrigation, drinking water, infrastructure, construction and other emerging areas. 
 
• A National Programme on Petrochemical Development is proposed to be 
formulated to improve the existing petrochemical technology and research, in the 
Country and to promote the development of new applications of polymers and 
plastics;  
• A new scheme of Petrochemical Research and Development Fund (PRDF) which 
would cater to the projects of R&D, waste management, recycling and 
development of biopolymers and biodegradable polymers is proposed to be 
formulated. The fund would be managed and  controlled by the Department of 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals. Recommendations to the Department for the 
allocation of funds to industrial units and projects from this fund would be made by 
the proposed Plastic Development Council. The proposed PRDF would also fund 
projects for the development of biodegradable polymers.  
• Plastic Development Council under the Schedule 19 (4) of the IDR Act, 1951 will 
be set up. This body will be an advisory body with members from Industry, 
academia, and the Government. This will work for a sustained development of 
plastics processing sector.  
• Centres of Excellence in polymer Technology will be set up in existing educational 
and research institutions working in the field of polymers viz. National Chemical 
Laboratory, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Indian Institutes of 
Technology, National Institutes of Technology and others.   
 
III. Feedstock: 
 
The petrochemical sector in India did not have feedstock advantages. To 
address the issue of feedstock availability, a Standing Committee with 
representatives from DCPC, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Ministry 
of Power, Department of Fertilizers an d Ministry of Textiles was planned. The 
committee would recommend a policy framework for full utilization of available 
feedstock at internationally competitive prices and suggest measures for 
expanding the availability of feedstock, allocation of feedstock  amongst the 
different consuming sectors, quick resolution of inter -ministerial issues and 
suggest measures to ensure the availability of petrochemical feedstock to 
future cracker complexes.  
 
IV. Tariffs and Taxes: 
The policy document envisaged that efforts will be made to have a stable tax 
regime which will help in attracting investments in petrochemical sector.  
  
V. Plastic Applications Development: 
The policy recommended the following:   

3 
 
• The feasibility of increasing usage of plastics in agriculture and other sectors will 
be examined.   
• The policy would aim at encouraging, promoting and expanding the usage of  
synthetic fibres rather than replacing usage of natural fibre with synthetic fibre.   
• It is proposed to set up an Inter -Ministerial Expert Committee under the DCPC 
which will look into the requirement of making the use of plastics in thrust areas 
and make recommendations to the concerned Ministries. This Expert Committee 
will be serviced by the Plastic Development Council.  
 
VI.  Plastic Processing Industry:  
• Many of the plastic items reserved for SSI sector needs review through a process 
of consultation with the stakeholders.   
• Quality of the Plastic products and development of brand image in plastic 
products are essential to sustain the export of value added plastic products.   
• Steps will be taken to augment the existing Testing centres and promotion of new 
testing centres in the public private partnership to act as Certifying agency for 
testing of plastic products and raw materials to meet the international as well as 
BIS standards.  
 
VI. Human Resource Development: 
 
• The private sector would also be encouraged to set up training institutes in plastic 
engineering and technology. Efforts will be made for providing technically trained 
manpower in the North Eastern Region.  
• Central Institute of Plastics Engineering and Technology (CIPET) will be further 
strengthened and expanded.  
 
VII. Plastics and Environment:  
 
• Plastic industry will be encouraged to take up community awareness Program on 
safe use of plastics through continuous and voluntary information, education and 
communication (IEC) campaigns with a view to achieve visible results.  
• For curtailing the indiscriminate littering of waste from plastic packaging, efforts 
will be made to evolve mechanism for industry contribution to the recovery and 
recycling of the post -consumer spent packages. Encouragement for the use of 
recycled plastic products in non-critical services will be given priority.  
• Urban Local Bodies would be supported and their capability will be strengthened 
so that they can effectively deal with issues relating to plastic waste management. 
An Incentive Scheme for urban local bodies which contribute significantly towards 
plastic waste management/ recycling would be formulated with the Ministry of 
Urban Development being the nodal agency.  
• The policy of restrictions on import of plastic waste/scrap will be reviewed in 
consultation with the Ministry of Environment & Forest and Department of 
Commerce.  
 
 
 

4 
 
VIII. Competition, Market Dominance and Monopoly: 
 
         The National Policy on Petrochemicals contains policy measures to provide 
level playing field, reduce barriers to entry, increased competitiveness by 
encouraging to bring in investments in modern technology and development of 
infrastructure thereby enhanci ng competition and restricting any monopolistic or 
oligopolistic tendencies. The Government will encourage technology upgradation 
of synthetic fibre industry.  
C. The National Policy on Petrochemicals, 2007 
2. As the National Policy on Petrochemicals was conceived way back in the year 
2007 with  an intended investment of rupees three la khs and fifty thousand crore , the  
Committee sought to know whether the Department has found any lacunae/loopholes in 
the policy   and the details of corrective measures initiated if any. The Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) thereupon submitted that the Policy was notified 
with the objective of increasing investments, research and development of both upstream 
and downstream sector and the sector has seen significant growth since 2007 driven by 
the rise in demand in this sector. As the  sector is deregulated and delicensed , t he 
investments are done mainly by the private sector and the PSUs based on the demand 
and growth in the sector. Projects under the Policy are given approval after due 
Environmental clearance  wherever required. The use of plastic has increased over the 
period of the time in various industries like automobile, agriculture, aviation, defence, 
space along with rise in household applications and food industry.  These applications 
have driven growth in these sectors along  with increasing affordability of the goods for 
the people. However, with increased use of single use plastics and absence of proper 
disposal mechanism, many plastic waste management issues have  arisen. To reduce 
plastic waste generation and their safe disposal various measures are prescribed under 
Plastic Waste Management (PWM) Rules. These rules are notified and implemented by 
the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC). The Plastic Waste 
Management (Amendment) Rules, introduced ban on many single use plastic products 
alongwith the Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) framework. Under EPR 
producers, importers, and brand owners have to take responsibility for the 
environmentally sound management of plastic packaging waste.   
The Department through the Central Institute of Plastic Engineering and Technology 
(CIPET) and their Centres of Excellence (CoEs)  is promoting research in the area of the 
promotion of bioplastics. CIPET through its Research & Developmental Wing has been 
developing innovative solutions in the area of development of sustainable packaging 
(rigids/flexible) using biopolymers like PLA (polylactic acid), PBAT (polybutylene adipate-
co-terephthalate, and PHB (polyhydroxybutyrate), Seaweed etc. The De partment’s 
Centres of Excellence (CoE) at IIT , Guwahati and IIT , Chennai are also working on 
promoting bio-plastics and their applications. IIT Guwahati is developing the technology 
for the production of Poly Lactic Acid and its applications development. IIT , Chennai is 
working on developing packaging from bio -based resources. Further, the checks & 
verifications of the plastic packaging material for the purpose of food packaging, storage 
& serving at inter alia the manufacturing/ processing units and the food service 
establishments (Hotels, Restaurants etc.) are being done by FSSAI as per the provisions 

5 
 
under the FSS Act 2006 & regulations made there under. Schedule IV of FSS (Packaging) 
Regulation, 2018 prescribes the List of suggestive packaging materials for various food 
products categories including milk and milk products wherein Flexible plastic pouch made 
of polyethylene (PE) or Polypropylene (PP) based co-extruded multilayered material are 
recommended for packaging milk.       
 
3. Asked about the outcome of such huge investments; whether  risk  mitigation has 
been done;  whether  investment should not be according to the global prospective; and 
whether regulatory environment framework should govern the projects under this Policy, 
the Department submitted that  the sector is delicensed and deregulated . H owever,  
before establishment of the new projects , requisite  approvals are taken from the 
MoEF&CC in the form of environmental clearances. The demand and growth in the sector 
are attracting investments in the sector both in domestic as well as global markets. Along 
with the traditional petrochemical  sector,  investments are also being done in the 
alternative solutions as well. India’s fir st bioplastics (PLA) plant is being set up in Uttar 
Pradesh with 80,000 MT annual capacity . The Department is continuously working 
towards achieving the objectives envisaged in the policy.  During the last 5 years following 
capacity additions have happened: 
Sr. No. Companies Capacity in KT 
1. HMEL 1700 KT (Polypropylene (PP) -500 KT, Polyethylene 
(PE)-1200 KT) 
2. Nayara Polypropylene (PP)-450KT 
3. Indorama Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET)-230 KT 
4. IOCL Polypropylene (PP)--200 KT 
 
4. The demand and production of petrochemicals have grown over this period. In 
India, the capacity of major petrochemicals has increased from 10 MMT to 35 MMT during 
this period. In 2007, there were eight naphtha and gas cracker complexes with combined 
capacity of 2.4 million tons per annum in India. Out of these, one million tons per annum 
ethylene capacity was gas based and rest was naphtha based. There were four aromatic 
complexes in the country with an installed capacity of 1.9 million tons of xylene.  At 
present, there are 12 domestic Naphtha /Dual feed cracker complexes in operation with 
combined ethylene capacity of about 8.7 million tonnes per annum and Propylene 
capacity of 7.4 million tons per annum. In addition, there are seven aromatic complexes 
with a combined Purified Terephthalic Acid capacity of about 6.4 million tonnes. 
 
5. The petrochemical and plastic industry had shown significant growth since 2007 
driven by corresponding increase in demand. The outcomes are as follows: 
 
• From 2007 to 2024, the domestic demand of petrochemicals has increased 
from 9 MMT to 40 MMT. The petrochemicals production has increased from 
8.6 MMT in 2007 to 28 MMT in 2024; 
• The Synthetic fibre (Man made fibre) industry has also grown significantly 
during this period. In 2007, Indian production capacity was 3.4 MMT and 

6 
 
the production was 2.4 MMT. India now has sufficient capacity of 9.7 MMT. 
The total production is of 6.7 MMT including 0.37 MMT of exports; 
• The per capita consumption of Plastics and Synthetic fibre was 4 kg and 
1.6 kg respectively in 2007; which has increased to 21.6 kg and 5.1 kg in 
2024; 
• The FDI in Chemicals and Petrochemicals sector has increased from USD 
220 million in 2007 to USD 1060 million in 2024. The total FDI in Chemical 
and Petrochemicals sector from 2007 to 2024-25 is 22,450 million USD. 
 
6. The Policy stated that the upstream petrochemical products are technology 
intensive for which the technologies need import from the global licensors. While the new 
Indian petrochemical complexes being set up were based on modern technologies, there 
were still s ome old units which needed to upgrade technology in terms of conversion 
efficiency, energy economies, product qualities and newer applications. The downstream 
plastic processing and fabrication industry needed technological upgradation in the areas 
of scale of operation, core processing machineries, downstream finishing equipments, 
tools, moulds and innovations in end products to meet the emerging global and domestic 
market demands.  In this background the policy recognized that the expenditure on 
Research and Development in the sector was less than 1% of industry turnover and 
Promotion of Research and Technology development in the petrochemical sector was 
envisaged to strengthen and c o-ordinate development of technology in areas of 
comparative advantage. The policy also had identified areas for research and technology 
development. The areas included performance plastics, engineering polymers, specialty 
plastics, bio and photodegradable plastics and replacement of additives and master 
batches by materials w ith lesser adverse impact on environment.  Policy also had 
emphasized Research and Development efforts to improve the quality of existing 
products, making it safe for environment and human health. These areas included pipes 
used in irrigation, drinking wa ter, infrastructure, construction and other emerging areas.  
These sectors use polymer pipes such as PVC, CPVC and HDPE due to their durability, 
light weight, corrosion resistance, leak -proof and energy efficiency compared to 
traditional material like ductile iron or concrete pipes. 
 
D. Plastic Development Council 
7. The Plastic Development Council was constituted on 24th October, 2007 with 
tenure of 2 years. The tenure was extended further till 2013. 
 
8. The 1st meeting of Plastic development council was held on 02.04.2008 under the 
chairmanship of Secretary(C&PC). The following issues were discussed in the meeting: 
 
a) Status of domestic processing/measures for improving competitiveness; 
b) Impact of de-reservation of items for manufacture in SSI and investments 
during the last five years in the plastic processing sector;  
c) Promotion of recycling of plastic wastes and addressing environmental 
concerns; 
d) Performance of Export of Polymers, Plastics Processed Articles and 
Potential for growth. 

7 
 
    The PDC was constituted to make recommendation for allocation of fund from 
Petrochemical technology Upgradation Fund (PTUF) and advise the Government on 
future measures to augment the PTUF. The Department has not constituted PTUF 
and instead implemented th e New Scheme on Petrochemicals. Under this scheme 
Centres of Excellence were created. Industry and academia were associated while 
selecting the Centres of Excellence and thereafter fund allocation was done by 
Department as a part of the scheme of the Department. After 2013, the Department 
has been interacting with various industry associations and stakeholders for various 
issues to promote plastic processing industries and make suitable recommendation 
in this regard, whenever required. 
9. The Council was constituted with the following mandate: 
a) To maintain a data base on the polymer and plastic processing industry; 
b) To advise the Government on measures to augment the Petrochemical 
Research and Development Fund (PRDF); 
c) To identify the emerging areas of plastics application both in commodity and 
engineering polymers; 
d) To promote the development of new applications of plastics; 
e) To improve the export competitiveness of the domestic plastic processing 
industry; 
f) To encourage environmental awareness and plastic waste 
management/recycling through industry associations and other organizations; 
g) To recommend changes in the Recycled Plastic Manufacture and Usage Rules 
1999 and Amendment Rules 2003, to the Ministry of Environment & Forests; 
h) To plan and oversee the setting up of testing centers for plastic pipes and other 
plastic applications in order to ensure quality standards in line with international 
standards; 
i) To ascertain the requirements of plastics in agriculture Promotion of application 
of plastics in the North Eastern Region. 
 
10. During the Briefing  Sitting, while explaining the PDC, the representative of the 
Department apprised the Committee as follows:- 
“PDC was constituted under the IDR Act in 2007. The tenure of the council ended 
in 2013. The council deliberated and suggested measure for sustained 
development of plastic processing industry. The department conducts regular 
stakeholder consultation with all industry stakeholders and associations now. The 
process of consultation continues even now. Export promotion and market access 
initiatives are done by two industry councils – Plexconcil and Chemexcil. 
Plexconcil is for plastics and Chemexcil is for the chemical part. The department 
has worked for tariff rationalization as was suggested in the policy. In the last three 
years, eight tariff changes have been done to rationalize the tariff regime. For 
skilling and human resource development, which was one of the main objectives 
of this policy, various new centres and new courses have been initiated by 
CIPET……….” 

8 
 
11. The Department in a written reply submitted that  Petrochemicals provide critical 
inputs which enable other sectors to grow and play important role in economic growth 
and development of the country. With GDP growth; the demand for petrochemical 
products has also grown. To meet the growing demand; capacities have been added by 
the private sector and also public sector enterprises. 
 
12. The demand of the major petrochemicals is approximately 40 MMT whereas 
production is 29 MMT. There are significant capacities of Polyethylene (PE), 
Polypropylene (PP), however capacities for Polyvinylchloride (PVC) are less. The 
demand-supply gap in petrochemicals exists mainly because demand is increasing faster 
than domestic capacity additions, driven by India’s economic growth, urbanization, and 
expanding end-use sectors like construction, automotive, packaging, and textiles. As per 
the EIL (Engineer India Limited) assessment in 2022, India will need eleven world scale 
crackers (1.5 to 1.8 MMTPA) by 2040. 
             During the last 5 years, following capacity additions have happened: 
Sr. 
No. 
Companies Capacity in KT 
1. HMEL 1700 KT (Polypropylene (PP) -500 KT, 
Polyethylene (PE)- 1200 KT) 
2. Nayara Polypropylene (PP)- 450KT 
3. Indorama Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET)- 230 KT 
4. IOCL Polypropylene (PP)- 200 KT 
13. Petrochemicals is a deregulated sector and the investments are highly capital 
intensive. The petrochemical industries have planned investments of approximately 6.5 
lakh crores. For PVC especially, 3300 KT of new capacities are coming up (Reliance 
1200KT, Adani 1000KT, IOCL 800KT and Chemplast & Sanmar 300 KT) which will 
significantly reduce import dependence. 
 
14. The Government has created infrastructural support through Petroleum, Chemical 
and Petrochemical Investment Regions (PCPIRs), and policy support through tariff & 
trade remedial measures. 
 
15. Asked to give a brief account of investment made in Petrochemicals Sector, the 
Department submitted that as on May, 2026, the petrochemical industries have planned 
investments of approximately 7.0 lakh crore. These investments are being done by 
private sector companies or PSUs. Many new petrochemical projects are under 
implementation and will be functional in coming years. Detail s of major investments are 
as under:  
S. 
No 
Stage Investment  
(in Rs. Crores) 
Detail of Investors and 
estimated Investment 
1. Under 
Implementation 
3,49,000 Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
(IOCL) – Rs 1,20,000 Cr, 

9 
 
HPCL Rajasthan Refinery Limited  
(HRRL) - Rs 73,000 Cr, 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation 
Limited (BPCL) - Rs 55,000 Cr 
Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) - 
Rs 45,000 Cr,  
GAIL India Limited - Rs 14,000 Cr, 
Mundra Petrochem Limited - Rs. 
42000 Cr, 
2. Announced 
(Yet to be firmed 
up) 
3,50,000 Bharat Petroleum Corporation 
Limited (BPCL) - Rs 1,00,000 Cr, 
Nayara energy - Rs 90,000 Cr, 
GAIL India Limited - Rs 90,000 Cr, 
Haldia Petrochemicals Limited 
(HPL) - Rs 70,000 Cr,  
Total 6,99,000  
(Source: IOCL presentation) 
 
16. Asked to provide data regarding demand and supply of Petrochemicals in the 
country also details of Petrochemicals prospective Plan of the Department , it was 
submitted that the demand of the major petrochemicals in 2024 is approximately 40 MMT 
where as production is approximately 30 MMT. The demand & supply of the major 
Petrochemical products in 2024 is as follows:  
 
S. 
No. 
Product Demand in KT 
 
Production in KT 
 
1.  Polyethylene (PE) 8893 5796 
2.  Polypropylene (PP) 7017 5684 
3.  Purified Terephthalic acid 
(PTA) 
7355 5734 
4.  Polyester fibres and Yarns  5988 6024 
5.  Mono Ethylene Glycol (MEG) 3021 1948 
6.  Poly Ethylene Terephthalate 
(PET) 
1648 1761 
7.  Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) 4347 1390 
8.  SBR/Butyl Rubber 400 239 
9.  Linear Alkyl Benzene (LAB) 728 479 
10.  Polystyrene 313 282 
11.  Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene 278 150 

10 
 
S. 
No. 
Product Demand in KT 
 
Production in KT 
 
(ABS) 
12.  Styrene acrylonitrile (SAN) 173 152 
Total 40161 
(40.1 MMT) 
29639 
(29.6 MMT) 
(Source: Industry data) 
Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL) had submitted a report on supply - demand 
scenario of major petrochemical products in India up to 2040. Based on the inputs given 
by IOCL, Engineers India Ltd. (EIL) had compiled the report “Enhancing Petrochemical 
Production in India” which is also known as Petrochemical Perspective Plan. The report 
includes the domestic demand for top 52 petrochemicals. As per the assessment in the 
report the domestic demand will reach around 87 million metric tonnes per annum 
(MMTPA) in 2040 from around 27 million metric tonnes per annum (MMTPA) in 2020 for 
these petrochemicals. The demand projections have also been included for the years 
2025 and 2030 in this report. 
17. Further, e laborating the production of Petrochemicals , the representatives 
apprised the Committee as under: - 
 
“In addition, there are seven aromatic complexes. They make the purified 
terephthalic acid which goes into the polyester. It is having a capacity of about 6.4 
million metric ton. We have also studied the demand and supply of petrochemicals 
till 2014. We ha ve made a petrochemical perspective plan. So, our future works 
will be centred around that. The new capacities which were added in the last five 
years is about 2,600 KT. HMEL plant is situated in Bhatinda; Nayara in Jamnagar; 
Indorama in Gujarat; and IOCL plant in Panipat. We can see that an investment of 
Rs. 6,51,000 is being planned for the new plants which are to be established.” 
 
E. Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Regions (PCPIRs) 
18. With regard to investment made in Dahej Gujarat, Paradeep Odisha and 
Vishakhapatnam PCPIRs and the outcomes of the investments  made, it was submitted 
that currently, three Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Regions are in 
operation in the States of Andhra Pradesh (Vishakhapatnam), Gujarat (Dahej) and 
Odisha (Paradeep) to promote investment and industrial development in these sectors 
under the PC PIR Policy, 2007. Total investment made as on date in Gujarat is Rs. 
1,37,163 Crores. Total investment made in Andhra Pradesh as on date is Rs. 68,148 
Crores. Total investment made in Odisha as on date is Rs. 1,43,881 Crores.   
 
19. Collectively, the three PCPIRs have attracted investments of approximately Rs. 
3,49,192 Crores, facilitated the establishment of 2,246 chemical and petrochemical units, 
and generated employment for about 3.71 lakh persons, highlighting the significance of 
PCPIRs in promoting industrial development and supporting the chemical and 
petrochemical sector’s contribution to India’s economic growth. Also, these investments 
have significantly strengthened India’s chemical and petrochemical manufacturing 
ecosystem, creation of integrated industrial infrastructure, improved logistics and utility 

11 
 
networks, enhanced domestic production capacities, promoted downstream industries 
and value addition, and enhanced industrial competitiveness.  
 
20. Asked to give a brief account of all there PCPIRs, and employment generated by 
them, the Department in its written replies submitted as under:- 
 
 “The Government of India had notified the Petroleum, Chemical and 
Petrochemical Investment Region(s) (PCPIR) Policy, 2007 to attract investment 
and for generation of employment in the Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical 
Investment Region(s) (PCPIR). PCPIRs are conceptualized for cluster -based 
approach with common infrastructure and support services to provide a 
competitive environment , conducive for setting up businesses.  Currently, three 
Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Regions (PCPIRs) have been 
notified including in the State of Andhra Pradesh (Vishakhapatnam), to promote 
investment and industrial development in thes e sectors under the PCPIR Policy, 
2007. Till date, total investment made in Vishakhapatnam PCPIR is Rs. 68,148 
Crores and 154 industrial units have been set up which have generated 
employment for 86,123 individuals. Investment made in Andhra Pradesh PCPIR is 
Rs. 68,148 Crores, which is less compared to the figure of Rs. 1,37,163 Crores in 
case of PCPIR. It may be mentioned that the number of chemical units established 
in the three notified PCPIRs depends upon investment decisions of private entities, 
which are largely guided by the economic viability and specific requirements of 
individual projects, including varying land parcel needs for units of different scales. 
Further, it is to mention that the nature of projects in the PCPIR being mega 
industrial undertakings, they have long gestation periods. The realization of the full 
potential of a PCPIR is a gradual process, as it involves phased development over 
many years. Each PCPIR requires infrastructure projects, such as roads, ports, 
power co nnectivity, utilities, sewerage and effluent treatment linkages and 
common facilities. Additionally, large-scale industrial investments in the chemical 
and petrochemical sector require careful alignment of the availability of feedstock 
and market conditions.  The major Industrial Clusters in the Vishakhapatnam 
PCPIR region are JNPC Pharma City, BRANDIX, AP SEZ Atchutapuram, Rambilli 
Cluster, Nakkapalli Cluster and Kakinada SEZ. After notifying of the area as 
PCPIR, the mandate of State Government includes de velopment of the physical 
infrastructure and utilities linkages”.  
 
21. The details of employment generated by each of the PCPIR as on date is as below: 
Indicator Gujarat Andhra 
Pradesh Odisha Total 
Employment 
generated 
(No.) 
2,45,140 86,123 40,000 3,71,263 
 
        The Department periodically conducts stakeholder consultations with the concerned 
State Governments including that of Andhra Pradesh, as well as with the industry in this 
context. The Department also promotes the development of these PCPIR regions in 
various industry promotional events that it organizes, such as “IndiaChem” a biennial 
conference cum exhibition. 

12 
 
22. The Committee then desired to know  about the details of the present status of 
three PCPIR notified in Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Odisha  and whether the PCPIRs 
have been able to generate the desired employment and investment made in them have 
proved to be useful for the country, the Department in their written replies submitted that 
the  Government of India had notified the Petroleum, Chemical and  Petrochemical 
Investment Region(s) (PCPIR) Policy, 2007 to attract investment and for generation of 
employment in the Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Reg ion(s) 
(PCPIR). PCPIRs are conceptualized for cluster -based approach with common 
infrastructure and support services to provide a competitive environment, conducive for 
setting up businesses. 
 
23.  Currently, three Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Regions 
(PCPIRs) have been notified in the states of Andhra Pradesh (Vishakhapatnam), Gujarat 
(Dahej) and Odisha (Paradeep) to promote investment and industrial development in the 
sector un der the PCPIR Policy, 2007. The updated status of implementation and 
execution of these three PCPIR projects is as follows: 
 
Indicator Gujarat Andhra 
Pradesh Odisha  Total 
Location/ Region Dahej, 
Bharuch 
Vishakhapatnam– 
Kakinada Paradeep  - 
Total Area (Sq. kms.) 453.00 640.00 284.15  1377.15 
Investments made (Rs. 
Crore) 1,28,509 68,148 1,43,881 
 
3,40,538 
Employment generated 
(No.) 2,45,140 86,123 40,000  3,71,263 
No. of Chemical Units 2079 154 13  2246 
 
These three PCPIRs have attracted investment of around Rs. 3.4 lakh crore in 
Petroleum, Chemicals, Petrochemicals and ancillary industries and generated 
employment to around 3.71 lakh persons. 
 
F. Centres of Excellence (CoEs) 
24. When the Committee desired to know the details of the meeting of the Department 
held with the CoEs, the outcomes of meeting  and whether any guidelines were being 
issued during the meeting; the Department in its written reply submitted as under:- 
 
“The Department held an interaction/review meeting under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (C&PC) with the Principal Investigators of ongoing Centres of Excellence 
(CoEs) through Video Conferencing on 13th May, 2026.  In the meeting the progress of 
the CoEs were reviewed and the CoEs were requested to focus on the real outcome of 
the research in the CoEs in terms of commercialization of the technologies/products 
developed and how these can be strengthened. The CoEs were requested to have close 

13 
 
interaction with industry people to better understand their needs for research, to focus on 
industry-driven research rather than fundamental research. The CoEs were also 
requested CoEs to focus on the commercialisation of technologies/products developed 
and proactively reach out to the industries. The Department proposes to organise a one-
day conclave later in the year of all CoEs with industry for better industry -academia 
linkage.” 
 
25.     When asked about the details of Centre of excellence set up in the Country and 
also whether 18 CoEs are sufficient enough to meet the demand of the Country, the 
Department provided the following details:-    
 
“The details of Centres of Excellence set up so far is as under: 
S.No. Title of CoE Approval 
Year 
DCPC 
Approved 
Grant 
(in Rs. 
crore) 
DCPC Grant 
released, so 
far (in Rs. 
crore) 
i. 
Green Transport Network (GREET) at 
Central Institute of Petrochemicals 
Engineering & Technology (CIPET), 
Chennai  
2011 6.00 6.00 
ii. 
Sustainable Polymer Industry to research & 
innovation at CSIR - National Chemical 
Laboratory (NCL), Pune 
2011 6.00 6.00 
iii. Advanced Polymeric Materials at  Indian 
Institute of Technology, Delhi  2013 6.00 6.00 
iv. Sustainable Polymers (SusPol) at Indian 
Institute of Technology, Guwahati  2013 6.00 6.00 
v. 
Sustainable Green Materials at Central 
Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering & 
Technology (CIPET), Bhubaneswar  
2013 6.00 6.00 
vi. Bio-engineered Sustainable Polymeric 
Systems at CIPET, Bhubaneswar 2019 5.00  5.00 
vii. 
Process Development, Wastewater 
Management in Petrochemical Industries at 
Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee  
2019 4.40  4.40 
viii. Manufacturing of Next Generation Bio -
Medical Devices at CIPET, Bhubaneswar 2020 5.00  5.00 
ix. Specialty Polymers for Customized Additive 
Manufacturing at CSIR-NCL, Pune 2019 2.80  2.26 
x. 
CoE on Polymer Coatings for Decorative, 
Protective and Strategic Applications at 
CSIR- Indian Institute of Chemical 
Technology (IICT), Hyderabad 
2020 4.86  3.00 
xi. 
Polymers, Their Composites and Polymeric 
Membranes for Sustainable Development of 
Petroleum Industries at CSIR - North East 
Institute of Science & Technology (CSIR -
NEIST), Jorhat 
2020 4.99  4.99 

14 
 
S.No. Title of CoE Approval 
Year 
DCPC 
Approved 
Grant 
(in Rs. 
crore) 
DCPC Grant 
released, so 
far (in Rs. 
crore) 
xii. 
Sustainable & innovative Design and 
manufacturing of polymer -TOYS (SUNDAR 
- TOYS) at IIT, Guwahati 
2022 5.00 1.50 
xiii. 
Design and Development for Value added 
Toys of Rubber and Allied Finished Products 
at Indian Rubber manufacturers Research 
Association (IRMRA), Thane 
2022 4.93  2.50 
xiv. Coal to Acetylene and Fine Chemicals at IIT 
(ISM), Dhanbad 2024 2.61 1.75 
xv. Biodegradable Packaging Materials 
(BioPack) at IIT, Madras 2024 4.95 1.50 
xvi. 
Performance Chemicals and Sustainable 
Polymers for Industrial Applications at CSIR-
National Institute for Interdisciplinary 
Science and Technology (CSIR -NIIST), 
Thiruvananthapuram  
2024 5.00  2.50 
xvii. Speciality Chemicals at IIT, Kanpur 2024 4.99 1.50 
xviii. 
Transparent and Biocompatible Metal -
Polymer Composite Based X -ray, Gamma 
ray and Neutron Shields for Window and 
Personal Protecting Apparels at CSIR -
Advanced Materials and Processes 
Research Institute (CSIR-AMPRI), Bhopal  
2024 1.95  0.75 
 
      The Department reviews the requirements of the Sector and accords approval for 
new CoEs based on the needs of the industry and the quality of research proposals 
received. These centres have so far filed 77 patents, published 490 research papers and 
developed 8 6 new products/ technologies. They have transferred 35 technologies/ 
products for applications in the industry.”  
26. To a specific query of the Committee whether the Department promote research 
and development on biopolymers through the CoEs, the Department submitted as under:- 
“ Various CoEs are doing research in applications of Biopolymers. The details are as 
follows: 
(i) CoE on  “Performance Chemicals and Sustainable Polymers for Industrial 
Applications” at CSIR -NIIST, Thiruvananthapuram : CoE has the following major 
ongoing activities in the area of sustainable polymers:  
(a) Biodegradable Bottles: Alternatives to PET,  
(b) Agricultural Biomass-based Biodegradable Cutlery,  
(c) Indigenous fibre -based biodegradable -high barrier primary and secondary 
packaging,  

15 
 
(d) Bio -resin Coated Mycelium -based Biodegradable Packaging Materials from 
Agri Biomass,  
(e) Compostable Natural Fibre Reinforced Smart Packaging Containers,  
(f) Biopolymers for Solar-Driven Atmospheric Water Harvesting, and  
(g) Sustainable Multifunctional Nanofiller for Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate). 
  
(ii)  CoE on   "Polymers, Their Composites and Polymeric Membranes for 
Sustainable Development of Petroleum Industries" at CSIR - NEIST, Jorhat:    The 
CoE have isolated plant -based biopolymers and used these isolated biopolymers for 
designing and development of biodegradable packaging materials. 
(iii)  CoE on   "Bio-engineered Sustainable Polymeric Systems" at CIPET, 
Bhubaneswar: The CoE focuses on development of eco- friendly applications of various 
biopolymers like PLA, PBAT etc. The majority of applications are in Packaging and 
Agricultural Sectors.  It has developed Sustainable Agri -Mulches from PLA, PBAT & 
Starch based formula tions for Weed Control, inherent moisture stability while retaining 
the soil fertility as well as composability.  Additionally, sustained release mulches 
comprising of NPK-fertilizers for better growth of plants have been developed.  The CoE 
has also developed compostable overwraps with improved heat sealability, high barrier 
properties for packaging sectors. 
(iv)  CoE on  Green Transport Network (GREET) at CIPET, Chennai - The CoE has 
carried out research on bio-based and natural fibre–reinforced polymer composites. The 
research was on  Development of High -Performance Polypropylene for Engineering 
Application in Automobile Sector for the Industry namely MRPL, Mangalore. The CoE 
has also done research on Natural Fibre Reinforced Polymer Composites for Automotive 
Application for Mercedes Benz Research & Development India Pvt. Ltd.  
(v)  CoE on   “Biodegradable Packaging Materials (BioPack)” at IIT, 
Madras:     The CoE is doing research on (a)  Starch extraction from mango seed for 
bioplastics; (b) Pectin, polysaccharides derived from seaweed (c) Bio-foam for packaging 
applications (d) Biopolymer-based dewaxing aid for lube oil (e) Active packaging film for 
food packaging. 
(vi)  CoE on  Sustainable Polymers (SusPol) at IIT, Guwahati:  The CoE has done 
following research on bio-polymers:  
a. Establish 100 Kg Pilot Plant for production of PLA from Lactic acid, PBAT 
production and PCL production for the MSMEs. Fifty Kg per batch Lactide 
Production plant and PLA production in downstream reactor facility was created; 
b. Established monomer production processes for adipic acid, succinic acid, lactic 
acid and butanediol, etc.; 
c. Established Production facility for production of compostable bags at large scale 
as pilot project (50000 linen bags/day) and supplied to the NF Railways on three 
occasions in 2025.Protocols for daily supplies are being developed; 
d. Developed Compostable Woven Tape bags to replace existing non degradable 
Polypropylene bags at large scale facility; 

16 
 
e. Developed technology for compostable bags for mushroom cultivation and other 
agriculture applications.   
f. Biopolymer based edible coatings has been developed for enhancing the shelf-life 
of the vegetables and fruits so that spoilage of the perishable commodities is 
reduced. Large scale demonstrations has been done to more than 5000 farmers.   
g. Developed coating for Urea fertilisers to increase the nitrogen efficacy to the plants 
and to reduce to the consumption of fertilizers without affecting the production rate. 
(vii)  CoE on Sustainable & innovative Design and manufacturing of polymer -
TOYS (SUNDAR - TOYS) at IIT, Guwahati:  
 CoE is doing  research on development of bamboo dust -based bio polymers, 
rattan-based biopolymers, banana fibre based bio composite material and geopolymers.” 
27. When Committee desired to know about the details of research papers or studies 
conducted on single-use plastics or plastic alternatives in recent years by the CoEs, the 
Department submitted as under:-  
“  The details of research papers on single use plastics or plastic alternative and bio based 
polymers and their applications are as follows: 
i. CoEs at  CIPET, Bhubaneswar has published four research papers regarding 
single use plastics or plastic alternatives or reuse of single use of plastic or 
prevention of single use plastics.   
ii. CoE at CIPET, Chennai has published research papers in the broader areas of 
bio-based composites, natural fibre reinforced polymers, polymer 
nanocomposites, recyclability and green transportation. These works collectively 
contribute to the development of p lastic alternatives and green materials, 
supporting reduction and replacement of conventional plastics in various 
applications.     
iii. CoE at IIT, Guwahati:    CoE has developed various polymers and its formulations 
which can be used as alternate to the replacement of single used plastics and also 
related applications. Laboratory is dedicated to develop various technology in the 
area of c ompostable/biodegradable polymers. CoE has published about bio 
polymer & related subjects.  
 
G. Plastic Parks 
 
28. When the Committee desired to know whether the Department is satisfied with the 
present progress made by these Plastic Parks since the Plastic Parks Scheme was 
launched in 2012-13, the Department responded as under:- 
The Scheme for Setting up of Plastic Parks aims at creating infrastructure for the 
plastics processing industry, promoting investment, enhancing production capacity 
and generating employment. The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has 
approved 10 Plastic Parks under the Scheme for Setting up of Plastic Parks viz., 
Tamot, Madhya Pradesh, Jagatsinghpur District,  Odisha, Tinsukia, Assam, Bilaua, 

17 
 
Madhya Pradesh, Deoghar, Jharkhand, Tiruvallur, TamilNadu, Sitarganj, 
Uttarakhand, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, Ganjimutt, Karnataka and Gorakhpur, Uttar 
Pradesh. At present, 322 plots and 15 sheds have been allotted. Out of these, 
industrial operations have commenced in 50 plots and 15 sheds. Based on the 
progress achieved so far, the Scheme has contributed towards mobilization of private 
investment, commencement o f production activities in operational parks, and 
employment generation in certain Plastic Parks.  As regards production, the Plastic 
Parks have reported production worth Rs. 229.46 crore during the last three years, 
comprising Rs. 67.25 crore in 2023 -24, Rs. 51.24 crore in 2024 -25 and Rs. 110.97 
crore in 2025 -26. The increasing production in 2025 -26 indi cates gradual 
operationalization and expansion of industrial activities in the parks. 
     The Scheme has also facilitated mobilization of private investment and 
employment generation in operational Plastic Parks. The details are as under: 
 
S.  
No. 
Name of Plastic Park  Private Investment 
Mobilized (in Rs. 
crore) 
 
Employment 
Generated 
(in persons) 
i. Tamot, Madhya Pradesh  68.75 341 
ii. Jagatsinghpur District, Odisha 91.28 295 
iii. Tinsukia, Assam 147.39 982 
iv. Bilaua, Madhya Pradesh  2.54 - 
v. Deoghar, Jharkhand  - - 
vi. Tiruvallur, TamilNadu - - 
vii. Sitarganj, Uttarakhand - - 
viii. Raipur, Chhattisgarh - - 
ix. Ganjimutt, Karnataka - - 
x. Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh 89.00 320 
 
29. Asked about the present status of 10 Plastic Parks approved and no. of Plastic 
Parks being established in the Country, the Department provided the following details:- 
 
 

18 
 
“The present status of all Plastic Parks is as under:   
   (Rs. in crore)  
 
Sl. No. 
Name of Plastic 
Park  
Final 
Approv
al 
Total 
Approved 
Project 
Cost 
Total GoI 
Grant 
approved  
Grant 
Released 
Total 
No. of 
Plots 
No. of 
Plots 
allotted 
No. of Units 
Operational 
Overall 
progress in 
physical 
infrastructur
e (Civil work) 
(in %) 
i. 
Tamot, 
Madhya 
Pradesh  
2013 108.00 40.00 36.00 172 38 10 (on 15 
Plots) 
100 
ii. 
Jagatsinghpur 
District, 
Odisha 
2013 106.78 40.00 36.00 81 46 3 (on 9 
Plots) 
100 
iii. 
Tinsukia, 
Assam 
2014 93.65 40.00 35.73 104 
Plots 
and 19 
Sheds 
84 
Plots 
and 15 
sheds 
15 (on 21 
Plots) and 
11 (in 15 
Sheds) 
96 
iv. 
Bilaua, 
Madhya 
Pradesh  
2018 68.72 34.36 30.92 108 05 1 100 
v. Deoghar, 
Jharkhand  
2018 67.33 33.67 30.30 102 Nil  Nil 91 
vi. Tiruvallur, 
TamilNadu 
2019 216.92 40.00 15.97 65 Nil  Nil 87 
(Stayed) 
vii. Sitarganj, 
Uttarakhand 
2020 67.73 33.93 30.51 81 41 Nil 75 
viii. Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh 
2021 42.10 21.04 17.38 48 42 Nil 100 
ix. Ganjimutt, 
Karnataka 
2022 62.78 31.38 17.26 66 Nil  Nil 89 
x. Gorakhpur, 
Uttar Pradesh 
2022 69.58 34.79 19.13 92 66 4 70 
  
TOTAL   903.59 349.17 269.20 919 
Plots 
and 19 
Sheds 
322 
Plots 
and 15 
Sheds 
50 Plots 
(to 33 
Units) and 
15 Sheds 
(to 11 
units) 
  
 
 

19 
 
30. The Committee noted that out of 912 approved plots in the 10 Plastic Parks, only 
316 have been allotted so far and has 19 sheds out of which only 15 have been 
operational  and  sought explanation regarding the slow progress made over the long 
period of 13 years in the establishment of Plastic Parks, In response to this specific query, 
the Department submitted as under:- 
 “The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has approved 10 Plastic Parks 
under the Scheme for Setting up of Plastic Parks with the objective of creating 
common infrastructure and promoting downstream plastic processing industries.  At 
present, against a total of 919 plots and 19 sheds developed in the Plastic Parks, 322 
plots and 15 sheds have been allotted. Out of these, industrial operations have 
commenced in 50 plots and 15 sheds. The operational units are presently mainly in 
Assam, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.  The comparatively low 
operationalisation ratio in some Plastic Parks is primarily attributable to the fact that 
several parks are still unde r different stages of infrastructure completion and 
industrial ecosystem development. Further, industrial units generally require 
additional time after allotment of plots for obtaining statutory approvals, arranging 
finance, installation of plant and machi nery, and commencement of commercial 
production. The reasons reported by various Plastic Parks for low operationalisation 
include delays in development of external infrastructure, absence of dedicated power 
supply, technical complexities in low -lying areas , transportation and logistics 
constraints, fluctuations in raw material prices, market uncertainties, financial 
constraints faced by entrepreneurs, and delays in statutory clearances. In certain 
cases, such as the Plastic Park at Tinsukia, Assam, the proj ect was originally 
envisaged around downstream products from BCPL, particularly HDPE and LLDPE; 
however, the anticipated availability of these products did not materialize as 
expected, which affected the pace of industrial investment and operationalization . 
The State Governments/SPVs have informed that investor interest is gradually 
increasing as infrastructure and connectivity improve. In Gorakhpur Plastic Park, 
Uttar Pradesh, out of 66 allotted plots, 19 units are already under construction and 
are expected  to become operational during the current financial year.  Similarly, 
Karnataka has issued notifications inviting applications for land allotment and expects 
allotment and operationalization to accelerate as infrastructure nears completion. To 
improve ut ilization and operationalisation of the Plastic Parks, various corrective 
measures are being undertaken by the concerned State Governments/SPVs. These 
include expeditious completion of remaining infrastructure works, establishment of 
dedicated power supply systems and substations, strengthening internal roads, water 
supply and drainage systems. Continuous monitoring and coordination with 
concerned departments and agencies is also being carried out for early completion 
and operationalization of the parks.  The Department is regularly reviewing the 
progress of Plastic Parks with State Governments/SPVs and taking necessary steps 
to ensure timely completion of infrastructure and improved occupancy and utilization 
of the parks.” 
31. When asked about the chronological details of the Sittings held by the Department 
with each of the State Governments regarding delay in the establishment of Plastic Parks 
and also the details regarding the last meeting held, the Department provided the details 
which are as under:- 

20 
 
 “The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) regularly reviews the 
progress of implementation of Plastic Parks with the concerned State 
Governments/State Implementing Agencies at the levels of Secretary, Joint Secretary 
and Deputy Secretary.  Issues relating to delays in implementation, including 
infrastructure development, release of State share, status of allotment and 
operationalisation of Plots, etc. are discussed during such review meetings. 
The chronological details of the review meetings/sittings held with the respective 
State Governments are as under: 
S. 
No. 
Review 
Meeting 
held on  
Review Meeting 
held under the 
chairmanship of  
Review Meeting held with State 
1 08.04.2022 Secretary (C&PC) Plastic Parks viz., Madhya Pradesh (Tamot); 
Tamilnadu; Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand. 
2 11.04.2022 Secretary (C&PC) Plastic Parks viz., Madhya Pradesh (Bilaua); 
Uttarakhand; Karnataka, Odisha and Assam 
3 19.09.2022 Director 
(Petrochemicals) 
Plastic Parks viz., Karnataka and Chhattisgarh 
4 21.09.2022 Director 
(Petrochemicals) 
Plastic Parks viz., Assam and Uttarakhand 
5 29.09.2022 Director 
(Petrochemicals) 
Odisha Plastic Park 
6 30.09.2022 Director 
(Petrochemicals) 
Jharkhand Plastic Park 
7 06.10.2022 Director 
(Petrochemicals) 
Plastic Parks viz., Madhya Pradesh (Tamot) 
and (Bilaua) 
8 15.12.2022 Secretary (C&PC) Plastic Parks viz., Madhya Pradesh (Tamot) 
and (Bilaua), Odisha, Assam, Jharkhand, 
Uttarakhand and Chhattisgarh 
9 29.03.2023 Secretary (C&PC) Plastic Parks viz., Madhya Pradesh (Tamot) 
and (Bilaua), Odisha, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand, 
Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and 
Chhattisgarh 
10 18-
19.09.2024 
Secretary (C&PC) Plastic Parks viz. Tamot, Bilaua, Odisha, 
Assam and Jharkhand 
11 06.12.2024 Secretary (C&PC) Plastic Parks viz., Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, 
Karnataka and Chhattisgarh 
12 02.06.2025 Joint Secretary 
(Petrochemicals) 
Plastic Parks viz., Madhya Pradesh (Tamot) 
and (Bilaua), Odisha, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand, 
Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Assam and 
Chhattisgarh 

21 
 
S. 
No. 
Review 
Meeting 
held on  
Review Meeting 
held under the 
chairmanship of  
Review Meeting held with State 
13 12.11.2025 Secretary (C&PC) Plastic Parks viz., Madhya Pradesh (Tamot) 
and (Bilaua), Odisha, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand, 
Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Assam and 
Chhattisgarh 
14 04.02.2026 Secretary (C&PC) Plastic Parks viz., Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, 
Karnataka and Chhattisgarh 
15 10.02.2026 Secretary (C&PC) Plastic Parks viz., Madhya Pradesh (Tamot) 
and (Bilaua), Odisha, Jharkhand and Assam 
16 08.05.2026 Secretary (C&PC) Plastic Parks viz., Madhya Pradesh (Tamot) 
and (Bilaua), Odisha, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand, 
Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Assam, Tamil Nadu 
and Chhattisgarh 
      The last such review meeting was held on 08.05.2026 under the chairmanship of 
Secretary (Chemicals & Petrochemicals) with representatives of all the Plastic Parks and 
concerned Secretaries/Principal Secretaries (Industry) of the respective State 
Governments. The matter relating to implementation of Plastic Parks has been regularly 
taken up with the concerned State Governments at various levels, as indicated above. 
Continuous monitoring and periodic review meetings have resulted in significant progress 
in the infrastructure development and operationalisation of Plastic Parks across the  
Country.” 
32. On being pointed out specifically about the operational issues involved in the 
plastic parks, the Department has submitted as under:- 
“The operational issues in Plastic Parks vary across States depending upon the stage 
of implementation, local conditions, infrastructure readiness and industrial response. 
Feedback received from the concerned State Governments/State Implementing 
Agencies (SPVs) indicates that the major operational issues relate to infrastructure gaps, 
power connectivity, market conditions, logistics, and pace of operationalisation of allotted 
units. 
 
33. The details of feedback received from various States/Plastic Parks are as under: 
(a) Assam (Tinsukia Plastic Park):      The Plastic Park was conceptualized 
based on the expected availability of downstream petrochemical products 
such as HDPE and LLDPE from Brahmaputra Cracker and Polymer Limited 
(BCPL). However, the anticipated supply of th ese raw materials could not 
materialize as envisaged, which affected investor confidence and industrial 
growth in the park. Other issues reported include higher transportation 
costs, fluctuations in raw material prices, market access constraints and 
delays in obtaining statutory clearances.  

22 
 
(b) Madhya Pradesh (Bilaua Plastic Park):     The State Government/SPV has 
informed that continuous promotional efforts are being undertaken to attract 
investors and new plot allotments have recently been made. It is expected 
that allotment and operationalisat ion will improve further with sustained 
investor outreach activities.  
(c) Chhattisgarh (Raipur Plastic Park):      The State Government/SPV has 
advised allottees to expedite construction activities on allotted plots so that 
industrial units may become operational at the earliest.  
(d) Uttar Pradesh (Gorakhpur Plastic Park):      No major operational issues 
have been reported so far by the operational units in the Plastic Park.  
(e) Jharkhand (Deoghar Plastic Park):     The State Government has reported 
issues relating to proposed changes in the State land allotment policy and 
pending electrical substation works, which have affected the pace of 
operationalisation.  
(f) Karnataka (Ganjimutt Plastic Park):      Major developmental activities are 
nearing completion and the State Government has issued notification 
inviting applications for plot allotment. It is expected that investor response 
and allotment activity will gain momentum as infrastructure development 
progresses further.  
(g) Odisha (Jagatsinghpur Plastic Park):      The State Government/SPV has 
reported issues such as volatility in global crude oil prices affecting polymer 
raw material costs, technical complexities arising from low -lying areas, 
absence of dedicated power supply  and relatively slow operationalisation 
of industrial units despite completion of physical infrastructure.  
(h) Madhya Pradesh (Tamot Plastic Park):     No major operational issues have 
been reported in respect of the existing operational units in the Plastic Park.  
(i) Uttarakhand (Sitarganj Plastic Park):      Since industrial units are yet to 
become operational, operational issues cannot be fully assessed at this 
stage.  
 
34. The Department submitted that regular review s of the  the progress of Plastic 
Parks are being made with the concerned State Governments/SPVs and taking up the 
issues relating to infrastructure, power supply and operationalisation of units for timely 
resolution. Continuous efforts are also being made through investor outreach 
programmes, infrastructure strengthening and coordination with State authorities to 
improve occupancy and operationalisation in the Plastic Parks. 
 
35. On being asked about the timeline by which the Plastic Parks which are still under 
construction are likely to be set up and populated, the Department submitted as under: -
  
The details of the Plastic Parks, started in the country and time by which likely  to 
be fully set up, are as under: 
S.No. Name of the Plastic Park Date of 
Approval 
Plastic Park likely to be 
set up by 
1. Tamot, Madhya Pradesh  09.10.2013  Already completed 
2. Jagatsinghpur District, 
Odisha 09.10.2013 31.03.2026 

23 
 
S.No. Name of the Plastic Park Date of 
Approval 
Plastic Park likely to be 
set up by 
3. Tinsukia, Assam 21.02.2014   31.03.2026 
4. Tiruvallur, TamilNadu 05.09.2019 Stayed by the Hon’ble NGT 
5. Deoghar, Jharkhand 20.12.2018  31.10.2026 
6. Bilaua, Madhya Pradesh 20.12.2018  31.01.2026 
7. Sitarganj, Uttarakhand 03.12.2020   31.07.2026 
8. Raipur, Chhattisgarh 13.04.2021 31.07.2026 
9. Ganjimutt, Karnataka 21.01.2022   20.01.2027 
10. Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh 13.07.2022   12.07.2027 
 
 
36. When asked about providing the details of the current status of Plastic Parks under 
construction at Gorakhpur and Ganjimutt, the Department provided the following details:-
  
   “ The present status of Plastic Parks under construction at Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh 
and Ganjimutt, Karnataka is as under: 
S.No. Name of the 
Plastic Park 
Overall progress in 
Physical 
Infrastructure 
(Civil work) 
(in %) 
Total 
No. of 
Plots 
No. of 
Plots 
allotted 
No. of Units 
Operational 
1 Ganjimutt, 
Karnataka 75 66 - - 
2 Gorakhpur, 
Uttar Pradesh 62 92 62 3 (on 3 Plots) 
 
37. On being asked about the details of Plastic Park being established at Bilaua, Gwalior, 
Madhya Pradesh and by what time the Plastic Park is likely to be completed , the 
Department submitted that the target date for c ompletion of the Park was set as 
31.12.2025.  The details and status was as under: 
 
Total 
Project 
Cost 
(in Rs. 
crore) 
Central 
Grant 
(in Rs. 
crore) 
Overall progress in Physical 
Infrastructure (Civil work) 
(in %) 
Total No. 
of Plots 
No. of Plots 
allotted 
68.72 34.36 99 108 03 
 
38. Current Status of Development of plastic parks 
“प्लास्टिक पाक क बहुत छोटा कॉन्सेप्ट था। एक प्लास्टिक पाक क की लागत करीब 100 से 125 करोड़ 
रुपए थी। वह एररया छोटा होता है, क्ोोंकक प्लास्टिक की यूकिट्स छोटी होती हैं। ऐसे 10 एररयाज़ 

24 
 
स्वीक ृ त हुए थे, कििमें से िौ िगहोों पर इम्प्प्लीमेंटेशि हो गया है और एक को रोक दे िा पड़ा। हमारी 
पूरी कोकशश है कक उि िौ में इन्फ्राि र क्चर का काम पूरा हो सक े । यह काम डेकििेटली थोड़ा 
कपछड़ा हुआ है, लेककि, हमारी कोकशश यह है कक िो पुरािे प्लास्टिक पार्क्क हैं, उिमें हम अगले 
मार्क तक इन्फ्राि र क्चर का काम पूरा कर सक ें । तीि प्लास्टिक पार्क्क ऐसे हैं, िो बाद में स्वीक ृ त हुए 
हैं। उिका इम्प्प्लीमेंटेशि टाइम पाोंर् साल है। इसकलए उसमें दो साल और लगेंगे, लेककि हमारी 
कोकशश यही है कक इन्फ्राि र क्चर का काम पूरा कर कदया िाए और उसक े बाद वहाों इोंडि र ी को 
लािे पर िोर लगाया िाए। हालाोंकक, हम अभी भी इोंडि र ी को कस्टवोंस करिे पर िोर लगा रहे हैं। 
हमार े िो भी इवेंट्स होते हैं, या िब भी इोंडि र ी से इोंटर े क्शि होता है, तो उिको इस बार े में बताया 
िाता है और उन्हें वहाों अट रैक्ट करिे की कोकशश की िाती है। िहाों-िहाों ये प्लास्टिक पार्क्क स्टित 
हैं, वहाों की राज्य सरकार ें भी अपिी तरि से कोकशश कर रही हैं कक वहाों प्लास्टिक इोंडि र ी को 
लाया िाए। “ 
 
H. CENTRAL INSTITUTE OF PETROCHEMICALS ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY 
(CIPET) 
39. To promote the quality of the products the Testing labs in CIPET have been added 
and strengthened. 13 CIPET Centres have been established for providing technical 
services during this period. The details are as follows: IPT Kochi, IPT Raipur, CSTS 
Agartala, CSTS Baddi, CSTS Chandrapur, CSTS Dehradun, CSTS Jaipur, CSTS 
Madurai, CSTS Ranchi, CSTS Vijayawada, APDDRL Bengaluru, ARSTPS Chennai, 
LARPM Bhubaneswar. 
 
• The Department has taken various measures for environment sustainability 
during this period. Some of the measures are as follows: 
 
a. Report on Single Use Plastics: In order to address issues related 
to Single Use Plastics, an Expert Committee consisting of policy 
makers, scientists, academicians and researchers in the field of 
plastics and allied materials was formed by Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals. The  Committee examined the 
restrictions on plastic products issued by various State Governments 
and Union territories. The Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals conducted a study on Single Use Plastic. As per the 
report submitted by the Expert Committee to DCPC, various single 
use plastic items were categorized. This categorization resulted in a 
group of SUP items being identified as having serious environmental 
impacts. These items were included in the ban later imposed by 
MoEF&CC.  
 
b. Plastic Waste Management Centres at Bhagalpur, Bangalore & 
Varanasi:  In recent years CIPET has established new Plastic Waste 
Management Centres (PWMCs) at Bhagalpur, Bangalore & Varanasi 
in the premises of existing/ new CIPET centres. These are 
established by CIPET with the financial support from Government of 
India and internal resources of respective CIPET centre. The PWMC 
centres will demonstrate the technologies for plastic waste recycling 
and to train various stakeholders.    

25 
 
c. Compostability/Biodegradability Tests  at CIPET Centres:  To 
promote and develop Compostable/ Biodegradable Plastic Materials 
as replacement of Single Use Plastics, CIPET has established test 
facility at 11 centres for the aerobic biodegradability in soil as per 
ISO: 17556-2019 and compostable polymers testing as  per IS/ISO: 
17088:2021. Recently, BIS with active involvement of CIPET & other 
members, has published a provisional Indian Standard IS 
17899T:2022 for Assessment of Biodegradability of Plastics in Varied 
Conditions. This standard addresses the aspects like 
biodegradation, negative effects of resulting biomass on terrestrial 
plant growth/organism and negative effects on the quality of the 
resulting biomass including the presence of high levels of regu lated 
heavy metals. This standard is applicable for assessing the 
biodegradability of plastics under aerobic and anaerobic conditions.  
 
d.  Awareness program on Transition to Alternatives to Single Use 
Plastics:  With the support of Central Pollution Control Board 
(CPCB), Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change, Govt. of 
India, New Delhi, Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering & 
Technology (CIPET) has organized 14 workshops on “Transition to 
Alternatives to Single Use Plastics in -line to Implementation of 
Plastics Waste Management (PWM) Rules: 2021 (Amendment) in 
MSME Units” at various CIPET Centres across the country.  447 
MSME units were trained in these programs. Further, with the 
financial support of DCPC, CIPET has organized 10 Awareness 
programs on “Implementation of Plastics Waste Management 
(PWM) Rule: 2021 (Amendment) in MSME Units at 10 different 
locations across the country.   
 
e. Research & Development on Biopolymers: DCPC is promoting 
research in area of Biopolymers and biodegradable/Compostable 
plastics and their products through promoting Centres of Excellence 
in nationally reputed academic organizations. Centre of Excellences 
at CIPET, Bhubaneswar, CSIR - North East Institute of Science & 
Technology (CSIR -NEIST), Jorhat, Assam, IIT Guwahati and IIT 
Madras are actively working in research and development activities 
in these areas. 
 
         The Department regularly extends its support for industry promotion events through 
the Chemical Promotion Development Scheme ( CPDS). The Department provides logo 
as well as financial support for various events such as India-Chem, Annual Conferences 
on Advancement in Polymeric Materials, Plast -India, Plastivision, Global Chemical and 
Petrochemical Manufacturing Hubs (GCPMH), Global Conclave on Plastic Recycling and 
Sustainability (GCPRS), etc.  
40. The Committee desired to know the response of FICCI, AIPMA etc regarding 
CIPET and the response of All India Plastic Association along with steps taken by CIPET 
to minimize the health hazards to the human beings by the use of Plastic/microplastics . 
The Department in a written reply submitted that CIPET has established NABL-accredited 

26 
 
labs as per ISO IEC 17025:2017 for testing and quality assessment of Plastics from raw 
materials to its product stage in accordance with various National/International 
Standards. Every Plastics Raw Material/Product irrespective of their intended application 
sector viz. Automobile, Building & Construction, Packaging, Agriculture, 
Electrical/Electronics, Health Care etc are subjected to Mandatory Standard Test 
Protocols as defined by  the Regulatory Bodies – BIS, CPCB, FSSAI.  There are 
regulations governing nearly every aspect of plastic products and their utilization in India. 
These regulations cover manufacturing, packaging, labelling, traceability, recycling, and 
environmental responsibility. R&D wings of CIPET offers microplastic analysis as well as 
Chemicals of concern & trace element analysis using instruments like Pyrolysis -GCMS 
and micro-FTIR. It also provides biodegradability testing (ISO 17088/17556) and heavy 
metal/leachate analysis (IC P/OES). These services allow quantifying microplastic 
content, hazardous additives and assessing recyclability.  
The R&D wings also undertake “Assessment & Remediation of Microplastics in Terrestrial 
& Marine Ecosystem,” covering sampling (water, sediment, biota), extraction and 
spectroscopic identificationi. Notably, CIPET also participates in the INOPOL -2 (2022–
26) Indo –Norway programme on plastic and chemical pollution (focusing on coastal 
areas). CIPET also conducts national training and capacity -building in plastics handling 
and waste management It has a dvised government and industry via consultations & 
awareness programmes. Additionally, the Institute also supports start -ups in polymer 
innovation, enabling development of safer materials and technologies. 
41. Regarding the concept of ‘No Plastic to Know Plastic’ , the Department submitted 
that it was propagated by Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering & Technology 
(CIPET) and aims to create awareness that plastics should not merely be rejected but 
scientifically understood and responsibly used. The initiative emphasizes the importance 
of proper plastic waste management, recycling, reuse, and adoption of circular economy 
practices. CIPET promotes awareness on the beneficial applications of plastics in various 
sectors while encouraging sustainable disposal, recycling technologies, skill 
development, and research to minimize environmental impact and transform plastic 
waste into valuable resources. 
 
42. Asked w hether CIPET is creating awareness programmes among the students 
studying in Government and Private institutes particularly at grassroot level.  The 
Department submitted that CIPET centres conduct various awareness drives and 
programmes in school and colleges based in their region to create awareness on Plastic 
materials, Plastic waste management and activities of CIPET. As a part of mobilisation 
activities students and teacher s from Government and Private Institutions are invited to 
CIPET Centres to understand the courses offered at Centres and facilities available at 
centres. This is done in order to spread awareness among the students at grassroot 
levels.  
I. PLASTIC WASTE MANAGEMENT CENTRES (PWMC)  
43. The Committee enquired whether three Plastic Waste Management Centres have 
been fully established and inaugurated at Bengaluru, Bhagalpur and Varanasi. It was 
submitted as follows: - 

27 
 
     The three Plastic Waste Management Centres (PWMC) have been established   and 
the details are as follows: 
Sl. 
No. 
 PWMC Centre/State Status 
1 Bhagalpur – Bihar Completed and functional 
2 Bengaluru (including e -waste)- 
Karnataka 
Completed and functional 
3 Varanasi – Uttar Pradesh Completed and functional 
 
44. When specifically asked about the measures taken by the Department to promote 
environmental sustainabilit y, t he Department submitted that t he Department through 
CIPET and the Centres of Excellence (CoE) is promoting research in the area of the 
promotion of bioplastics and their applications. CIPET through its Research & 
Developmental wing has been developing innovative solutions in the area of development 
of sustainable packaging (rigids/flexible) solutions using biopolymers like PLA (polylactic 
acid), PBAT (polybutylene adipate -co-terephthalate, and PHB (polyhydroxybutyrate), 
Seaweed etc. The Department’s Centres of Excellence (CoE) at IIT Gu wahati and IIT 
Madras are also working on promoting bio-plastics and their applications. IIT Guwahati is 
developing the technology for the production of Poly Lactic Acid and its applications 
development. IIT Madras is working on developing packaging from bio-based resources. 
Further to promote and develop Compostable/ Biodegradable Plastic Materials as 
replacement of Single Use Plastics, CIPET has established test facility at 11 centres for 
the aerobic biodegradability in soil as per ISO: 17556 -2019 and compostable polymers 
testing as per IS/ISO: 17088:2021. Recently, BIS with active involvement of CIPET & 
other members, has published a provisional Indian Standard IS 17899T:2022 for 
Assessment of Biodegradability of Plastics in Varied Conditions. This standard addresses 
the aspects like biodegradation, negative effects of resulting biomass on terrestrial plant 
growth/organism and negative effects on the quality of the resulting biomass including 
the presence of high levels of regulated heavy metals. This stan dard is applicable for 
assessing the biodegradability of plastics under aerobic and anaerobic conditions.   
DCPC is also establishing 3 Plastic Waste Management Centres (PWMC) at Varanasi, 
Bhagalpur and Bengaluru. These centres will demonstrate various Plastic recycling 
techniques and will provide effective plastics waste management solutions including 
solutions for production of eco -friendly and cost-effective value added recyclates. They 
will facilitate start-ups/ prospective entrepreneurs in the relevant field of recycling, create 
awareness on good practices of recycling and will establish digital demonstration facilities 
on plastic recycling and waste management. The CIPET has conducted 39 workshops or 
conferences on Single Use Plastics for the Industry. 
 
45. Asked to state whether the Department has any proposal to establish CIPET as a 
Central University, it was submitted that t he polymer and petrochemical sector are the 
fastest-growing sectors globally and is strategically aligned with India’s national priorities, 
including Atmanirbhar Bharat, Make in India, Circular Economy, and the Sustainable 

28 
 
Development Goals (SDGs).  The courses offered at CIPET are well  recognised among 
industries globally and the recognition among academic fraternity is not predominant due 
to affiliation with various State Universities / Technical education Departments. In this 
context, the upgradation of the Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering & 
Technology (CIPET) as a Central University may be timely and essential to meet India’s 
present and future technological and industrial needs. 
Such an upgradation would enable CIPET to: 
(a) CIPET as a Multidisciplinary HEI in the area of Petrochemicals: 
UG/PG/Ph.D,/ Vocational Education / Internships / Skilling  
(b) Restructuring of the ongoing academic programs and revamping the 
syllabus/ curricula to align with credit system and credit transfer policy 
(c) Having MoU’s with renowned national/ International Universities will facilitate 
to offer Joint/Twinning Degree programmes of National and International 
recognition. 
(d) Offer uniform curriculum across the country in line with NEP 2020 to design 
and deliver industry -aligned curricula in polymer science, petrochemicals, 
advanced manufacturing, and emerging materials. This will enhance the 
placement opportunities of the enrolled students. 
(e) Promote multidisciplinary and translational research in critical areas such as 
advanced polymer science, green and biodegradable polymers, circular 
plastics, plastic waste management, and sustainable materials. 
(f) Attract international faculty, researchers, and collaborations, thereby 
enhancing India’s global academic and research footprint in the polymer and 
petrochemical domain. 
 
     Considering the above, the Department is examining conversion of CIPET as a 
Central University in consultation with various stakeholders. 
46. The Committee were apprised that CIPET has a target to train 1.2 lakh  students. 
On a pointed query whether CIPET has the necessary infrastructure in place in order to 
achieve the enhanced target of training 1.2 lakh student strengthening of infrastructure 
facilities will be required. Proposals for expansion and modernization of infrastructure  
have been incorporated in the SFC proposal and the same was under examination of 
Department of Expenditure.   
J.  Synthetic Fiber  
47. On being asked about the details of synthetic fibre industry  and man-made fibre 
which  ha s a  capacity of around 9700 kilo tones with production of 6700 kilo tones ; 
whether this capacity was enough to meet the  Country’s  demands; whether the Country 
was  self-reliant in  synthetic fibre; and whether the Country has  export surplus , the 
Department submitted that the Country have sufficient capacity in synthetic fibres with a 
total  capacity of 9700 KT. The production of synthetic fibres was  6700 KT and export  
quantity was of the tune of  370 KT during 2024 -25. Some speciality fibres like carbon 
fibre, glass fibre  and antimicrobial fibres used in technical textiles are not produced in 
India. 
 

29 
 
48. On being asked  on the demand of plastic and synthetic Fiber , the Department 
submitted that India’s per capita consumption  of plastics increased drastically due to 
rapid urbanization, expanding middle -class incomes and industrial growth. Under the 
Policy, increased use of plastics was envisaged to commensurate with the economic 
development and growth in critical downstream growth sectors —including automotive 
manufacturing, medical, electronics, textiles, and drinking water supplies. However, with 
increased use of single use plastics, littering, open burning, improper waste management 
as well as la ck of awareness among common public  and absence of proper disposal 
mechanism many plastic waste management and environmental issues have arisen. The 
Government was taking various measures to prevent environmental degradation 
including the measures to ban those plastic items which were having high environmental 
pollution potential. To reduce plastic waste generation and their safe disposal ,  various 
measures were prescribed under Plastic Waste Management (PWM) Rules. These rules 
were notified and implemented  by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change (MoEF&CC). The Plastic Waste Management (Amendment) Rules introduced 
ban on many single use plastic products alongwith the Extended Producer Responsibility 
(EPR) framework. Under EPR producers, importer s, and brand owners have to take 
responsibility for the environmentally sound management of plastic packaging 
waste. The industry promotion for plastic and synthetic fibres is on the agenda of this 
department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals. The harmful  effects are mainly on the 
account of improper waste management issues for which various measures are being 
taken by the Government. The Department was promoting sustainable alternatives, 
recycling initiatives and a circular economy approach to balance development needs with 
environmental protection. 
 
49. The Committee was also informed that the policy would aim at encouraging, 
promoting and expanding the usage of synthetic fibres rather than replacing usage of 
natural fibre with synthetic fibre and single use plastic. On being asked to what extant the 
policy had been successful in achieving its objectives , it was submitted  that in 2007, 
Indian production capacity of synthetic fibres was 3.4 MMT and the production was 2.4 
MMT. The capacities increased significantly with rise in demand and India now has 
capacity of 9.7MMT of Synthetic fibres. In 2024, the total production was 6.7 MMT out of 
which 0.37MMT was exported. 
 
50. Asked to state specifically  w hether the ban imposed in the chemical and 
petrochemicals sector in other Countries has also been imposed in our Country and 
whether due to its effect, cancer cases were increasing, it was submitted that  hazardous 
chemicals have been banned or regulated under FSSAI Act, Environment Protection Act, 
Insecticides Act and Drugs and Cosmetics Act. 
K. Minimizing the ill Effects of Plastics 
51. The Committee desired to know whether increasing per capita consumption of 
plastics was one of the targets of the Department  keeping in view the fact that 
consumption of plastic was harmful for human health and also sought to know the steps 
taken by the  Department in this regard.  It was submitted that  India’s per capita 
consumption of plastics has increased drastically due to rapid urbanization, expanding 
middle-class incomes, and industrial growth. Under the policy, increased use of plastics 
is envisaged commensurate with the economic development and growth in critical 
downstream growth sectors—including automotive manufacturing, medical, electronics, 

30 
 
textiles, and drinking water supplies. However, with increased use of single use plastics, 
littering, open burning, improper waste management as well as lack of awareness among 
common public  and absence of proper disposal mechanism many plastic waste 
management and environmental issues have arisen. The Government was taking various 
measures to prevent environmental degradation including the measures to ban those 
plastic items which are having high environmental pollution potential. To reduce plastic 
waste generation and their safe disposal various measures are prescribed under Plastic 
Waste Management (PWM) Rules. These rules are notified and implemented by The 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC). The Plastic Waste 
Management (Amendment) Rules, introduced ban on many single use plastic products 
alongwith the Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) framework. Under EPR 
producers, importers, and brand owners have to take responsibility for the 
environmentally sound management of plastic packaging waste. The industry promotion 
for plastic and synthetic fibres is on the agen da of this D epartment of Chemicals & 
Petrochemicals. The harmful effects are mainly on the account of improper waste 
management issues for which various measures are being taken by the Government. 
The Department is promoting sustainable alternatives, recycling initiatives, and a circular 
economy approach to balance development needs with environmental protection.  
 
52. As plastics has ill-effects on human life and environment,  the Committee desired 
to know the preventive measures being followed in the established plastic parks . The 
Department has stated as under: - 
“The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC), under the Scheme for 
Setting up of Plastic Parks, emphasizes environmentally sustainable industrial 
development and creation of common infrastructure facilities for proper waste 
management and pollution control. The Plastic Parks are required to comply with 
environmental norms prescribed by the Central Po llution Control Board (CPCB), State 
Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) and other statutory authorities. Various preventive and 
mitigation measures are being undertaken in the established Plastic Parks to minimize 
adverse impact on human health and environmen t. These measures, inter alia, include 
establishment of waste management infrastructure, sewage treatment systems, recycling 
facilities, adherence to Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) norms, promotion of 
circular economy practices, and environmentally compliant disposal mechanisms. 
The major measures being adopted in different Plastic Parks are as under: 
(a) Waste Management and Recycling Facilities: Plastic waste recycling and 
waste management facilities have been established/proposed in various 
Plastic Parks. Recycling sheds have been developed in Plastic Parks such 
as Tamot (Madhya Pradesh), while Plastic W aste Management Facilities 
including dumping sheds have been developed at Bilaua (Madhya 
Pradesh).  
(b) Sewage Treatment Infrastructure: Several Plastic Parks have 
established/proposed Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs), drainage systems 
for scientific treatment and disposal of wastewater.   STP and sanitation 
infrastructure have also been developed in Odisha and  Bilaua Plastic 
Parks.  
(c) Compliance with Environmental Regulations:     Industrial units operating in 
the Plastic Parks are required to obtain necessary environmental 

31 
 
clearances and comply with pollution control norms prescribed by the 
concerned authorities. Chhattisgarh Plastic Park has obtained Consent to 
Establish from the State Environment Conservation Board, and the units 
operating therein belong to non-polluting categories.  
(d) Promotion of Recycling and Circular Economy Practices:     Plastic Parks 
are encouraging industries to adopt recycling, reuse and circular economy 
practices through in-house waste segregation, scientific disposal systems 
and environmentally sustainable manu facturing processes. Compliance 
with Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) norms and plastic waste 
recycling targets is also being promoted.  
(e) Development of Common Environmental Infrastructure:      Common 
infrastructure such as sewerage systems, drainage networks, waste 
segregation facilities, hazardous waste handling infrastructure, sanitation 
facilities and collection systems are being develop ed in various Plastic 
Parks for safe and regulated waste management.  
(f) Promotion of Green and Sustainable Technologies:     Industries are being 
encouraged to adopt eco -friendly technologies, energy -efficient systems 
and sustainable industrial practices to minimize environmental impact. 
Certain State Governments are also prov iding incentives for development 
of recycling and waste-to-energy infrastructure.  
(g) Continuous Monitoring and Regulatory Oversight:      The concerned State 
Governments/SPVs and Pollution Control Authorities monitor compliance 
with environmental standards and ensure that industrial activities are 
undertaken in accordance with applicable en vironmental laws and 
regulations.  
The above measures are aimed at ensuring environmentally responsible industrial 
development, proper management of plastic waste, promotion of recycling and 
minimization of adverse environmental impact in the Plastic Parks.” 
53. The Committee  also desired to know  whether it was a fact that  some of the 
products were identified for imposing ban on them and a report was sent to Ministry of 
Environment Forest and Climate Change and on that basis, they were banned.  The 
Department thereupon submitted as under: - 
 
“The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals constituted an expert Committee of 
scientists, academicians, researchers in the field of plastics and allied materials and its 
officials in 2018 with following Terms of references (ToR): 
I. To study the implementation of Plastic Waste Management (PWM) Rules, 
2016 and Plastic Waste Management (Amendment) Rules 2018, in different 
States. 
II. To study the consistency in guidelines issued by the various State 
Governments. 
III. Assessment of the impact of ban on various types of plastics products by State 
Governments and other authorities. 
IV. To categorise single use plastic products and careful assessment of their 
impact on environment, economy and society with relevance/reference to 
Indian context. 

32 
 
V. To recommend the way forward for implementation of end of life solution for 
plastic products. 
VI. To recommend the way forward for plastic waste recycling strategies to be 
adopted. 
The Committee proposed to phase out the following Single Use Plastic products: 
a) Thin carry bags (less than 50 micron), 
b) Non-woven carry bags and covers (less than 80 Gsm and 320 microns), 
c) Small wrapping / packing films, 
d)  Straws / Stirrers, 
e) Cutlery: Foamed cups, bowl, plates, 
f) Cutlery: Laminated bowls and plates (non – foamed), 
g) Cutlery: Small plastic cups / containers (less than 150 ml and 5 g), 
h) Ear buds with plastic sticks, and plastic sticks for balloons, flags, candies etc., 
i)  Cigarette filters (non-biodegradable), 
j)  Expanded Polystyrene used for decoration, 
k) Small plastic bottles for drinking water (≤ 200 ml), 
l) Plastic banners (less than 100 microns thickness) 
On the basis of the recommendation of the committee, MoEFCC prohibited manufacture, 
import, stocking, distribution, sale and use of identified single use plastic (SUP) items 
with effect from the July 01, 2022 under Plastic Waste Management Rules. The detai ls 
of the prohibited items are as follows: 
I. Ear buds with plastic sticks, plastic sticks for balloons, plastic flags, candy 
sticks, ice-cream sticks, polystyrene [Thermocol] for decoration; 
 
II. Plates, cups, glasses, cutlery such as forks, spoons, knives, straw, trays, 
wrapping or packing films around sweet boxes, invitation cards, and cigarette 
packets, plastic or PVC banners less than 100 micron, stirrers; 
 
III. Carry bag made of virgin or recycled plastic of less than one hundred and 
twenty (120) microns in thickness. 
 
54. On being asked about the details of the awareness programmes conducted by 
CIPET on transition to alternatives to single use plastics  and  how the industry can 
transform themselves in making the products which are not banned , the Department 
submitted as under:- 
 
“ CIPET conducted following awareness programmes on transition to alternative from 
single use plastics: 
➢ Two days Workshops on “Transition to Alternatives to SUP in -line to 
Implementation of Plastics Waste Management (PWM) Rule: 2021 

33 
 
(Amendment) in MSME Units” were organized in various centres. The details are 
as follows: 
S. No. CIPET Centre No. of 
Batch 
Dates of workshop Nos. of 
Participants 
1 IPT Ahmedabad 1 28th & 29th June 2022 27 
2 CSTS Aurangabad 1 28th & 29th June 2022 25 
3 CSTS Baddi 1 28th & 29th June 2022 34 
4 CSTS Bhopal 1 28th & 29th June 2022 48 
5 CSTS Guwahati 1 16th & 17th June 2022 40 
6 CSTS Haldia  1 27th & 28th June 2022 25 
7 CSTS Hyderabad 1 28th & 29th June 2022 30 
8 CSTS Jaipur  1 28th & 29th June 2022 25 
9 IPT Kochi 1 22nd & 23rd June 2022 39 
10 IPT Lucknow  1 28th & 29th June 2022 26 
11 CSTS Madurai 1 10th & 11th June 2022 28 
12 IPT Murthal  1 27th & 28th June 2022 30 
13 CSTS Mysuru 1 29th & 30th June 2022 33 
14 CSTS Ranchi 1 13th & 14th June 2022 37 
Total 14  447 
 
➢ CIPET Mysuru conducted a seminar on “Discouraging of various single -use 
plastics & curb the use of single-use plastic” on September 4, 2024. 
➢ CIPET-PWMC, Bengaluru conducted a Blended Mode Training programme on 
“Circular Economy: Recycling of Plastics & E Waste”  from 1 st to 19 th July, 
2025. 
➢ 2-days Awareness training program on "Single-use plastics & various 
manufacturing processes of Plastics" at PNS School of Engineering and 
Technology was organized by CIPET, Bhubaneswar, during 15th to 16th July, 2025. 
➢ CIPET, Agartala conducted awareness programs about the “Single Use Plastics 
& its proper disposal” at various schools located at South Tripura district from 
11th and 12th December, 2023. 
➢ CIPET, Dehradun conducted Awareness Programme on “Single Use Plastics & 
Plastics Waste Management Rules2022”  at M/s. Saraswati Vidya Mandir, 
Doiwala, Dehradun on 2nd August, 2023. 
➢ Awareness program on “Single Use Plastics” at Khurusia Pat, Kapileswar High 
School, Kendrapada, Odisha was conducted by CIPET, Bhubaneswar on 25th July, 
2024. 
➢ During the 16 th International Conference APM -2025 at CIPET Lucknow, 
Awareness Campaign for “NO Plastics to KNOW Plastics” was conducted. 

34 
 
➢ CIPET, Hyderabad organised one awareness programme on Single Use Plastics with 
the assistance of the Department in 2021 and 2 awareness programmes on Single 
Use Plastics with the assistance of Telangana SPCB in 2022. 
   
55. When the Committee desired to know the steps initiated by the Department to 
minimise the use of Single use Plastic s;  details of expenditure incurred in this regard ;  
details of various awareness campaigns launched by the Departments and t he end 
results to curb their use, the Department in its written reply submitted as under:-   
   
“To reduce plastic waste generation and their safe disposal various measures are 
prescribed under Plastic Waste Management (PWM) Rules. These rules are notified 
and implemented by the Ministry of Environment, Forest  and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC). To eliminate specific single use  plastic items that have low utility and 
high littering potential manufacture; import, stocking, distribution, sale, and use of 19 
categories of products were prohibited under these rules in 2022. These products are 
ear buds with plastic sticks, plastic sticks for balloons, plastic flags, candy sticks, ice-
cream sticks, polystyrene [Thermocol] for decoration, plates, cups, glasses, cutlery 
such as forks, spoons, knives, straw, trays, wrapping or packing films around sweet 
boxes, invitation cards,  and cigarette packets, plastic or PVC banners less than 100 
micron, stirrers. The thickness of the carry bags was increased gradually from 50 
microns to 120 microns to promote effective collection and recycling. Additionally, use 
of non -woven carry bags of 60 gsm was only permitted. The use of these 
commodities if made of compostable plastic are still allowed. Subsequent to the ban, 
various alternatives pertaining to the banned plastics products have been developed 
and became available across the country. Some of these products are made of bio -
based feedstocks like bagasse -based trays, plates and cups, compostable items, 
clay / earthen products etc.   The Plastic Waste Management (Amendment) Rules, 
2022, also introduced Extended Producer Responsi bility (EPR) framework wherein 
producers, importers, and brand owners have to take responsibility for the 
environmentally sound management of plastic packaging waste.  This includes 
collecting and managing plastic packaging waste, reuse, recycling, use of r ecycled 
content and end of life disposal. The following plastic packaging categories are 
prescribed under Extended Producer Responsibility and targets for waste collection, 
recycling, disposal and use of recycled content is given as per these categories:  
• Category I: Rigid plastic packaging; 
• Category II: Flexible plastic packaging of single layer or multilayer (more than one 
layer with different types of plastic), plastic sheets or like and covers made of 
plastic sheet, carry bags, plastic sachet or pouches; 
• Category III: Multilayered plastic packaging (at least one layer of plastic and at 
least one layer of material other than plastic); 
• Category IV: Plastic sheet or like used for packaging as well as carry bags made 
of compostable plastics.  
The Department through CIPET and the Centres of Excellence is promoting research 
in the area of the promotion of bioplastics. CIPET through its Research & 
Developmental wing has been developing innovative solutions in the area of 
development of sustainable packaging (rigids/flexible) using biopolymers like PLA 

35 
 
(polylactic acid), PBAT (polybutylene adipate -co-terephthalate, and PHB 
(polyhydroxybutyrate), Seaweed etc. The Department’s Centres of Excellence (CoE) 
at IIT Guwahati and IIT Madras are also working on promoting bio -plastics and their 
applications. IIT G uwahati is developing the technology for the production of Poly 
Lactic Acid and its applications development. IIT Madras is working on developing 
packaging from bio-based resources. 
Further to promote and develop Compostable/ Biodegradable Plastic Materials as 
replacement of Single Use Plastics, CIPET has established test facility at 11 centres 
for the aerobic biodegradability in soil as per ISO: 17556 -2019 and compostable 
polymers testing as per IS/ISO: 17088:2021. Recently, BIS with active involvement 
of CIPET & other members, has published a provisional Indian Standard IS 
17899T:2022 for Assessment of Biodegradability of Plastics in Varied Conditions. 
This standard addresses the aspects like biodegradation, negative effects of resulting 
biomass on terrestrial plant growth/organism and negative effects on the quality of 
the resulting biomass including the presence of high levels of regulated heavy metals. 
This standard is applicable f or assessing the biodegradability of plastics under 
aerobic and anaerobic conditions.  
DCPC is also establishing 3 Plastic Waste Management Centres (PWMC) at 
Varanasi, Bhagalpur and Bengaluru. These centres will demonstrate various Plastic 
recycling techniques and will provide effective plastics waste management solutions 
including solutions  for production of eco -friendly and cost -effective value added 
recyclates. They will facilitate start -ups/ prospective entrepreneurs in the relevant 
field, create awareness on good practices of recycling and will establish digital and 
physical demonstration facilities on plastic recycling and waste management.” 
56. The representative of the Department  during the oral evidence apprised the 
Committee on ban of single use plastic as follows: - 
 
“The report was given to the MEFCC. Based on that, a ban was imposed on single-
use items. We have also established Plastic Waste Management Centres at 
Bhagalpur, Bangalore and Varanasi. Then, there is a whole class of polymers 
which are called compostable or biodegradable. CIPET has developed the testing 
facility for those. So, whichever industry comes and claims to be compostable and 
biodegradable, they have to take a license from the Central Pollution Control 
Board based on the report by the CIPET. Then, CIPET has conducted awareness 
programmes on transition to alternatives to single use plastics on how the industry 
can transform themselves in making the products which are not banned. Through 
the COEs, we are also  trying to promote research and development on 
biopolymers. We extend our support to various events also and various 
associations. The Plast-India event, the Plastivision and the Global Conclave on 
Plastic Recycling and Sustainability are major events.” 
 
57. The Committee then desired to know as to what steps the Department have taken 
to develop alternatives to Plastics , the Department submitted that t o reduce reliance on 
petroleum-based polymers in single use plastics, CIPET Centres and Centres of 
Excellence (CoEs) were involved in developing various applications of Biodegradable 
and compostable polymer -based alternatives. These include polylactic acid (PLA), 
polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB), and poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) derived from agro-
waste, seaweed and other bio resources, starch-based thermoplastics using plant seeds, 

36 
 
development of PLA/Coir composites. World over countries are also trying to develop 
Biobased, bio compostable and biodegradable plastics and their applications. 
 
58. The Committee pointed out that though from the view point of environment ,  the 
Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change was to take action, however since  
the production of single use plastics was  under the Department, it should also take steps 
to minimize the production of Plastic instead of imposing ban/restrictions etc. after they 
are manufactured and circulated in the Market, the Department submitted as under: - 
“ Various measures to reduce plastic waste generation to protect environment are 
given under plastic waste management (pwm) rules. these rules are notified and 
implemented by the ministry of environment, forest and climate change (moef&cc). 
to eliminate specific single use plastic items that have low utility and high littering 
potential; manufacture, import, stocking, distribution, sale, and use of 19 
categories of products were prohibited under these rules in 2022.the industry is 
not allowe d to manufacture such items. the regulation encourages the use of 
biocompostable polymers. the department is also supporting promotion of 
biocompostable applications through cipet and its centres of excellence (CoE).” 
 
59. The Committee desire d to know whether the Department has any policy to 
discourage the manufacturing of single use plastic or to give license to the factories 
manufacturing them. It was submitted that the  Chemicals and Petrochemicals does not 
provide any license to the any factories including manufacture of Single use plastics. 
MoEF&CC has banned 19 single use plastic products. CPCB gives the licenses for 
manufacture of plastic items made of compostable plastics. 
 
60. When asked about the details of awareness programmes run for single -use 
plastic, the Department submitted that t he Central Institute of Petrochemicals 
Engineering & Technology (CIPET) has organized 14 workshops on "Transition to 
Alternatives to Single Use Plastics to support implementation of Plastics Waste 
Management (PWM) Rules, 2021 in MSME Units at various CIPET Centres across the 
country. 447 MSME units participated in these programs. Further, with the support of 
DCPC, CIPET has organized 10 Awareness programs on "Implementation of Plastics 
Waste Management (PWM) Rule, 2021 in MSME Units at 10 different locations across 
the country. CIPET is creating awareness through its three Plastic Waste Management 
Centre (PWMC) at Bhagalpur, Varanasi and Bengaluru. These centres are conducting 
Skill up-gradation Training Programme and Skill Development Training Programme on 
"Recycling of Plastics and E-Waste", "Basics of Plastic Recycling Process" and "Plastics 
Waste Management", etc. for various stakeholders to create  awareness on safe use of 
plastics. 
 
61. As regard s  the awareness programmes conducted on creating awareness of 
single use Plastic, the representative apprised the Committee as follows:- 
“For single-use plastic, we have already run two programmes in Hyderabad only. 
Apart from this, we used to have five industry interaction programmes in every 

37 
 
CIPET centre including Hyderabad. In these programmes, we used to make the 
industry aware about what are the technologies available for recycling of those 
plastics in case they are there and what are the substitute for the single-use plastic 
and other thing? There are some requirements from the industry also. So, that is 
quite beneficial for us.” 
62. The representative of the Department further apprised the Committee regarding 
single use plastics  as follows: - 
“सर, मैं पहले यह बतािा र्ाहोंगी कक िो कसोंगल यूज़ प्‍ लास्टिक है, उसक े यूज़ेज़ का िो इोंस्टप्लमेंटेशि 
होता है या उसक े यूज़ेज़ को रोकिे का िो इोंस्टप्लमेंटेशि होता है, वह कमकिस्‍‍ ट र ी ऑि इिवायिकमेंट, 
िॉर े स्‍‍ ट्स ए ों ड क्‍ लाइमेट र्ेंि के पास है। उन्फ्‍ हीों के एक्‍ ट के तहत यह कियम लाया गया है। बेकसकली, 
इस काम को प्राइमेररली वे ही करते हैं। सीपीसीबी और िो स्‍‍ टेट पॉल्‍ यूशि क ों ट र ोल बोड्कस हैं, उिक े 
माध्‍ यम से वे इसे करते हैं।  
सर, इसमें एक और प्रयास ककया िाता है। म्प्‍ यूकिकसपल वेस्‍‍ ट में कसोंगल यूज़ प्‍ लास्टिक का भी बहुत 
ज्‍ यादा यूज़ होता है। म्प्‍ यूकिकसपल वेस्‍‍ ट का कडस्‍‍ पोज़ल आकद कमकिस्‍‍ ट र ी ऑि हाउकसोंग ए ों ड अबकि 
अि े यसक के पास आता है। कितिी भी म्प्‍ यूकिकसपैकलटीज़ हैं, उिका कामकाि भी इसी कमकिस्‍‍ ट र ी के 
पास आता है। इसकलए, वे भी इस कवषय पर बहुत काम करते हैं। डीसीपीसी भी इसमें थोड़ा सा 
एिटक करता है, लेककि इोंस्टप्लमेंटेशि करते समय किसक े हाथ में एक्‍ शि लेिे की पावर है, उसका 
ही प्राइमरी रोल होता है। अत: इसमें उिका ज्‍ यादा एिटक होता है। हम उिसे सूर्िा ले लेंगे कक इस 
कदशा में ककतिे प्रयास हुए हैं और वह िािकारी हम सकमकत को दे देंगे। 
 
63. On being asked to ban the use of single use plastic, the representative of the 
Department apprised the Committee as follows: - 
 “सर, हमार े यहाों से ककसी भी इोंडस्‍‍ ट र ी को कोई लाइसेंस िहीों कदया िाता है, क्‍ योोंकक ये पूरा सेक्‍ टर 
डीर े गुलेटेड सेक्‍ टर है। िो भी इोंडस्टि र यल यूकिट्स लगती हैं, उिको एमओईएिसीसी से 
एन्फ्‍ वायरिमेंटल क्‍ लीयर ें स सीक करिी होती है। िब से कसोंगल यूि प्‍ लास्टिक बैि हुआ है, उसक े बाद 
कसोंगल यूि प्‍ लास्टिक बिािे वाली ककसी यूकिट को वहाों से एन्फ्‍ वायरिमेंटल क्‍ लीयर ें स िहीों दी िा रही 
है।“ 
 
L.  JUTE BAGS 
64. When asked about Jute bags  increasingly  being  recognized as an eco -friendly 
alternative to plastic bags and steps taken by the Department to promote and expand the 
use of jute bags across the Country, the Department submitted that t he Government of 
India has enacted the National Jute Board (NJB) Act, 2008 for the development of the 
cultivation, manufacture and marketing of jute and jute products and for matters 
connected therewith and incidental thereto. In consonance with the NJB Act,  2008, 
National Jute Board has been implementing National Jute Development Program (NJDP) 
for 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 with the mandate of overall development of jute sector. This 
Programme comprises various schemes to cover the jute sector from farm to market. The 
schemes are:-  
 

38 
 
i. Jute Improved Cultivation and Retting Exercise Scheme (Jute I -CARE) - The 
objective of the scheme is to improve quality of raw jute to meet the requirement of 
manufacturers and exporters of diversified products made out of Jute  for making 
value added products. Under the scheme the Government supports jute farmers’ 
through distribution of high yield variety of certified jute seeds, microbial Consortium, 
modern and scientific agronomic tools, etc.  to achieve the objective of the scheme. 
ii. Jute Diversification Scheme (JDS)  - The objective of the scheme is to support 
design, training, production, etc. for production of diversified product of Jute. Under 
the scheme the Government provides training, supply of raw material on ex-mill gate 
price, promotion sale and marketing of JDPs, develop unit specific designs and 
products, production linked incentive and facilitate modernization/promote jute 
packaging material, and of persons engaged in the production thereof, and for matters 
connected therewith.      
iii. The Government attempts to provide as much reservation as possible to utilize the 
jute crop that is produced in the country, without creating the bottleneck in the suppy-
distribution chain of the commodities. In this regard, the Government has kept 
mandatory packaging of 100% in food grains and 20% in sugar for the last 8 years. 
65. Asked to  explain the existing policy framework for jute  and  the current gap 
between the demand and supply of jute products vis -à-vis plastic products  the 
Department submitted that the Government of India has enacted Jute Packaging Material 
(Compulsory Use in Packing Commodities) Act, 1987. Through this act, every year, 
Government specifies the commodities and the extent to which they are mandatorily 
required to be packed in Jute Packaging Materials. Based on the demand & supply 
position of raw jute and jut e goods the Government prescribes reservation of 
commodities to be packed in Jute bags. The Government attempts to provide as much 
reservation as possible to utilize the jute crop that is produced in the country, without 
creating the bottle -neck in the sup ply-distribution chain of the commodities.  During the 
last seven years, the Government has decided to pack 100% food grains and 20% sugar 
in jute bags. Presently, 100% food grains and 20% sugar are required to be packed in 
jute bags as per Order dated 22.0 4.2025 issued under the JPM Act, 1987. The Order 
further stipulates that “Minimum percentage of total production of commodity or class of 
commodities required to be packed in jute packaging material manufactured in India from 
raw jute produced in India”. I t means that the entire jute bags required for packing food 
grains and sugar to be manufactured indigenously with raw jute produced in India. 
 
The details of Mandatory Jute Packaging Orders issued under JPM Act, 1987 for packing 
commodities like foodgrains and sugar over the years are furnished below:- 
 
Order date Year Sugar Food grains 
30.11.2018 2018-19 20% 100% 
20.12.2019 2019-20 20% 100% 

39 
 
26.11.2020 2020-21 20% 100% 
27.12.2021 2021-22 20% 100% 
31.03.2023 2022-23 20% 100% 
26.12.2023 2023-24 20% 100% 
22.04.2025* 2024-25 20% 100% 
 
*The validity of the order has been extended up to 31 -12-2025 vide notification 
S.O. No. 4501(E) dated 01-10-2025. 
 
As per stipulations of the Order, different State’s food grains procuring agencies including 
FCI purchase jute bags to the tune of around 30.0 to 35.0 lakh bales for packing food 
grains. The total purchase currently constitutes around 85% of the total production of jute 
goods. 
66. Asked to state whether the Department has conducted any study or assessment 
to estimate the present and future demand for jute products and If the supply of jute bags 
is less than plastic bags would be used please comment, the Department submitted that 
the Government of India has enacted Jute Packaging Material (Compulsory Use in 
Packing Commodities) Act, 1987. Through this act, every year, government specifies the 
commodities and the extent to which they are mandatorily required to be packed in Jute 
Packaging Materials. Based on the demand & supply position of raw jute and jute goods, 
the Government prescribes reservation of commodities to be packed in Jute bags. The 
Government attempts to provide as much reservation as possible to utilize the jute crop 
that is produced in the country, without creating the bottle-neck in the supply-distribution 
chain of the commodities.  During the last seven years, the Government has decided to 
pack 100% food grains and 20% sugar in jute bags. Under the order different state  food 
grains procuring agencies including FCI purchase jute bags to the tune of around 30.0 to 
35.0 lakh bales for packing food grains. The total purchase currently constitutes around 
85% of the total production of jute goods.  It  was also submitted that Expert Committee 
on Jute estimates the availability of raw jute every year and based on such estimation, 
the Standing Advisory Committee under Chairpersonship of Secretary (Textiles) consider 
the requirement of raw jute for producing of  jute bags for mandat ory packaging of food 
grains and sugar under the provisions of Jute Packaging Material (Compulsory Use in 
Packing Commodities) Act, 1987. Further, the proposal after Inter-Ministerial Consultation 
is submitted before the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affai rs for decision on 
percentage of food grains and sugar to be packed in jute material.   
 
        As per information available, production of jute goods vis -a-vis domestic 
consumption during last 5 years are given below:- 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
Table I-Production of Jute Goods 
 
                                  Qty.: 000 M. Tons 
Year  
(April- March)  
Hessian  Sacking Yarn Others Total 
2020-21 118.4 739.2 61.3 43.9 962.8 
2021-22 119.4 865.1 59.4 36.1 1080.0 
2022-23 117.6 1041.0 45.6 42.4 1246.6 
2023-24 
  
103.7 1071.8 41.4 41.1 1257.0 
2024-25 
  
102.6 866.0 61.3 14.0 1043.9 
2025-26 
(April- August- 25) 
41.5 490.4 42.9 18.2 593.0 
            
      Table II- Domestic consumption of Jute Goods: 
                                                           
   Qty: 000 M.Ton 
Year (April - 
March)   
Hessia
n  
Sacking Yarn Others Total % to total jute 
goods 
production  
2020-21 96.0 736.4 48.1 35.8 916.3 95 
2021-22 93.1 834.5 42.4 30.3 1000.3 93 
2022-23 89.1 1013.2 33.7 34.6 1170.6 94 
2023-24 85.9 1033.8 27.0 36.1 1182.8 94 
2024-25 82.9 854.0 22.2 28.5 987.6 95 
2025-26 
(April- 
August- 
2025) 
31.5 466.4 38.9 15.9 552.7 93 
              Source: Office of the Jute Commissioner & Indian Jute Mills Association 
 
67. The Committee then desired to be apprised of the prescribed procedure for 
establishing Centres of Excellence (CoE) for jute in various States. T he Department 
submitted that National Jute Board has been implementing umbrella of schemes under 
National Jute Development Program for development of Jute Sector throughout the 
country. However, under NJDP, there was no Scheme for establishing Centres of 
Excellence (CoE) for jute in various States.     
 
  

41 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
URGENT NEED TO REVIEW NATIONAL POLICY OF PETROCHEMICALS, 2007  
         The Committee note that the National Policy on Petrochemicals -2007 was 
formulated to promote investment and to strengthen research and development in 
both the upstream and downstream sectors of the petrochemical industry. The 
Committee further not e that since its inception in 2007, the sector has grown 
significantly  driven by the rising demand as this sector has been deregulated and 
delicensed. The Committee find that the domestic demand for petrochemicals has 
grown significantly from 9 MMT in 200 7 to 40 MMT in 2024. Similarly, domestic 
production has increased from 8.6 MMT in 2007 to 28 MMT in 2024. The Committee, 
however, observe that over the last 19 years, the sector has witnessed major shifts 
and changes in the demand and supply with an emerging need to address global 
competitiveness, new challenges, sustainability goals in order to boost economy, 
ensure feedstock security and rapid technological advancements. Keeping in view 
these factors, the Committee are of the considered opinion that the National Policy 
on Petrochemicals, 2007 requires a comprehensive review to incorporate current 
industry needs with an overall aim to overcome current challenges and set high 
future growth trajectories. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals to consider and examine the 
feasibility of initiating a holi stic review of the Policy with massive stakeholder 
consultations across the spectrum so that the views and suggestions of industry 
associations and organization in volved are incorporated in the Policy to ensure 
continued growth, self -reliance and global positioning of the current Indian 
petrochemical sector. The Committee also desire that the review may also taken 
with a view to further give a boost to other schemes  viz. establishment of PCPIRs 

42 
 
and Plastic Parks too. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this 
regard.  
DEMAND & SUPPLY OF PETROCHEMICALS 
2.  The Committee note that the demand of the major petrochemicals was  
approximately 40 MMT whereas the production stood at only 30 Million Metric 
Tonnes Per Annum (MMTPA). The Committee further note that the domestic 
demand was projected to reach around 87 MMTPA in the year 2040 from around 27 
Million Metric Tonnes Per Annum (MMTPA) in the year 2020. The Committee are 
happy to note with satisfaction that during the last five years more than 3300 KT of 
additional capacity could be added to the production of major petrochemicals and 
the petrochemical industry was statedly having a planned investment of Rs 6.5 
lakh crore approximately. Besides, admittedly, many new petrochemicals projects 
were under  implementation and would be functional in future. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend  that appropriate initiatives and interventions may be 
brought about for requisite augmentation of production of major petrochemicals 
to meet the rising  demand in the Country. 
DISCONTINUATION OF THE PLASTIC DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL 
3.   The Committee note that a Policy Resolution for Petrochemicals was 
notified way back in the Year 2007 which  inter-alia aimed to increase investment 
in the petrochemical sector, increase the domestic demand and per capita 
consumption of plastics and synthetic fibres etc. Notably, in order to achieve these 
objectives, the policy proposed  setting up of Petrochemicals Investment Regions, 
Plastic Development Council, enhancing technology and research and 
development under the schedule 19(4) of IDR Act, 1951 which resulted in setting 

43 
 
up of the Plastic Development Council (PDC), an advisory body with members from 
industry, academia and Govt. working  for a sustained development of plastic 
processing sector. The Committee further note that though the  PDC was initially 
constituted in the  year 2007 itself and had deliberations resulting in outcome 
suggestions on measures for sustained development of plastic processing 
industry. However, the tenure of the Council ended in the year 2013  and thereafter,  
the PDC was not at all constituted. T he Committee have been informed that at 
present, the issues regarding value added petrochemical products, export 
promotion, market access etc. are being addressed through various Councils 
under the M/o Commerce and Industry. The Committee find that the  
discontinuance of the PDC is apparently  a major deviation from the New 
Petrochemical Policy, 2007 resulting in  dilution of  the Policy. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Dep artment to take appropriate steps for re -
constitution of the PDC in acco rdance with the extant Policy. Accordingly, t he 
Committee may be apprised of the reasons for discontinuance and also the steps 
taken in the matter.  
PETROLEUM, CHEMICAL AND PETROCHEMICAL INVESTMENT REGIONS 
(PCPIRS) 
4. The Committee note that the Policy of PCPIR was conceptualized for cluster-
based approach with common infrastructure and support services to provide a 
competitive environment, conducive for setting up businesses. The total 
investment made  in the three PCPIRs was stated to be Rs. 1,37,163 Crores in 
Gujarat PCPIR; Rs. 68,148 Crores in Andhra Pradesh PCPIR and Rs. 1,43,881 
Crores in Odisha PCPIR. The Committee further note that in Andhra Pradesh PCPIR 
where a huge investment of Rs. 68,148 crore has been made was still struggling to  

44 
 
secure an anchor tenant. Further, the policy continues to face challenges in 
achieving the set desired goals of attracting investments and generating 
employment opportunities despite being in existence for decades. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department may review the policy comprehensively 
to infuse the requisite momentum to grow. The Committee also desire that the 
Department should identify shortcomings, existing gaps and areas of oversight; 
examine the lacunae/loopholes therein;  take appropriate corrective measures to 
address them so as to safeguard the large -scale investments made in the sector. 
The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
PETROLEUM, CHEMICAL AND PETROCHEMICAL INVESTMENT REGIONS 
(PCPIR), VISHAKHAPATNAM 
5. The Committee note that the total area (sq kms) of Dahej, Gujarat PCPIR was 
stated to be 453, investments made stood at  Rs. 1.28,509 crore; employment 
generated was 2,45,140 and no. of chemicals units established was  2079. Similarly, 
as with respect to V ishakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh PCPIR, total area (sq kms) 
was  640; investment made stood at  Rs. 68,148 crore; employment generated was  
86123 and no. of chemicals units established was 154.  Further, in the case of 
Paradeep, Odisha PCPIR, the area was   2 84.15 sq kms; investments made stood 
at Rs 1,43,881 crore; no. of employment generated was 40,000 and no. of chemical 
units established stood at only 13. The Committee observe that as compared to 
Dahej, Gujarat PCPIR, the  Vishakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, P CPIR and Odisha 
PCPIR are lagging behind in terms of investment made, employment generated 
and no. of Chemical Units established.   Moreover, the Vishakhapatnam, Andhra 
Pradesh, PCPIR was apparently  lagging behind both the other PCPIRs in terms of 
investment made even though the total area of Vishakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh, 

45 
 
PCPIR was  more than the other two PCPIRs. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the reasons for these slow progress and also desire that a more robust 
mechanism may be brought in for more effective yield.  
 
PROMOTION OF BIO-COMPOSTABLE POLYMERS 
6. The Committee note that Single Use Plastic (SUP) poses a serious threat to 
the environment as well to  human health.  Admittedly, to tackle menace of SUP, 
the Department has inter-alia submitted that to eliminate specific single use plastic 
items that have low utility and high littering potential; manufacture, import, 
stocking, distribution, sale, and use of 19 categories of products were prohibited 
in the Year 2022 and the industry was not allowed to manufacture such items. The 
Committee are happy to note that the Department was encouraging use of bio -
compostable polymers and also supports promotion of bio -compostable 
applications through CIPET and its Centres of Excellence (CoE). The C ommittee, 
therefore, desire that Department should intensify their promotion of Bio 
compostable Polymers through CIPET and its COEs.  The Committee may be 
apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
SETTING UP OF MORE CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE (CoEs) 
7. The Committee note that there are only 18 CoEs across the Country catering 
to the requirement of the Country. The Committee are, however, of the considered 
view that  18 CoEs are apparently not sufficient and desire that  the Department 
should consider the  feasibility to  establish more CoEs  keeping in view the fact 
that the Department is supporting promotion of bio -compostable applications 

46 
 
through Centres of Excellence. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken 
in this regard. 
TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER BY CoEs 
8. The Committee note that the 18 CoEs across the Country has filed 83 patents 
of which 41 are stated to have been granted and have developed 96 new 
products/technologies. The Committee further note that the CoEs could manage 
to transfer just 38 technologies/  products for applications in the industry. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should take a holistic 
review on the functioning of CoEs in so far as filing and granting of patents and  
transfer of the remaining 58 products/technologies are concerned. The Committee 
also desire that the  Department should ensure that the CoEs cater to the need of 
the market and industries while developing products/technologies so that 
maximum commercial benefits can be reaped by the CoE which will further  
strengthen their functioning. 
SETTING UP OF PLASTIC PARKS 
9. The Committee note that the Scheme for Setting up of Plastic Parks was 
launched way back in the Year 2012 which aimed at  creating infrastructure for the 
plastics processing industry, promoting investment, enhancing production 
capacity and generating employment. The Committee also note that the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals has approved 10 Plastic Parks under 
the Scheme for Setting up of Plastic Parks viz., Tamot, Madhya Pr adesh, 
Jagatsinghpur District, Odisha, Tinsukia, Assam, Bilaua, Madhya Pradesh, 
Deoghar, Jharkhand, Tiruvallur, Tamil Nadu, Sitarganj, Uttarakhand , Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh, Ganjimutt, Karnataka and Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh,  which are at  

47 
 
various stages of completion. The Committee further note that out of 919 plots and 
19 sheds, only 322 plots and 15 sheds could be allotted so far out of which only 50 
plots and 15 sheds are operational. The Committee are of the view that the 
establishment of Plastic Parks needs more faster progress so that benefits due to 
be accrued are fully garnered. The Committee recommend that the Department 
should initiate concrete steps towards achievement of the noble intentions with 
which  the Plastic Parks have been conceived in the Policy. The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter.   
 
NIL ALLOTMENTS OF PLOTS IN SOME PLASTIC PARKS 
10. The Committee note with concern that ‘NIL’ plots have been allotted in the 
Plastic Park at Deoghar, Jharkhand, Tiruvallur, Tamil Nadu and Ganjimutt, 
Karnataka. The Committee observe that the Department cited the reasons for low 
operationalisation which include delays in development of external infrastructure, 
absence of dedicated power supply, technical complexities in low -lying areas, 
transportation and logistics constraints, market uncertainties, financial 
constraints, delays in statutory clearances etc. The Committee are, however,   
happy to note that civil work at the Plastic Parks viz. Tamot, Madhya Pradesh 
Jagatsinghpur District, Odisha Bilaua, Madhya Pradesh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh have 
been 100% completed and trust that the  Department would succeed in  their 
earnest efforts for allotment of plots/ sheds and making them operational at the 
earliest. The Committee are of the considered view that  the Department should 
work in close coordination with the concerned State Government/SPVs to 
overcome these hur dles and leave no stone unturned in pushing State 

48 
 
Governments to undertake the completion of pending infrastructure/civil work. The 
Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.  
 
OUTCOME OF REVIEWS TO EXPEDITE ESTABLISHMENT OF PLASTIC PARKS 
11. The Committee note that the Department has submitted that the issue of 
Plastic Parks was regularly being reviewed and progress of implementation of the 
plastic parks was being taken up with the concerned State Governments. 
Admittedly,  since the Year 2022,  sixteen meetings have been held with the State 
Governments and the last meeting was held on 08.05.2026 under the Chairmanship 
of Secretary with all the representatives concerned. The Committee are happy to 
find that  continuous monitoring and periodic re view by the Department resulted 
in  significant progress in the development of infrastructure operationalisation of 
the Plastic Parks in the Country. The Committee hope and trust that as assured by 
the Department, all the targeted Plastic Parks would be es tablish expeditiously 
across  the Country.  
DEVELOPMENT OF BIO-PLASTICS 
12. The Committee note that through CIPET and its Centers of Excellence 
(CoEs) the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) is promoting 
research in the area of Bio - Plastics.  Further the Committee note that  CIPET is 
engaged in developing innovative solutions in the area of development of 
sustainable packaging using Bio -Polymers. Besides the Centers of Excellence at 
IIT Guwahati and IIT Chennai were also stated to be working on promotion of Bio -
Plastics and their appl ications. Statedly, IIT Guwahati w as developing the 
Technology, production of Poly Lactic Acid and its applications. The Committee 
are happy to note the progressive developments on this front and desire that the 

49 
 
adequate encouragement and support including financial may be given by the 
Department in all possible ways so that the process of developing of Bio -Plastics 
be streamlined and expedited for commercial production needs of the Country.  
THE CONCEPT OF ‘NO PLASTIC TO KNOW PLASTIC’ 
13. The Committee have been apprised that the CIPET is stated to be 
propagating the concept of ‘No Plastic to Know Plastic’. Admittedly, the concept of 
“No Plastic to Know Plastic” was being propagated by Central Institute of 
Petrochemicals Engineering & Technology and it aimed to create awareness that 
plastics should not merely be rejected but scientifically understood and 
responsibly used. The Committee are happy to find that the initiative emphasizes 
the importance of proper plastic waste management, recycling, reuse and adoption 
of circular economy practices. Notably, CIPET promotes awareness on the 
beneficial applications of plastics in various sectors while encouraging 
sustainable disposal, recycling technologies, skill development, and research to 
minimize environmental impact and transform plastic waste into valuable 
resources. The Committee recommend such a good initiative undertaken by CIPET 
must be propagated for adoption and adaptation throughout the Country. To this 
extent the Committee desire that D epartment renders adequate support to bring 
the benefits of the initiatives to its logical conclusion. 
TRAINING GIVEN BY CIPET 
14. The Committee have been apprised that the CIPET has set a target to train 
1.2 lakhs students. On the aspect pertaining to whether CIPET possess the 
necessary requisite infrastructure in place for the said purpose, the Committee find 
that that the proposals  for expansion and modernization of infrastructure have 

50 
 
been incorporated in the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) proposal and the 
same was under examination of Department of Expenditure.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Department should vigorously pursue the proposal 
with the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure to achieve the set target. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcomes in this regard.  
PLASTIC WASTE MANAGEMENT CENTERS (PWMC) 
15. The Committee find that that three Plastic Waste Management Centers have 
been fully established and inaugurated at Bengaluru, Bhagalpur and Varanasi 
which are complete and functional. The Committee also find that these Centers will 
demonstrate various Plastics Waste Management Solutions including solutions for 
production of eco-friendly and cost-effective value-added recycling. Further, they 
will facilitate start-ups/prospective entrepreneurs in the relevant field of recycling, 
create awareness on good prac tice of recycling and will establish digital 
demonstration facilities on plastic recycling and waste management. The 
Committee are happy to note these developments and observe that this was a 
welcome step to manage  plastic waste and save the environment. The Committee 
recommend that more Plastic Waste Management Centers be established  across 
the Country. The Committee also desire that the three established Plastic Waste 
Management Centers may be accorded utmost priority by the Department. 
SELF SUFFICIENCY IN PRODUCTION OF SYNTHETIC FIBRES 
16. The Committee are happy to note that our Country is having sufficient 
production capacity in synthetic fibres and it stood at 9700 KT whereas the actual 
producing of synthetic fibres in 6700 KT only and export stood at is just 370 KT 
during the year 2024 -25. In this regard, the Committee would like to know that 

51 
 
production of synthetic fibres stands at 6700 KT, the Country is having capacity of 
9700 KT. Further, the export of 370 KT is very meagre as compared to 6700 KT of 
synthetic fibres which is being produced in the Country. The Committee 
recommend therefor e, that the production of synthetic fibres be increased and 
steps be taken to enhance the export of synthetic fibres. 
PRODUCTION OF PLASTIC AND SYNTHETIC FIBRES 
17. The Committee note that the industry promotion for Plastic and Synthetic 
Fibres is on the agenda of the Department. However, the Department has submitted 
that the harmful effects of Plastic and Synthetic Fibres are ma inly on account of 
improper waste management issues for which various majors under Plastic Waste 
Management Rules are initiated by the Government and the rules have been 
notified and implemented by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change. Further, the Department is promoting sust ainable alternatives, recycling 
initiatives and a circular economy approach to balance development needs with 
environmental protection. The Committee desire that the Department should 
promote Plastic and Synthetic Fibres by strictly remaining in the ambit of Plastic 
Waste Management Rules.  
PRODUCTION OF SYNTHETIC FIBRES UNDER THE NEW PETROCHEMICAL 
POLICY 
18. The Committee have been informed that the New Petrochemical Policy 
would aim at encouraging, Promoting and expanding the uses of Synthetic Fibres 
rather than replacing uses of natural fibres with synthetic fibres and single use 
plastic. The Committee, Furt her, note that in the year 2007 Indian Production 
capacity of synthetic fibres was 3.4 MMT and the production was 2.4 MMT which 
has now increased to 9.7 MMT of synthetic fibres. The Committee are happy to note 

52 
 
that the increase in the production and desire that the Department should keep up 
the pace. 
STEPS TO CURB MENACE OF SINGLE USE PLASTIC (SUP) 
19. The Committee have been informed that to tackle the menace of SUP, an 
Expert Committee was formed by the Department, which examined the restrictions 
on plastic products. The Department also conducted a study on SUP on the basis 
of which various single use plastics were categorized & identified as having 
serious environmental impacts, which were later included in the ban imposed by 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) . The Committee 
are happy to note that a ban has been imposed on various single use plastic items 
having serious environmental impacts, however the Committee recommend that 
the ban on the identified single use plastics be imposed vigorously & any violation 
of the ban be dealt with firmly. 
AWARENESS PROGRAM ON SINGLE USE PLASTIC (SUP) 
20. The Committee note that the Department with the support of CPCB, Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC)  & CIPET had organized 
fourteen workshops on the subject 'Transition to alternatives to SUP', at various 
CIPET centres across the country beside conducting of ten awareness programs 
on Implementation of Plastic Waste Management Rule, 2021 in MSME units at ten 
different locations across the country. The Committee finds these fourteen 
workshops & ten awareness programs are very few but it seems to be a good 
beginning. The Committee, therefore, recommend that more and more such 
workshops & programs be conducted in near future to facilitate early transition 
from SUP. 

53 
 
BAN ON HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS 
21. The Committee have noted that a Ban on Hazardous Chemicals have been 
imposed in foreign Countries and similar ban has also been imposed in our 
Country but unfortunately the ban in our Country is not being implemented in letter 
and spirit and as a result there have been increase in the number of cases of 
cancer. In this regard, the Department has submitted that hazardou s chemicals 
have been banned or regulated under FSSAI Act, Environment Protection Act, 
Insecticides Act and Drugs and Cosmetics Act. The Comm ittee do accept the 
contention of the Department however, the y desire that the Department should 
work in close coordination will other Ministries to strictly enforce the Ban on the 
Hazardous Chemicals. 
STEPS TO CURB PLASTIC POLLUTION 
22. The Committee note that an expert Committee of Scientist, Academicians, 
Researchers in the field of plastics and allied materials and its officials was 
constituted in the year 2018. This expert Committee proposed to phase out single 
use plastic products like thin carry bags  which are less than 50 microns, non -
woven carry bags and covers etc. and on the basis of recommendation of the 
expert Committee the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
prohibited manufacture, import, stocking, sell and use with effect from 01.07.2022 
under Plastic Waste Management Rules. The Committee desire that the ban 
imposed on the single use plastic products be implemented in letter and spirit and 
any deviation may be dealt with firmly. 
 

54 
 
EXTENDED PRODUCER RESPONSIBILITY (EPR) FRAMEWORK FOR 
PRODUCERS, IMPORTERS AND BRAND OWNERS 
23. The Committee note that the Plastic Waste Management (Amendment) Rules 
2022 has introduced Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) framework whereby 
producers, importers and brand owners have to take responsibility for the efficient 
management of plastic pa ckaging waste management keeping in view the 
protection of Environment. The Plastic Waste Management (Amendment) Rules 
2022 also includes collecting and managing plastic packaging waste, recycling and 
end of life disposal. The Committee recommend that the Extended Producer 
Responsibility (EPR) be implemented firmly in the Country.  
USE OF JUTE BAGS AS AN ECO-FRIENDLY ALTERNATIVE TO PLASTIC BAGS 
24. The Committee note that Jute Bags are increasingly being recognized as an 
eco-friendly alternative to plastic bags in this regard the Department has informed 
that the Government of India has enacted the National Jute Board (NJB) Act, 2008 
for the developme nt of the cultivation, manufacturing and marketing of Jute and 
Jute products. the Government of India has enacted Jute Packaging Material 
(Compulsory Use in Packing Commodities) Act, 1987. Through this act, every year, 
Government specifies the commodities and the extent to which they are 
mandatorily required to be packed in Jute Packaging Materials. This Act stipulates 
that minimum percentage of total production of commodity or class of 
commodities required to be packed in Jute Packaging Material manufactur ed in 
India from raw Jute produced in India. A perusal of jute packing orders issued 
under Jute Packaging Material Act, under 1987 for packing commodities over the 
years has remained 20% for sugar and 100% for foodgrains. The Committee are of 
the view that for foodgrains 100% is the stipulation for packing them in Jute Bags. 

55 
 
The Committee desire that for other eatable items also the Department should take 
up the matter with concerned Ministry to provide a stipulation regarding their 
packing in Jute Bags. 
 
PRESENT AND FUTURE DEMANDS OF JUTE BAGS 
25.  The Committee find that the Department has submitted a very vague reply 
in regard to any assessment to estimate the present and future demand of jute 
bags that inter-alia states that Government attempts to provide as much 
reservation as possible to utilise the Jute Crop produce in the Country without 
disturbing the supply/distribution chain of the commodities and no specific 
information has been provided to the Committee. The Committee therefore, desire 
that a specific reply regarding demand and supply of Jute Bags viz-a-viz supply of 
plastic bags in the Country may be furnished to them. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
03 August, 2026 Chairperson, 
12 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
  

56 
 
APPENDIX-I  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 4th November, 2025 from 1100 hrs. to 1300 
hrs. in Committee Room ‘2’, EPHA, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Robert Bruce C. 
3.  Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
4.  Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
5.  Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
6.  Shri Praveen Patel 
7.  Shri Balram Naik Porika 
8.  Shri Sachithanantham R. 
9.  Shri Eatala Rajender 
10. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
11. Shri Nalin Soren 
12. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
13.  Shri Naresh Bansal 
14.  Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
15.  Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
16.  Shri Arun Singh 
17.  Shri Tejveer Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi          -       Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam  -       Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh    -        Deputy Secretary 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
Representatives of Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
1. Ms. Nivedita Shukla Verma, Secretary (C&PC) 

57 
 
2. Shri Deepak Mishra, Joint Secretary, (Petrochemicals)  
3. Shri Deepankar Aron, Joint Secretary (Chemicals) 
4. Ms. Divya Parmar, Economic Adviser 
5. Ms. Vandana, Director 
 
Representative of Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering & Technology 
(CIPET) 
1.  Dr. Shishir Sinha, Director General, CIPET 
2.  Dr. Vishal Verma, Director (TSS&BD), CIPET 
3.     Dr. Smita Mohanty, Principal Director & Head, CIPET  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC), Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers to the 
Sitting of the Committee convened for briefing by the Department on the subject ‘Review 
of National Policy on Petrochemicals, 2007’. Their attention was then drawn to Direction 
55(1) of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Chairperson asked the Secretary, Department of Ch emicals 
and Petrochemicals to apprise the Committee about the subject.  
3. The representative of the Department through a power point presentation briefed 
the Committee about background of the National Policy of Petrochemicals, aims of the 
Policy, salient features of the Policy, outcomes and measures taken by the Department 
for environment sustainability. The Committee were apprised that under the Policy, the 
Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs) would be set 
up to promote investment in this sector, Plastic parks would be considered to be 
developed as an integral part of the PCPIR, centers of Excellence in polymer Technology 
would be set up in existing educational and research institutions working in the field of 
polymers, a new scheme of Petrochemical Research and Development fund (PRDF) 
would be f ormulated to fund the projects on R&D, waste management, recycling and 
development of biopolymers and biodegradable polymers. The Committee were further 
apprised that the PRDF was not formulated instead new schemes of Petrochemicals 
were launched. Moreover, the Plastic Development Council which was to be set up under 
the Schedule 19 (4) of the IDR Act was not at all set up.  

58 
 
4. As regard outcomes and measures taken by the Department, the Committee were 
apprised that the capacity of major Petrochemicals has increased from 10 MMT to 35 
MMT since the year 2007 and at present there are 12 domestic Naphtha/ Dual feed 
cracker complexes in operation with Ethylene capacity of about 8.7 million ton nes per 
annum and Propylene capacity of 7.4 million tonnes per annum besides seven aromatic 
complexes with a purified Terephthalic Acid capacity of about 6.4 million tonnes and the 
demand and supply of Petrochemicals has been assessed by the Department and 
Petrochemical Perspective Plan was made in 2020. 
5. The Chairperson thanked the Secretary, DCPC and the accompanying Officers 
for briefing the Committee on the important aspects relating to the subject and asked 
them to furnish written replies to points raised by the members that remained 
unanswered, at the earliest.  
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
                       [A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record]            
                                       The Committee then adjourned. 
  

59 
 
APPENDIX-II  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS  
(2026-27) 
Minutes of the Twentieth Sitting of the Committee 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 07th May, 2026 from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. in 
Committee Room C, PHA, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA MEMBERS 
2. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
3. Shri Babu Singh Khuswaha 
4. Shri Praveen Patel 
5. Shri Balram Naik Porika 
6. Shri Sachithannatham R. 
7. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
8. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
9. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA MEMBERS 
 
10. Shri Naresh Bansal 
11. Shri Subhash Barala 
12. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
13. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
14. Shri Arun Singh 
15. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary (ML) 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director (CF&W) 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary (CF&R)  
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
Representatives of Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC) 
1. Shri Tejveer Singh, Secretary (C&PC), DCPC 
2. Dr. G.Venkatesh, JS, Petrochemicals, DCPC 

60 
 
3. Shri Deepankar Aron, JS, Chemicals, DCPC     
4. Shri Anil Phulwari, Dy. DG (S&M), (JS Level) DCPC 
5. Ms. Divya Parmar, Economic Advisor, (JS Level) DCPC 
6. Ms Vandana, Director, DCPC 
7. Shri Mrinal Chawla, Deputy Secretary, DCPC 
8. Shri B.K Maharana, DIA (Petrochemicals), DCPC 
9. Shri Chitvan Singh Dhillon, Dy Director, DCPC 
 
Representative of Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering & Technology 
(CIPET) 
1.  Dr. Shishir Sinha, Director General, CIPET 
2.  Dr. Vishal Verma, Director (TSS&BD), CIPET 
3.     Dr. Smita Mohanty, Principal Director & Head, CIPET  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC)  to the 
sitting convened to examine the subject ‘Review of National Policy on Petrochemicals, 
2007’.  Drawing the attention of the witnesses to Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked them to apprise the Committee regarding the subject.  
3. The representative of the Department  of Chemicals and Petrochemicals  through 
a power point presentation briefed the Committee about the key objectives of National 
Petrochemicals Policy which included to increase investment in the Chemical sector, both 
upstream and downstream by ensuring availability of raw materials, ensuring value 
addition and growth in exports, enhancing competitiven ess, promoting Research and 
Development (R&D) in petrochemicals along with human resource development. The 
Committee was further apprised that overall Petrochemicals capacity has been increased 
from 10 MMT to 35 MMT and Number of cracker units and aromatic complexes have 
been increased from 8 to 12 units and 4 to 7 complexes respectively. 
4. The Committee expressed concern over the slow pace of allotment of plots in the 
Plastic Parks and delay in the establishment of the ‘ Petroleum, Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Investment Region ’ (PCPIRs). The Committee appreciated ‘Central 

61 
 
Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering & Technology ’ (CIPET)  performance and 
operations and desired that at least one CIPET Centre be established in every district . 
The Committee also highlighted serious concern over health risks posed by plastic 
exposure. In response, the representatives form CIPET had submitted that initiatives on 
recycling, rethinking, and reuse of plastic are under development  and CIPET is also 
propagating the concept of “No Plastic to Know Plastic”.   
5. Thereafter, the Chairperson and Members of the Committee sought certain 
clarifications on the issues  related to examination of  the subject and posed several 
queries which inter-alia included the following: -  
(i) Urgent need for periodic review and evaluation of the National Petrochemicals 
Policy, 2007;  
(ii) Operational issues in the establishment of Plastic Parks; 
(iii)     Preventive measures being followed in the established plastic parks; 
(iv) Delay in securing an anchor tenant at PCPIR, Andhra Pradesh; 
(v) Status of job placements after training in CIPET Centres;  
(vi) Ensuring adequate faculty and requisite infrastructure in all CIPET Centres; 
(vii) ill effects of micro plastics being absorbed into our body; 
(viii) Hazards of single use plastic; 
(ix) Adverse effects on human health of using low grade plastic in pickle packaging; 
(x) Increase in the consumption of plastic; 
(xi) Promotion for energy-efficient and low-carbon technologies in Petrochemicals 
sector; 
(xii) Promotion of Bio-plastics; and 
(xiii) Initiatives undertaken for development of alternative feedstocks in 
Petrochemicals industry; 
 
6. The Chairperson thanked the Secretary, DCPC and the accompanying Officers 
for briefing the Committee on the important aspects relating to the subject and asked 
them to furnish written replies to points raised by the members that remained 
unanswered, at the earliest.  
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
                       [A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record]            
                                       The Committee then adjourned. 

62 
 
          APPENDIX-III 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2025-26) 
Minutes of the Twenty-sixth Sitting of the Committee 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 03rd August, 2026 from 1500 hrs to 1530 hrs 
in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
LOK SABHA MEMBERS 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman 
7. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
8. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
9. Shri Praveen Patel 
10. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
11. Shri Eatala Rajender 
12. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
13. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
14. Shri Naresh Bansal 
15. Shri Subhash Barala 
16. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
17. Shri Arun Singh 
18. Shri Tejveer Singh 
19. Shri L. K. Sudhish 
SECRETARIAT  
4.   Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
5.   Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
6. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
7. Shri Abhishek Kumar  - Joint Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of the following seven draft Reports: 
i. XXX    XXX         XXX             XXX; 
ii. XXX    XXX         XXX             XXX; 
iii. XXX    XXX         XXX             XXX; 

63 
 
 
iv. Thirty-first Report on the subject ‘Review of National Policy on Petrochemicals, 
2007' pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers , Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals;  
v. XXX    XXX         XXX           XXX 
vi. XXX    XXX         XXX           XXX and;  
vii. XXX    XXX         XXX           XXX 
3. After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee  
with slight amendments. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and  
present/lay them in both the Houses of Parliament in the ongoing Monsoon Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 
 
 
 