1 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Fiftieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Promotion of 
Medical Device Industry’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2024/Agrahayana 1946 (saka) 
 
 2 


2 
 
C&F NO. 182 
SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Fiftieth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Promotion of Medical Device Industry’ of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16 December, 2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16 December, 2024 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2024/Agrahayana 1946 (saka) 
 
  


3 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2024-25) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
 
 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2024-25) held on  12 December, 2024. 
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report  
(17th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘ Promotion of Medical Device Industry ’ of the 
Ministry of Chemicals an d Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals). 
 
 

4 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS 
(2024-2025) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
      2.       Shri Brijmohan Agrawa        
 3. Shri Ajay Bhatt         
 4. Shri Robert Bruce C         
 5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi       
 6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman        
 7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale       
 8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang        
 9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha       
 10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur       
 11. Shri Praveen Patel         
 12. Shri Sambit Patra         
 13. Shri Balram Naik Porika        
 14. Shri Sachithanantham R        
 15. Shri Eatala Rajender        
 16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan         
 17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao       
 18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S.        
 19. Shri Nalin Soren         
 20. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon        
 21. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar       
             
      RAJYA SABHA     
            
 22. Shri Subhash Barala         
 23. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli         
 24. Dr. Anbumani Ramadoss        
 25. Shri Sanjay Raut         
 26. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy       
 27. Dr. Kalpana Saini            
 28.      Shri Arun Singh            
 29.      Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh       
 30. Shri Tejveer Singh         
 31. Vacant          
                  
 SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Suman Arora     - Additional Secretary                               
2.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam    - Director                                                  
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh    - Deputy Secretary                                  
4. Ms. Neelam Bhave     - Committee Officer 

5 
 
  
 INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2024-25) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fiftieth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Promotion of Medical Device Industry’  pertaining to the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
2.  The Fiftieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha on 
8th February, 2024. The Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers furnished the ir replies on 08.07.2024 indicating Action Taken on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report. The Committee 
considered and adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 12.12.2024. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Gove rnment on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fiftieth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
12 December, 2024                                                          CHAIRPERSON, 
21 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)               STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS               
  
 
 
 

6 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
  
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers deals with 
action-taken by the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Pharmaceuticals) on observations/recommendations contained in the ir Fiftieth Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) on 'Promotion of Medical Device Industry’ of the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Pharmaceuticals). 
1.2 The F iftieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on              
8th January, 2024. It contained 22 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken 
Replies of Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and 
categorized as follows: 
 (i)  Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government: 
  Rec. Para No.Sl.No.1,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,18,19,20,21,22
            
            (Total=19) 
  These are included in Chapter II of the Report.            
(ii)  Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire   
 to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 Rec. Para No.  - NIL -         (Total=0) 
 These are included in Chapter III of the Report.             
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committe e which  require 
reiteration: 
  Rec. Para No.  2,3 and 17                          (Total = 3)          
  These are included in Chapter IV of the Report.  
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
  Rec. Para No.  - NIL -               (Total = 0)  
  These are included in Chapter V of the Report.  

7 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that  the Action Taken Statement  on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report may be 
furnished to them at the earliest. 
 
1.4  The Committee will now deal with action -taken by the Government on  some of 
their Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 
1.5 Import and Export of Medical Devices 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA  NO. 2) 
  
 “The Committee note that the medical devices is a sunrise sector which is growing 
at a fast pace and its market in the country is expected to grow to USD 50 Billion by 2030. 
It is, however, a matter of concern that, at present, 80 percent of the sales of me dical 
devices in our country comprise imported medical devices. The import value of high-end 
technology medical devices, viz. surgical instruments, electronic equipments and In-Vitro 
Diagnostic Reagents during 2019 -20 was 180 USD million, 3647 USD million and 527 
USD million, respectively. Further, during 2022 -23, the import value in these segments 
was increased to 210 USD million, 4884 USD million and 767 USD million, respectively. 
This is despite the fact that the Department in the year 2020 launched vari ous schemes 
to promote medical device industry like Production Linked Incentives (PLI) and Promotion 
of Medical Device Parks, etc. Besides, during 2022-23, even quantum of exports in these 
segments was only 72 USD million, 1335 USD million and 191 USD million, respectively, 
which was far less than the imports during the year. 
  
 In view of the foregoing , the Committee find that the promotional schemes of the 
Department has so far proved unproductive. Again, in view of the fact that it would be 
extremely difficult to sustain exports of medical devices in the absence of a strong and 
stable domestic medical device industry, the Committee impress upon the Government 
to make all out efforts to remove the bottlenecks for effective implementation of their 
promotional schemes. There is no denying the fact that India has a huge growth potential 
in the manufacturing of medical devices. The Department, however, need to aim at inter-
ministerial and inter -governmental strategies for the implementation of its promotional 
schemes by offering manufacturers competitive advantage for manufacturing in India, so 
that it is more profitable to manufacture in India than to import the medical devices.” 
 
  

8 
 
1.6 The Department in their Action Taken Notes has submitted as follows: 
 
“PLI Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing of Medical Devices :   PLI 
Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing of Medical Devices with total financial 
outlay Rs. 3,420 crore and tenure from FY 2020-2021 to FY 2027-28, provides incentive 
to selected companies at the rate of 5% on incremental sales of medical devices 
manufactured in India and covered under the four Target segments of the scheme, for a 
period of five (5) years. Under the PLI scheme for Medical Devices, 2022-23 was the first 
year of production/performance, wherein, 26 applicants have been selected out of which 
19 projects have been commissioned for 43 medical devices related to cancer care, 
radiology & imaging, anesthetics & cardio respiratory and body implants. Under the 
scheme, domestic manufacturing of high-end medical devices has started which include 
Linear Accelerator, MRI Scan, CT-Scan, Mammogram, C-Arm, MRI Coils, etc. 
Further, based on the arising needs and subsequent to the decision taken with the 
approval of competent authority, the Department has invited the application for Category–
B applicants. In response, 13 applications have been received in 5th Round of application 
window which are under examination. 
 
The Department is regularly interacting with the selected applicants to take their 
inputs for resolving their issues for commissioning of projects and to encourage domestic 
production of medical devices. Further, upto March 2024, the total  cumulative sales of 
5986.56 crore has been made by the applicant which includes the export of 2806.37 crore. 
As on date a cumulative incentive of 48.85 crore were disbursed to the selected applicants 
under the scheme. 
 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Pharmaceuticals, with a financial outlay of 
Rs. 15,000 crores and the tenure from FY 2020- 2021 to FY 2028-29, also covers In-Vitro 
Diagnostic (IVD) medical devices among other pharmaceutical goods. Five applicants 
selected for In-vitro diagnostic medical devices. Under the scheme, an incentive amount 
of Rs.8.84 crore has been disbursed to 3 IVD applicants. 
 
Phased Manufacturing Programme (PMP): Department of Pharmaceuticals vide OM 
dated 22.01.2021 notified Phased Manufacturing Programme  (PMP), whereby tariff 
changes are to be carried out in a phased manner on the medical X -Ray Machines and 
specified sub -assemblies / parts / sub -parts thereof. Further, to boost the domestic 
manufacturing of other medical devices, as per National Medical Device Policy, 2022 Action 
Plan, under the strategy to implement Phased Manufacturing Program (PMP) for critical 
components for Medical Devices,  the Department has initiated the exercise of to identify 
the critical components/medical devices for the PMP.  
 
 Growth in export vis -à-vis import: Currently, India is exporting electronic items like 
ventilators, IVD items like diagnostic kits and Consumables and Disposable items like 
PPEs, sanitizers and surgical gloves etc. During last 03 years between FY 2021-22 to 2023-
24, the CAGR of export is 13.8% while, the CAGR of import is -2.08%. With various 
initiatives being implemented by the Department to boost the domestic production of 
medical devices, exports are expected to increase further, with the likely decreas e in the 
imports.”  
 

9 
 
1.7. The Committee in their original recommendation had noted that  the import 
value of high-end technology medical devices, viz. surgical instruments, electronic 
equipments and In-Vitro Diagnostic Reagents during 2019-20 was 180 USD million, 
3647 USD million and 527 USD million, respectively.  Further, during 2022 -23, the 
import value in these segments had increased to 210 USD million, 4884 USD million 
and 767 million, respectively, despite the fact that the Department in the year 2020 
launched various  schemes to promote medical device industry like Pro duction 
Linked Incentives (PLI) and Promotion of Medical Device Parks etc. The Committee 
had also noted that the promotional schemes of the Department had so far proved 
unproductive.  Emphasizing the fact that it would be extremely difficult to sustain 
exports of medical devices in the absence of a strong and  stable domestic  medical 
device industry, the Committee impressed upo n the Department to make all out 
efforts to remove the bottlenecks for effective implementation of their promotional 
schemes.  The Committee are however dismayed  to observe that the action taken 
reply of the Department  is totally silent about the steps taken to remove the 
bottlenecks  for effective  implementation of their promotional schemes and for 
reducing dependency on imports  and also to increase the exports of medical 
devices.  The Department has merely reproduced the details of va rious Schemes 
being implemented by it such as PLI Scheme for Promoting Domestic 
Manufacturing of Medical Devices, Production Linked Incentive Scheme for 
Pharmaceuticals, P hased Manufacturing  Programme etc.  The Committee 
therefore reiterate their earlier recommendations and  desire that a specific reply 
be furnished by  the Department about the steps taken to remove the bottlenecks 
for an effective implementation of their promotional schemes. 
1.8 Scheme for Promotion of Medical Device Parks 
 
 (RECOMMENDATION PARA No. 3) 
  
“The Committee note that the scheme for the ‘Promotion of Medical Device Parks’ has 
been approved and four medical device parks would be set up  in Himachal Pradesh,  
Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh with an outlay of Rs. 100 crore each, 
for the establishment of common testing and laboratory facilities. The First installment of 
Rs. 30 crore has been released to these States in 2021 -22. It is unfortunate that even a 
modest amount of Rs. 120 crore for four States remained unspent during 2022 -23 and 
only Rs. 89 lakh were utilized. As stated, the release of the next installment depends upon 
the utilization of funds granted in the previous installments.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that the whole scheme has no meaning if funds allocated are not utilized by the 
respective States. There is a need for regular monitoring with regard to the progress of 
the project in coordination with the State agencies so that reme dial measures are taken 
and successful creation of Common Infrastructure Facilities under the scheme is ensured. 
The Committee are unhappy with the tardy progress in the implementation of the 
schemes and urge the Department that the scheme should be implem ented with all 

10 
 
seriousness. Besides, possibilities of expanding the schemes to other States, where the 
medical device industry is more vibrant, should be explored. 
 
1.9 The Department in their Action Taken Notes has submitted as follows: 
 
“The scheme “ Promotion of Medical Devices Parks ”, with a total financial outlay of Rs. 
400 crore provides for the maximum financial assistance of Rs. 100 crore each to 4 
selected States/Union Territories for creation of Common Infrastructure Facilities in the 
upcoming Medical Devices Parks. Under the scheme, final approval for financial 
assistance of Rs. 100 crore each was given to the States of Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, 
Madhya Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh. First installment was released to all 4 selected 
states in 2021-2022. Till the date, three States have almost utilized the first installment of 
Grant-in-aid. 
 
 Further, it is informed that IFCI is engaged as Project Management Agency(PMA) 
under the scheme for providing secretarial, managerial and implementation suppo rt to 
DoP for effective implementation of the scheme as well as to assist Department of 
Pharmaceuticals (DoP) in periodic monitoring of the projects and timely disbursement and 
utilization of the funds.  
 
The Department is regularly reviewing the progress of the creation of the Common 
Infrastructure Facility (CIF) in the four selected Medical Device Parks. The Department 
would keep constant engagement with four State Governments to help further 
development and nurturing of the parks since they will be one o f the main drivers to 
address the domestic manufacturing of medical devices and promote self-reliance in the 
sector.”  
 
1.10. The Committee noted in their recommendation that the first installment of 
Rs. 30 crore released to each of the four States i.e. Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, 
Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh for setting up of Medical  Devices Parks in the 
Year 2021-22 remained  unspent  even during the Year 2022-23.  The Department, 
in their  Action Taken Reply stated that  IFCI has also been engaged as Project 
Management Agency under the Scheme for providing secretarial, managerial and 
implementation support to the Department for  effective implementation of the 
Scheme and also to assist the Department in periodic monitoring of the proj ect 
and timely disburseme nt and utilization of the funds and the Department   is 
regularly reviewing the progress of the creation of the common infrastructure 
facility in the four  Medical Devices Parks.  The Committee are dismayed to note 
that despite regular review of  the progress for setting up the Medical Device 
Parks and engagement of IFCI, the four states have apparently not been able to 
utilize the amount of the first installment  which had since been released  in the 
Year 2021-22. The Committee therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendations 

11 
 
and desire that a detailed information regarding release of subsequent 
installments of funds to the four States alongwith the steps taken for their timely 
utilization be furnished.  The Committee also desire that the reasons for delay in 
utilization of funds may be furnished to them. 
1.11 Human Resource for Medical Device Industry 
 
(RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 17) 
 
 
“One of the major issues being faced by the medical device industry in our country is the 
lack of skilled manpower. The Department has stated to have set up the National Institute 
of Pharmaceutical Education & Research (NIPER) to provide human resource for 
pharmaceutical industry. Further, four amo ng the seven NIPERs at Mohali, Hyderabad, 
Guwahati and Kolkata have started M Tech (Medical Devices) courses in addition to M 
Pharma (Medical Devices) and PhD (Medical Devices) courses already running at NIPER 
Ahmedabad. The Committee are happy to note that a new Scheme on ‘Human Resource 
Development in Medical Devices Sector’ has been approved with an outlay of Rs. 480 
crore for a period of 3 years for financial assistance to government institutions for running 
multi-disciplinary dedicated courses in medic al devices.The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the status with regard to the implementation of the Scheme. 
The Committee further note that, keeping in view the specific technical 
requirements of medical device industry , it isproposed to establish the National Institute 
for Medical Device Education and Research (NIMERs) on lines of NIPERs. While 
appreciating the initiatives being taken for human resource development to fulfill the need 
of the medical device industry, the Committee trust that initiativ es so taken will be 
implemented in letter and spirit and utmost care will be taken to ensure that they do not 
face any resource crunch.”  
 
1.12. The Department in their Action Taken Notes has submitted as follows 
 
“The department has signed MoU with Life S ciences Sector Skill Development Council 
(LSSSDC) on 05.04.2024 for engaging them as Project management Agency (PMA) for 
the Scheme on ‘Human Resource Development in Medical Devices Sector’. 
 
The proposal to establish the National Institute for Medical Dev ice Education and 
Research (NIMERs) on lines of NIPERs was sent to Department of Expenditure, the same 
was not agreed to. Department of Expenditure have stated that with a view to optimize 
use of infrastructure and resources and reduce cost, Department of Pharmaceuticals may 
consider running courses on medical device education & research from existing 
institutions like Universities, NIPER, IIT and Medical Colleges in consultation with Ministry 
of Health & Family Welfare/Department of Health Research and M/O  Education instead 
of setting up more such Institutes.” 
 

12 
 
1.14 The Committee in their earlier recommendation had noted that keeping in 
view the specific technical requirements of medical device industry, the 
Department had proposed to establish the National Institute for Medical Device 
Education and Research (NIMERs) on lines of NIPERs.  The Committee trusted that 
the initiatives taken by the Department would be  implemented in letter  and spirit  
and utmost care would be taken to ensure that the Department does not face any 
resource crunch. Hence, the Department in their Action Taken Reply  has submitted 
that the proposal to establish the National Institute for Medical Device Education 
and Research (NIMERs)  on lines of NIPERs was sent to the Department of 
Expenditure and the Department of Expenditure has not agreed to the proposal 
inter-alia  citin g the reason that with a view to optimize the use of infrastructure 
and resources and reduce cost, the Department of Pharmaceuticals may consider 
running courses on medical device education and research from existing 
institution like Universities, NIPER, I IT and Medical  colleges in consultation with 
the M inistry of Health & Family Welfare, Department of Health Research and 
Ministry of Education instead  of setting up more such institutes.  The Committee 
are perturbed to note this unfortunate sequence of events.  In view of the 
Committee consultation with several Ministries/Departments like  Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare, Departme nt of Health Research and the Ministry of Education 
would itself be an uphill task for the Department of Pharmaceuticals.  They 
therefore desire  to know  as to what course of action  the Department of 
Pharmaceutical has proposed to deal with the issue of NIMERs.  At the same time 
the Committee desire that detailed reas ons alongwith full justification may be 
furnished  for turning down the proposal of Department of Pharmaceuticals by the 
Department of Expenditure  be furnished to them at the earliest. 
……… 
 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 1 
 
1.15. The Medical devices sector is an essential and integral constituent of the  Indian 
healthcare sector. It forms an important pillar in the healthcare delivery system along with 
healthcare providers, pharmaceuticals and health insurance industry, thus helping 
achieve the key objectives of the National Health Policy (NHP) 2017 in te rms of the 
provision of good quality, affordable and comprehensive healthcare to all citizens. 
However, the Committee find that, at present, India’s medical device industry 
manufacturing is limited to low to moderate -end medical devices like consumables, 
disposables and implants and there is a high import dependence to the extent of 70 
percent in the case of high -end medical devices like electronic equipment, advance 
surgical instruments and IVD Reagents to meet our domestic requirements.  
 
The Committee's attention has been drawn to various issues impeding the growth 
of the medical device industry which, inter-alia, include a miniscule investment in research 
and development, less tax concessions, problem of inverted duty structure for domestic 
manufacturers, low capital investment, long gestation period in the induction of new 
technology, lack of skilled manpower, less trained healthcare professionals, lack of 
industry academia collaboration,  limited price and quality regulation etc., which need 
immediate attention of the Government. The Department of Pharmaceuticals has stated 
to have taken certain schematic and non -schematic initiatives to promote the medical 
device industry in the country, which are broadly discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Considering that the initiatives taken by the Department since 2015, when the medical 
device was first added to its mandate, are yet to fructify to actually play a deciding role in 
the promotion of the medical device industry in our country, the Committee sincerely hope 
that the Department will take all required measures to effectively and timely execute  their 
initiatives for promotion of the medical device industry and create a well -developed 
manufacturing ecosystem to counter the domestic manufacturing disabilit ies and 
strengthen domestic manufacturers competitiveness in the international market. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.16. The Government of India has taken several steps to create a medical device 
ecosystem and brand building for the Indian Meditech  sector and the Department is 
regularly monitoring and reviewing the implemented schemes for effective execution.  
 
  

14 
 
(I)      The Programmatic interventions to support Medical Devices sector are as 
follows:- 
 
 PLI Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing of Medical Devices with total 
financial outlay Rs. 3,420 crore and tenure from FY 2020 -2021 to FY 2027 -28, 
provides incentive to selected companies at the rate of 5% on incremental sales 
of medical devices ma nufactured in India and covered under the four target 
segments of the scheme, for a period of five (5) years. Under the scheme, domestic 
manufacturing of high -end medical devices has started which include Linear 
Accelerator, MRI Scan, CT-Scan, Mammogram, C-Arm, MRI Coils, etc. 
 
 Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Pharmaceuticals, with a financial outlay 
of Rs. 15,000 crores and the tenure from FY 2020 - 2021 to FY 2028 -29, also 
covers In -Vitro Diagnostic (IVD) medical devices among other pharmaceutical 
goods. Five applicants selected for In-vitro diagnostic medical devices (1259 IVD 
Products approved so far). 
 
 The scheme “Promotion of Medical Devices Parks”, with a total financial outlay of 
Rs. 400 crore provides for the maximum financial assistance of Rs. 100 crore each 
to 4 selected States/Union Territories for creation of Common Infrastructure 
Facilities in the upcoming Medical Devices Parks. Under the scheme, final 
approval for financial assistance of Rs. 100 crore each were given to the States of 
Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh. Construction 
activities are in progress in all 04 selected parks. So far, 121 plots have already 
been allocated to applicants.  
 
 Scheme for Assistance to the Medical Devices Clusters for the Common Facilities 
and Establishing / Strengthening of testing facilities for the medical devices has 
also been launched (financial outlay of Rs.300 crore for three years period), to 
support 12 Common Infrastructure Facilities in the medical devices clustersand to 
establish 12 testing facilities. 
 
 New scheme on ‘Human Resource Development in Medical Devices Sector ’ has 
been approved with financial outlay of Rs. 480 crore  for the period of three years 
Financial assistance for running multi -disciplinary dedicated co urses in medical 
devices will be provided to government institutions. 
 
 The Cabinet approved the Scheme for Promotion of Research and Innovation in 
Pharma-Med Tech (PRIP) with an outlay of Rs. 5000 crore for a five -year period 
from 2023-24 to 2027-28. The scheme was notified on 17.8.2023, wherein financial 
assistance for research in medical devices will be provided to the industry. 
 
  

15 
 
(II)    The Non-programmatic interventions to support Medical Devices sector are 
as follows:- 
 
 In order to attract investments in medical devices sector, the Government has 
allowed 100% FDI under automatic route. 
 
 The Union Cabinet approved the National Medical Device Policy, 2023 on 
26.04.2023.  Policy aims to  facilitate medical devices sector and guides it to 
achieve its missions through a set of strategies that cover followingsix broad areas 
of interventions for the promotion of the medical device industry: - 
 
 Regulatory Streamlining 
 Enabling Infrastructure 
 Facilitating R&D and Innovation 
 Attracting investments in the Sector 
 Human Resources Development 
 Brand Positioning and Awareness Creation 
 
 Export Promotion Council for Medical Devices (EPC -MD) was established  on 
22.05.2023 with headquarters in Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development 
Authority (YEIDA), Greater Noid a, Uttar Pradesh, under the aegis of D/o 
Pharmaceuticals. The primary objective of EPC -MD is to promote and facilitate 
exports of medical devices and related products from India. 
 
 The National Medical Devices Promotion Council (NMDPC) was set up by DPIIT 
vide OM dated 03.03.2020. Since the D/o Pharmaceuticals has the mandate for 
the promotion of the medical device industry and has created dedicated 
institutional mechanisms such as Standing Forum of Medical Device Associations. 
The NMDPC has been reconstitut ed under the chairpersonship of Secretary, D/o 
Pharmaceuticals, since 05.08.2022. The council consists of stakeholders from 
Government and industry and provides a platform to discuss and resolve various 
regulatory issues for ease of doing business and promotion of the Medical Device 
sector. 
 
 Department of Pharmaceuticals is the nodal Department for implementation of 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) Order for 
providing purchase preference in public procurement. In accordance with the 
revised Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) Orderdated 16.09.2020, 
the Department has issued revised guidelines for implementation of the order for 
medical device sector on 16.02.2021. The Department vide Order dated 
16.02.2021 and 25.03.2021 has also notified 135 & 19 med ical devices 
respectively where there is sufficient local capacity and local competition available 
in the country, under Para 3(a) of PPO Order dated 16.09.2020. This enables 
procurement of these notified medical devices only from the “Class -I local 
suppliers”.  
  

16 
 
(III) Other initiatives for the medical device industry: 
Constitution of Standing Forum of Medical Devices :The Medical Device sector has 
seen significant activity in recent years with increase in demand, introduction of 
Production Linked Incentive  Schemes etc., all of which have contributed to taking on 
board a range of views on important policy issues. The Department has been consulting 
the industry on many of these issues from time to time.  The Department has constituted 
a Standing Forum of Medic al Devices Associations to deliberate upon different issues 
related to Medical Devices that are referred to it by the Department and arrive at a set of 
inputs from industry for policy and program formulation which, in turn, enable the 
Department to underta ke consultation with the wider range of stakeholders including 
regulatory authorities. 
India MedTech Expo-2023:India MedTech Expo (IMTE) 2023, 1st edition, was organized 
by Department of Pharmaceuticals, GoI, from 17th-19th August 2023 at Helipad Exhibition 
Center, Gandhinagar. The event showcased the strength and potential of Indian Medical 
Devices ecosystem. It brought all stakeholders on one platform, creating opportunities to 
network and explore collaborations for sector ’s growth in India. In the Event, more than 
4000 Buyer-Selller meetings were organized and more than 10000 visitors visited INDIA 
MEDTECH EXPO 2023 
1.17. The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of the 
Observations /Recommendations  to  create a medical device ecosystem and 
brand building for the Indian Meditech sector may be regularly monitored, 
reviewed and the status of implementation may be furnished to the Committee 
within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) Order (PPO), 2017 
 
1.18. The Committee note that the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade (DPIIT), pursuant to Rule 153 (iii) of the General Financial Rules 2017, issued the 
Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India) Order (PPO), 2017  dated 15.06.2017 
and the same has been revised on 16.09.2020. Further, the Department, being the nodal 
Department for implementing the provisions of PPO, 2017 for product category ‘medical 
devices’ vide order dated 16.02.2021 and 25.03.2021, has notified 135 in -vitro 
diagnostics (IVD) and 19 medical devices, respectively, having sufficient local capacity 
and local competition in the country. Thus, PPO, 2017 has given preference to domestic 
manufacturers in public procurement of medical devices done by the hospitals of the 
Central Government. The Committee feel that PPO, 2017 can prove to be a significant 
pull for a number of medical device companies to manufacture medical devices in India 
and, therefore, recommend that the Department should make their PLI Scheme broad -
based to gradually cover all the medical devices under it so that more medical device and 
IVD can be notified under Public Procurement Order. 
 
 

17 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.19. DPIIT had identified Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) as the Nodal 
Department for implementing the provisions of the Public Procurement Order, 2017 
(PPO-2017) relating to goods & services related to Pharmaceuticals and Medical Device 
Sector. Further, Do P revised the local content limit for medical devices for giving 
preference in public procurement to local supplier: 
 class I local supplier (local content equal to or more than 50%) 
 class II local supplier (local content more than 25% but less than 50%) 
 Non-local supplier (local content less than or equal to 25%) 
 
Under the PLI scheme for medical devices 138 medical devices have been approved so 
far.  Domestic manufacturing of 43 medical devices has started which include high end 
devices like Linear Acceler ator, MRI Scan, CT -Scan, Mammogram, C -Arm, MRI Coils, 
etc. After approval of the Competent Authority, the Department invited application sunder 
Category–B for 100 products, which included 75 products identified by Technical 
Committee under the scheme for w hich there is import dependency . In response, 13 
applications for more medical devices have been received in 5 th Round of application 
window which are under examination. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 5 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing 
of Medical Devices 
 
 
1.20. The primary objective behind the launch of Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
Scheme to promote domestic manufacturing of medical devices is stated to be to create 
a manufacturing ecosystem for domestic manufacturers. Under this  Scheme, the 
Government will provide an incentive of Rs. 3420 crore to Greenfield projects within a 
span of five years from 2022-23 to 2026-27. The Committee note that out of 64 applicants, 
26 applicants viz. 19 Category-A and 07 Category-B applicants, with criteria for threshold 
incremental sale of Rs. 60 crore and Rs. 20 crore, respectively in the first year, i.e. 2022-
23, have been selected. Each of the Category -A and Category -B applicants will be 
receiving a maximum incentive of  Rs. 121 crore and Rs. 40 crore, respectively. The 
Department, as per scheme guidelines, will disburse an incentive of Rs. 60 crore and Rs. 
120 crore to Category -A applicants; Rs. 20 crore and Rs. 22 crore to Category -B 
applicants for the year 2022 -23 and 2023-24, respectively based on their threshold 
incremental sales performance.  
 
The Committee are satisfied to learn that 26 selected applicants who have 
committed an investment of Rs. 1330.44 crore made investment of Rs. 851.56 crore upto 
June, 2023. Furt her, as per the June, 2023 Quarterly Review Report, 14 projects have 
been commissioned for 36 medical device products related to cancer care, radiology & 
imaging, anesthetics & cardio respiratory and implants like pacemakers etc. Again, after 
the launch of the Scheme, various companies have initiated the production of high -end 
medical devices like Linear accelerator, CT scan, Cath lab, ultrasonography devices, 
mammography devices, MRI coils etc. Besides, the Department has also proposed to 

18 
 
consider PLI appl icants for preference in public procurement, which will give assured 
market to their products.  
 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee trust that the aforesaid PLI schemes 
guidelines and proposed initiatives, if followed in letter and spirit, would yield the desired 
result. At the same time, the Committee are of the opinion that in order to make the 
scheme more effective, there is a need to increase the number of beneficiaries to boost 
the production of medical devices and the Department should make sincere efforts in this 
direction. Further, it is desired that the Department, being the nodal authority, should hold 
regular interactions with Medical Device Industries associates in all the States/UTs and 
take their feedback/inputs to make the Scheme more att ractive while encouraging the 
medical device manufacturers for domestic production of high-end medical devices. 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.21. Under the PLI scheme for Medical Devices, 26 applicants have been selected out 
of which 19 projects have been commissioned for 43 medical device products related to 
cancer care, radiology & imaging, anesthetics & cardio respiratory and body implants. 
Based on the arising needs and subsequent to the decision taken with the approval of 
competent authority, the Department invited the application under Category –B for 100 
products. In response, 13 applications have been received in 5 th Round of application 
window which are under examination.  
 
The Department is regularly interacting with the select ed applicants to take their 
inputs for resolving their issues for commissioning of projects and to encourage domestic 
production of medical devices. The last meeting was held on 05.06.2024.  Further, the 
Department is supporting the applicants to facilitate  resolution of all issues related to 
commissioning of projects through the Project Development Cell (PDC) mechanism. The 
Department has helped in resolution of various issues such as facilitating manufacturing 
licenses from CDSCO and State Drug Controller etc. and other issues in commissioning 
of the projects under PLI schemes. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 6 
 
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Pharmaceuticals 
 
1.22. Under the scheme PLI for Pharmaceuticals, the Department has planned to 
provide an amount of Rs. 250 crore as an incentive to domestic manufacturers on 
incremental sales for in-vitro diagnostic (IVD) devices production for the period 2020-21 
to 2028 -29. Th e Committee are constrained to observe tardy implementation of the 
scheme as out of 21 applications received under the scheme, the Department has 
selected only 5 industry applicants and among them 4 are from the MSME sector. The 
year 2022-23 was the first year to assess the incremental sales on the production of the 
selected applicants and an incentive of just Rs. 4.76 crore has been released to one of 
the IVD applicant out of the total proposed incentives of Rs. 250 crore to the beneficiaries. 
Given the demand and size of IVD manufacturing medical device industry in our country, 
the Committee are not satisfied to note the selection of only 5 applicants and allocation 
of only Rs. 250 crore for a period of seven years which is effective from 2022-23 to 2028-

19 
 
29 for the manufacturing of i n-vitro diagnostic devices . In view of the fact that in -vitro 
diagnostic device is one of an important high -end device having 70 to 80 percent import 
dependencies, the Committee would like to be assured that whatever might be th e 
constraints, serious efforts will be made to successfully implement the scheme. The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the incentives disbursed to applicants during 
2023-24. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.19. As per scheme guidelines clause 4.6,onl y 5 slots were available for selection of 
IVD applicants. Financial year 2022 -23 was the first year of production/performance 
under the scheme and incentive amount of Rs.8.84crore has been disbursed to IVD 
applicants. 
 
1.23. The Committee are disappointed to note that in their Action Taken Notes 
the Ministry have merely stated that there were only 5 slots for the selection of 
IVD applicants, while an incentive amount of Rs.250 crore have been allocated to 
the beneficieries under th e PLI Scheme for Pharamaceuticals.  The Committee 
regret to note that the lapse on the part of the Ministry for not being able to 
implement the scheme in its right earnest for over seven years is deplorable.  The 
Ministry have not befittingly responded to the recommendation of the 
committee.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take 
immediate necessary measures to ensure that the ambit of Clause 4.6 of the 
Scheme is expanded to accommodate more beneficiaries so that our dependency 
for procurement of high -end device such as IVD is not only reduced but the 
incentives are also disbursed to eligible applicants.  The Committee feel that in 
order to augment the procurement of high-end medical devices, Ministry; should 
take earnest efforts in this regard and the Committee may be apprised of the 
same within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 7 
 
NON-SCHEMATIC INITIATIVES FOR PROMOTION OF MEDICAL DEVICE INDUSTRY 
 
National Medical Device Promotion Council 
 
1.24. The Committee learn that the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
Trade (DDPIIT) on 07.12.2018 had set up National Medical Device Promotion Council 
(NMDPC), with members from all the stakeholder departments and representatives from 

20 
 
all the Medical Devices Industry Associations , to deliberate and resolve various issues 
for ease of doing business and promotion of the sector . The Council has  been 
reconstituted on 05.08.2022 under the Chairpersonship of Secretary, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals with appropriate representation from DPIIT. The Committee are happy 
to learn that the NMDPC has been able to resolve issues viz. (i) the V endor registration 
process of Medical Devices on GeM portal  has been simplified for all medical device 
manufacturers (ii) Exemption of Lead in Medical Devices as listed in Schedule I of E -
Waste (Management) Rules, 2022 and the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change (MoEF&CC) has amended the law in line with the industry needs and (iii) 
Transitioning of licensin g of Medical Devices  has been streamlined. Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare ( MoHFW) had published G.S.R. 102 (E) dated 11.02.2020 for 
regulation of medical devices in phases. There are, h owever, certain issues which are 
still under deliberation of NMDPC viz. (i) the demand of industry to reduce the double 
regulatory burden to comply with labeling and packaging requirements specified under 
the Legal Metrology Act and Medical Device Rules and(ii)  Request of the Industry for 
consideration of exemption of accessories/components pertaining to Medical Devices 
from Compulsory Registration Order, 2012 of Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY), according to which no person shall manufacture or store for sale, 
import, sell or distribute goo ds which do not conform to the Indian standard specified in 
the order.  The Committee have been informed that MeitY is open to examination of 
component items for exemption if it is to be used only for the manufacturing of medical 
devices. The Industry has been advised to furnish the details to the MeitY for further 
examination.  
 
Considering these matters being deliberated in NMDPC to be of the utmost 
importance as they are associated with medical products labeling and standards having 
implications on quality and safety of medical device products, the Committee desire that 
both the matters may be deliberated upon, in depth, in the Council weighing all the pros 
and cons before coming to a resolution. The Committee would like to be kept informed of 
the updated status in this regard. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.25. National Medical Device Promotion Council (NMDPC)  consists of stakeholders 
from Government and industry and provides a platform to deliberate and resolve various 
issues for ease of doing business and promotion of the sector. As per issues highlighted 
by the Committee, the issue of exemption of accessorie s/components pertaining to 
Medical Devices from Compulsory Registration Order, 2012 of Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY) is under consideration with MeitY (OM dated 13.05.2024 
is enclosed). Further, the issue to comply with labelin g and packaging requirements 
specified under the Legal Metrology Act and Medical Device Rules, is also under active 
consideration and will be taken up in the next meeting of NMDPC, to be convened soon.  
 
1.26. The Committee are not satisfied with the Action Taken Notes furnished by 
the Ministry which are not only evasive but also lack clarity on critical issues such 
as issues relating to reduction in the double regulatory burden to comply with 

21 
 
labelling and pack aging requirements; exemption of accessories /components 
pertaining to medical devices from compulsory registration.  The Committee are 
not satisfied with the casual and routine reply of the Ministry on these issues.  
The Committee while reiterating their earlier recommendations urge the Ministry 
to intensify the measures to address the issues which are still under the 
deliberation of NMDPC with utmost sincerity as they are associated with medical 
products which may have implications on quality and safety o f medical device 
products.   
RECOMMENDATION No. 8 
 
Standing Forum of Medical Devices Associations 
 
1.27. It is further learnt that the Department of Pharmaceuticals has constituted a 
Standing Forum of Medical Devices Associations on 25th August, 2021 to deliberate upon 
the different issues related to medical devices and it has given inputs for the draft Uniform 
Code for Medical Device Marketing Practices (UCMDMP). The Committee learn that 
presently, due to litigation pending on this matter in the Supreme Court, the conduct of 
pharmaceutical/medical device companies is governed by  the Uniform Code of 
Pharmaceutical Marketing Practices (UCPMP). After the directions of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in the matter of UCPMP, further action in UCMDMP will be taken. O nce 
the UCMDMP is adopted, medical device promotion will be done within ethical limits and 
boundaries. In addition, the Standing Forum also headed a task force on the mapping of 
testing infrastructure for medical devices and has submitted its Report to the  Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare (M/o H & FW) for consideration and action.  
 
The Committee feel that with the transition towards licensing of all types of medical 
devices, the requirement of testing equipments and testing infrastructure for Class A,  B, 
C and D type of medical devices will increase and in this regard the recommendations 
given by the Standing Forum on Medical Device Associations will be of immense value. 
The Committee, therefore, desire the Department of Pharmaceuticals to ensure that the 
M/o H&FW / CDSCO soon consider the Report of the Standing Forum of Medical Device 
Associations and take suitable and timely action on its recommendations. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.28. As per Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in order to increase the Medical 
Device testing facility in the country, all the stakeholders were requested through public 
notice dated 03.04.2024 (copy enclosed) to identify and register their facility for testing 
medical devices on behalf of the manufacturer, in application Form MD-39 along with the 
requisite information with fees as per MDR, 2017. In 12.03.2024 all the existing medical 
Devices testing Laboratories have been requested to submit the endorsement application 
for expending scope of testing facility for other category of medical devices which are not 
included in the existing registration certificate. 
 

22 
 
Furthermore, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoH&FW) has incorporated 
provision in the Medical Device Rules, 2017 vide G.S. R no. 409 (E) dated 02. 06.2023, 
to enable State Government to notify their laboratory having facility for carrying out test 
and evaluation of particular medical devices as “State Medical Devices Testing 
Laboratory” and also to notify Medical Devices Testing Officer. 
 
For Strengt hening of Government Medical Devices Testing Laboratory in the 
country, the CDSCO has informed the Central Medical Device Testing laboratories to 
identify and expand scope of Medical Devices testing. 
 
1.29. The Committee feels that the Action Taken Note submitted by the Ministry 
is not only ambiguous but is also devoid of facts.  The soft peddling being done 
by the Ministry to ask the existing medical device testing laboratories to submit 
without any follow up action clearly indicates the casual approach of the Ministry 
in dealing with the critical issue of such magnitude.  The Committee are of the 
view that the Ministry should make genuine efforts to take cognizance of the 
recommendation given by the Standing Forum on Medical Device Association in 
order to streamline logistics and also to optimize the transition towards licensing 
of all types of medical devices and requirement of testing equipments and testing 
infrastructure for Class A,B,C and D type of medic al devices.  The Committee 
further desires that the Ministry of H&FW/CDSCO ought to monitor 
implementation of the recommendations of the standing forum and device a 
framework to establish right kind of environment and infrastructure to ensure 
smooth transition. The Committee may be apprised of the progress /status from 
time to time. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 9 
 
Price Regulation of Medical Devices 
 
1.30. The Committee note that there are only 4 Medical Devices (Cardiac stents, drug 
eluting stents, condoms and intra uterine devices) that have been included in the National 
List of Essential Medicines(NLEM) by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, and 
hence covered under Schedu le-I of the Drugs (Prices Control)Order, 2013. The ceiling 
prices of these 4 scheduled medical devices are notified by National Pharmaceutical 
Pricing Authority (NPPA). In the year 2017, NPPA vide S.O 2668(E) dated 16.08.2017 
fixed the ceiling price of knee  implants to control the excessive trade margins of 
orthopedic knee implants under extraordinary circumstances. Later, during the post -
Covid crisis, a Delhi High Court judgement dated 17.05.2021 directed NPPA to regulate 
the prices of medical devices. Resu ltantly, Gazette Notification No. 2161 (E) dated 3rd 
June 2021 and Notification No 2808 (E) dated 13th July 2021 were issued to cap the 

23 
 
Trade Margin at Price to Distributor (PTD) at 70% for medical devices, namely, Oxygen 
Concentrators, Pulse Oximeter, Blo od Pressure Monitoring Machine, Nebulizer, Digital 
Thermometer and Glucometer.  
 
In view of the foregoing, the Committee are of the considered opinion that the 
devices which are required for critical care to the patients should be listed under National 
List of Essential Medicines. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals should take up the matter with NPPA, for inclusion of 
other medium and high -end medical devices which are used for critical care of the 
patients, at highest level with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in public interest.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.31. The issue related to inclusion of medical devices under the National List of 
Essential Medicines (NLEM) comes under the purview of Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare. Vide this Department's OM dated 02/04/2024, D/o Health Research, MoHFW 
has already been requested to include a representative of DoP/NPPA for the ongoing 
consultation w.r.t. preparation of List of Medical Devices. 
 
The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoH&FW) has constituted a committee 
for finalization of National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM). The matter for inclusion of 
other medium and high end medical devices which are used for critical care of the patients 
will be taken up with the said committee.  
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 10 
 
Regulation of Medical Devices under Medical Device Rules, 2017 
 
1.32. The Committee note that the Department of Health and Family Welfare is 
responsible for the regulation of quality, safety, labelling & performance of medical 
devices and in this respect, Medical Device Rules, 2017 have been formulated under the 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act,1940. Further, Central Drugs Standard Control Organization 
(CDSCO) regulates import of all classes of medical devices and manufacture of Class 
C&D medical devices whereas the State Licensing Authorities (SLA), appointed by the 
State Governments, are responsible for the regulation of the manufacture of Class A&B 
medical devices as well as sale and distribution of all classes of medical devices.  
 
The Committee further note that,  as per MoH&FW Notification GSR 102(E)dated 
11.02.2020, all non-notified medical devices are presently under regulation. Accordingly, 
Class A and B medical devices have come under licensing regime w.e.f. 01.10.2022 and 
Class C&D medical devices have come under licensing regime w.e.f. 01.10.2023. 
Henceforth, for manufacturing and marketing of any type of Class A, B, C and D medical 
device, a manufacturer has to get license for its respective regulator i.e. CDSCO or State 
Licensing Authorities. In this regard, the DoH&FW has stated to have received 3413 
manufacturing license applications so far and out of the same 2262 applications have 
been approved. The Committee are satisfied to learn that all those manufacturers whose 
applications are pending will still be allowed to sell their products for the next six month 
without any penalty. The Committee would like to be ensured that all the necessary 

24 
 
arrangement will be made to complete the process of the issuance of license to the 
manufacturers of all kind of devices in a time-bound manner.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.33. As per Department of Health and Family welfare, the applications for grant of 
manufacturing license for all class of Medical Devices is reviewed and processed as per 
stipulated timelines of Medical Devices Rules-2017 (MDR-2017) provided the documents 
for the checklist available are found satisfactory. For minimal disruption in implementation 
of licensing regime for Class-C and Class-D Medical Devices with effect from 01.10.2023 
as per G.S.R 102 (E) dated 11/02/2020, a circular issued thereby relaxing for  the Six 
month for all those manufacturers who has submitted applications before 01.10.2023. 
 
1.34. The Committee note with satisfaction that the applications for grant of 
manufacturing license for all class of medical devices will be reviewed and 
processed subject to fulfillment of eligibility criteria. While the Ministry has spelt 
out the course of action for the grant of license in respect of Class C&D medical 
device with effect from 01.10.2023, the Action Taken Notes do not mention 
insofar as grant of license in respect of Class A&B medical devices are concerned.  
The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and impress upon the 
Ministry to ensure that all the necessary arrangements will be made to complete 
the process of issuance of license to t he manufacturers of all kind of device in a 
time bound manner. 
 The Committee also recommends that since Class A&B categories are 
regulated by the State License Authorities (SLA), the Ministry should sensitize the 
States that on their part that arrangements are required to be made so that best 
practices are implemented without unnecessary skewed delays as is commonly 
believed. 
RECOMMENDATION No. 11 
 
Notified Bodies and their role in regulation 
 
1.35. The Committee have been informed that under Medical Device Rules, 2017, 13 
Notified Bodies have been registered to audit and inspect manufacturing sites of Class 
A&B medical devices for quality standards. For Class C&D medical devices, audits are 
conducted by Central Medical Device Officers. 
 
The Committee, however, are not satisfied to note that there are only 13 Notified 
Bodies to undertake audit duties and inspections of medical devices at manufacturing 

25 
 
sites. The Committee, therefore, desire that immediate measures be taken to increase 
the number of Notified Bodies and equip them with suitable technical infrastructure and 
manpower to carry out audit functions for handling humongous task of ensuring quality, 
safety and efficacy of Class A&B medical devices manufactured in our country. Further , 
the Committee trust that the Department of Health & Family Welfare would take utmost 
care to ensure that the Central Medical Device Officers are well equipped and trained to 
carry out audits of Class C&D medical devices in the country. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.36 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare informed that as per information 
available on the website of the National Accreditation Board for Certification Bodies 
(NABCB), NABCB has certified sixteen (16) certification bodies for issuance of Medi cal 
Device Quality Management System Certificate and out of these fourteen (14) certification 
bodies has been registered as Notified Body (NB) with CDSCO.  Further, CDSCO 
convened periodic meetings with the registered Notified Bodies and State Licensing 
Authority (SLA) to monitor /obtain feedback on Notified Bodies functioning and availability 
of suitable technical infrastructure and manpower to carry out audit functions of Class - A 
& Class -B medical devices manufactured in our country. Furthermore, CDSCO has 
conducted various training programs to equip and train the Medical Device officers to 
regulate the Medical Devices. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 12 
 
Materio-vigilance Programme of India (MvPI) 
 
1.37 The Committee note that the M aterio-vigilance Programme of India (MvPI) is in 
operation since 10.02.2015 to ensure the safety and efficacy of medical devices in the 
country. Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission (IPC) Ghaziabad is a National Coordination 
Centre for MvPI. In the case of medical device adverse events,  IPC issues 
recommendations to CDSCO to take necessary regulatory action. MvPI publishes 
medical device safety information on the IPC website for public awareness and conducts 
various workshops/webinars/physical meetings throughout the country for the 
stakeholders. Also , safety alerts are being issued to monitoring centres for Medical 
Device Adverse Event for safety surveillance of medical devices. As has been informed, 
there are 397 Medical Device Adverse Event Monitoring Centres enrolled under MvPI. 
Besides, the MoH&FW has issued letter to the State Health Secretaries regarding the 
enrolment of district level hospitals/institutions under MvPI and, in response, States/UTs 
of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka and Puducherry have issued an office order to their 
respective State’s District hospitals/medical colleges to participate in MvPI.In addition, 
IPC-MvPI has also recognized 06 Regional Training centres, viz. (i) PGIMER, Chandigarh 
(ii) NIPER, Hajipur (iii) AIIMS, Bhopal (iv) NIMHANS, Bangaluru (v) Alshifa Col lege of 
Pharmacy Kerala and (vi) AMTZ, Vishakhapatanam for the effective implementation of 
MvPI. 
 
While appreciating the initiatives taken to expand the network of Adverse Events 
Monitoring Centres, the Committee would desire that continuous efforts be made to enroll 
more number of Adverse Event Monitoring Centres in view of the actual requirements of 
such centres in the country to keep a strict vigil over such incidents.  

26 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.38 As per information received from Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission (IPC), 
National Coordination Centre –Materio-vigilance Programme of India (NCC -MvPI) has 
diligently pursued various avenues to expand the enrolment of new Medical Device 
Adverse Event Monitoring Centres (MDMCs), tailored to meet the specific requirements 
of such facilities. These efforts include - Government initiatives such as Order dated 
October 14, 2022 issued by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India to 
all the states /UTs regarding the enrolment of all district level hospitals under MvPI. 
Subsequent to the order issued, Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and Puducherry have 
issued G.O. to all the healthcare settings to actively participate under MvPI.Continuous 
training and awareness programmes conducted by IPC-MvPI and its monitoring centres 
sensitize and encourage the healthcare settings to participate under MvPI and address 
the evolving needs of medical device safety and surveillance. Moreover, the mandatory 
enrolment of  all NABH -accredited hospitals in MvPI as per the NABH 5th edition 
guidelines further encourages healthcare settings to be part of MvPI. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 13 
 
1.39 The Committee note to their surprise that in the years 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 and 
2022, the number of alert notices issued by CDSCO for Medical Device Adverse Event, 
were only 4, 2, 0, 4 and 3 respectively.  The Committee desire that factors responsible 
for the less number of such alert notices should be looked into and remedial measures 
be taken for the effective implementation of the Materio-vigilance Programme of India 
(MvPI) so as to ensure the safety and efficacy of medical devices in the country.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.40 As per Department of Health and Family Welfare, the Medical Device Safety Alert 
is issued by the Licensing Authority based on the reported Serious Adverse Event (SAE) 
on the Medical Devices. Certain Adverse Events (AEs) are bein g rectified by the 
manufacturer through Field Safety Corrective Action (FSCA) and certain major events for 
which product recall is required is identified and taken up to ensure Safety, Quality and 
Performance of the Medical Devices. However, maintaining th e trend of Adverse Event 
(AE) and Serious Adverse Event (SAE) for medical devices are undertaken by the 
Materio-vigilance Programme of India (MvPI) and time to time regulator is informed for 
taking suitable remedial measures.  
 
As per information received from Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission (IPC) , 
factors contributing to fewer Medical Device Safety Alerts/Notices are: 
 
 Underreporting of Adverse Events:  Lack of awareness or reluctance among 
healthcare professionals and consumers to report adverse events related to 
medical devices. 

27 
 
 Inadequate Reporting Infrastructure:  Insufficient resources and infrastructure 
for collecting, analyzing, and disseminating i nformation on medical device safety 
issues 
 
Remedial Measures for Effective MvPI Implementation: 
 
 Awareness Campaigns: Launching targeted awareness campaigns to educate 
stakeholders about the importance of reporting adverse events and the role of 
MvPI in ensuring medical device safety. 
 Streamlined Reporting Mechanisms: Simplifying reporting procedures and 
providing user -friendly platforms to encourage timely and accurate reporting of 
adverse events. 
 Capacity Building: Offering training and resources to healthcare professionals and 
regulatory authorities to enhance their ability to identify, report, and address 
medical device safety concerns. 
 Collaboration and Information Sharing: Facilitating collaboration among 
stakeholders to promote transparent communication and sharing of information on 
medical device safety issues. 
 Number of Medical Device Adverse Event reporting to MvPI and action taken 
on them, year-wise. 
 
S.No. Year Total adverse event reports 
1 2021 3473 
2 2022 5685 
3 2023 9255 
 
All the adverse events received at IPC via reporting forms, mobile app, toll -free 
helpline number or post were checked for their completeness or validity, analyzed to 
obtain signal, if any. Based on the analysis, MvPI has forwarded advisory notices to its 
monitoring centres for further surveillance and to CDSCO for regulatory interventions. 
The details are given as under: -  
 
S.No. Year Total 
advisory/Alerts to 
Monitoring 
Centres 
Total 
Recommendations to 
CDSCO 
1 2021 13 5 
2 2022 9 9 
3 2023 7 13 
 
Further, NCC -MvPI, IPC is continuously engaged in conducting awareness 
programmes, CMEs, basic and advanced level training courses and participate in medical 
expo, seminars/webinars to update our stakeholders on MvPI, its importance, recent 
activities and updates in the area. Total 27 Training/workshop were organized in 2023. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 14 

28 
 
 
Medical Device Testing Laboratory 
 
1.41. The Committee note with concern that there are only 6 Central Medical Device 
Testing Laboratories notified by the Government for carrying out the statutory test and 
evaluation of various medical devices. Further, there are 39 medical device testing 
laboratories registered by CDSCO to carry out testing on behalf of device manufacturers 
for various medical devices and 35 listed labs for the testing of IVD. All these laboratories 
are NABL accredited. Since there is shortage of Government labs, CDSCO is relying on 
other NABL accredited laboratories. The Committee are of the considered opinion that 6 
Central Medical Device Testing Laboratories are grossly inadequate, keeping in view the 
size of the country. As the testing facility for medical devices plays a crucial role in 
deciding the quality and cost of domesti cally produced medical devices, it would be 
appreciated if at least one Central Medical Device Testing Laboratory is set up in proximity 
of medical device industry clusters in the country. Such measures, if undertaken, would 
definitely help in reducing the  cost of production which ultimately will improve the 
availability and affordability of medical devices in the domestic market. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that the Department of Pharmaceuticals should take up 
the matter for setting up of more Central Medical Device Testing Laboratories in the 
country with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare/CDSCO at the highest level and 
expeditiously take concrete steps in this regard. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.42. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoH&FW) has incorporated provision in 
the Medical Device Rules, 2017 vide G.S. R no. 409 (E) dated 02.06.2023, to enable 
State Government to notify their laboratory having facility for carrying out test and 
evaluation of particular medical devices  as “State Medical Devices Testing Laboratory” 
and also to notify Medical Devices Testing Officer. For Strengthening of Government 
Medical Devices Testing Laboratory in the country, the CDSCO has informed the Central 
Medical Device Testing laboratories to identify and expand scope of Medical Devices 
testing. 
 
Report on Task Force on “Mapping of Testing Infrastructure for Medical Devices in India” 
shared with CDSCO recommended that CDSCO should regularly invite applications from 
NABL accredited labs by issuing circulars for them to get registered with CDSCO for the 
purpose of testing of medical devices. It is recommended that this information of labs by 
the CDSCO may be disseminated with the medical device industry associations as well 
as State Licensing Authorities (SLAs) in a proactive manner.  
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 15 
 
GST and Custom Duty 
 
1.43. The Committee take note of the domestic manufacturing disabilities such as high 
GST rates (around 12% to 18 %) on domestically produced medical devices and low 

29 
 
custom duty on imported finished medical devices in comparison to Basic Custom Duty 
on raw material, subparts, parts etc. that has created a vicious circle of high dependence 
on imported medical devices.  The Department of Revenue has, however, clarified th at 
the reduction in GST rates creates an inverted duty structure and blockage of input tax 
credit. 
 
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that inverted duty structure 
occurring due to anomaly in the levying of Basic Custom Duty Rates has cause d major 
disadvantage to domestic medical devices manufactures as the cost of domestically 
produced item is higher in comparison to the imported item. In this regard, the Department 
of Pharmaceuticals has introduced Phased Manufacturing Programme (PMP), whe rein 
the Department of Revenue has to increase the basic custom duty in a phased  manner 
on the Medical X -Ray Machines and specified sub -assemblies/parts/sub-parts. In 
addition, based on industry request and sufficient domestic manufacturing capacity, the 
Department has also requested the Department of Revenue to increase Basic Custom 
Duty on 40 finished products to protect the interest of the domestic manufacturers.  
 
The Committee are of the view that the medical devices sector is at a nascent 
stage of development and in order to promote private players investment, it is necessary 
to make the domestic products competitive, which require Government support in terms 
of reducing the GST rates for domestically produced medical devices considering 
international competition in export market and the ‘Make in India’ initiative. Moreover, 
there is also a need to support the domestic manufacturers by giving them attractive 
custom duty concessions on the import of electronic components, metal compounds, 
plastics resins, reagents etc. used for manufacturing medical devices as a short term 
measure till the time the industry does not attain self -sufficiency in the manufacturing of 
raw material, subparts, parts, etc. The Committee further desire that Phased 
Manufacturing Programme (PMP) may gradually be extended to other medical devices in 
a time-bound manner. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.44. The recommendation of the Committee to support the domestic manufacturers by 
giving them attractive custom duty concessions on components/parts/subparts, to boost 
manufacturing to make the industry self-sufficient is noted.  
 
After examining the request re ceived from the industry, the Department vide OM 
dated 12.04.2023 has recommended the list of 40 medical devices to Tax Research Unit - 
I, Department of Revenue, to consider the increase in Basic Custom Duty and imposition of 
Health Cess, which are either c urrently exempted from BCD or those where sufficient 
domestic manufacturing capacity has come up in last years.  
 
Further, it is to apprise that Department of Pharmaceuticals vide OM dated 
22.01.2021 notified Phased Manufacturing Programme (PMP), whereby tariff changes are 
to be carried out in a phased manner on the medical X -Ray Machines and specified sub -
assemblies / parts / sub-parts thereof. Further, to boost the domestic manufacturing of other 
medical devices, as per National Medical D evice Policy, 2022 action plan, under the 
strategy to implement Phased Manufacturing Program (PMP) for critical components for 

30 
 
Medical Devices,  the Department has initiated the exercise of to identify the critical 
components/medical devices for the PMP.  
 
1.45. The Committee observed that though much has been done to boost 
domestic manufacturing of medical devices, however, the Committee desires 
that the Ministry may device a mechanism to see to it that attractive duty 
concessions and reasonable reduction i n the GST rates are effectuated in 
consultation with other stake holders so that the momentum is not lost and the 
benefits of PMP are able to reach beyond the realms of a few medical devices.  
The Committee may be apprised of the status in this regard. 
RECOMMENDATION No. 16 
 
Investment in Research and Development 
 
1.46. According to medical device industry associates, for high -end medical device 
research there is a need for Government investment in R&D as medical device 
manufacturer end up investing a huge amount on R&D, which includes cost of failures as 
well. The Committee are happy  to note that the Department has recently launched the 
‘National Policy on R&D and Innovation in the Pharma -MedTech Sector in India’ on 
26.09.2023 to encourage R&D in pharmaceuticals and medical devices sectors and 
create an ecosystem for innovation in drug discovery and innovative medical devices by 
incubating an entrepreneurial environment. This policy will incentivize investment in 
research, exploring various funding mechanism and enhancing academia -industry 
collaboration. Also, a new Scheme for the Promotion of Research and Innovation in 
Pharma-Med Tech (PRIP) has been launched on 17.08.2023 with an outlay of Rs. 5000 
crore for a period of 5 years from 2023-24 to 2027-28. This scheme reflects the intent of 
the R& D policy. One component of this sche me aims at Strengthening  the Research 
Infrastructure through Centres of Excellence (CoEs) to be established in the seven 
existing National Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education & Research (NIPERs), at a 
tentative cost of Rs. 700 crore (including recurring and non-recurring cost) over a period 
of five years. The second component of this Scheme will provide financial assistance to 
the companies/ projects for both in -house and academic R&D in six specified priority 
areas including medical devices. T he Committee are hopeful that with the launch of the 
Policy on R&D as well as the Scheme for Promotion of Research and Innovation in 
Pharma-Med Tech (PRIP), R&D infrastructure will be strengthened and enabling 
ecosystem for research will be created in NIPERs. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.47. In order to strengthen the Research Infrastructure under Promotion of Research 
and Innovation in Pharma-Med Tech (PRIP) Scheme, Department has invited proposals 
for setting up Centre of Excellence (CoE) from all the NIPERs which h ave since been 
received and are under examination. Out of the seven CoE proposed, CoE for Medical 

31 
 
Devices will be set up at NIPER -Ahmedabad which will help in strengthening the R&D 
infrastructure in the Sector. 
 
Under Component B, Companies/MSME/Startups will be financially supported for 
R&D in six priority area including Medical Devices. This step will help leverage significant 
private investment in R&D in high -end technologies like -robotic devices, telemedicine,  
SiMD (Software in Medical Devices), SaMD (Software as Medical Device) etc. and help 
in developing innovative products in the country. 
  
RECOMMENDATION No. 18 
 
1.48. The Committee was apprised during the evidence held on 14.12.2022 that 236 
Medical Device Officers (MDO) have been notified in CDSCO and States have also 
notified MDO’s as per Medical Device Rules, 2017. 23 Drugs Inspector (Medical Devices) 
and 03 Assistant Drugs Controller (Medical Devices) with engineering background were 
appointed in Medical  Device Division. In addition, 219 new posts at various levels  from 
the lowest level of medical device officer to the supervisory level officer, joint medical 
device officer and additional drug controller level officers  have been created by the 
Department of Expenditure on 13 July 2022.  
 
The Committee are of the opinion that the recruitment process for 236 notified and 
219 created posts, which is pending for more than a year, would have serious implications 
on regulation as well as issuing lice nses to manufacturers. The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Department of Pharmaceuticals to impress upon the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare/CDSCO to expedite the process of recruitment and appointment on 
aforesaid posts and keep them apprised of the same. Further, the Committee would like 
to be ensured that the recruitment of specialized cadre of Medical Device Officers for 
performing the crucial task of regulation and audit of medical devices would be done 
within the prescribed timeline without fai l. Moreover, CDSCO should also follow up 
recruitment of Medical Device Officers with States that have notified such posts as per 
Medical Device Rules, 2017. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.49. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has informed that the matter related to the 
recruitment of 219 sanctioned posts has been initiated and is under consultation with 
DoPT for the finalization of Recruitment Rules (RR). 
RECOMMENDATION No. 19 
 
 
Training for Regulation of Medical Devices 
 
1.50. The Committee note that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has been 
imparting training to State Licensing Authorities for an effective implementation of Medical 
Device Rules, 2017. However, the Committee learnt from the representatives of the 
medical device industry during an informal discussion that much more handholding and 
training is required for all stakeholders in the Medical Device ecosystem for proper 

32 
 
understanding of the recently announced rules, regulations and procedures in this regard. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that more training 
programmes/workshops/interactive sessions should be conducted with concerned States 
Licensing Authorities and representatives of the medical device industry for clear 
understanding and effective implementation of Medical Device Rules, 2017. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.51. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has informed that various training programs 
with States Licensing Authorities have been conducted by CDSCO. Various measures 
such as periodic meetings with representatives of the medical device industry, issuance 
of FAQ and Guidelines and PRO at Zonal and Headquarter level are undertaken for clear 
understanding and effective implementation of Medical Device Rules, 2017. 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 20 
 
National Standards for domestically produced medical device 
 
1.52. The Committee have been informed during an informal discussion with the medical 
device industry representatives at Goa and Kochi held in May, 2023 that the absence of 
national standards for all dome stically produced medical devices is a matter of concern 
for the industry. The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) lays down the standards for 
medical dev ices and has published 1540 Indian Standards for medical devices. The 
Committee note that there are 6000 plus medical devices in the market and are growing 
day by day. Therefore, in th e absence of National Standards for medical devices 
manufactured in India, domestic manufacturers are forced to follow the WHO/American/ 
European standards, which also limits the export of Indian made medical devices in other 
countries. Further, a wide variety of testing standards are to be complied by the 
manufactures even for low risk class medical devices and procurement agencies also 
come with different standards which poses challenge to the manufacturer. 
 
The Committee learn that BIS has now prepared a 5 -year Standards National 
Action Plan (SNAP) for the year 2022-2027 in which sector-wise priority areas (including 
medical devices and healthcare) for standardization have been identified, which are being 
taken up and prioritized by the respective technical committees.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly urge the DoP/BIS to expedite the process of setting up National 
Standards for all types of medical devices to save the interest of domestic medical device 
manufacturers. Further, the Committee would like the Department of Pharmaceuticals to 
convince MoH&FW/CDSCO for using a ‘National Mark’ for all medical devices that comply 
with BIS/IEC standards to ease procurement related con cerns and facilitate exports as 
well. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.53. The adoption and expansion of Indian standards for Medical Devices has been 
specified under strategy “Regulatory streamlining” of National Medical Device Policy, 
2023.The Department of Pharmaceuticals is following up with BIS on regular basis for 
development of standards for Medical Devices.  

33 
 
 
  Further, as per Bureau of Indian Standard (BIS) the standardization activities in 
the field of medical sector are as follows:  
 
(a) The standards development in the field of Medical Sector is carried out by BIS 
through its 20 Technical Committees which deals with formulation of Indian standards 
in specific areas, which also includes Indian Standards on various types of Medical 
Devices. 
 
(b) Various stakeholders like Regulator, Ministry, Hospitals, Manufacturers, Industry 
Association, Consumers, Academic Institutions, R&D Experts and Labs are involved in 
the standards setting process so that the interests of all categories of organizations are 
protected through the consensus based deliberations in the Committee.  
 
(c)  As on date, BIS has published 1615 Indian Standards pertaining to medical 
sector, out of which 1169 Standards are related to medical devices which includes 
product standards, testing standards, safety. 
 
(d) Further, 187 new documents pertaining to medical sector are also under various 
stages of standards development based on national priorities which includes 93 
documents that are related to medical devices includi ng product standards and testing 
standards. 
 
Further, with respect use of 'National Mark' for all medical devices that comply 
with BIS/IEC standards to ease procurement related concerns and facilitate exports , it is 
informed that: 
 
(a) BIS operates the pro duct certification scheme which ensures conformity of the 
product to the requirements of the relevant Indian Standard. BIS Certification is 
granted to manufacturers permitting them to use BIS Standard Mark (ISI Mark) on the 
product. The BIS certification scheme is voluntary in nature. 
 
(b) However, as per the provisions of Section 16 of the BIS Act, 2016 the Central 
Government can direct compulsory use of BIS Standard Mark on products under various 
considerations viz. public interest, protection of human, animal or plant health, safety of 
environment, prevention of unfair trade practices and national security. For such 
products, the concerned line Ministry of the Government directs mandatory use of B IS 
Standard Mark under a Licence or Certificate of Conformity (CoC) from BIS through 
issuance of Quality Control Orders (QCOs). 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 21 
 
Single Window System/ Unified Application Portal 
 
1.54. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee by the medical device industry 
representatives that the presence of multiple -regulators have made the setting up of 
industry and manufacturing medical devices a time taking process which impairs 
investment, often causing delays in product launch.  Currently, the licensing framework 

34 
 
for medical devices is spread across several legislations, guidelines and policies 
(including the Medical Devices Rules, 2017 and Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940), and is 
governed b y a host of regulators, including the Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation, National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority and State Licensing Authorities. 
Hence, the current regulatory landscape is complex, which inhibits business. The 
Committee, however, find some consolation in the fact that the National Medical Devices 
Policy, 2023 envisages to have Single Window Clearance System for the medical devices 
sector in line with the National Single Window System (NSWS) for medical devices sector, 
integrating all the regulators of the MedTech Sector. Further, the Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare are in the process of integrating various departments/ministries 
concerned, like the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), Atomic Energy Regulatory Board 
(AERB), Minis try of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), Department of 
Animal Husbandry and Dairying, etc. with the Medical Device Portal. The Committee are 
hopeful that the proposed system for the licensing of medical devices would minimise 
duplication of e fforts and compliance burdens for licensing medical devices . The 
Committee urge the Department to take immediate necessary steps to expedite the 
creation of a Single Window System/Unified Application Portal for medical device industry 
so as to enhance the ease of doing business in this sector.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.55. As informed by Department of Health and Family Welfare, currently feasibility of 
integration of the existing online portal of the other departments with the CDSCO portal 
is being executed by the C-DAC (Software development agency). 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 22 
 
 
Regulation of Refurbished/Pre-owned Second-hand Medical Devices 
 
1.56. The Committee are constrained to observe that presently, there is no specific 
provision under Medical Device Rules 2017, to regulate refurbished/pre -owned second-
hand medical devices. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC), howeve r, is regulating the import and use of refurbished/second-hand 
medical devices under Hazardous and Other Waste (Management and Transboundary 
Movement) (HOWM) Rules, 2016. Further, import of high -end and high value medical 
devices has been liberalized after MoEF&CC amended HOWM rules vide its notification 
dated 23.12.2022. The Committee are deeply concerned to note that CDSCO does not 
maintain any data/record for safety and quality standards of such products and neither 
assessment is being done to evaluate t heir ill effects on public health.  
 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that, due to laxity in regulatory 
framework with regard to quality, safety and efficacy assessment of second -hand/used 
medical devices, the standard of health services in our country is being compromised. 
Besides, the easy importation of refurbished medical devices is weakening the ‘Make in 
India’ initiative. Also, it should be kept in view that m arket in developing countries like 
India is generally price sensitive, resulting i n the strong emergence for refurbished 

35 
 
medical devices, as such medical devices are cheaper and save out -of-pocket 
expenditure of the patients to a large extent.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the needful be done at the earliest to ensure safety, quality and efficacy 
of imported second -hand medical devices by regulating them under Medical Device 
Rules, 2017, in the best interest of the public at large. Also, in order to safeguard the 
interest of domestic manufacturers, it becomes imperati ve to restrict the import and use 
of such products which are being manufactured in India and initiatives are required to 
be taken in this direction. The Department of Pharmaceuticals should take up these 
issues with the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare/  CDSCO on an urgent basis.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
1.57. With respect of the issue of import and use of refurbished/second-hand medical 
devices under Hazardous and Other Waste (Management and Transboundary 
Movement) (HOWM) Rules, 2016 , a DO letter from Secretary (DoP) dated 08.05.2024 
was sent to Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. MoEFCC vide OM 
dated 03.06.2024, stated that the OM dated 19.06.2023 w.r.f. the import of the list of 50 
High End and High Value used Medical Devices to be allowed of import, was issued after 
the consultation with DGHS and MoHFW . Further, a meeting on the issue of import of 
refurbished High -End-High-Value medical device was convened on 09.05.2024 and 
chaired by Member (Health) NITI Aayog, wherein, the following outcomes/decisions were 
taken:  
i. The MoEFCC notification of  23.12.2022 and 19.06.2023 should be withdrawn in 
view of the key observations. 
ii. Refurbished MDs may only be permitted from OEMs located and making in India.  
iii. Imports of new high - end and high - value medical equipment, through GTE 
exemption, may be continued. 
iv. CDSCO to frame a Policy for regulation of refurbished devised under  MDR 2017, 
after constitution of a committee, including DoP as a member. 
v. BIS to develop standards for all priority MDs identified by MoHFW and NITI Aayog 
jointly, within next 3 months. 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE  COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
   
  
 
-   NIL  -  
 
 

36 
 
 
 
  

37 
 
 
CHAPTER - IV 
 
OBSERVATION S/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION  
  
(RECOMMENDATION No. 2) 
 
Import and Export of Medical Devices 
 
1.58 The Committee note that the medical devices is a sunrise sector which is growing 
at a fast pace and its market in the country is expected to grow to USD 50 Billion by 2030. 
It is, however, a matter of concern that, at present, 80 percent of the sales of medical 
devices in our country comprise imported medical devices. The import value of high-end 
technology medical devices, viz. surgical instruments, electronic equipments and In-Vitro 
Diagnostic Reagents during 2019 -20 was 180 USD million, 3647 USD million and 527 
USD million, respectively. Further, du ring 2022-23, the import value in these segments 
was increased to 210 USD million, 4884 USD million and 767 USD million, respectively. 
This is despite the fact that the Department in the year 2020 launched various schemes 
to promote medical device industry like Production Linked Incentives (PLI) and Promotion 
of Medical Device Parks, etc. Besides, during 2022-23, even quantum of exports in these 
segments was only 72 USD million, 1335 USD million and 191 USD million, respectively, 
which was far less than the imports during the year. 
  
In view of the foregoing , the Committee find that the promotional schemes of the 
Department has so far proved unproductive. Again, in view of the fact that it would be 
extremely difficult to sustain exports of medical devices in  the absence of a strong and 
stable domestic medical device industry, the Committee impress upon the Government 
to make all out efforts to remove the bottlenecks for effective implementation of their 
promotional schemes. There is no denying the fact that India has a huge growth potential 
in the manufacturing of medical devices. The Department, however, need to aim at inter-
ministerial and inter -governmental strategies for the implementation of its promotional 
schemes by offering manufacturers competitive advantage for manufacturing in India, so 
that it is more profitable to manufacture in India than to import the medical devices. 
 
  

38 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.21 The programmatic interventions to support Medical Devices sector are as follows 
 
PLI Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing of Medical Devices :   PLI 
Scheme for Promoting Domestic Manufacturing of Medical Devices with total financial 
outlay Rs. 3,420 crore and tenure from FY 2020-2021 to FY 2027-28, provides incentive 
to selected companies at th e rate of 5% on incremental sales of medical devices 
manufactured in India and covered under the four Target segments of the scheme, for a 
period of five (5) years. Under the PLI scheme for Medical Devices, 2022-23 was the first 
year of production/performance, wherein, 26 applicants have been selected out of which 
19 projects have been commissioned for 43 medical devices related to cancer care, 
radiology & imaging, anesthetics & cardio respiratory and body implants. Under the 
scheme, domestic manufacturing of high-end medical devices has started which include 
Linear Accelerator, MRI Scan, CT-Scan, Mammogram, C-Arm, MRI Coils, etc. 
Further, based on the arising needs and subsequent to the decision taken with the 
approval of competent authority, the Department has invited the application for Category–
B applicants. In response, 13 applications have been received in 5th Round of application 
window which are under examination. 
 
The Department is regularly interacting with the selected applicants to take their 
inputs for resolving their issues for commissioning of projects and to encourage domestic 
production of medical devices. Further, upto March 2024, the total cumulative sales of 
5986.56 crore has been made by the applicant which includes the export of 2806.37 crore. 
As on date a cumulative incentive of 48.85 crore were disbursed to the selected applicants 
under the scheme. 
 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme for Pharmaceuticals , with a financial outlay of 
Rs. 15,000 crores and the tenure from FY 2020- 2021 to FY 2028-29, also covers In-Vitro 
Diagnostic (IVD) medical devices among other pharmaceutical goods. Five applicants 
selected for In-vitro diagnostic medical devices. Under the scheme, an incentive amount 
of Rs.8.84 crore has been disbursed to 3 IVD applicants. 
 
Phased Manufacturing Programme (PMP): Department of Pharmaceuticals vide OM 
dated 22.01.2021 notified Phased Manufacturing Programme (PMP), whereby tariff 
changes are to be carried out in a phased manner on the medical X -Ray Machines and 
specified sub -assemblies / parts / sub -parts thereof. Further, to boost the domestic 
manufacturing of other medical devices, as per National Medical Device Policy, 2022 Action 
Plan, under the strategy to implement Phased Manufacturing Program (PMP) for critical 
components for Medical Devices,  the Department has initiated the exercise of to identify 
the critical components/medical devices for the PMP.  
 
 Growth in export vis -à-vis import: Currently, India is exportin g electronic items like 
ventilators, IVD items like diagnostic kits and Consumables and Disposable items like 
PPEs, sanitizers and surgical gloves etc. During last 03 years between FY 2021-22 to 2023-
24, the CAGR of export is 13.8% while, the CAGR of impor t is -2.08%. With various 
initiatives being implemented by the Department to boost the domestic production of 

39 
 
medical devices, exports are expected to increase further, with the likely decrease in the 
imports.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter –I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION No. 3 
 
Scheme for Promotion of Medical Device Parks 
 
1.59. The Committee note that the scheme for the ‘Promotion of Medical Device Parks’ 
has been approved and four medical device parks would be set upin Himachal Pradesh, 
Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh with an outlay of Rs. 100 crore each, 
for the establishment of common testing and laboratory facilities. The First installment of 
Rs. 30 crore has been released to these States in 2021 -22. It is unfortunate that even a 
modest amount of Rs. 120 crore for four States remained unspent during 2022 -23 and 
only Rs. 89 lakh were utilized. As stated, the release of the next installment depends upon 
the utilization of funds granted in the previous insta llments. The Committee are of the 
opinion that the whole scheme has no meaning if funds allocated are not utilized by the 
respective States. There is a need for regular monitoring with regard to the progress of 
the project in coordination with the State ag encies so that remedial measures are taken 
and successful creation of Common Infrastructure Facilities under the scheme is ensured. 
The Committee are unhappy with the tardy progress in implementation of the schemes 
and urge the Department that the scheme s hould be implemented with all seriousness. 
Besides, possibilities of expanding the schemes to other States, where the medical device 
industry is more vibrant, should be explored. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
1.60. The scheme “Promotion of Medical Devices Parks”, with a total financial outlay of 
Rs. 400 crore provides for the maximum financial assistance of Rs. 100 crore each to 4 
selected States/Union Territories for creation of Common Infrastructure Facilities in the 
upcoming Medical Devices Parks. Under the scheme, final approval for financial 
assistance of Rs. 100 crore each were given to the States of Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, 
Madhya Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh. First installment was released to all 4 selected 
states in 2021-2022. Till the date, three States have almost utilized the first installment of 
Grant-in-aid. 
 
 Further, it is informed that IFCI is engaged as Project Management Agency(PMA) 
under the scheme for providing secretarial, managerial and implementation support to 
DoP for effective impl ementation of the scheme as well as to assist Department of 
Pharmaceuticals (DoP) in periodic monitoring of the projects and timely disbursement and 
utilization of the funds.  
 
The Department is regularly reviewing the progress of the creation of the Common 
Infrastructure Facility (CIF) in the four selected Medical Device Parks. The Department 
would keep constant engagement with four State Governments to help further 

40 
 
development and nurturing of the parks since they will be one of the main drivers to 
address the domestic manufacturing of medical devices and promote self-reliance in the 
sector.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter –I of the Report) 
 
  

41 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
- NIL – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
12 December, 2024                                                          CHAIRPERSON, 
21 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)               STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS               
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
  

42 
 
APPENDIX II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE          
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN    
THEIR FIFTIETH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON ‘PROMOTION OF 
MEDICAL DEVICE INDUSTRY’ OF THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
(I) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations                                             22 
 
(ii)  Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
 Government: 
  Rec. Para No.Sl.No.1,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,18,19,20,21,22            
              (Total=19) 
 
         Percentage of Total:: 86% 
  .            
(iii)  Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire   
 to pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
 Rec. Para No.  - NIL -            (Total=0) 
           Percentage of Total:: 0%                                                    
              
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee which require 
reiteration: 
  Rec. Para No.  2,3 and 17                          (Total = 03) 
                                                                                      Percentage of Total : 14%          
    
(v) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
  Rec. Para No.  - NIL -                    (Total = 0) 
                                                                                Percentage of Total : 0%  
    
  

43 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2024-25) MINUTES 
OF THE SIXTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 12 th December, 2024 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1600 hrs. in the Committee Room ‘D’, PHA, New Delhi. 
  
PRESENT 
 
     SHRI AZAD KIRTI JHA -    CHAIRPERSON 
 
     MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Robert Bruce C 
4. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
5. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
6. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
7. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
8. Dr. Sambit Patra  
9. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
10. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
11. Shri Eatala Rajender 
12. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
13. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
14. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
15. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
16. Shri Subhash Barala 
17. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
18. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
19. Dr. Kalpana Saini 
20. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
21. Shri Tejveer Singh 

44 
 
  
SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Suman Arora   - Additional Secretary 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Nagendra Suman  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Abhishek Kumar  -  Deputy Director 
6. Ms. Neelam Bhave   - Committee Officer 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following Draft 
Reports:  
(i) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
(ii) Second Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by th e Government on 
the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Fiftieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ‘Promotion of Medical Device Industry’ 
of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of 
Pharmaceuticals,  
(iii) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
(iv) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
(v) XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX 
 
3. Giving an overview of the important Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of the Members. 
4.      After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee without 
any amendment. 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and present/lay 
the Reports in both the Houses of Parliament in light of factual verifications received from 
the concerned Ministry/Departments. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 