i 
 
 
 
 
 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
           MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘ Review of the Functioning of Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology 
(IPFT)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
  JULY, 2026/    SRAVANA 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
  
26 
 


ii 
 
 
CC&F NO. 206 
 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the Functioning of Institute of Pesticide 
Formulation Technology (IPFT)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27 July, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27 July, 2026 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
  JULY, 2026/ SRAVANA 1948 (SAKA) 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26) (iv) 
Introduction v 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
13 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
19 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
20 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
27 
 
APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2025-26) held on 29th June, 2026 
28 
II Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report 
of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘ Review of the Functioning of Institute of Pesticide 
Formulation Technology (IPFT)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
30 
 
  

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
21. Vacant* 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
25. Shri Manmohan Samal& 
26. Shri Arun Singh 
27. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
28. Shri Tejveer Singh 
29. Shri L. K. Sudhish%  
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant  
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Vandana Rawat - Assistant Executive Officer  
 
* Vacant vice Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon, MP(LS), passed away on 19.02.2026 vide LS Table Office Notification 
No.21/4(8)/2026/TO(B) dated 20.02.2026. 
& Nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 04.06.2026 Para No. 5267.  
% Nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 04.06.2026 Para No. 5267. 
Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli, MP(RS) retired from the membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 21.06.2026 vide RS Bulletin Part II No. 
66058 dtd 09.01.2026   
Dr. Bhagwat Karad, MP(RS) retired on 02.04.2026 vide RS Bulletin Part II No. 66058 dtd 09.01.2026   
Shri G.K. Vasan, MP(RS) retired on 02.04.2026 vide RS Bulletin Part II No. 66058 dtd 09.01.2026   
  

v 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Twenty-sixth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Nineteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of the Functioning of Institute Of Pesticide Formulation 
Technology (IPFT)’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals). 
 
2.  The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya Sabha on 10th, 
February, 2026. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals, furnished their replies on 11th May, 2026  indicating Action Taken on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report. The Committee considered 
and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 29th June, 2026. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                    Azad Kirti Jha 
29 June, 2026                                                                            Chairperson, 
08 Ashadha, 1948(Saka)                                                         Standing Committee on 
                                                            Chemicals and Fertilizers 
 
 

1 
 
 
 REPORT 
 
              CHAPTER–I 
 This Report deals with action taken by the Government on 
observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
contained in their Nineteenth Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on  the subject ‘ Review of the 
functioning of Institute of Pesticide formulation Technology (IPFT) ’ pertaining to the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
1.2 The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 10th February, 2026. It contained 1 2 Observations/Recommendations. The Replies 
of the Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Rec. Para No. 2, 4,5 ,8 10  and12  
 
Chapter-II Total- 06 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
                      Rec.   NIL                                                      
Chapter–III Total–‘NIL’ 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee which require 
reiteration: 
                      Rec. 1, 3, 6, 7, 9, and 11  
Chapter-IV Total– 06 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
                      Rec.  NIL 
 
Chapter–V Total- ‘NIL’ 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I be furnished to them within three months of 
the presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4      The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 

2 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
1.5.   The Committee made the following recommendation regarding fixing periodic 
targets for development of Pesticide formulation: 
 
 The Committee note that IPFT was established way back in the year 1991 as an 
Autonomous Institute under the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers as the successor of Pesticide Development Program in India 
(PDPI), which was established in the year 1986 in collaboration with the Government of 
India by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). As regards 
achieving goals and objectives by IPFT, the Committee note that since the inception of 
IPFT, it has developed 86 pesticide formulations, out of which 64 technologies have been 
transferred to Industries. The Committee also note that IPFT has inter-alia developed 47 
new formulations besides engaging in other activities like conducting analytical studies, 
filing of Patents and Research Papers, etc. The Committee, however note with concern 
that IPFT had not fixed any periodic targets for development of pes ticide formulation, 
quantum of new formulations for transferring them to Industries in the last 34 years of its 
functioning. The Committee further note that during the huge time period of 34 years of 
its functioning which spans more than three (03) decades IPFT has developed 86 
pesticide formulations amounting to a meager 2.5 percent pesticides formul ations per 
year. The Committee observe with dissatisfaction, the slow pace of IPFT and desire that 
they may be apprised about the precise reasons for non -fixation of yearly targets. The 
Committee recommend that IPFT should immediately review its functionin g in 
consultation with the Department and bring forth initiatives for development of pesticide 
formulations at a faster pace as per the needs of the industries as well as farmer 
communities across the Country. 
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The facts and figures as observed by the Hon’ble Committee are respectfully 
noted. However, it is submitted that IPFT has consistently aligned its activities with 
the evolving needs of the agrochemical industry and the agricultural sector. The 
Institute remains committed to  identifying and expanding areas for growth in the 
development and transfer of pesticide formulation technologies. 
It is pertinent to mention that pesticide formulation development is largely demand-
driven and market -oriented. IPFT undertakes development of formulation 
technologies based on specific requirements of the agrochemical industry, 
including molecule -specific and application -oriented needs. The Institute 

3 
 
possesses the requisite expertise and infrastructure to meet such demands of the 
industry. In this context, IPFT has developed 86 formulation technologies and 
successfully transferred 6 4 technologies to industry for commercialization , 
reflecting its sustained contribution to the agrochemical sector. 
The development of pesticide formulations is a complex, multi -stage process , 
involving laboratory research, bio -evaluation, pilot -scale optimization, and 
compliance with regulatory requirements prescribed by the Central Insecticides 
Board and Registration Committee (CIB&RC). These processes are inherently 
time-intensive and resou rce-driven, and therefore not amenable to rigid annual 
numerical targets. 
Further, formulation development constitutes only one of the core activities of 
IPFT. The Institute also undertakes: 
• Comprehensive chemical characterization and analytical studies 
• Residue monitoring and risk assessment , including long -term studies in districts 
of Haryana and collaborative work in Rajasthan 
• Support and promote the regulatory compliance and quality assurance 
In the last few decades, the issue of pesticide residues in food commodities and 
environment spheres has predominantly gained the attention of all stakeholders 
and IPFT has strategically shifted focus towards development of safer, residue -
minimized, and eco-friendly formulations, including biopesticides. The Institute is 
actively working towards establishing a biofoundry facility in collaboration with the 
Department of Biotechnology under the BioE3 policy, aiming to provide an 
integrated platform for development and evaluation of biopesticides derived from 
plant, microbial, and waste-based resources. 
IPFT has also undertaken extensive farmer outreach and capacity -building 
initiatives, conducting over 40 awareness programmes across more than 25 
districts in 10 states, promoting safe pesticide use, integrated pest management, 
and adoption of biopesticides for sustainable agriculture. It is further submitted that 
the scope of IPFT’s work could not be viable to be restricted to fixed formulation 
targets, as the requirements of the agrochemical sector are dynamic and 
influenced by regulatory, environmental, and market considerations . IPFT 
reiterates its commitment to enhancing its performance and contributing effectively 
to the needs of the agrochemical industry and farming community in a sustainable 
and impactful manner”. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.7 The Committee had observed that during the last 34 years, IPFT had 
developed only 86 formulations out of which only  64 technologies could be 
transferred to the industries.  The Committee had also pointed out that no yearly 
targets were fixed by IPFT.  In their Action Taken Notes, it had been submitted that 
development of pesticide formulations was a complex, multi -stage process, 
involving laboratory research, bio -evaluation, pilot -scale optimization and 

4 
 
compliance with regulatory requirements prescribed by the Central Insecticides 
Board and Registration Committee (CIB&RC). These processes were inherently 
time-intensive and resource -driven and therefore not amenable to rigid annual 
numerical targets. The Committee does not find  this contention totally acceptable 
and are of the considered view that some guiding principles be laid down for the 
functioning of the IPFT with quantifiable targets fixed not only for development of 
formulations but also for comprehensive chemical characterization and analytical 
studies, residue monitoring and risk assessment for long-term studies in Districts 
of Haryana and collaborative work in Rajasthan , the Committee are of the 
considered view that qualitative and quantitative targets may be fixed for 
promoting regulatory compliance and quality assurance for conducting of farmers 
awareness programmes across the Country. In the absence of concrete data, the 
Committee do not find convincing the contention of IPFT that it had consistently  
aligned its activities with the evolving needs of the agrochemical industry and the 
agricultural sector  and t he Institute remain ed committed to identifying and 
expanding areas for growth in the development and transfer of pesticide 
formulation technologies. The Committee reiterate that broad targets in respect of 
various aspect of functioning of the IPFT may be laid down and the Committee be 
apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
Recommendation No. 3  
1.8 The Committee made the following recommendation regarding fixing reasonable 
prices for New Generation Pesticides: 
 
The Committee were informed that new generation pesticides formulation 
technologies, which are being developed by the IPFT are better than the conventional 
pesticides formulations containing large amount petroleum derived organic solvents and 
composed of f ine dusty powders. The Committee, however note that price of new 
generation pesticide formulations depends on the type of pesticides, formulation 
technology, concentration and brand and the actual market price was determined by the 
industry partner, taking  into account production cost, commercialization strategy and 
affordability for farmers. The Committee observe that the price fixation of new generation 
pesticide formulations, if left totally to the industry partner with IPFT having no say in this 
regard, may leave scope for manipulation by the industry partner. The Committee are of 
the considered view that the new generation pesticides formulation which are much better 

5 
 
than the conventional pesticides formulations must reach farmers all across the country 
so that the benefits of new generation pesticides formulation developed by IPFT are 
reaped proportionately by one and all across the agriculture sector. The Committee 
desire that the IPFT and the Department work together in tandem and recommend that 
appropriate steps be taken for determination of reasonable prices for new generation 
pesticides formulation of IPFT so as to make it available to the farmers at affordable 
prices. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. It is submitted that IPFT has 
been actively engaged in the development of new generation pesticide formulation 
technologies, which are cost-effective, safer, environmentally benign, and superior 
to conventional solvent-based and dust formulations. 
 
It is respectfully submitted that price determination of pesticide formulations is 
governed by market dynamics, including cost of raw materials, scale of production, 
regulatory compliance, distribution channels, and commercial strategies of the 
industry pa rtner. As per the existing framework, IPFT transfers technologies to 
industry for commercialization, and the pricing is determined by the industry based 
on the manufacturing and marketing over-heads. 
However, IPFT recognizes the concern of the Hon’ble Committee regarding 
affordability and accessibility to farmers, and has taken/initiated the following 
steps: 
• Development of cost -effective and scalable formulations, including water -
based and solvent-free technologies, to reduce production costs. 
• Promotion of multiple licensing of technologies to avoid monopolistic 
practices and enhance competitive pricing. 
• Focus on biopesticides and green formulations, which are inherently safer 
and can be produced at decentralized levels. 
• Engagement with farmer producer organizations (FPOs), cooperatives, and 
public sector agencies for wider outreach”. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.10 Noting the benefits of new generation pesticides formulation technologies , 
the Committee  had emphasized that these formulation must reach all farmers 
across the Country so that benefits are reaped across the agriculture sector.  
However, the Department in its Action Taken notes  has submitted that price 
determination of pesticide formulations was governed by market dynamics, 
including cost of raw materials, scale of production, regulatory compliance, 
distribution channels and commercial strategies of the industry partner. As per the 
existing framework, IPFT transfers technologies to industry for commercialization 

6 
 
and pricing is determined by the industry based on the manufacturing and 
marketing over-heads. The Committee are of the considered view that IPFT need 
to take some proactive steps to make the new generation pesticides formulation 
technologies across the agriculture sector. The Committee, therefore, reiterate its 
earlier recommendation that the Department as well as IPFT must design a way out 
to ensure that benefits of new generation pesticides formulation technologies 
reaches across the Country and to each and every farmer invariably as IPFT is 
stated to be engaged in public welfare-oriented research.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
Recommendation No. 6  
 
1.11 The Committee made the following recommendation regarding further 
strengthening the function of IPFT: 
 
 As regards new generation pesticides formulation for agriculture and as well as for 
household pest management and their pricing, the Committee were informed that IPFT 
was a Research and Development Institute focused on the development of pesticides 
formulation technologies and it does not engage in production or marketing of any of its 
formulations. The IPFT after development of formulations merely transfers the 
technologies to the industries for commercial production and marketing. The Committee 
are intrigued about the reasons restricting the IPFT for production and marketing of its 
formulations despite being in existence for 34 years. The Committee therefore, desired 
that IPFT come up with feasibility studies towards expanding its ventures for production 
as well as market its formulations in the coming future. The Committee note that as 
regards the size of IPFT, it is very small as compared to its objectives and mandate. IPFT 
has however submitted that based on the emerging needs of the sector, the capacity  of 
IPFT can be strengthened. The Committee are of the considered view that it is high time 
for the IPFT to go for deep introspection for further strengthening its functions including 
mass production and marketing of its own products so that the institute can successfully 
compete with the private players in the market. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the steps taken in this regard.  
 
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. It is respectfully submitted 
that IPFT was established as a specialized R&D institution with a mandate to 

7 
 
develop, validate, and transfer pesticide formulation technologies to industry, 
rather than to undertake commercial production and marketing. This model has 
enabled IPFT to promote technology dissemination across multiple industry 
partners, avoid duplication of infrastructure, and support the broader agrochemical 
ecosystem. 
It is further submitted that production and marketing of pesticide formulations 
require significant investments in manufacturing infrastructure, regulatory 
approvals, distribution networks, and working capital, which are typically beyond 
the scope of a res earch-oriented institution. Accordingly, technology transfer to 
industry has been adopted as a scalable and efficient mechanism for 
commercialization. 
It is also submitted that IPFT’s current approach of non -exclusive technology 
transfer ensures wider availability of technologies, promotes competition, and 
prevents monopolistic practices in the market”. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.13 The Committee had recommended that the IPFT to go for deep introspection 
for further strengthening its functions including mass production and marketing 
of its own products so that the institute can successfully compete with the private 
players in the market . However , the Department in the Action Taken Notes ha d 
submitted that production and marketing of pesticide formulations require 
significant investments in manufacturing infrastructure, regulatory approvals, 
distribution networks and working capital, which are typically beyond the scope of 
a research-oriented institution. The Committee are of the conside red view that as 
agriculture sector already is reaping benefits of the pesticides formulation 
developed by the IPFT , feasibility studies towards exp anding its ventures for 
production as well as marketing its formulation in the near future  would further 
augment its activities . The Committee , therefore, reiterate that the IPFT must 
initiate feasibility studies accordingly and come up with a concrete proposal in this 
regard in consultation with the Department. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Department as well as IPFT. 
 
 

8 
 
Recommendation No. 7  
 
1.14 The Committee made the following recommendation regarding farmers awareness 
programmes: 
 
 
The Committee are happy to note that for promoting the safe use of pesticides, 
IPFT had initiated farmer awareness programmes. These programmes were stately 
initiated in the year 2022-2023. The Committee further note that from the year 2022-2023 
to 2024-2025, a total of 32 such programmes were conducted by IPFT where a total of 
just 9223 farmers participated in these programmes who provided positive feedback.  The 
Committee find these figures grossly inadequate keeping in view the fact that the farmers 
across the Country totals to more than 10 crores. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the IPFT and the Department come out with a roadmap to conduct such programmes 
periodically and to encourage more and more farmers to participate in them so that the 
benefits are reaped by all farmers across the nation.  
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The Department through IPFT has been organizing farmer awareness 
programmes across the country to enhance farmers’ knowledge regarding the use 
of new -generation pesticide formulations in agricultural practices. These 
programmes are aimed at educating farmers on the safe, judicio us, and effective 
use of pesticides, particularly highlighting the advantages of new -generation 
formulations that offer improved efficacy, lower dosage requirements, and 
comparatively reduced environmental impact. Farmers are also s ensitized about 
safe handling practices, proper application techniques, and the importance of 
adhering to the guidelines issued by the Central Insecticides Board and 
Registration Committee. During the last four years, from 2022 –23 to 2024-25, 32 
farmer awareness programmes  have been organized by IPFT in remote areas 
across various States of the country. During the year 2025 -26, 11 such farmers 
awareness programs were organized in 6 different states and 4565 farmers had 
participated. In total, these 43 programmes during the period 2022-23 to 2025-26 
have benefited more than  15,000 farmers, who received training and awareness 
in local languages”.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.16 The Committee had recommended that the Department should come out 
with a roadmap to conduct farmers awareness programmes periodically and to 
encourage more and more farmers to participate in them so that the benefits are 
reaped by all farmers across the na tion. The Department has inter-alia submitted 
that from 2022 -23 to 2024 -25, 32  farmer awareness programmes  have been 
organized by IPFT in remote areas across various States of the country. During the 
year 2025-26, 11 such farmers awareness programs were or ganized in 6 different 

9 
 
states and 4565 farmers had participated. In total, these 43 programmes during the 
period 2022-23 to 2025-26 have benefited more than 15,000 farmers, who received 
training and awareness in local languages. These figures little bit seems to be 
satisfactory but it appears to the Committee that more serious efforts need to be 
put to organize farmers awareness programmes keeping in view that farmers 
across the country totals to more than 10 crore.  
 
Recommendation No. 9 
1.17 The Committee made the following recommendation regarding optimum utilization 
of IPFT infrastructure: 
 
 The Committee note that IPFT at present has laboratories under its three divisions 
viz (i) Formulation division, (ii) Analytical division and (iii) Bio-Science division. The 
formulation division is stated to have laboratory set up for development of pesticides 
formulations for agricultural as well as household pest management and it also have pilot 
plant facility that can scale up lab scale research t o a commercial production with 
optimum budget and it has capacity to produce upto 100 kg. per shift. Similarly the 
analytical division is accredited and equipped with chemical testing of pesticides. The 
bio-science division is equipped to evaluate the diff erent pesticides formulations by the 
IPFT or by the industry for their commercial viability through well -equipped bio -assay 
laboratory, green house/ glass house and experimental field trials. Admittedly, IPFT has 
pilot plant facilities but was never utiliz ed for commercial production. The Committee 
deplore the same and recommend that the IPFT should initiate ameliorative steps for full 
capacity utilization of its installed capacities in so far as plants and laboratories are 
concerned. To this extant, the Committee desire that appropriate monitoring mechanism 
be put in place to ensure optimum capacity utilisation of IPFT infrastructure. 
 
1.18 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. It is submitted that IPFT has 
established well-equipped infrastructure comprising Formulation, Analytical, and 
Bio-Science divisions, including pilot plant facilities for scale -up of laboratory -
developed technologies. 
It is respectfully submitted that the pilot plant facility is primarily intended for 
process optimization, validation, and demonstration of technologies prior to 
transfer to industry, rather than for continuous commercial production. This 
approach ensures that technologies are developed, standardized, and transferred 
efficiently to industry for large-scale manufacturing. 
However, the concern of the Hon’ble Committee regarding optimal utilization of 
infrastructure is duly acknowledged. In this regard, IPFT has identified the 

10 
 
following steps: 
• Strengthening inter-division integration (Formulation, Analytical, Bio-
Science) for end-to-end utilization of facilities; 
• Establishment of a centralized monitoring mechanism for tracking 
infrastructure utilization, including: 
• Periodic review of facility usage; 
• Performance indicators for each division”. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.19 The Committee had noted that IPFT has pilot plant facility for commercial 
production but was never utilized for commercial production and had 
recommended that IPFT should initiate ameliorative steps for full capacity 
utilization of its installed capacities in so far as plants and laborat ories are 
concerned.  The Department in their Action Taken notes has submitted that pilot 
plant facility is primarily intended for process optimization, validation, and 
demonstration of technologies prior to transfer to industry, rather than for 
continuous commercial production.  In this regard, the committee note with deep 
concern that so far IPFT could transfer 64 pesticides formulation technologies out 
of 86 pesticides formulation technologies developed, it therefore implies that the 
pilot plant facilities were used sparingly during the  last 35 years.  This is a not 
satisfactory commentary on the part of IPFT. The Committee , therefore, reiterate 
its recommendation that the Department as well as IPFT must immediately review 
their policy to use the pilot plant facility and ensure that it is used optimally for the 
benefits of the farmers of our country.  
Recommendation No. 11 
 
1.20  The Committee made the following recommendation regarding non transference 
of remaining 22 formulations to the industries: 
 
 
The Committee note that since inception of the IPFT, it has developed 86 
pesticides formulations out of which, only 64 technologies have been transferred. A total 
of 22 pesticides formulations could not be transferred according to IPFT. Stately, the 
market for bio-based formulations was not very robust at present and even if IPFT was 
not able to transfer such formulations, they will be transferred in future once the market 

11 
 
for bio based pesticides picks up. The Committee are not satisfied with the submission 
of the IPFT. The Committee observed that the reasons for non-transfer of its 22 pesticides 
formulations needs to be analyzed in a professional manner and IPFT need to work on 
the development of further formulations keeping in view the needs of the industry and the 
farmers. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.  
 
1.21 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. It is submitted that out of 86 
pesticide formulation technologies developed by IPFT, 64 technologies have been 
successfully transferred to industry, while 22 technologies could not be transferred 
due to a combination of technical, market, and regulatory factors. 
It is further submitted that the majority of the 22 non -transferred technologies 
pertain to bio-based pesticide formulations and nano-formulations. 
In respect of bio-based formulations, these have largely been developed under 
externally funded R&D projects (e.g., NASF) and are currently at different stages 
of development. The processes of comprehensive evaluation, field trials, and 
subsequent pilot -scale optimization  are underway, which are prerequisites for 
regulatory approval and technology transfer. These technologies are expected to 
be taken up for commercialization upon successful completion of these stages. 
In respect of nano-formulations, these have been developed as part of advanced 
research initiatives at IPFT . However, at present, there is no specific regulatory 
framework or approval mechanism available under the Central Insecticides Board 
and Registration Committee (CIB&RC) for such formulations. This regulatory gap 
is a key constraint in transferring these technologies to industry for commercial 
production. IPFT is actively engaging with stakeholders and monitoring 
developments in the regulatory domain, and will facilitate technology transfer as 
and when appropriate regulatory guidelines are established”. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.22 The Committee had recommended that the reasons for the non transfer of 
22 pesticides formulation needs to be analysed in a professional manner and IPFT 
should work on the development of further formulation keeping in view the need 
of the industry and farmers. The Department in their action taken notes had 
submitted that 22 technologies could not be transferred  due to a combination of 
technical, market, and regulatory factors.  It has been further submitted that in 
respect of bio-based formulations , these have largely been developed under 
externally funded R&D projects (e.g., NASF) and were currently at different stages 
of development. The processes of comprehensive evaluation, field trials, and 

12 
 
subsequent pilot-scale optimization were underway, which were prerequisites for 
regulatory approval and technology transfer. These technologies were expected to 
be taken up for commercialization upon successful completion of these stages. In 
this regard the Committee would like to be apprised of the time limit by which all 
these processes would be brought to logical conclusion.  The Committee 
recommend that whole process be streamlined and expedited and necessary 
action taken without further loss of time.  As regard ‘nano formulation’, it has been 
submitted that these have been developed as part of advanced research initiatives 
at IPFT. However, at present, there is no specific regulatory framework or approval 
mechanism available under the Central Insecticides Board and Registration 
Committee (CIB&RC) for such formulations. This regulatory gap is a key constraint 
in transferring these technologies to industry for commercial production. IPFT is 
actively engaging with stakeholders and monitoring developments in  the 
regulatory domain, and will facilitate technology transfer as and when appropriate 
regulatory guidelines are established. The Committee therefore desire to know the 
specific reasons for developing ‘nano formulation’ by IPFT when it was fully aware 
that there is no specific, regulatory framework or approval mechanism and the 
technologies cannot be transferred.  The Committee also desire to know as to what 
steps the IPFT and the Department has taken so far to bring the specific regulatory 
framework etc. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
IPFT and the Department at the earliest.  

13 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
Reducing financial dependency on Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
2.1 The Committee in their Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended 
as under: 
The Committee note that though IPFT is an autonomous body, the Department 
gives grants for salary, general expenditure and Capital expenditure.  As regards reasons 
for the same the Committee were apprised that IPFT generates revenue through 
technology transfer, testing and analytical services, bio-efficacy etc. but it was dependent 
on the Department for Grants for meeting its expenditure of salary, general expenditure 
and capital expenditure. The Committee are of the considered view that IPFT being 
established way back in the year 1991 should have gained sufficient expertise in its field 
by now and reduce its dependency on the Department for meeting its expenditures. The 
Committee therefore desire that concrete steps should be initiated in this regard. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard by the IPFT and by the 
Department separately. 
2.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. It is submitted that IPFT, 
since its inception, has progressively strengthened its technical capabilities and 
has been actively generating revenue through technology transfer, analytical and 
testing services, bio-efficacy studies, consultancy, and industry collaborations. 
However, it is respectfully submitted that IPFT functions as a national R&D 
institution with a mandate to support the agrochemical sector and farming 
community, including activities of public good such as regulatory support, residue 
monitoring, farmer awar eness, and development of environmentally safe 
technologies. Such activities, by their nature, are not always revenue -generating 
and require sustained Government support. Moreover, it is pertinent to submit that 
the fund allocations made by the Government of India in the form of the Grant-in-
Aid to the IPFT majorly constitute for the fund for creation of the capital assets. 
For the last many years, the fund allocation has remained has stagnant and no 
major increase was made therein.  
Notwithstanding the above, IPFT has taken concrete steps to enhance its internal 
revenue generation and reduce dependency on Government grants, which 
include: 
• Strengthening industry interface through increased technology transfer; 
• Analytical and regulatory services to industry, including GLP/NABL -compliant 
testing; 
• Development of new generation formulations (biopesticides, nano-formulations); 

14 
 
• Establishment of biofoundry facilities to support translational research and industry 
engagement; 
• Promotion of sponsored and collaborative R&D projects with national and 
international agencies; 
IPFT has shown a consistent increase in external cash flow (ECF) over the years 
through industry-linked activities. The Institute is also focusing on developing self-
sustaining models through commercialization of technologies and services, while 
maintaining its core mandate of societal and regulatory support. 
It is further submitted that complete financial self-reliance may not be feasible for 
institutions engaged in strategic, regulatory, and public welfare-oriented research, 
as seen in similar national laboratories. However, IPFT has been making all-round 
efforts to minimi ze the dependency and efficient resource utilization through 
exploring the various source of revenue generation”.  
 
Recommendation No. 4  
Awareness for New Generation Pesticides formulations amongst farmers 
 
2.3 The Committee in their Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended 
as under: 
As regards steps taken by the IPFT to make the farmers aware of its new 
generation pesticides formulation for agriculture management, the Committee note that 
the IPFT has initiated several steps which include Farmer Awareness Programmes, field 
demonstrations and training workshops etc. besides distribution of brochures, Manuals 
and translated materials in local languages for the purpose. The Committee, however 
desire that these steps initiated by IPFT for making farmers aware of its new generation 
pesticides formulations  be further augmented through advertisements in newspapers, 
TV channels, radio channels in English as well as regional languages. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the steps taken by IPFT in this regard. 
 
2.4 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“In compliance with the instructions of the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals under the initiative of the Chemical Promotion and Development 
Scheme (CPDS), the Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology has been 
organizing farmer awareness programmes across the country to enhance farmers’ 
knowledge regarding the use of new -generation pesticide formulations in 
agricultural practices. These programmes are aimed at educating farmers on the 
safe, judicious, and effective use of pesticides, particularly highlighting the 
advantages of new -generation formulations that offer improved efficacy, lower 
dosage requirements, and comparatively reduced environmental impact. Farmers 
are also sensitized about safe handling practices, proper application techniques, 
and the importance of adhering to the guidelines issued by the Central Insecticides 
Board and Registration Committee. During the last four years, from 2022 –23 to 
2025–26, 43  farmer awareness programmes  have been organized by IPFT in 
remote areas across various States of the cou ntry. These programmes have 
benefited more than 15,000 farmers, who received training and awareness in local 
languages. The programmes have significantly contributed to enhancing farmers’ 

15 
 
understanding of new -generation pesticide formulations and their safe and 
judicious usage in crop protection. The awareness initiatives have been widely 
appreciated and have proven beneficial for the farming community by bridging the 
gap between scientific  advancements and field -level adoption. Through such 
programmes, IPFT continues to support sustainable agricultural practices, 
promote responsible pesticide usage, and contribute to improving agricultural 
productivity across the country. However, IPFT make  every effort to popularize 
through IPFT website and social media posts and we will abide by the 
observations given by the Hon’ble Standing Committee through print media”. 
 
Recommendation No. 5  
Impact of New Generation Pesticides 
 
2.5 The Committee in their Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended 
as under: 
Noting the advantages of new generation pesticides formulations, the Committee 
specifically enquired regarding the impact of these new generation pesticides in 
enhancing production of wheat, paddy and other crops. The Department have, however 
merely submitted the names of technologies that have been found useful for wheat and 
paddy crops. The Committee, therefore, desire that they be apprised of the specific 
impact of new generation pesticides formulation in enhancing production of wheat, paddy 
and other crops. 
 
2.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The observation of the Hon'ble Committee is noted. It is submitted that new 
generation pesticide formulations developed by IPFT contribute to enhanced crop 
productivity, improved input -use efficiency, and reduced crop losses, thereby 
positively impacting agricultural output. 
Though the role and mandate of IPFT is limited to develop and stabilize the new 
generation pesticides formulation to meet the specific need of the agro -chemical 
industry and the crop -level yield impact assessment comes under the purviewof 
the manufacturing  industry as well as with the regulatory bodies at state and 
national level. However, based on the literature data, it is pertinent to note that 
pest-related losses in wheat and paddy are well documented as the stem borers 
are known to cause yield losses o f 10 –40% in paddy crop while leaf folder 
infestations are the major cause to reduce yields of wheat by 30 –80% depending 
upon the regional climatic and other allied conditions.  In wheat, weed infestation 
alone can cause yield losses in the range of 18 –25% annually, while aphid 
infestation and associated diseases further cause losses of 6 -8%. The new 
generation pesticide formulations developed and transferred by IPFT such as 
Fipronil 5 SC specifically target the stem borers and leaf folders in paddy, and 
Metsulfuron Methyl 20 WG for weed control and Deltamethrin 20 WG for insect 
control in wheat effectively address these causes of the crops losses and 
contribute to enhance the yield of the crops. Being new -generation water-based 
formulations, they offer superior coverage, lower dosage requirements, and better 
efficacy over conventional formulations, thereby contributing meaningfully for the 
mitigation of these established crop losses. 

16 
 
Unlike conventional formulations, new generation formulations such as 
Suspension Concentrates (SC), Water Dispersible Granules (WDG), 
microencapsulated and nano -formulations offer better bioavailability, targeted 
delivery, and controlled release, resulting  in improved efficacy against pests and 
diseases. 
The specific impacts observed in major crops such as wheat, paddy, and others 
include: 
• Reduction in pest and disease incidence, leading to lower crop losses; 
• Improved efficacy at lower dosages, enhancing cost-effectiveness for farmers; 
• Better crop health and yield stability; 
• Reduced phytotoxicity and environmental load, supporting sustainable 
agricultural practices; 
• Improved residue profile, ensuring safer food production and compliance with 
regulatory standards. 
It is further submitted that the actual quantum of yield enhancement depends on 
multiple factors such as agro-climatic conditions, pest pressure, crop variety, and 
agronomic practices. Therefore, while IPFT technologies contribute significantly to 
yield im provement, they function as part of an integrated crop management 
system. 
IPFT being a Research and Development institute is mandated to develop and 
evaluate pesticide formulations with regulatory compliance to maximise crop yield. 
The Institute is deeply committed to the larger goal of enhancing agricultural 
productivity and fa rmer welfare, and shall continue to align its research and 
development activities towards addressing the crop protection needs of wheat, 
paddy and other major crops across the country”. 
Recommendation No. 8  
 
Promotion of New Pesticides Formulation amongst farmers  
 
2.7 The Committee in their Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended 
as under: 
The Committee are happy to note that generally positive response have been 
received from farmers towards new generation pesticides formulations for agriculture 
management. The Committee were apprised that farmers have appreciated safety and 
other aspects of new generation pesticides formulations especially bio -botanical, neem 
based and eco -friendly products during field demonstrations and awareness 
programmes. According to the farmers, the effects of new generation pesticides 
formulations may be slower as c ompared to conventional pesticides but they recognize 
the long-term benefit for crops and their fields. Against this backdrop, the Committee feel 
that IPFT becomes duty bound to educate the farmers regarding its new generation 
pesticides formulations and t o make them popular amongst them. The Committee 
recommend that necessary steps be taken by the IPFT in this regard and utmost priority 
may be accorded to the matter. 
 
2.8 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 

17 
 
The IPFT stands committed to act as a catalyst for government plans and initiatives for 
the benefit of the farmer community of the nation and assure s of active participation in 
organizing Farmer Awareness Programmes as per the plan and policies of the 
Government of India. 
 
Recommendation No. 10 
 
Filling up of vacant posts in IPFT 
 
2.9 The Committee in their Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended 
as under: 
 
The Committee note that 05 Scientific Posts are vacant at present in the IPFT out 
of which Offer Letters for 02 posts to join have been issued by the IPFT and 03 posts 
remain vacant for which recruitment process was under progress. The Committee desire 
that the recruitment process be expedited and the vacant posts be filled up at the earliest 
so as to further enhance the efficiency of IPFT. 
 
2.10 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted for compliance. Necessary 
action has already been taken to fill up the vacant scientific posts. Out of the five 
scientific posts referred to by the Hon’ble Committee, four have been filled as on 
date. Action is currently underway to fill the remaining one vacant scientific post at 
the earliest. 
The IPFT stands committed to act as a catalyst for government plans and 
initiatives for the benefit of the farmer community of the nation and assures of 
active participation in organizing Farmer Awareness Programmes as per the plan 
and policies of the Government of India”. 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
Status of Transfer of Pesticide Formulations 
2.11 The Committee in their Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended 
as under: 
 
The Committee also note that IPFT had developed 47 formulations out of which 
just 16 formulations could be transferred and 31 formulations could not be transferred. 
The Committee were apprised that for 31 formulations, the data generation as per 
regulatory requirement has to be done and studies are in progress for 19 formulations. 
Further, the IPFT is making efforts for publicizing these formulations through industry 
needs. The Committee desire that appropriate steps be taken so that the studies initiated 
in this regard be expedited.  
 
 
2.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 

18 
 
It is to submit that the IPFT has developed total 86 pesticide formulation 
technology and the observation of the Hon’ble Committee mentioning the 47 formulations 
which constitute the part of the total technologies developed by IPFT. Since the Hon’ble 
Committee has observed and mentioned that the IPFT has transferred total 64 
technologies and the reason for the non -transfer of the remaining 22 formulation 
technologies has been elaborated as a reply under para 11.  
 
  

19 
 
  
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

20 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Recommendation No.  1 
 
Fixing periodic targets for development of Pesticide formulation 
 
4.1   The Committee made the following recommendation regarding fixing periodic targets 
for development of Pesticide formulation: 
 
 The Committee note that IPFT was established way back in the year 1991 as an 
Autonomous Institute under the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers as the successor of Pesticide Development Program in India 
(PDPI), which was established in the year 1986 in collaboration with the Government of 
India by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). As regards 
achieving goals and objectives by IPFT, the Committee note that since the inception of 
IPFT, it has developed 86 pesticide formulations, out of which 64 technologies have been 
transferred to Industries. The Committee also note that IPFT has inter-alia developed 47 
new formulations besides engaging in other activities like conducting analytical studies, 
filing of Patents and Research Papers, etc. The Committee, however note with concern 
that IPFT had not fixed any periodic targets for development of pes ticide formulation, 
quantum of new formulations for transferring them to Industries in the last 34 years of its 
functioning. The Committee further note that during the huge time period of 34 years of 
its functioning which spans more than three (03) decades  IPFT has developed 86 
pesticide formulations amounting to a meager 2.5 percent pesticides formulations per 
year. The Committee observe with dissatisfaction, the slow pace of IPFT and desire that 
they may be apprised about the precise reasons for non -fixation of yearly targets. The 
Committee recommend that IPFT should immediately review its functioning in 
consultation with the Department and bring forth initiatives for development of pesticide 
formulations at a faster pace as per the needs of the industries  as well as farmer 
communities across the Country. 
 
4.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The facts and figures as observed by the Hon’ble Committee are respectfully 
noted. However, it is submitted that IPFT has consistently aligned its activities with 

21 
 
the evolving needs of the agrochemical industry and the agricultural sector. The 
Institute remains committed to  identifying and expanding areas for growth in the 
development and transfer of pesticide formulation technologies. 
It is pertinent to mention that pesticide formulation development is largely demand-
driven and market -oriented. IPFT undertakes development of formulation 
technologies based on specific requirements of the agrochemical industry, 
including molecule -specific and application -oriented needs. The Institute 
possesses the requisite expertise and infrastructure to meet such demands of the 
industry. In this context, IPFT has developed 86 formulation technologies and 
successfully transferred 6 4 technologies to industry for commercialization , 
reflecting its sustained contribution to the agrochemical sector. 
The development of pesticide formulations is a complex, multi -stage process , 
involving laboratory research, bio -evaluation, pilot -scale optimization, and 
compliance with regulatory requirements prescribed by the Central Insecticides 
Board and Registration Committee (CIB&RC). These processes are inherently 
time-intensive and resou rce-driven, and therefore not amenable to rigid annual 
numerical targets. 
Further, formulation development constitutes only one of the core activities of 
IPFT. The Institute also undertakes: 
• Comprehensive chemical characterization and analytical studies 
• Residue monitoring and risk assessment , including long -term studies in districts 
of Haryana and collaborative work in Rajasthan 
• Support and promote the regulatory compliance and quality assurance 
In the last few decades, the issue of pesticide residues in food commodities and 
environment spheres has predominantly gained the attention of all stakeholders 
and IPFT has strategically shifted focus towards development of safer, residue -
minimized, and eco-friendly formulations, including biopesticides. The Institute is 
actively working towards establishing a biofoundry facility in collaboration with the 
Department of Biotechnology under the BioE3 policy, aiming to provide an 
integrated platform for development and evaluation of biopesticides derived from 
plant, microbial, and waste-based resources. 
IPFT has also undertaken extensive farmer outreach and capacity -building 
initiatives, conducting over 40 awareness programmes across more than 25 
districts in 10 states, promoting safe pesticide use, integrated pest management, 
and adoption of biopesticides for sustainable agriculture. It is further submitted that 
the scope of IPFT’s work could not be viable to be restricted to fixed formulation 
targets, as the requirements of the agrochemical sector are dynamic and 
influenced by regulatory, environmental, and market considerations . IPFT 
reiterates its commitment to enhancing its performance and contributing effectively 
to the needs of the agrochemical industry and farming community in a sustainable 
and impactful manner”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
  

22 
 
Recommendation No. 3  
Fixing reasonable prices for New  
4.3 The Committee made the following recommendation regarding fixing reasonable 
prices for New Generation Pesticides: 
 
The Committee were informed that new generation pesticides formulation 
technologies, which are being developed by the IPFT are better than the conventional 
pesticides formulations containing large amount petroleum derived organic solvents and 
composed of f ine dusty powders. The Committee, however note that price of new 
generation pesticide formulations depends on the type of pesticides, formulation 
technology, concentration and brand and the actual market price was determined by the 
industry partner, taking  into account production cost, commercialization strategy and 
affordability for farmers. The Committee observe that the price fixation of new generation 
pesticide formulations, if left totally to the industry partner with IPFT having no say in this 
regard, may leave scope for manipulation by the industry partner. The Committee are of 
the considered view that the new generation pesticides formulation which are much better 
than the conventional pesticides formulations must reach farmers all across the country  
so that the benefits of new generation pesticides formulation developed by IPFT are 
reaped proportionately by one and all across the agriculture sector. The Committee 
desire that the IPFT and the Department work together in tandem and recommend that 
appropriate steps be taken for determination of reasonable prices for new generation 
pesticides formulation of IPFT so as to make it available to the farmers at affordable 
prices. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
4.4 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. It is submitted that IPFT has 
been actively engaged in the development of new generation pesticide formulation 
technologies, which are cost-effective, safer, environmentally benign, and superior 
to conventional solvent-based and dust formulations. 
 
It is respectfully submitted that price determination of pesticide formulations is 
governed by market dynamics, including cost of raw materials, scale of production, 
regulatory compliance, distribution channels, and commercial strategies of the 
industry pa rtner. As per the existing framework, IPFT transfers technologies to 
industry for commercialization, and the pricing is determined by the industry based 
on the manufacturing and marketing over-heads. 
However, IPFT recognizes the concern of the Hon’ble Committee regarding 
affordability and accessibility to farmers, and has taken/initiated the following 
steps: 
• Development of cost -effective and scalable formulations, including water -
based and solvent-free technologies, to reduce production costs. 
• Promotion of multiple licensing of technologies to avoid monopolistic 
practices and enhance competitive pricing. 
• Focus on biopesticides and green formulations, which are inherently safer 
and can be produced at decentralized levels. 
• Engagement with farmer producer organizations (FPOs), cooperatives, and 
public sector agencies for wider outreach”. 
 

23 
 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 6  
Competing in Market/Expansion of ventures 
4.5 The Committee made the following recommendation regarding further 
strengthening the function of IPFT: 
 
 As regards new generation pesticides formulation for agriculture and as well as for 
household pest management and their pricing, the Committee were informed that IPFT 
was a Research and Development Institute focused on the development of pesticides 
formulation technologies and it does not engage in production or marketing of any of its 
formulations. The IPFT after development of formulations merely transfers the 
technologies to the industries for commercial production and marketing. The Committee 
are intrigued about the reasons restricting the IPFT for production and marketing of its 
formulations despite being in existence for 34 years. The Committee therefore, desired 
that IPFT come up with feasibility studies towards expanding its ventures for production 
as well as market its formulations in the coming future. The Committee note that as 
regards the size of IPFT, it is very small as compared to its objectives and mandate. IPFT 
has however submitted that based on the emerging needs of the sector, the capacit y of 
IPFT can be strengthened. The Committee are of the considered view that it is high time 
for the IPFT to go for deep introspection for further strengthening its functions including 
mass production and marketing of its own products so that the institute can successfully 
compete with the private players in the market. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the steps taken in this regard.  
 
4.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. It is respectfully submitted 
that IPFT was established as a specialized R&D institution with a mandate to 
develop, validate, and transfer pesticide formulation technologies to industry, 
rather than to unde rtake commercial production and marketing. This model has 
enabled IPFT to promote technology dissemination across multiple industry 
partners, avoid duplication of infrastructure, and support the broader agrochemical 
ecosystem. 
It is further submitted that production and marketing of pesticide formulations 
require significant investments in manufacturing infrastructure, regulatory 
approvals, distribution networks, and working capital, which are typically beyond 
the scope of a res earch-oriented institution. Accordingly, technology transfer to 
industry has been adopted as a scalable and efficient mechanism for 
commercialization. 
It is also submitted that IPFT’s current approach of non -exclusive technology 
transfer ensures wider availability of technologies, promotes competition, and 
prevents monopolistic practices in the market”. 
 

24 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 7  
Participation of Farmers in Awareness Programmes 
 
4.7 The Committee made the following recommendation regarding farmers awareness 
programmes: 
 
 
The Committee are happy to note that for promoting the safe use of pesticides, 
IPFT had initiated farmer awareness programmes. These programmes were stately 
initiated in the year 2022-2023. The Committee further note that from the year 2022-2023 
to 2024-2025, a total of 32 such programmes were conducted by IPFT where a total of 
just 9223 farmers participated in these programmes who provided positive feedback.  The 
Committee find these figures grossly inadequate keeping in view the fact that the farmers 
across the Country totals to more than 10 crores. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the IPFT and the Department come out with a roadmap to conduct such programmes 
periodically and to encourage more and more farmers to participate in them so that the 
benefits are reaped by all farmers across the nation.  
 
4.8 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 “The Department through IPFT has been organizing farmer awareness 
programmes across the country to enhance farmers’ knowledge regarding the use 
of new -generation pesticide formulations in agricultural practices. These 
programmes are aimed at educating farmers on the safe, judicious, and effective 
use of pesticides, parti cularly highlighting the advantages of new -generation 
formulations that offer improved efficacy, lower dosage requirements, and 
comparatively reduced environmental impact. Farmers are also sensitized about 
safe handling practices, proper application techni ques, and the importance of 
adhering to the guidelines issued by the Central Insecticides Board and 
Registration Committee. During the last four years, from 2022 –23 to 2024-25, 32 
farmer awareness programmes  have been organized by IPFT in remote areas 
across various States of the country. During the year 2025 -26, 11 such farmers 
awareness programs were organized in 6 different states and 4565 farmers had 
participated. In total, these 43 programmes during the period 2022-23 to 2025-26 
have benefited more tha n 15,000 farmers, who received training and awareness 
in local languages”.  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
Optimum Utilization of IPFT infrastructure 
4.9 The Committee made the following recommendation regarding optimum utilization 
of IPFT infrastructure: 
 
 The Committee note that IPFT at present has laboratories under its three divisions 

25 
 
viz (i) Formulation division, (ii) Analytical division and (iii) Bio -Science division. The 
formulation division is stated to have laboratory set up for development of pesticides 
formulations for agricultural as well as household pest management and it also have pilot 
plant facility that can scale up lab scale research to a commerci al production with 
optimum budget and it has capacity to produce upto 100 kg. per shift. Similarly the 
analytical division is accredited and equipped with chemical testing of pesticides. The 
bio-science division is equipped to evaluate the different pestic ides formulations by the 
IPFT or by the industry for their commercial viability through well -equipped bio -assay 
laboratory, green house/ glass house and experimental field trials. Admittedly, IPFT has 
pilot plant facilities but was never utilized for comme rcial production. The Committee 
deplore the same and recommend that the IPFT should initiate ameliorative steps for full 
capacity utilization of its installed capacities in so far as plants and laboratories are 
concerned. To this extant, the Committee desire that appropriate monitoring mechanism 
be put in place to ensure optimum capacity utilisation of IPFT infrastructure. 
 
4.10 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. It is submitted that IPFT has 
established well-equipped infrastructure comprising Formulation, Analytical, and 
Bio-Science divisions, including pilot plant facilities for scale -up of laboratory -
developed technologies. 
It is respectfully submitted that the pilot plant facility is primarily intended for 
process optimization, validation, and demonstration of technologies prior to 
transfer to industry, rather than for continuous commercial production. This 
approach ensures that technologies are developed, standardized, and transferred 
efficiently to industry for large-scale manufacturing. 
However, the concern of the Hon’ble Committee regarding optimal utilization of 
infrastructure is duly acknowledged. In this regard, IPFT has identified the 
following steps: 
• Strengthening inter-division integration (Formulation, Analytical, Bio-
Science) for end-to-end utilization of facilities; 
• Establishment of a centralized monitoring mechanism for tracking 
infrastructure utilization, including: 
• Periodic review of facility usage; 
• Performance indicators for each division”. 
•  
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 11 
Analyzing the reasons for non-transfer of 22 formulations. 
 
 
4.11  The Committee made the following recommendation regarding non transference 

26 
 
of remaining 22 formulations to the industries: 
 
 
The Committee note that since inception of the IPFT, it has developed 86 
pesticides formulations out of which, only 64 technologies have been transferred. A total 
of 22 pesticides formulations could not be transferred according to IPFT. Stately, the 
market for bio-based formulations was not very robust at present and even if IPFT was 
not able to transfer such formulations, they will be transferred in future once the market 
for bio based pesticides picks up. The Committee are not satisfied with the submissio n 
of the IPFT. The Committee observed that the reasons for non-transfer of its 22 pesticides 
formulations needs to be analyzed in a professional manner and IPFT need to work on 
the development of further formulations keeping in view the needs of the industry and the 
farmers. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.  
 
4.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“The observation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted. It is submitted that out of 86 
pesticide formulation technologies developed by IPFT, 64 technologies have been 
successfully transferred to industry, while 22 technologies could not be transferred 
due to a combination of technical, market, and regulatory factors. 
It is further submitted that the majority of the 22 non -transferred technologies 
pertain to bio-based pesticide formulations and nano-formulations. 
In respect of bio-based formulations, these have largely been developed under 
externally funded R&D projects (e.g., NASF) and are currently at different stages 
of development. The processes of comprehensive evaluation, field trials, and 
subsequent pilot -scale optimization  are underway, which are prerequisites for 
regulatory approval and technology transfer. These technologies are expected to 
be taken up for commercialization upon successful completion of these stages. 
In respect of nano-formulations, these have been developed as part of advanced 
research initiatives at IPFT . However, at present, there is no specific regulatory 
framework or approval mechanism available under the Central Insecticides Board 
and Registration Committee (CIB&RC) for such formulations. This regulatory gap 
is a key constraint in transferring these technologies to industry for commercial 
production. IPFT is actively engaging with stakeholders and monitoring 
developments in the regulatory domain, and will facilitate technology transfer as 
and when appropriate regulatory guidelines are established”. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
  

27 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
- Nil – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
29 JUNE, 2026 CHAIRPERSON, 
08 ASHADHA, 1948 (SAKA) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
  

28 
 
          
APPENDIX I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2025-26) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-second Sitting of the Committee 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 29th June, 2026 from 1100 hrs to 1130 
hrs in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
                                     Present 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
4. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
5. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
6. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
7. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
8. Shri Praveen Patel  
9. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
10. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
11. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Naresh Bansal 
13. Shri Subhash Barala 
14. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
15. Shri Arun Singh 
16. Shri Tejveer Singh 
17. Shri L. K. Sudhish  
 
 
 
  

29 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
5.   Smt. Maya Lingi    - Joint Secretary 
6.   Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
7.   Shri  Kulvinder Singh   - Deputy Secretary  
8.   Shri Abhishek Kumar   - Joint Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the  
Committee convened to consider and adopt four draft Action Taken Reports of the 
Committee. The Chairperson, on behalf of the Committee, also welcomed Shri 
Manmohan Samal, MP (RS) and Shri L.K. Sudhish, MP (RS) who had been newly 
nominated to the Committee w.e.f 3rd June, 2026. Thereafter, the Committee took 
up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
 
(i)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx  xxxx; 
(ii)  xxxx   xxxx   xxxx  xxxx; 
(iii) Twenty -sixth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Nineteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Chemicals and Fertilizers on ‘Review of the functioning of Ins titute of 
Pesticide formulation Technology (IPFT)’ pertaining to the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals; and 
(iv) xxxx   xxxx   xxxx  xxxx; 
 
3. After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee 
without any amendments. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and 
present/lay them in both the Houses of Parliament in the upcoming Monsoon 
Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxxx Not related to the Report.  

30 
 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINENEENTH REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING  COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2025-26) ON THE SUBJECT ‘REVIEW OF THE 
FUNCTIONING OF INSTITUTE OF PESTICIDE FORMULATION TECHNOLOGY 
(IPFT)’ PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
Total No. of Recommendations 12 
I. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
(Sl. Nos. 2,4,5,8 10  and12 )  
 
06 
Percentage of Total:  50 % 
II. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not like to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
NIL 
 
00 
Percentage of Total:  0% 
III
. 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies given 
by the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
which require reiteration:  
(Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 6, 7, 9, and 11)  
 
 
06 
Percentage of Total: 50 %  
I
V
. 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies 
of the Government are still awaited:  
NIL 
 
00 
Percentage of Total:  0%  
 
 
 
 
 