 
 
 33 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
 
Review of Role, Functions and Duties of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authoriy 
(NPPA) with specific reference to increase in prices of medicines in the Country 
THIRTY- THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
  August, 2026/   Sravana 1948 (Saka) 
 
 


 
 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
  
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
Review of Role, Functions and Duties of National Pharmaceutical Pricing 
Authoriy (NPPA) with specific reference to increase in prices of medicines in 
the Country 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 6 August, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 6 August, 2026 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 2026/Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
  Page  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26) iv 
INTRODUCTION  vi 
REPORT 
PART I 
A Introduction 1 
B Setting up of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 1 
C Functions of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 2 
D NPPA Composition 5 
E Affordability of medicines 7 
F Shift from cost-based pricing to market-based pricing under DPCO 
2013  
10 
G Price fixation of medicines by National Pharmaceutical Pricing 
Authority (NPPA) 
11 
H Fixation of Retail prices of new drugs 13 
I Impact assessment of pricing interventions by NPPA  15 
J Margins in sale of certain medicines 16 
K Affordable healthcare schemes/initiatives 20 
L Trade Margin Rationalization (TMR) 24 
M Pharmaceutical companies 28 
N Monitoring of unfair practices that have come to notice of NPPA 29 
O Recovery of overcharging amount from the violators 31 
P Pharmarack Technologies Private Limited 32 
Q Availability of medicines 41 
R Price Monitoring and Resource Units 43 
S Pharma Jan Samadhan (PJS) Portal 46 
T Integrated Pharmaceutical Database Management System 
(IPDMS) 2.0 
47 
U Manpower strength in NPPA 48 
PART II 
 Observations/Recommendations 50 
APPENDICES  
 Minutes of Sittings of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2025-26) held on 3rd November, 2025, 24th November, 
2025 and  
3rd August, 2026 
59 
 

iv 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-2026) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
21. Vacant* 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Shri Ramesh Lingamaneni$ 
25. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
26. Shri Manmohan Samal& 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
29. Shri Tejveer Singh 
30. Shri L. K. Sudhish%  
31. Vacant 
  
* Vacant vice Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon, MP(LS), passed away on 19.02.2026 vide LS Table Office Notification No.21/4(8)/2026/TO(B) dated 
20.02.2026. 
& Nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 04.06.2026 Para No. 5267.  
% Nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 04.06.2026 Para No. 5267. 
$ Nominated w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 24.07.2026 Para No. 5724. 
 
Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli, MP(RS) retired from the membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 21.06.2026 vide Committee Branch note dated 
19.02.2026.  
Dr. Bhagwat Karad, MP(RS) retired on 02.04.2026 vide Committee Branch note dated 19.02.2026.  
Shri G.K. Vasan, MP(RS) retired on 02.04.2026 vide Committee Branch note dated 19.02.2026.  
 
 
 
 

v 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi   — Joint Secretary  
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam  —  Director  
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  — Deputy Secretary  
4. Smt. Preeti Negi   — Committee Officer 
 
 
  

vi 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2025-26) having been 
authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf, this Thirty–third Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Review of Role, Functions and Duties of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authoriy 
(NPPA) with specific reference to increase in prices of medicines in the Country’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Pharmaceuticals.  
2. The Committee had a briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers, Department of Pharmaceuticals on 3rd November, 2025 and oral evidence on 24th 
November, 2025. 
3.  The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 3rd August, 2026.  
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers, Department of Pharmaceuticals for tendering evidence and placing before the Committee 
all the requisite information related to examination of the subject. 
 
5.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered 
to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.  
 
6.  For ease of reference and convenience, the Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
    NEW DELHI; AZAD KIRTI JHA 
3 August, 2026 Chairperson 
12 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on Chemicals  
and Fertilizers 
 
 

vii 
 
  
 

1 
 
 
 REPORT 
PART-I 
A. Introduction 
The Committee learnt that Government through various policy interventions since early 1960s 
had ensured the availability, affordability and accessibility of drugs. The price control over drugs was 
first introduced in the Country in 1962 under the Defence of India Act, 1915 with the promulgation of 
the Drugs (Display of Prices) Order, 1962 and the Drugs (Control of Prices) Order, 1963. These 
orders led to freezing of the prices of drugs with effect from 1.4.1963. Thereafter, a series of price 
control orders were notified through various orders in the Country from time to time based on 
different principles. The span of control of prices as well as the nature of control of prices under 
various orders has varied as per the underlying principles in the respective drug policies. 
 
2. The National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012 (NPPP, 2012) was notified on 7.12.2012 
with the objective of putting in place a regulatory framework for the pricing of drugs with the following 
objectives: 
(a) Ensuring availability of required medicines at reasonable prices; 
(b) Providing sufficient opportunity for innovation and competition; 
(c) Supporting industry growth; and 
(d) Meeting goals of employment and shared economic well-being for all. 
3. The key principles of NPPP, 2012, statedly, are as follows: 
(a) Essentiality of drugs: This criterion is to be met by considering the list of medicines 
specified in the National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM) declared and revised from time 
to time by the Department of Health and Family Welfare (DoHFW) under the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare (MoHFW). NLEM is prepared by the Standing Committee on Medicines 
(SNCM) constituted by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare out of the World Health 
Organization model list of essential medicines, Essential Drugs Lists of various States, 
medicines used in various national health programmes and emergency care drugs, and 
contains such medicines that satisfy the priority health needs of the Country’s population. 
(b) Control of prices of formulations only: This refers to control of price of only the final end-
product. 
(c) Market-based pricing: Market-based pricing refers to pricing based on widely available 
information in the public domain as against individual manufacturer level production costing 
data, as the same would result in more transparent and fair pricing. 
 
B. Setting up of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
4. The National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) was constituted by the Government of 
India vide resolution published in the Official Gazette no. 159 dated 29.8.1997. NPPA is an attached 
office of the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP), Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (MoC&F), 

2 
 
Government of India. Prior to setting-up of NPPA, the implementation of Drugs Price Control Orders 
(DPCOs) was with the Government itself. The Tariff Commission and its predecessor bodies, that is, 
Tariff Board, Interim Tariff Board, first Tariff Commission (TC) and the Bureau of Industrial Costs and 
Prices (BICP) (constituted in 1970) were closely associated with the costing and pricing of drugs 
with the charter of advising the Government on industrial costs and prices, and on issues relevant 
to cost reduction, improvement in industrial efficiency and pricing of industrial products. 
5. With the formation of NPPA in 1997, the task of price fixation, revision and other related 
matters for Bulk Drugs and Formulations along with related manpower was transferred from BICP 
to NPPA. With the setting-up of DoP in 2008 in MoC&F, NPPA is now under DoP.  
C. Functions of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority 
6. As per the resolution and powers delegated from time to time, NPPA, inter alia, statedly, 
performs the following functions: 
(a) Implement and enforce the provisions of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order in accordance 
with the powers delegated to it. 
(b) Deal with all legal matters arising out of the decisions of the Authority. 
(c) Monitor the availability of drugs, identify shortages, if any, and to take remedial steps. 
(d) Undertake and/or sponsor relevant studies in respect of pricing of drugs/pharmaceuticals. 
(e) Render advice to the Central Government on changes/revisions in the drug policy. 
(f) Render assistance to the Central Government in the parliamentary matters relating to the 
drug pricing. 
7. The Committee were informed that functions of NPPA, inter alia, include fixation and revision 
of prices of scheduled formulations as per the provisions of the DPCO including monitoring and 
enforcement of prices. The extant DPCO, i.e., DPCO, 2013 aims to make the essential medicines 
available at reasonable prices through their price regulation. Further, MoHFW vide SO 648 (E), dated 
11.2.2020 notified all the medical devices intended for use in human beings or animals as Drugs 
under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 with effect from 1.4.2020. Accordingly, NPPA vide SO 1232 
(E) dated 31.3.2020 has notified that all medical devices shall be governed under the provisions of 
DPCO, 2013 with effect from 1.4.2020. 
8. The NLEM published by MoHFW is adopted as the primary basis for determining essentiality 
and is incorporated in the Schedule-I of the DPCO, 2013, as scheduled medicines for the purpose 
of price control. The Committee were informed that under NLEM, 2022, there are 388 medicines 
specified which correspond to over 900 formulations.   
 
9. As regard the role of Department of Pharmaceuticals and NPPA in updation/revision of NLEM, 
the Department submitted as under: 
“Standing National Committee on Medicines (SNCM) consists of all stakeholders and experts 
and is chaired by the Director General, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). A 
representative from DoP is a member of SNCM while a representative from NPPA is a special 
invitee.”  
 

3 
 
10. The Committee further sought details regarding frequency of revision of the National List of 
Essential Medicines (NLEM) and criteria which guided inclusion/exclusion of medicines/drugs in this 
List. In response, the Department submitted as under: 
“NLEM is released by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW). The 
inclusion/exclusion of the drugs in NLEM is done based on the recommendation of Standing 
National Committee on Medicines (SNCM) constituted by MoHFW.  The process of inclusion 
or deletion in NLEM is done by the SNCM so constituted, from time to time, after 
comprehensive review to address the evolving healthcare needs of the Country as arrived at 
through wide stakeholder consultation and expert opinion. MoHFW vide order dated 3.7.2018 
constituted the SNCM to review and revise the National List of Essential Medicines and 
published the revised NLEM in September 2022.  
As per NLEM 2022 report1, the criteria for inclusion of a medicine are listed below: 
(a) The medicine should be approved/ licensed in India. 
(b) The efficacy and safety profile of the medicine should be based on robust scientific 
evidence. 
(c) The medicine should be useful in disease which is a public health problem in India. 
(d) All medicines enlisted in National Health Programmes/National Disease Control 
Programmes are as such essential and hence included in the NLEM, 2022. 
(e) The medicine should be affordable to the community in the Indian context. 
(f) The medicine should be readily accessible at Primary, Secondary and Tertiary healthcare 
levels. 
(g) When more than one medicine are available from the same therapeutic class, preferably 
one prototype/ best suited medicine of that class to be included after due deliberation and 
careful evaluation of their relative safety, efficacy, availability and affordability. 
(h) Overall cost of therapy was considered and not just the unit cost of the medicine. 
(i) A Fixed Dose Combination (FDC) was generally not included unless the combination had 
unequivocally proven advantage over individual ingredients administered separately, in 
terms of increasing efficacy, reducing adverse effects and/or improving compliance. 
The criteria for deletion of a medicine from the existing NLEM are listed below: 
(a) The medicine has been banned in India by the regulatory authority. 
(b) There are reports of serious concerns on the safety profile of a medicine. 
(c) Another medicine with better efficacy or favourable safety profile or better accessibility 
and affordability is now available. 
(d) The disease burden, for which a medicine is indicated, is no longer a national health 
concern for India. 
(e) In case of antimicrobials, if the resistance pattern has rendered an antimicrobial ineffective 
in the Indian context.” 
11. The Committee further desired to know that considering the current system of multiple 
categories of medicines—essential, non-essential and others, whether a unified regulatory 
framework for all medicines which would enhance clarity, transparency and ease of enforcement of 
price controls would be a more desirable option. In this regard, the Department submitted as under: 
 
1 NLEM Report 2022- 
https://cdsco.gov.in/opencms/resources/UploadCDSCOWeb/2018/UploadPublic_NoticesFiles/reportnlem2022.pdf  

4 
 
“The National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012 (NPPP, 2012) strives to achieve a 
balance between affordability and availability of drugs on the one hand and promotion of 
growth of industry on the other. Since the present framework is based on market data, it is a 
fair and transparent mechanism and is available in the public domain. Under the existing 
policy framework, NPPA controls the prices of essential formulation by fixing ceiling prices of 
scheduled formulation and retail prices of new drugs.  However, with a view to keep a check 
on overall drugs prices, the prices of non-scheduled drugs are monitored as per provisions of 
paragraph 20 of DPCO, 2013. The existing framework has given impetus to the sustained 
growth of the sector that has made India the third largest producer of drugs in volume terms.  
However, the Department and NPPA remain engaged with stakeholders with a view to 
understanding issues and resolving them either under extant mechanism or by making 
appropriate provision.” 
12. During the course of oral evidence, on the same issue of categorization of medicines as 
essential and non-essential, scheduled and non-scheduled, the representative of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals deposed as under: 
“As you know, business and investment for business ultimately flows wherever you get better 
returns. So, if we reduce returns across the board on a particular sector, while immediate 
effect of that would be that prices may become lower, investment will also dry up because 
investors’ money comes with expectation of return and they will go wherever they can earn a 
higher return. What are the likely consequences? If you look at the National Pharmaceutical 
Pricing Policy, it explicitly mentions this fact. It is a speaking policy and it says that in the 
medium and long term, an investment crisis is created with the result that capacities are not 
created to meet the supply for availability. Fresh investments in technology, delivery systems, 
innovations etc. do not happen. These are the problems which arise when we regulate the 
prices tightly according to today's technology and today's volumes. It is because then fresh 
investment in the sector stops.   
The fresh investment does not only come from the industries which are there. They invest 
elsewhere. If all sectors were under price control – which takes us back to the license permit 
raj – from the commanding heights of the economy, you direct the flows of investment to any 
given sector. But if only one sector is under regulation and that is very tightly controlled, then 
that sector will stop getting investment and it may stop growing. That is the policy risk. And 
as was mentioned, the policy has not only price control, but also availability, innovation, 
employment and industrial growth as well as its objectives. So, it is a multi-dimensional policy 
and there is a need to balance various concerns. The idea of the essential medicine list is a 
very old idea. It is a well-recognized idea not just in India but across the globe. It is something 
which emanates from the essential drug list which the WHO brings out. And that is a baseline 
kind of a list for not just India but for other countries. Even Indian Public Health Standards 
(IPHS) recognize it. So, that is the basis for this distinction. ….Whatever I stated is there in 
the Gazette notified policy of the Government of India as approved by the Cabinet of the day. 
Back in 2012, it was issued with the approval of the Union Cabinet. It was examined before it 
went to the Union Cabinet. It was recommended upon by the Prime Minister’s Economic 
Advisory Council under Dr. Rangarajan. They also had a very transparent consultation for 
almost 8-9 months on this policy before coming out with the recommendation. So, that is the 
background.” 

5 
 
13. To a pointed query of the Committee that whether the Pharmaceuticals sector was in the 
hands of the private sector, the Department submitted as under: 
“India in 1991 initiated economic liberalization that, inter alia, involved reforms to reduce 
government control, open sectors to private and foreign investment, and integrate India with 
the global economy as against the mixed economy policy followed earlier. Accordingly, at 
present, India’s pharmaceutical industry is predominately private-sector driven – with private 
pharmaceutical companies operating across formulations, APIs, vaccine, biosimilars, etc. As 
per the India Brand Equity Foundation (IBEF)2, The domestic pharmaceutical ecosystem 
comprises around 3,000 drug companies and roughly 10,500 manufacturing units. The public 
sector involvement through government PSUs in pharma sector remains limited to five 
Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) i.e. Indian Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited 
(IDPL), Rajasthan Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Limited (RDPL), Hindustan Antibiotics Limited 
(HAL), Karnataka Antibiotics and Pharmaceuticals Limited (KAPL) and Bengal Chemicals and 
Pharmaceuticals Limited (BCPL).  As per the Cabinet decisions, these PSUs are either in the 
process of closure/transfer or strategic disinvestment. 
Government’s role is primarily regulatory, policy-making, facilitative and welfare-oriented, 
while production and marketing are largely handled by the private sector.” 
D. NPPA COMPOSITION  
14. The Committee learnt that NPPA is a five Member body comprising Chairman (in the rank of 
Secretary or Additional Secretary of Govt. of India), Member Secretary (in the rank of Joint Secretary 
to the Govt. of India), three ex-officio Members, one each from the Department of Economic Affairs, 
O/o Chief Adviser Cost, Department of Expenditure and Drug Controller General of India, M/o 
H&FW. The Committee further learnt that the functions of NPPA are to implement and enforce the 
provisions of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order in accordance with the powers delegated to it, to 
monitor the availability of drugs, identify shortages, if any, and to take remedial steps, to render 
advice to the Central Government on changes/ revisions in the drug policy, to render assistance to 
the Central Government in the parliamentary matters relating to the drug pricing. The ex-officio 
members enable NPPA to discharge its functions by providing the expert opinion relating to their 
expertise on the above matters.  
15. The details of (a) number of meetings of NPPA held in the last three years; (b) attendance of 
each ex Officio Member in these meetings; and (c) agenda and significant decisions taken, 
especially for benefit of the public in these meetings, as furnished by the Department are as under: 
“During the last three years (December, 2022 to November, 2025), 36 Meetings were held. 
These meetings have been attended by all the ex-officio members or their representative 
except 6 meetings were not attended by Economic Advisor or his representative. In these 
meetings, Authority considered various agenda relating to fixation of ceiling price in respect 
776 scheduled formulations, 1425 retail prices of new drugs, issuance of direction to 
companies to ensure continued production and other matters requiring discussion/decision 
of the Authority etc. The minutes of the Authority meeting are uploaded on NPPA website 
www.nppa.gov.in.” 
 
2 https://www.ibef.org/industry/pharmaceutical-india  

6 
 
16. When asked to explain CDSCO’s role in NPPA, the Department submitted as under: 
“ Drug Controller General of India (DCGI), CDSCO, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is 
one of the members of NPPA. In addition, representative of DCGI is a member of the Multi-
Disciplinary Committee of Experts (MDC). CDSCO also provides technical/ expert inputs on 
various issues such as licensing requirement of the drug, composition of the drugs, approval 
status of the drugs, Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, etc.” 
17. When further queried that whether any formal mechanisms or inter-agency frameworks 
existed to ensure regulatory convergence, coordination, and consistency in the quality standards, 
enforcement, and market surveillance of pharmaceuticals across the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals (DoP), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) and Ministry of AYUSH, 
the Department submitted as under: 
“NPPA itself is constituted as an inter-agency body with the Drugs Controller General (India), 
Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO), office of Chief Adviser (Cost), 
Department of Expenditure and the Department of Economic Affairs represented on it. 
Further, it refers matters to a number of inter-departmental committees for various purposes, 
such as the Committee on Affordable Medicines and Health Products, the inter-ministerial 
committee, the Multi-Disciplinary Committee of Experts and the Standing National Committee 
on Medicines.  
As per the information received from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), 
CDSCO and MoHFW are involved in regulation to ensure quality, safety and efficacy of drugs 
in accordance with the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and rules made thereunder. CDSCO 
coordinates activities of State Drug Control Organisations and provides expert advice through 
the Drugs Consultative Committee (DCC) meetings as well as other regular interactions held 
with State Drugs Controllers for uniformity in administration of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act 
to ensure drug quality. CDSCO conducts joint inspections and enforcement activities with 
State Licensing Authorities and other law enforcement agencies. Ayush vertical has been 
created in the CDSCO since 5.2.2018 to oversee the regulation of Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani 
and Homeopathy (AYUSH) drugs from Central level.” 
18. When asked about method of NPPA’s coordination with Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation (CDSCO) and State Drug Controllers to ensure holistic regulation of drugs and 
pharmaceuticals in the Country, the Department submitted as under: 
 “NPPA is a five-member body, and DCGI, CDSCO, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is 
one of the three ex-officio members.  
Further, in order to disseminate information on functioning of NPPA and create awareness 
among the consumers of pharmaceutical products, NPPA has established Price Monitoring 
and Resource Units (PMRUs) in 32 States / Union territories (UTs) as registered societies 
under the overall supervision and guidance of respective State Drugs Controllers (SDCs). 
This facilitates NPPA’s engagement with SDCs as and when required.” 
 
 
 

7 
 
E. Affordability of medicines 
19. The Committee were informed that NPPA has contributed to affordable medical care in the 
Country through the effective regulation of pricing of drugs/ medical devices and ensuring availability 
of essential drugs at affordable prices. Some of the steps taken by NPPA towards this end, as 
furnished by the Department, are as follows: 
(a) Fixation of ceiling price of scheduled formulations: NPPA fixes the ceiling prices of 
scheduled medicines specified in Schedule-I of the DPCO, 2013, in accordance with the 
provisions of paragraphs 4 and 6 of the DPCO, on the basis of market- based data. All 
manufacturers of scheduled medicines have to sell their products within the ceiling price (plus 
applicable Goods and Service Tax) fixed by the NPPA. Further, prices fixed by NPPA are 
applicable to all the manufacturers/marketers selling the said formulation, whether generic or 
branded. The ceiling prices of scheduled drugs are revised every year on the basis of 
Wholesale Price Index (WPI). As on 23.10.2025, ceiling prices are in effect for 933 
formulations. Four medical devices (Bare metal stents, drug eluting stents, condoms and 
intra-uterine devices) have been included in the NLEM and hence are in Schedule-I of DPCO, 
2013 and their ceiling prices have been fixed too. The average price reduction due to 
refixation of prices after inclusion NLEM, 2022 in Schedule-I is about 16.80% leading to total 
savings of around ₹3,801 crore to public. 
(b) Revision of Ceiling Prices based on Wholesale Price Index (WPI): Paragraph 16 of DPCO, 
2013 provides that the government shall revise the ceiling prices of scheduled formulations 
as per the annual wholesale price index (WPI) for preceding calendar year on or before 1st 
April of every year. Although, the annual permitted increase in the prices of Scheduled drugs 
is based on the increase in WPI (all commodities), WPI increase is the maximum increase 
permissible and may or may not be availed by the manufacturers. 
(c) Retail price fixation of new drugs: NPPA also fixes the retail price of new drug. As per 
paragraph 2(1)(u) of DPCO, 2013, the expression “new drug” means a formulation launched 
by an existing manufacturer of a drug of specified dosages and strengths as listed in NLEM 
by combining such drug with another drug that may or may not be listed in NLEM, or a 
formulation launched by changing the strength or dosages or both of the same drug of 
specified dosages and strengths as listed in the NLEM. The retail price of new drugs is fixed 
as per paragraph 5 of DPCO, 2013, for existing manufacturers of scheduled formulations and 
is applicable to the applicant manufacturer and marketer. The applicant manufacturer cannot 
sell the new drug above the price notified by NPPA. Till 23.10.2025, NPPA has fixed 
approximately 3,570 retail prices of new drugs under DPCO, 2013. 
(d) Monitoring the prices of drugs: For non-scheduled formulation, NPPA monitors prices as 
per the provisions of DPCO 2013, and manufacturers are required to not increase the 
maximum retail price (MRP) of such formulations by more than 10% of the MRP during 
preceding 12 months. However, this is the maximum permissible increase and price increase, 
if any, by manufactures may be lower also. The average annual price increase by such 
manufacturers of non-scheduled drugs over the five-year period from April 2020 to March 
2025 is at 5.6%, which is broadly in line with the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) rise of 5.4% 
over the same period and is significantly lower than the permissible 10% increase. 

8 
 
(e) Price fixation in public interest: Paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013 provides for fixation of prices 
of drugs in extraordinary circumstances in public interest to ensure the availability of drugs at 
affordable prices. NPPA has invoked paragraph 19 in the following cases, in public interest 
and fixed the prices as below: 
(i) The MRP of 106 non-scheduled drug formulations were capped in 2014, which 
includes 22 diabetic and 84 cardiovascular drugs. 
(ii) Ceiling prices of coronary stents were fixed and notified on 13.2.2017 for the first 
time. 
(iii) Ceiling price of knee implants, which is one of the components under ‘Orthopaedic 
Implants’, was notified on 16.8.2017. 
(iv) Vide order S.O. 1041 (E) dated 27.2.2019, a cap on Trade Margin @ 30% on 42 
selected non-scheduled anti-cancer medicines was put under ‘Trade Margin 
Rationalisation’ approach. Under this, price of 526 brands of medicines were reduced 
by an average of around 50% leading to annual savings of ₹ 984 crore to the patients. 
(v) During COVID-19, the price of Oxygen Concentrators, Pulse Oximeter, Blood 
Pressure Monitoring Machine, Nebulizer, Digital Thermometer and Glucometer were 
regulated under “Trade Margin Rationalisation” approach by fixing trade margins on 
these devices in June/July 2021 under paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013. 
(vi) Prices were revised for Heparin to ensure its availability during COVID- 19, vide 
S.O. 2151(E) dated 30.6.2020. 
(vii) Vide notification S.O. 3322 (E), dated 25.9.2020, prices were capped for Liquid 
Medical Oxygen (LMO) and the Oxygen Inhalation (Medicinal gas) to ensure their 
continued availability during COVID. 
20. The Committee were informed that NPPA has been delegated the power of executing and 
implementing the DPCO, 2013, except powers under Para 17, 22(2) and 31, by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals. The Department of Pharmaceuticals under the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers is the competent authority that drafts, frames, amends and issues the DPCOs. 
 
21. Keeping in view significant growth and transformation of India’s Pharmaceutical sector, the 
Committee desired to know whether there was any plan to review and revise/update the extant 
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy 2012 and DPCO, 2013 to reflect current realities. The 
Department, in this regard, submitted as under: 
“The National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012 (NPPP, 2012) strives to achieve a 
balance between affordability and availability of drugs on the one hand and promotion of 
growth of industry on the other. The objective of the policy is to put in place a regulatory 
framework for pricing of drugs with a view to ensure availability of required medicines — 
“essential medicines” — at reasonable prices while providing sufficient opportunity for 
innovation and competition to support the growth of industry, thereby meeting the goals of 
employment and shared economic wellbeing for all.  
The policy framework is based on three principles, viz., essentiality of drug, control of 
formulations prices only and market-based pricing. The essentiality criteria for drugs under 

9 
 
NPPP, 2012 is met by considering the medicines specified in NLEM, as revised from time to 
time by MoHFW. The same is incorporated in Schedule-I to DPCO, 2013.  
The policy framework as given effect to through DPCO, 2013 protects and balances interests 
of various stakeholders. Revisions/updates to the same are an ongoing activity. The 
Department, from time to time, holds consultations with stakeholders and takes appropriate 
action on suggestions received with a view to address them through appropriate 
implementation and strengthening of the extant framework, issuance of appropriate 
instructions and guidelines, and making suitable fresh provisions.” 
 
22. The Committee were informed that the scheduled medicines, for which NPPA fixed the ceiling 
price or imposed a cap, constituted only 18 per cent of the overall market size. As per the extant 
policy, in case of non-scheduled formulation, prices are fixed by manufacturers themselves. 
However, the same are monitored as per Para 20 of DPCO, 2013 wherein manufacturers are not 
permitted to increase the maximum retail price (MRP) of such formulation by more than 10% of their 
MRP during the preceding 12 months. 
 
23. When asked about percentage of increase in the prices in non-NLEM medicines, the 
Department submitted that from the market-based data, it was observed that in case of non-
scheduled formulation the average annual price rise over last five years (FY2020-21 to FY2024-25) 
is approximately 5.6%, as against permitted annual increase of 10%.  
 
24. When enquired about the Department’s suggestions for further bolstering the existing 
regulatory structure to make medicine pricing more transparent, predictable and effective for both 
consumers and industry, the Committee were apprised as under: 
“Under the existing framework of DPCO, 2013 NPPA uses a formula-based approach to fix 
ceiling prices/retail prices. The draft working sheets of the ceiling and retail prices proposed 
are uploaded on the NPPA website for 10 working days for information of public and invitation 
of comments. Comments and representations received are examined and considered before 
prices are notified. Further, all price notifications and minutes of the Authority’s meetings are 
uploaded on its website (www.nppa.gov.in). This methodology is fair, transparent and 
predictable, bringing certainty for industry and consumers. As and when requirement is felt, 
the same are sought to be addressed through appropriate amendment or administrative 
instruction.”  
25. On being asked to provide data regarding comparison of drug prices in India vis-a-vis with 
countries like UK, USA, Germany, which were major pharmaceutical manufacturers and exporters, 
the Department submitted as under: 
“IQVIA, a leading global life sciences consulting firm, has informed on the basis of analysis 
of market data for drugs and dosage forms that have large market share in various therapeutic 
categories and are available in at least three identified countries, that prices of drugs in India 
are generally the lowest across categories.” 
 
 
 

10 
 
F. Shift from cost-based pricing to market-based pricing under DPCO 2013  
26. DPCO, 2013 marked a shift from cost-based pricing to market-based pricing. When asked 
whether there were any possibilities/opportunities for the pharmaceutical companies to exploit any 
regulatory gaps in current market-driven pricing policy and whether shifting from cost-based pricing 
to market-based pricing had any adverse effect on prices of these medicines, the Department 
submitted as under: 
“As per NPPP, 2012, under market-based pricing, the pricing would be based on widely 
available information in the public domain as against individual manufacturer production 
costing data which would result in more transparent and fair pricing. Thus, market-based 
pricing is a well thought out decision as evident from NPPP, 2012. As and when any regulatory 
gaps are noticed, they are addressed through suitable amendments or administrative 
instructions.”  
27. The Committee desired to know why cost audit, despite being a statutory tool, was not being 
effectively utilized by NPPA for price fixation. In this regard, the Department submitted as under: 
“As per the existing framework, the mandate of NPPA is to fix the prices based on market 
data considering the average Price to retailer (PTR). Further, for the purpose of trade margin 
rationalisation, market-based data is considered. There is no provision in DPCO, 2013 to 
consider cost-based data.” 
 
28. When asked about the policy or statutory limitations presently restricting NPPA from 
conducting backward costing or cost-audit exercise to verify the substantial disparity between Price 
to Supplier (PTS), Price to Retailer (PTR) and Maximum Retail Price (MRP) in case of certain 
medicines, and whether any proposal had been made to empower it accordingly, the Department 
submitted as under: 
“As per the existing framework, prices of a formulation are fixed based on market data, by 
considering the average PTR of all brands having a market share equal to or more than 1% 
of that formulation and adding a margin of 16% to it. The methodology for price fixation is laid 
down in DPCO, 2013 and there is no concept of backward working in DPCO, 2013. There is 
no provision in DPCO, 2013 to consider cost-audit-based data for price fixation.”  
29. Regarding the feasibility of cost audit of medicines, the representative of NPPA during 
evidence deposed as under: 
“I have no power to do cost audit. The pricing used to be on cost basis earlier. Right now, it 
is based on the market data. Whatever is the market price, I have to fix the price on that. It is 
a policy issue. If the changes come in the DPCO, if I am given the mandate, we will do that. 
Earlier, as you said rightly, it used to be cost-based pricing. Whatever is the cost of producing 
that medicine, they used to add up margin and sell. Now, from 2013 DPCO, we shifted over 
to the market-based pricing. So, we have to do the pricing based on the market data.” 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
G. Price fixation of medicines by National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
30. When asked about the methodology adopted by NPPA for fixation and revision of prices of 
scheduled drugs and formulations, the Department submitted as under: 
“Fixation and revision of prices of scheduled drugs and formulations are governed by the 
provisions of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 2013 (“DPCO, 2013”) which has been 
promulgated based on the principles of the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy, 2012 
(“NPPP, 2012”). NPPA fixes ceiling prices of formulations specified in Schedule-I to DPCO, 
2013 in accordance with the provisions of DPCO. Under paragraph 4 of DPCO, 2013, the 
ceiling price of a scheduled medicine (i.e., a medicine included in Schedule-I to DPCO, 2013) 
is fixed based on market data, by taking the simple average of the prices to retailers (PTRs) 
of all brands and generic versions of medicine having market share of more than or equal to 
1% of the total market turnover, reckoned on the basis of moving annual turnover of the 
medicine. The ceiling price is arrived at by adding a margin of 16% to the simple average of 
PTR for the specified medicine. As provided for under DPCO, 2013, the GST if actually paid, 
wherever applicable on actual basis, is to be added to the ceiling price to arrive at the 
maximum retail price.  Further, in cases where there is no reduction in average price to 
retailers and there are less than five manufacturers, having one percent or more market 
share, the average PTR is reduced as per the methodology provided in paragraph 6 of DPCO, 
2013 and thereafter 16% margin is added to the reduced average PTR to arrive at the ceiling 
price.  
Revision in the prices of scheduled drugs as per the above methodology is carried out every 
five years. In addition, the ceiling prices of scheduled formulations are revised every year as 
per annual Wholesale Price Index (WPI) (all commodities) for preceding calendar year on or 
before 1st April of every year, which is notified by the Government on the 1st day of April every 
year.” 
31. When asked whether the Department fixed the prices of scheduled formulations based on 
PTR i.e. Price to Retailer declared by the company, the Department submitted as under:  
Under the existing policy framework, NPPA fixes ceiling prices of scheduled formulation and 
retail prices of new drugs based on market data. The prices are fixed by adding 16% margin 
to the average of price to retailer (PTR) of all brands having market share of equal to or more 
than 1% of that formulation.  
 
32. When further asked to state consequences being faced by the consumer due to this price 
fixation method, the Department submitted as under:  
The fixation of ceiling price as per the existing method results in reduction of prices of 
schedule drugs.  Despite the subsequent increase in their prices based on the increase in 
Wholesale Price Index, as permissible under the provision of DPCO, 2013, the scheduled 
medicines are available at reasonable prices in the Country.  The fact that the prices of 
essential medicines in India are lower in comparison to those in other middle and low income 
countries, is also indicated by the study comparing the prices of top-selling formulations in 
the top-selling therapeutic categories and dosage forms in India with those in such other 
countries.  

12 
 
33. NPPA's key responsibilities included fixing and revising drug prices as per the provisions of 
the Drugs Prices Control Order (DPCO). The Committee learnt that mandate of NPPA was to fix the 
price based on the market data. When asked to explain this ‘market data’, the Department submitted 
as under: 
“ DPCO, 2013 defines market-based data as the data of sales related to a drug, collected or 
obtained by the Government as deemed fit, from time to time. Further, Para 9 of DPCO, 2013 
provides that the source of market-based data shall be the data available with the 
pharmaceutical market data specializing company as decided by the Government. 
Accordingly, NPPA obtains the data from M/s. Pharmarack Technologies Pvt Ltd. The data 
includes Stock Keeping Unit (SKU), Maximum Retail Price (MRP), Price to 
Stockist/Distributor, Price to Retailer, Sales quantity and sales value. 
 
34. When further asked whether NPPA had the cost price of all medicines/products that 
pharmaceutical companies were manufacturing, the Department submitted as under: 
“As per NPPP, 2012 pricing is based on market-based data that considers average PTR of 
all brands of a drug having 1% or more market share of that drug and addition of 16% margin 
to retailers for fixing the ceiling/retail prices of such drug. Therefore, the cost data of the 
companies are not maintained by NPPA.” 
35. When asked about duration it took to be implemented once the price of medicines was fixed 
by NPPA, the Department submitted as under: 
“The prices fixed by NPPA comes into eﬀect immediately from the date of issue of Gazette 
Notification. However, in case of scheduled formulations produced or available in the market 
before the date of notification of ceiling price, the manufacturers shall ensure within a period 
of forty-five days of the date of the notification that the maximum retail price of such scheduled 
formulation does not exceed the ceiling price (plus taxes as applicable). 
36. On being enquired about time given by NPPA to the pharmaceutical companies to withdraw 
their medicines from market, the Department submitted as under: 
“For ensuring compliance with the downward revision of ceiling prices, the manufacturers are 
not required to withdraw the stock that are in the trade channel if they are able to ensure that 
such drugs are sold to the consumers at the reduced ceiling prices.” 
37. When asked whether there were other cases of price fixing and other issues that NPPA might 
had given notice of, the Department submitted as under: 
“NPPA issues notices to manufacturers if they are found violating the provisions of DPCO, 
2013. Further, notices for recovery of overcharged amounts are also issued to companies. 
Majority of cases that NPPA is contesting before various High Courts and the Supreme Court 
of India are related to price fixation and overcharged amount. Companies have also contested 
the validity of certain provisions of the DPCO itself. Further, some companies assert 
exemption from price control under Paragraph 32 of the DPCO, 2013 on the grounds that 
their products are patented or developed through indigenous research and development. 
Under the earlier DPCO, 1995, companies similarly disputed the inclusion of bulk drugs in 

13 
 
the schedule as arbitrary and inconsistent with the Drug Policy Amendment of 1986 which 
are currently pending.” 
38. To a categorical query of the Committee whether there was an anomaly in price fixation of 
medicines in the Country, the Department submitted as under: 
“There is no anomaly in price fixation of medicines. Under the existing framework, ceiling 
prices of scheduled formulation and retail prices of new drugs are fixed based on market data 
by taking the average of price to retailer (PTR) of all brands having market share of equal to 
or more than 1% of that formulation and by adding 16% margin to this average.  
Further, in case of non-scheduled formulations, NPPA monitors MRP with a view to ensure 
that increase in MRP is not more 10% over the period of preceding 12 months. 
Under the existing policy, prices are fixed based on PTR.” 
 
H. Fixation of Retail prices of new drugs 
39. The Committee were informed that NPPA also fixed the retail price of new drug. As per 
paragraph 2(1)(u) of DPCO, 2013, the expression “new drug” means a formulation launched by an 
existing manufacturer of a drug of specified dosages and strengths as listed in NLEM by combining 
such drug with another drug that may or may not be listed in NLEM, or a formulation launched by 
changing the strength or dosages or both of the same drug of specified dosages and strengths as 
listed in the NLEM. The retail price of new drugs is fixed as per paragraph 5 of DPCO, 2013, for 
existing manufacturers of scheduled formulations and is applicable to the applicant manufacturer 
and marketer. The applicant manufacturer cannot sell the new drug above the price notified by 
NPPA. Till 23.10.2025, NPPA has fixed approximately 3,570 retail prices of new drugs under DPCO, 
2013. 
 
40. The Department of Pharmaceuticals submitted that the retail prices of new drugs are fixed 
based on market data as per the formulae provided in the Drug (Prices Control) Order, 2013. Based 
on an application received, a draft working sheet of the retail price proposed is uploaded on the 
website of NPPA for 10 working days for information of general public and to invite comments. The 
comments and representations received, if any, are examined and considered before the prices were 
notified. Further, all price notifications and minutes of the Authority meetings were also uploaded on 
the website of NPPA, i.e., www.nppa.gov.in.  
 
41. When asked about stakeholder consultations conducted before revising or notifying new drug 
prices, the Department submitted as under: 
“The retail prices of new drugs are fixed based on market data as per the formulae provided 
in the DPCO, 2013. Based on an application received, a draft working sheet of the retail price 
proposed is uploaded on the website of NPPA for 10 working days for information of general 
public and to invite comments. The comments and representations received, if any, are 
examined and considered before the prices are notified. Further, all price notifications and 
minutes of the Authority meetings are also uploaded on the website of NPPA, 
i.e., www.nppa.gov.in.” 
 

14 
 
42. When asked about the rationale for fixing this period of 10 days, especially when price fixation 
affected millions of patients and many manufacturers and companies, the Department submitted as 
under: 
“The draft worksheets are uploaded on NPPA website for a period of 10 working days as per 
the directives of Government considering that a period of 10 working days is a reasonable 
period for any stakeholder to file representation, if any.” 
 
43. Regarding the number of comments/representations received by NPPA on draft working 
sheets of the retail price of new drugs proposed during the 10-working days window in the last three 
years and effect of these comments/representations in the final price notification, the Department 
submitted as under: 
“During the period from 01.12.2022 to 30.11.2025, 1426 draft working sheets were uploaded 
on website for 10 working days seeking comments. Approx. 30 comments/ representations 
were received by NPPA on the same. Out of these, 29 representations were received from 
pharmaceutical companies, 1 representation from industry association. This led to revision in 
calculations of draft worksheet in respect of only 6 cases.” 
 
44. When asked whether there was any provision for appeal or review mechanism for 
consumers/stakeholders who might be dissatisfied with the outcome of price fixation done by NPPA, 
the Department submitted as under: 
“Para 31 of DPCO, 2013 provides review mechanism. It stipulates that any person aggrieved 
by any price fixation notification issued or an order made under paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of the 
DPCO, 2013, may file a review application to the Department within thirty days of the date of 
publication of the notification in the Official Gazette or the receipt of the order by him, as 
applicable.”  
45. When asked about the average time taken from the uploading of a draft working sheet of the 
retail price of new drugs proposed to the final notification of prices and  challenges encountered by 
NPPA that may delay the finalization of prices, the Department submitted as under: 
“All draft working sheets are uploaded on the NPPA website for 10 working days before being 
placed for the Authority’s approval. Generally, Authority meetings of NPPA are held every 
month. Hence, all working sheets that have completed 10 days’ period since their date of 
uploading as on the day of Authority meeting are placed in the Authority meeting. For cases 
where the 10 days’ period is not completed till the date of Authority meeting, such draft 
worksheets are placed in the Authority meeting of the subsequent month. In cases where 
representations are received, additional time may be required for examination of the same.” 
 
46. When asked about measures taken by NPPA to ensure that the uploaded data on its website 
was accessible and intelligible to common stakeholders, including patients and smaller 
manufacturers, who might not have technical expertise as such, the Department submitted as under: 
“All draft working sheets relating to ceiling and retail price fixation are prominently displayed 
on the NPPA’s website, www.nppa.gov.in, for a period of ten working days. The draft working 
sheets are keenly watched by industry and other stakeholders. The same can be accessed 
by general public and no special technical or legal expertise is required to access and 
comprehend the same. This approach protects the interest of general public. All the price 
notifications are published in the official gazette. NPPA also disseminates its pricing decisions 

15 
 
through its website and social media platforms. Price Monitoring and Resource Units 
(PMRUs) in 32 States/UTs organize various campaigns to spread awareness and 
disseminate information among general public. Pharma Sahi Daam is a mobile application 
launched and developed by NPPA where the composition, drug type and prices of around 
98,000 SKUs of medicines are reflected.” 
 
I. Impact assessment of pricing interventions by NPPA  
47. The representative of the Department of Pharmaceuticals, during oral evidence, highlighted 
the reduction in prices of medicines as under: 
“The ceiling price are fixed periodically as per the existing provisions. Once a formulation or 
medicine is included in the schedule, the NPPA fixes its ceiling price based on prevailing 
market data. After that, the prices are again revised every five years based on the prevailing 
market data. Based on the NLEM, 2022, we have revised the prices of about 933 
formulations, which resulted in an average reduction of 17 per cent in the overall price of the 
medicines. …When the prices were revised in 2011, about ₹  2,423 crore savings were made. 
Similarly, in 2015, ₹  2,643 crore and in 2022, about Rs 3,801 crore savings were made to 
the public at large.” 
 
48. To a query of the Committee that whether NPPA had recently undertaken any impact 
assessment of its pricing interventions on public health outcomes, it was submitted that as per 
information provided by the Department of Health and Family Welfare, in the Total Health 
Expenditure of the Country between the financial years 2014-15 and 2021-22, the share of Out of-
Pocket Expenditure (OOPE) in Total Health Expenditure declined from 62.6% to 39.4%, indicating 
improved accessibility to healthcare and decline in financial burden on households.  
 
49. When further asked to quantify how much of the Out of-Pocket Expenditure (OOPE) in Total 
Health Expenditure reduction was specifically due to medicine price fixation and monitoring 
undertaken by NPPA, the Department submitted as under: 
“The fixation of ceiling prices/MRP under various NLEMs under DPCO, 2013 and invoking of 
paragraph 19 from time to time have resulted in substantial savings to consumers. Based on 
NPPA’s assessments, there has been an average annual total saving of more than ₹ 25,000 
crore to the public due to implementation of DPCO, 2013. The break-up of the total annual 
savings through various measures taken by NPPA are as follows: 
Particulars 
Saving to 
consumer 
(in crore ₹) 
Under NLEM, 2011 2,423 
Under NLEM, 2015 2,643 
Under NLEM, 2022 (till 23.10.2025) 3801  
Coronary stents (calendar year 2024) 12,747  
Anti-diabetic and cardiovascular drugs under paragraph 19 350 
Orthopaedic knee implants 1,500  
Anti-cancer drugs 984  
Trade margin rationalisation of 6 medical devices during 
covid 
1,000 
Total 25,448 
 

16 
 
 Note: The total savings calculated are in the nature of additional savings since prices of many 
scheduled drugs are historically under price control. Additionally, consumers are also 
benefited due to 10% cap on annual increase in MRP of non-scheduled drugs. Therefore, 
absolute savings on account of price regulation under DPCO, 2013 are likely to be much 
more than the above estimate.” 
 
50. The Committee were also informed that while ensuring affordability, access cannot be 
jeopardized and the life-saving essential drugs must remain available to the general public at all 
times. Therefore, unviability of formulations should not lead to a situation where these drugs become 
unavailable in the market and the public is forced to switch to expensive alternatives. Hence, NPPA, 
statedly, in public interest invoked paragraph 19 under DPCO, 2013 in the following instances: (i) 
Allowed 50% increase on 21 formulations of 12 medicines on the then applicable ceiling price to 
ensure the availability of medicines (notified vide S.O. 4461(E) dated 13.12.2019) (ii) Allowed 50% 
increase on 9 scheduled formulations of 3 drugs on the then applicable ceiling price (notified vide 
S.O. 2654(E) dated 1.7.2021) (iii) 11 scheduled formulations of 8 drugs were given one-time increase 
of 50% of the present applicable ceiling price (notified vide S.O. 4498(E) dated 14.10.2024). 
 
51. During oral evidence, the Committee desired to know the reasons for allowing increase in 
prices of certain medicines by NPPA. The representative of NPPA submitted as under: 
“These are the formulations which are very critical and over a period - because of the price 
fixation, repeated price fixation - their prices have gone down. This is number one. The 
number two is that they are either sole agency producing or there are only one or two 
agencies producing. Based on a certain criteria, this was examined at NITI Aayog long back. 
Then a criteria was evolved for those cases where it has become extremely unviable and 
they are going out of the market, there are no alternatives available. Also, taking into fact the 
API price increases. In some cases, the API increase has been so much - active 
pharmaceutical ingredient - the prices have gone up so much, which we confirm from the 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare over a period of time. It has become extremely unviable 
for these medicines to continue. We are extremely conservative. We receive large number of 
requests, hundreds of requests for price increase. But we are extremely conservative in giving 
price increase. But if you also see the actual prices, though it mentions 50 per cent, that 50 
per cent may be from ₹ 1 to ₹ 1.50. Most of these medicines are very low cost medicines. 
That is why they become extremely unviable to continue to produce. In those cases only, over 
a period of since 2019 to 2024, price increase has been allowed.” 
 
J. Margins in sale of certain medicines 
52. It came to notice of the Committee that several hospitals and retailers offered discounts on 
medicines ranging from 20% to 60% on MRP . When asked how such pricing behaviour, which 
reflected huge profit margins being earned by companies, stockists and retailers, existed when MRP 
was fixed under regulation by NPPA, the Department submitted as under: 
“NPPA fixes the ceiling prices of scheduled formulation and retail prices of new drugs based on 
market data as per the provisions of DPCO, 2013. Further, prices of non-scheduled formulation 
are determined by the manufacturers but as per paragraph 20 of DPCO, 2013 they are required 
to not increase the maximum retail price of these medicine by more than 10 percent in a year. 

17 
 
Further, discounts offered by hospital and retailers are guided by marketing and cost 
considerations of various business entities in the supply chain. The extent of trade margin differs 
across drugs depending on a variety of factors, such as:  
(a) Drug dosage form3 (for dosage forms that require special handling for reasons such as 
maintenance of sterilisation, cold chain, vials, ampoules, glass bottles, etc., trade channel 
costs are higher);  
(b) Volume of sales of the drug (for low sales volume, fixed costs of distribution get apportioned 
over a smaller quantity resulting in higher per unit trade channel costs);  
(c) Ex factory price (for low ex factory price, the per unit distribution channel costs are relatively 
larger and are higher when expressed as percentage of ex factory price); and 
(d) Marketing and distribution model (for MSME manufacturers, market development costs are 
often borne not by the manufacturer but by the trade channel; for sale in remoter areas, trade 
channel costs are higher due to lower turnover and higher costs of inventory and logistics).  
As per data available in the Pharmarack database, the average markup for common dosage 
forms of non-scheduled drugs4 is around 43% for distributors, stockists, wholesalers and retailers 
collectively.” 
53. In their 14th Report (18th Lok Sabha), the Committee had noted that the PTS of Ciprofloxin 
500 mg and Tinidazole 600 mg which came to notice of the Committee, was ₹  450/- but its MRP 
was ₹  3500/- hence a whopping difference of ₹  3050. Similarly, PTS of Ibrufin and Labocof was ₹  
831/- and ₹  316/- but their MRP was ₹  4560/- and ₹  2850/- respectively, hence again a big 
difference of ₹  3729/- and ₹  2534/-. When asked to provide factual details in this regard alongwith 
the reasons for such price increases and the steps being taken to control them, the Department 
submitted as under: 
“The formulation Ciprofloxacin 500 mg and Tinidazole 600 mg is a non-scheduled formulation 
and NPPA has notified the price for the existing manufacturer. The last retail price notified 
was ₹10.64 per tablet (excluding taxes), vide S.O. 1990(E), dated 15.5.2025. Further, as per 
market data available, the highest MRP per tablet (including taxes) for the said formulation in 
the month of October 2025 was ₹ 19.46 and the price to stockist was ₹13.34 (excluding 
taxes). 
NPPA has fixed ceiling prices of the formulation Ibuprofen as under:  
S. 
No. Dosage and strength Unit Ceiling price  
(in ₹, excluding taxes) 
1 Tablet 200 mg 1 tablet 0.72 
2 Tablet 400 mg 1 tablet 1.22 
3 Oral liquid 100 mg / 5mL(p) 1 ml 0.22 
4 Capsule 400 mg 1 capsule 1.33 
5 Capsule 200 mg 1 soft gelatin capsule 3.39 
 
 
3 Common dosage forms such as tablets, capsules, sachet, gums and strips, and other dosage forms that require special handling 
for reasons such as maintenance of sterilisation, cold chain, vials, ampoules, glass bottles, etc. 
4 Tablets, capsules, sachet, gums and strips 

18 
 
All manufacturers are required to sell the formulation within the notified ceiling prices (plus 
applicable taxes). 
Labocof is not a scheduled formulation. The formulation is not captured in Pharmarack, the 
principal source database used for monitoring market information in respect of over 14,000 
formulations.” 
54. When asked whether it was a fact that the PTS of paracetamol was ₹ 180 but it was being 
sold at ₹ 4,560 and PTS of Combiflam was ₹ 480 but PTR was around ₹ 4,560 per strip of 10 tablets, 
the Department submitted as under: 
“Paracetamol is a scheduled formulation and NPPA has fixed ceiling prices for the same. The 
currently applicable ceiling prices of Paracetamol tablet are as under: 
S. 
no. Dosage form and strength Unit Ceiling price (in ₹, excluding taxes) 
1 Tablet 650 mg 1 tablet 2.04 
2 Tablet 500 mg 1 tablet 0.92 
 
Combiflam is a non-scheduled formulation containing Ibuprofen 400 mg and Paracetamol 
325 mg, which is a new drug formulation. NPPA has notified the price for existing 
manufacturers. The last retail price notified was ₹1.59 per tablet (excluding taxes), vide S.O. 
1990(E), dated 15.5.2025. Further, as per market data available, the highest MRP per tablet 
price for the said formulation in the month of October 2025 was ₹4.64 (including taxes) and 
PTS (excluding taxes) was ₹3.18 per tablet.” 
55. On being enquired whether stents and other medical devices were being sold on-line or on 
other e-pharmacy platforms at lesser prices than MRP, the Department submitted as under: 
“Stents are scheduled medical device and NPPA has fixed the ceiling price for stents. No 
manufacturer including his trade channel (which may include online pharmacies) can sell the 
stent at MRP higher than the ceiling prices (plus applicable taxes) fixed by NPPA. Discounts, 
if any, oﬀered by retailers are guided by commercial considerations.” 
56. The representative of NPPA during the oral evidence submitted that “there may be a huge 
difference between the Price to Stockist (PTS) and the PTR for the final price that is sold to the 
consumer at the MRP in some cases”.  
 
57. Regarding margins in the prices of medicines, the representative of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals apprised the Committee as under: 
“It is important to note that the average mark-up for common dosage forms of non-scheduled 
drugs, that is, tablets, capsules, sachets, gums and strips, is around 43 per cent when taken 
collectively across distributors, stockists, wholesalers and retailers. This indicates that high 
trade margins are not the norm. The fact that over the last three financial years, in nominal 
GDP growth terms, the Indian pharmaceutical sector has grown at 9.9 per cent, which is 
significantly lower than the nominal GDP growth of 11.8 per cent for the economy as a whole, 
also indicates that the sector is not earning outlier profitability, as higher profitability would 
typically result in greater investment and faster growth.” 

19 
 
 
58. The Committee sought details of stages of the pharmaceutical supply chain—manufacturer, 
stockist, distributor, or retailer—where such excessive margins might be predominantly 
concentrated. Given the oral submissions of the representative of NPPA that “something needs to 
be done to contain these huge margins that are there in the distribution channel in some cases”, the 
Committee also desired to know about concrete corrective/remedial/punitive actions taken by the 
Department so far in this regard. The Department, in response thereto, submitted as under: 
“Analysis of Pharmarack database shows that majority (approximately 87%) of the non-
scheduled market is availing weighted average markup (margin for distributor & retailer as a 
percentage of price to distributor) up to 45%. Out of total non-scheduled market, 
approximately 4% are having the weighted average markup more than 100% of the price to 
distributor. Thus, the high margin is not the industry norm but is observed only in case of small 
fraction of the market.   So far as the issue of excessive trade margin and the stage where it 
exists in the supply chain is concerned, it would require analysis of various cost components 
specific to the business operations for the distribution of that formulation. Under the extant 
legal dispensation, such cost information is not available to the Department or NPPA.  
Further, there is no uniform supply chain for the Pharma industry. It may differ from company 
to company. Supply chain may be different for MSME and MNCs. It may also be diﬀerent for 
branded or generic products. Hence, it is not possible to ascertain the concentration of trade 
margin at a particular level of trade channel. However, from the feedback gathered from 
industry, it has emerged that supply and distribution of branded generic formulations is done 
through two types of marketing channels: the “branded generics” channel that typically 
caters to major demand centres and the “trade generics” channel that typically caters to 
remote and rural areas that have low-volume sales and account for about 8-9% of the 
market. The distribution costs for the two channels are structurally diﬀerent, which translate 
into high diﬀerence in their per unit distribution costs in percentage terms. The following 
factors are pertinent in this connection: 
i. Low-volume sales result in apportionment of fixed costs of distribution over a relatively 
smaller number of formulation units sold, which would translate into trade margins that may 
be high in percentage terms. 
ii. In the case of formulations sold through the “branded generics” channel, the manufacturer 
maintains inventory for uninterrupted supply, along with associated significant inventory 
carrying costs, and also bears the costs of awareness activities related to these products, 
while the distribution channel only incurs logistics and distribution point costs. In contrast, 
in the case of formulations sold through the “trade generics” channel, the distribution 
channel incurs additionally the cost of carrying inventory and awareness. 
iii. Apart from the above additional cost constituents, in the “trade generics” channel, the 
distribution channel costs are themselves typically higher than the corresponding costs 
incurred on formulations that are typically marketed through the “branded generics” channel, 
since the costs of logistics, staffing, expired inventory, cold chain, etc. in the “trade generics” 
channel are higher as sale volumes are smaller and oﬀtake slower and uncertain and the 
distribution chain is longer due to this channel being typically adopted for supplies to remote 
and rural areas. In this connection, it is pertinent that the inventory carrying costs are higher 
for smaller retailers located away from main towns as they need to carry at least two months 
of stock to ensure availability, whereas retailers in larger towns who are supplied on daily 
basis carry only two to three weeks of inventory. Further, the costs of finance for the two sets 

20 
 
of retailers may be significantly diﬀerent as smaller retailers may have smaller balance-
sheets and lower credit rating assessment. 
iv. Further, unlike in the case of the “branded generics” channel, where the manufacturer may 
maintain centralised inventory oﬀering cost advantages accruing from economies of scale, 
in the case of the “trade generics” channel, there may typically be multiple smaller 
distributors who would not have the same scale and whose cost of distribution would, 
therefore, be higher. 
v. The above cost related factors significantly impact the percentages for trade margin for 
formulations marketed through the “trade generics” channel in two ways. First, the Price to 
Stockist (PTS) at which the manufacturer sells becomes lower, reducing the denominator on 
which the percentage is calculated and, secondly, the absolute trade margin becomes 
higher, raising the numerator in the percentage calculation. 
Thus, the trade margins for the two channels may diﬀer considerably in percentage terms and 
may serve to oﬀset higher distribution costs, which enable uninterrupted supply of essential 
medicines despite inherently high costs and logistical challenges. 
In past, NPPA invoked an exceptional clause under DPCO, 2013 in public interest to cap the 
trade margin for 42 high-priced anti-cancer medicines as a pilot under a Trade Margin 
Rationalisation (TMR) approach and on Covid essential 6 medical devices during Covid 
pandemic. Further, in light of experience, DoP and NPPA have undertaken stakeholder 
consultations regarding incorporation of a suitable enabling provision for TMR in DPCO, 2013, 
and the feedback gathered from the consultations is under examination for formulating an 
appropriate policy in the matter.” 
 
K. Affordable healthcare schemes/initiatives  
59. The Committee were apprised by the representative of the Department of Pharmaceuticals 
that the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy, 2012, recognised price control as only one element 
of a broader strategy for the provision of affordable healthcare. Other elements included direct 
Government healthcare, insurance, and a well-spread, low-cost Jan Aushadhi pharmacy network. 
Statedly, the policy approach had been to complement price control with affordable healthcare 
programmes in order to achieve multiple policy objectives simultaneously. 
 
60. The Committee were further informed that Jan Aushadhi outlets had made commonly used 
scheduled and non-scheduled medicines available at an average of about 80 percent lower than 
leading brands in the market, resulting in savings of over ₹  40,000 crore. When asked whether the 
Department had any data regarding proportion of total pharmaceutical consumption in India which 
was actually sourced from Jan Aushadhi outlets, AMRIT Pharmacies and under the Free Drugs 
Service initiative, the Department submitted as under: 
“Under the Pradhan Mantri Bharatiya Janaushadhi Pariyojana (PMBJP) during FY 2024-25, 
total sales of ₹2,022 crore had been registered.  
As per the information provided by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW), the 
Affordable Medicines and Reliable Implants for Treatment (AMRIT) initiative, launched by 
MoHFW, is a pioneering intervention aimed at making essential medicines and medical 

21 
 
supplies affordable for the treatment of life-threatening diseases such as cancer, 
cardiovascular ailments, diabetes, and other critical illnesses. The initiative seeks to 
substantially reduce the financial burden of healthcare and improve access to quality 
treatment, particularly for economically disadvantaged sections of society. The AMRIT 
initiative has been designed primarily to serve tertiary healthcare institutions, including AIIMS, 
District Hospitals, General Hospitals, Medical Colleges, Super Specialty Hospitals, and 
Central Government institution hospitals. AMRIT Pharmacies function as a single-point 
solution for the medical requirements of tertiary healthcare centres, catering to both 
Outpatient (OPD) and Inpatient (IPD) needs.  
The product basket includes medicines, medical devices, implants, surgical items, and 
consumables, thereby supporting comprehensive patient care. Over the years, AMRIT has 
significantly expanded its scope and now covers a wide range of specialties such as oncology, 
cardiology, orthopaedics, medical implants (including stents), and medical disposables, in 
addition to both branded and generic medicines.  
As on date, 255 AMRIT Pharmacies are operational across 24 States and 4 Union Territories. 
These pharmacies offer more than 8,000 medicines and medical products, including drugs 
for cardiovascular diseases, cancer, diabetes, implants, stents, surgical disposables, and 
other consumables. Products are sold at discounts of up to 50% on the Maximum Retail Price 
(MRP) against authentic prescriptions issued by registered medical practitioners, including 
prescriptions from institutions other than where the AMRIT pharmacy is located.  
As on 15th December 2025, approximately 70.17 million patients have benefitted from the 
AMRIT initiative. The total value of medicines dispensed at MRP through AMRIT Pharmacies 
stands at ₹17,673.94 crore, resulting in direct savings of ₹8,691.42 crore to patients. This has 
significantly contributed to the reduction of out-of-pocket expenditure on healthcare, 
particularly for patients undergoing treatment for chronic and life-threatening conditions. The 
scale of operations, patient coverage, and cumulative savings clearly demonstrate the 
substantial role played by AMRIT Pharmacies in enhancing access to affordable medicines 
and reducing healthcare costs in the Country. 
For Free drugs service initiative as informed by NHM-I Division, MoHFW, they do not maintain 
this information.” 
61. When further asked about the steps taken by the Department to monitor quality compliance 
and uninterrupted availability of medicines supplied by Jan Aushadhi outlets, AMRIT Pharmacies 
and under the Free Drugs Service initiative, the Department submitted as under: 
“Jan Aushadhi Kendras (JAKs) 
The following measures are in place to ensure quality of medicines supplied through JAKs: 
(i) Supply only from WHO Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) certified plants: Only plants 
that are certified as WHO-GMP compliant by the Central Drugs Standard Control 
Organisation (CDSCO) after direct inspection are eligible for supply. 
(ii) Distribution only after 100% pre-testing of all medicine batches: Samples are drawn from 
100% of batches supplied at PMBI’s warehouses for testing anonymously, and medicines 
are dispatched for supply to JAKs only after the quality test is passed. 

22 
 
(iii) Testing only at labs compliant with Good Laboratory Practices (GLP): Samples are tested 
only at labs accredited and periodically inspected by the National Accreditation Board for 
Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) and, in addition, assessed by PMBI for GLP 
compliance. 
Number of steps have been taken to ensure effective and regular supply of medicines at JAKs, 
including the following: 
(i) Since September 2024, stocking by JAKs of 200 commonly used medicines, consisting 
of the 100 top-selling medicines in the scheme product basket and 100 fast-selling 
medicines in the market, has been incentivised, under which JAK owners are eligible for 
monthly incentive based on the stocks that they maintain of these medicines.  
(ii) An end-to-end information-technology-enabled supply chain system is in place to connect 
a robust supply chain system consisting of one central warehouse, four regional 
warehouses and a growing network of distributors across the Country, currently 
numbering 39.  
(iii) In addition, with a view to ensure availability of commonly used products, 400 fast-moving 
products are monitored regularly by the scheme implementing agency Pharmaceuticals 
and Medical Devices Bureau of India (PMBI) and demand for the same is forecasted on 
an ongoing basis. Further, steps have been taken to digitise the forecasting method to 
augment the procurement process through automation. 
Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Bureau of India (PMBI), the implementing agency of the 
scheme, has informed that due to reduced prices under Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya Jan Aushadhi 
Pariyojana, estimated savings of over ₹40,000 crore have accrued to citizens. 
Free Drugs Service Initiative (FDSI) 
As per the information provided by MoHFW, under FDSI, Government of India supports 
procurement of drugs and strengthening robust systems of procurement, Quality Assurance, 
Supply chain management and warehousing, Prescription audit, grievance redressal, 
dissemination of Standard Treatment Guidelines and Establishment of IT enabled platform 
DVDMS (Drugs & Vaccine Distribution Management System) for monitoring the real status of 
procurement and availability of essential medicines. 
MoHFW has recommended facility wise Essential Medicines List (EML) to be made available at 
the public healthcare facilities which includes 106 drugs at Sub Health Centre level, 172 at 
Primary Health Centre level, 300 at Community Health Centre level, 318 at Sub-district Hospital 
level and 381 drugs at district Hospital level. 
Quality of drugs procured, under FDSI, is ensured through the operational guidelines of the 
initiative that  
(i) All drugs must be sourced from Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) compliant 
 manufacturers through robust procurement mechanism.  
(ii) Post supply testing of every batch before distributing to the health facilities.  
The alert mechanism to monitor expiry dates of medicines involves robust tracking systems i.e. 
Batch Tracking, Inventory Management Systems and Barcode/RFID Technology. States/UTs 
monitor expiry dates at the district and local levels, ensuring no expired products are distributed. 

23 
 
In cases where products are approaching their expiry date, they are often redistributed to areas 
where they can be used before expiry. 
The Affordable Medicines and Reliable Implants for Treatment (AMRIT)  
As per the information provided by MoHFW, HLL Lifecare Limited, has put in place a robust and 
transparent mechanism to ensure quality compliance of medicines supplied through AMRIT 
Pharmacies and to maintain uninterrupted availability of essential medicines and medical 
supplies under the various schemes and initiatives. 
Monitoring of Quality Compliance of Medicines Supplied by AMRIT Pharmacies: 
1. Structured Vendor Registration and Evaluation 
 The Procurement Services Division (PSD) of HLL Lifecare Limited is responsible for  the 
identification, development, registration, and approval of vendors, including  manufacturers, 
importers, marketers, suppliers, and distributors. 
 All vendor development activities are executed through the Online Vendor Registration 
 Portal of HLL Lifecare Limited (https://vendorregistration.lifecarehll.com/). 
2. Online Vendor Registration Process 
 Interested vendors are required to access the online portal, create a profile, and upload 
 documents for Pan-India or regional registration. The registration process ensures 
 transparency, traceability, and standardisation across suppliers. 
3. Comprehensive Document Verification 
 The Vendor Registration Team of PSD thoroughly evaluates the documents uploaded  by 
vendors prior to approval. For manufacturers, the mandatory documents include: 
 Supply category details 
 GST Registration Certificate 
 PAN Card 
 Valid Manufacturing Licence 
 Quality Certifications (at least one mandatory), such as: 
o FDA Certificate 
o CE Certificate 
o WHO-GMP Certificate 
 Certificate of Incorporation / Licence issued by the Local Authority 
 MSE-related documents, wherever applicable, including Udyog Aadhaar, MSE 
Certificate, NSIC/KVIC/UAM Certificate, and ownership details 
 Non-Conviction Certificate 
 Details of previously executed supply orders (minimum three) 
 Company profile 
4. Techno-Commercial Evaluation and Rate Finalisation 
 Upon successful registration, vendors are invited to submit their rates through the 
 vendor portal. The rates are evaluated and finalised through a Techno-Commercial 
 Negotiation process, ensuring compliance with technical specifications, quality standards,                 
and commercial competitiveness. 

24 
 
5. Rate Contract and Supply Controls 
 After finalisation of rates, HLL enters into a Pan-India Rate Contract with the approved 
manufacturers. Supplies are accepted strictly against valid purchase orders and must be 
accompanied by: 
 Certificate of Analysis (CoA) from the manufacturer for each batch 
 NABL-accredited laboratory testing certificates for generic medicines, wherever 
applicable 
6. Quality Assurance and Traceability 
 These multi-layered controls-ranging from vendor qualification, certification 
 requirements, batch-wise testing, and documentation-ensure that only quality- compliant 
medicines and medical supplies are dispensed through AMRIT Pharmacies. 
(i) Pan-India Rate Contracts with Multiple Vendors 
Rate contracts are generally entered into with multiple qualified manufacturers on 
a  Pan-India basis, reducing dependency on a single supplier and ensuring 
continuity of  supplies. 
(ii) Centralised and IT-Enabled Procurement System 
The online vendor portal and integrated procurement systems enable real-time  monitoring 
of supplies, orders, and vendor performance, facilitating timely  replenishment. 
(iii) Advance Planning and Demand Forecasting 
Procurement planning is based on consumption patterns of AMRIT Pharmacies located  in 
tertiary healthcare institutions, covering both OPD and IPD requirements, thereby 
 minimising stock-out risks. 
(iv) Strict Purchase Order and Supply Monitoring 
 Supplies are made strictly against purchase orders, and adherence to delivery timelines 
 is monitored. Non-compliance by vendors attracts corrective measures as per contract 
 terms. 
(v) Quality-Linked Supply Acceptance 
Acceptance of supplies is conditional upon submission of required quality documents, 
including CoA and laboratory test reports, ensuring that availability is not compromised by 
sub-standard products. 
(vi) Single-Point Supply Support to Tertiary Healthcare Institutions 
AMRIT Pharmacies function as a single-point solution for medicines, implants, surgical items 
and consumables for tertiary healthcare centres, further strengthening availability and 
operational efficiency.” 
 
L. Trade Margin Rationalization (TMR) 
62. As per the existing framework, the mandate of NPPA was to fix the prices based on market 
data. The methodology provides for fixing the ceiling price of scheduled drugs, retail prices of new 
drugs and monitoring the increase in prices of non-scheduled drugs. Trade margin rationalisation 

25 
 
(TMR) approach for regulating prices was undertaken by exercising extraordinary powers available 
under paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013 for a limited period.  
63. The details of prices fixed under Para 19 in public interest in the last 5 years, as furnished by 
the Department, are as follows: 
NPPA invoked the provision of Para 19 in public interest to address the exigencies arising out 
during COVID pandemic by regulating the prices of following drugs and medical devices: 
 Ceiling Prices were fixed for Liquid Medical Oxygen (LMO) at ₹15.22 per  cubic meter and 
the Oxygen Inhalation (Medicinal gas) at ₹ 25.71 per cubic meter vide S.O. 3322(E) dated 
25.09.2020. 
 The prevailing ceiling prices for Heparin Injection 1000IU/ml and 5000IU/ml were revised 
upward by 50% to ₹24.39 and ₹60.54 per ml respectively vide S.O. 2151(E) dated 30.06.2020 to 
ensure its continued availability during COVID. 
 The trade margins of Oxygen Concentrators and five other medical devices viz., (i) Pulse 
Oximeter, (ii) Blood Pressure Monitoring Machine, (iii) Nebulizer, (iv) Digital Thermometer, and (v) 
Glucometer at first point of sale of product (Price to Distributor) were capped at 70% of PTD vide 
S.O. 2161(E) dated 03.06.2021 and S.O. 2808(E) dated 13.07.2021.  
 
64. Observing that non-scheduled drugs constituted a significant portion of the pharmaceutical 
market, the Committee desired to know whether Para 19 of DPCO 2013 needed to be invoked more 
frequently to address excessive pricing especially in cases where consumers/ patients faced severe 
affordability burdens. In response, the Department submitted as under: 
“As per Pharmarack database for financial year 2024-2025, which covers about 98000 SKUs, 
the market share of the scheduled formulations is approximately 18% of the total value and 
the market share of the non-scheduled formulations is approximately 82% of total value. 
Further, analysis of Pharmarack database shows that majority (approximately 87%) of the non-
scheduled market is availing weighted average markup (margin for distributor & retailer as a 
percentage of price to distributor) up to 45%. Out of total non-scheduled market, approximately 
4% are having the weighted average markup more than 100% of the price to distributor. Thus, 
huge margin in the sector is not a norm but may be only in a small segment of this market. 
 
A.  The mandate of NPPA is to ensure availability of drugs at aﬀordable prices. However, while 
ensuring aﬀordability, access cannot be jeopardized and the lifesaving essential drugs must 
remain available to the general public at all times. Therefore, unviability of certain formulations 
should not lead to a situation where these drugs become unavailable in the market and the 
public is forced to switch to costly alternatives. Based on the recommendation of Committee 
on aﬀordable Medicines and Health Products (CAMHP) under Chairmanship of Member 
(Health), NITI Aayog and Inter-Ministerial Committee on Para 19 constituted under NPPA, 
Authority invoked para 19 under DPCO, 2013 twice in last 5 years for upward revision of 
prices. The details are as follows: 
o Prices of 9 scheduled formulations of 3 drugs revised by giving one-time  increase of 50% 
on the then applicable ceiling price (notified vide S.O.2654(E) dated 1.07.2021). 
o Prices of 11 scheduled formulations of 8 drugs revised by giving one-time  increase of 50% 
on the then applicable ceiling price (notified vide S.O.4498(E) dated 14.10.2024). 

26 
 
B. Orthopaedic Knee Implants- The ceiling prices of orthopaedic knee implants for knee 
replacement therapy were first notified in 2017 vide S.O.2668(E) dated 16.08.2017. However, 
its prices are extended or revised every year under Para 19. The last extension of ceiling 
prices was made vide S.O. 5190(E) dated 14.11.2025 for a further period of one year up to 
the 15th November, 2026, or until further orders.” 
 
65. The Committee desired to know the details of the current trade margin in respect of non-
scheduled drugs and formulations for stockists, distributors, retailers and wholesalers. The 
Department submitted as under: 
“The market data available with NPPA (i.e., Pharmarack database) captures the price points 
only at the level of distributor and retailer, and not for intermediate dealers in the trade channel 
such as stockists and wholesalers.  
The extent of trade margin differs across drugs depending on a variety of factors, such as:  
(i) Drug dosage form5 (for dosage forms that require special handling for reasons such 
as maintenance of sterilisation, cold chain, vials, ampoules, glass bottles, etc., trade 
channel costs are higher);  
(ii) Volume of sales of the drug (for low sales volume, fixed costs of distribution get 
apportioned over a smaller quantity resulting in higher per unit trade channel costs);  
(iii) Ex factory price (for low ex factory price, the per unit distribution channel costs are 
relatively larger and are higher when expressed as percentage of ex factory price); 
and 
(iv) Marketing and distribution model (for MSME manufacturers, market development 
costs are often borne not by the manufacturer but by the trade channel; for sale in 
remoter areas, trade channel costs are higher due to lower turnover and higher costs 
of inventory and logistics).  
As per data available in the Pharmarack database, the average markup for common dosage 
forms of non-scheduled drugs6 is around 43% for distributors, stockists, wholesalers and 
retailers collectively.” 
66. When asked what framework or methodology would NPPA use to determine appropriate 
levels of trade margins across different therapeutic categories, the Department submitted as under: 
“Taking into account the suggestions of different stakeholders and after detailed analysis of 
the market data, a considered view will be taken for formulating an appropriate policy view in 
the matter by the Department.” 
67. On being queried whether NPPA was considering amendments to DPCO, 2013 or proposing 
a new rule under the Essential Commodities Act to incorporate TMR explicitly, the Department 
submitted as under: 
“DPCO, 2013 is issued under section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. The 
Department has held consultations with all stakeholders.  The feedback gathered from the 
consultations and experience gathered from implementation of the pilot on TMR, the 
 
5 Common dosage forms such as tablets, capsules, sachet, gums and strips, and other dosage forms that require special handling 
for reasons such as maintenance of sterilisation, cold chain, vials, ampoules, glass bottles, etc. 
6 Tablets, capsules, sachet, gums and strips 

27 
 
Department in association with NPPA is examining the issue regarding incorporation of a 
suitable enabling provision for applying a TMR approach in DPCO, 2013.”   
 
68. When asked whether it was a fact that the Department was working on TMR issue from the 
last 5-6 years and it had not yet been finalised and about the reasons therefor, the Department 
submitted as under: 
“Implementation of TMR would affect different stakeholders differently and hence require 
extensive consultation with all stakeholders and a well-calibrated approach. Accordingly, 
TMR approach of capping trade margin has been implemented as a pilot in respect of 42 
high-priced anti-cancer medicines. Further, TMR was also implemented on six covid-related 
devices during the pandemic. Also, the Department held extensive consultations with all 
stakeholders on various issues concerning the existing pricing framework including, inter alia, 
incorporation of a suitable enabling provision in DPCO, 2013 for a TMR approach.  
The proposal for a TMR approach for drugs/formulations is supported by number of 
pharmaceutical industry associations and consumer groups, with certain recommendations 
on various aspects such as formula for the same, percentage of trade margin, phasing of 
implementation, period of sales data to be taken into consideration, implication for lower value 
and lower volume products, etc. However, concerns have also been raised by some 
stakeholders regarding certain implementation aspects, including the span and extent of 
TMR. Further, associations of MSME pharmaceutical manufacturers have expressed concern 
regarding applicability of TMR on non-scheduled formulations. They have expressed the 
concern that TMR approach will be detrimental to MSMEs, resulting in loss of employment, 
and will affect the outreach of medicines to remote areas due to reasons such as different 
marketing/trade channels and manufacturing setups, dependence on small traders to sell 
their products mostly in remote areas and the need to shell out margin at every stage, 
resulting in high trade margins, and at the same time making medicines available at 
competitive prices.  
In view of the above, the Department is engaged with stakeholders and is examining the 
issues flagged by them with a view to mitigate the concerns flagged, while formulating the 
policy proposal and amendments to DPCO, 2013.” 
69. When further asked whether the Department could conduct cost audit until the TMR issue 
was finalized, the Department submitted as under: 
“As per the existing framework, the mandate of NPPA is to fix the prices based on market 
data. There is no provision in DPCO, 2013 to consider cost-audit-based data for price 
fixation.”  
70. To a pointed query about the expected timeline for finalizing the policy decision on TMR 
integration into DPCO, 2013, the Department submitted as under: 
“There is no set time frame for finalising the policy decision on TMR integration into DPCO, 
2013. However, the matter is under active examination of the Department. “ 
71. The Committee were informed that while the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) was 
working on the TMR engaged with all kinds of stakeholders, industry, other stakeholders in the 
system, the trade generics issue is cropping up for attention because of involvement of most of the 

28 
 
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). In this regard, the Committee sought details 
regarding: (a) estimated market size of pharmaceutical sector which is catered by MSMEs and 
number of MSME manufacturers in this sector; and (b) trade margin structure along the trade 
channels of ‘trade generics’. The Department submitted as under: 
“Trade Generics are not defined in the DPCO, 2013. As per the inputs gathered from the 
industry, ‘trade generics’ refer to generic pharmaceutical formulations that are primarily 
distributed through a separate marketing channel focused on remote, rural, and low-volume 
markets. The distributors and retailers in the trade-generic channel bear significant additional 
cost, including higher logistics expenses, greater inventory carrying costs, slower oﬀtake, 
increased risk of expired stock, and higher financing costs due to smaller retail balance sheets 
and weaker credit access. 
Further, the data of trade generics and trade margin structure along the trade channels of 
‘trade generics’ is not specifically captured by the department or Pharmarack database. 
However, as informed by Indian Federation of Pharma Generics, the number of MSMEs in 
the pharma sector is estimated to be about 7500 with a market size of ~ 10%.” 
 
M. Pharmaceutical companies 
72. Elaborating on the Department’s plans and policies to support the growth of Pharmaceutical 
industries to meet employment goals and promote economic wellbeing for all, the Department 
submitted as under: 
“In addition to the overall policies aimed at for promotion of industry, the Government has also 
undertaken measures and initiatives to supports the pharmaceuticals and medical devices 
industries through various schemes, including the following: 
(a) Promotion of Research and Innovation in Pharmaceutical MedTech sector (PRIP) 
scheme; 
(b) The Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Pharmaceuticals;  
(c) The PLI Scheme for promotion of domestic manufacturing of critical Key Starting Materials 
(KSMs) / Drug Intermediates (DIs) / Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs) in India, 
also known as the PLI Scheme for Bulk Drugs;  
(d) Scheme for Promotion of Bulk Drug Parks; and 
(e) Strengthening of pharmaceutical industry scheme, which consists of the following three 
sub-schemes: 
(i) Assistance to pharmaceutical industry for Common Facilities; 
(ii) Revamped Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme; and 
(iii) Pharmaceutical and Medical Devices Promotion and Development Scheme.” 
73. The Committee observed that NPPA’s role as a regulator is to work towards a healthy Nation 
by making medicines accessible and affordable while creating an enabling environment for the 
Indian pharmaceutical industry to develop into a world leader. When asked about measures being 
taken to maintain a balance between consumer welfare and Pharmaceutical industrial growth, the 
Department submitted as under: 
“The mandate of NPPA is to ensure availability of drugs at affordable prices. It strives to strike 
a balance between the interests of the consumers and the pharmaceutical industry within the 
ambit of DPCO, 2013. NPPA regulates the prices of scheduled formulations and new drugs 

29 
 
by fixing the ceiling and retail prices. Further, as per the provisions of DPCO, 2013 
manufacturers are required to not increase the maximum retail prices (MRP) of non-
scheduled formulation by more than 10% of the MRP during the preceding 12 months. 
Further, with a view to support innovation and research and development, DPCO, 2013 
provides exemption from provision of DPCO under paragraph 32. There also exists provisions 
of fixing separate ceiling or retail prices under paragraph 11(3) to encourage incremental 
innovation. In addition, the Government is implementing number of schemes to support 
research, innovation and self-reliance in the pharmaceutical sector as detailed in the reply 
above.” 
When sought details regarding formal representations or grievances from pharmaceutical 
industry received by the DoP in the last three years, main grievances and relief/resolution 
which  was given by DoP, the Department submitted as under: 
“Representation and suggestions are received from time to time from various stakeholders, 
including Pharmaceutical industry and associations. Some grievances are received directly 
by the Department whereas some are received through other Ministries/Departments. All 
such representations are examined on case- to-case basis in consultation with concerned 
Divisions, implementing agencies or other Ministries/ Departments, as required. Wherever 
the issue raised, fall within the scope of the Department, appropriate action is taken. Matters 
falling outside the mandate of the Department are referred to the concerned Authorities for 
necessary action.  The Department do not maintain the consolidated year-wise data of all 
such representation received or their disposal.” 
74. The Committee further sought number of requests from the pharmaceutical companies for 
increase in prices of medicines that had been received by NPPA in the last three years. In response, 
the Department submitted as under: 
“In the last three years, NPPA has received applications for increase in prices in respect of 
77 formulations. Against these, price increase was given for 11 formulations, while requests 
for increase in 47 formulations were rejected and those of the remaining 19 formulations are 
under examination.” 
 
N. Monitoring of unfair practices that have come to notice of NPPA 
75. When asked about the extant mechanism for monitoring price rise in case of non-scheduled 
drugs and formulations, the Department submitted as under: 
“Increase in prices of non-scheduled formulation is monitored by NPPA through analysis of 
the available market-based data, Form-V filed by pharmaceutical companies, samples 
purchased by Price Resource Monitoring Units (PMRUs).  Also, the complaints received from 
individuals and organisations through various channels like Pharma Jan Samadhan PMO 
Grievance Portal, etc. are sources of information with respect to any price increase that is in 
violation of the provisions of the DPCO, 2013.” 
76. The various unfair practices being employed by certain pharmaceutical companies to 
escape/violate NPPA enforcement were stated to be as under: 
“Some instances of unfair practices that have come to notice of NPPA are as under:  

30 
 
(a) Sale of drugs above the ceiling prices fixed by NPPA, especially sale of pre-manufactured 
stocks at pre-revised maximum retail price (MRP); 
(b) Launch of a new drug by the existing manufacturer of scheduled formulation without prior 
price approval from NPPA; 
(c) Increase of the price of non-scheduled formulation by more than 10% over the period of 
preceding 12 months; and 
(d) Misclassification of a scheduled drug as a non-scheduled drug based on claim of such drug 
having a novel drug delivery system. 
 
77. Regarding details pertaining to concrete cases detected by NPPA in the last five years for 
each unfair practice listed (a–d) above and penalties or recoveries resulted from each category, the 
Department submitted as under: 
“Category-wise list of number of Cases, Detected Amount (Principal Overcharged Amount 
including Penalty, if applicable and Interest) and Recovered Amount for the last five years (1st 
April 2020 to 31st March 2025) is as below: 
Category No. of 
Cases 
Principal 
Overcharged 
Amount 
including Penalty, if 
applicable 
and Interest 
(₹ in Crore) 
Recovered 
Amount 
(₹ in Crore) 
Ceiling Price Violation (including 
pre-manufactured stock) 
366 177.14 21.89 
New Drug launch without Price 
approval 
19 2.62 7.60 
Violation in Non-Scheduled drugs 40 35.22 20.54 
Misclassification as a non-
scheduled drug 
9 37.52 2.38 
Total 434 252.50 52.41 
          “ 
78. On being asked that in view of above-mentioned instances of unfair practices, how could the 
regulatory framework for scheduled and non-scheduled drugs/medicines/formulations be tightened 
to ensure fair pricing and accessibility of medicines in the Country, the Department submitted as 
under: 
“The existing policy and regulatory regime balances the objective of facilitating availability 
and accessibility of drugs in the Country.  Thus, the regulatory regime has facilitated 
availability of drugs in India as is reflected by the fact that India is one of the few countries 
which is net exporter of medicines in the world. The policy regime has also led to a price 
structure / levels of medicine that is also amongst one of the lowest in the world. However, 
further strengthening of PMRUs at the grassroots level, creation of more awareness among 
consumers, enhanced collaboration with other stakeholders such as the Directorate General 
of Health Services (DGHS), Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, Central Drugs Standard 
Control Organisation (CDSCO) etc., may help in better compliance of provisions of DPCO, 
2013.” 

31 
 
79. On being asked about number of cases of overpricing have been identified in the last five 
years, and punitive action/penalties or recoveries that had been enforced in such case, the 
Department submitted as under: 
“During the period from FY 2020-21 to FY 2024-25, demand notices for overcharging have 
been issued in 436 cases involving ₹ 406.85 crore. An amount of ₹ 133.19 crore has been 
recovered during the same period.” 
80. When further asked as to how NPPA monitored and enforced price compliance at the hospital 
pharmacy levels, the Department submitted as under: 
“Hospital pharmacies are like any other pharmacies and any price violation, if reported, is 
acted upon as per the provisions of DPCO, 2013. 
O. Recovery of overcharging amount from the violators 
81. It was submitted by the Department of Pharmaceuticals that as on 30.9.2025, total 
overcharging demand amount from the violators was ₹ 10,013.30 crore and ₹ 8,526.10 crore was 
outstanding. Out of the same, an amount of ₹5,944.16 crore was under litigation at various stages 
in the High Court / Supreme Court and 282 cases involving outstanding overcharged amount of ₹ 
223.80 crore had been referred to the District Collector for initiating recovery proceedings. Further, 
entire overcharged amount of ₹ 190.92 crore in respect of 1,022 cases had already been recovered. 
The balance amount of ₹ 2,358.20 crore had been disputed by the companies against whom the 
demand notices had been issued.  
 
82. When queried about the reasons for 85% of overcharging demand amount remaining 
unrecovered as on 30.9.2025, the Department submitted as under: 
  “As on 30th September 2025, ₹ 8526.10 Crore is outstanding for recovery out of which 
69.72% i.e., ₹ 5,944.16 Crore is under litigation in various High Courts / Supreme Court. “ 
 
83. Observing that an amount of ₹ 5,944.16 crore was under litigation at various stages in the 
High Court / Supreme Court, the Committee sought details regarding average duration of these 
litigations. In response, the Department submitted as under: 
Age-wise details of Cases are as under: 
 
Duration of Cases No. of Cases 
Less than 5 years 65 
6 to 10 years 142 
11 to 15 years  51  
16 to 20 years 44  
More than 20 years  43  
Total 345  
 
 
84. When asked whether there was a dedicated legal cell within NPPA/DoP to vigorously pursue 
and resolve such cases, the Department submitted as under: 
“To assist the Authority in legal work, consultants are hired on contractual basis with the 
approval of government. The consultants regularly follow up with the concerned government 
counsels for effective and timely hearings of pending cases.” 

32 
 
 
 
85. When further asked about the grounds on which companies against whom the demand 
notices had been issued were disputing ₹ 2,358.20 crore in overcharged amounts, the Department 
submitted as under: 
“An amount of ₹ 2,358.20 crore is outstanding in respect of 436 cases in which Demand 
Notices have been issued. In these cases, the companies dispute the demand on various 
grounds including non-acceptance of violation, dispute in data considered for calculation, 
classification of drugs as scheduled drugs, deduction of trade margin from overcharging 
amount, calculation of interest from the date of demand notice instead of date of 
overcharging.” 
 
 
86. When further asked that whether any loopholes had come to the notice of DoP/NPPA which 
were being exploited by these companies, the Department submitted as under: 
“No loopholes have been noticed by NPPA which are exploited by the companies.” 
 
87. When asked about the preventive measures or monitoring systems, apart from recovery 
mechanisms, in place to ensure that companies do not overcharge in the first place and steps being 
taken to deter recurrence of such violations within the industry, the Department submitted as under: 
“As per the extant provisions of the DPCO, 2013, every manufacturer of a scheduled/ Non-
scheduled formulation is required to print the maximum retail price on the label of the 
container of such formulation. Further, no person shall sell any formulation to any consumer 
at a price exceeding the price specified in the current price list or price indicated on the label 
of the container or pack thereof, whichever is less. The companies are also required to furnish 
Form-II/ V to NPPA with a copy to State Drug Controller and dealers, whenever any change 
in the prices is carried out by them. Further, all the notifications of Ceiling Price of scheduled 
drug and notification regarding price revision after WPI are placed on the NPPA’s website 
immediately for information to all stakeholders.  
PMRUs established in the States/UTs conduct IEC activities for dissemination of information 
relating to price changes. Further, PMRUs monitor the compliance of notified prices of 
medicines and detect likely cases of violation of the provisions of DPCO. In addition, increase 
in prices of drugs is also monitored by NPPA through analysis of the available market-based 
data, the complaints received from individuals and organisations through various channels 
like Pharma Jan Samadhan PMO Grievance Portal, etc.” 
 
P.   Pharmarack Technologies Private Limited 
88. The Committee were informed that NPPA obtained market-based data and information 
relating to pharmaceutical products from Pharmarack. This included reports on Sales values, Sales 
Quantity, Moving Annual Turnover (MAT) Units, MAT Values, MRP, Price to Retailer (PTR), Price to 
Stockists (PTS) Trend Reports, Price violation reports and market statistics reports on monthly basis 
through email and Compact Disk. NPPA analysed and examined the data to eﬀectively implement 
and act to discharge its duties for price fixation and monitoring in accordance with the provisions of 
the DPCO, 2013. The agency had been hired through open and competitive tendering process. 
Pharmarack has been providing services to NPPA since 2021.” 

33 
 
89. It was also clarified that Pharmarack did not fix or decide prices. Pharmarack is a third-party 
pharmaceutical market data specialising company and its services were engaged only for sourcing 
market-based data on drugs. Prices were fixed by NPPA in accordance with the provisions of DPCO, 
2013.  
90. A brief overview, as furnished by the Department, of Pharmarack Technologies, including its 
history, core business areas and leadership structure was as under: 
“As per the information provided by Pharmarack, it evolved over the years, beginning with the 
establishment of All India Organisation of Chemists and Druggists (AIOCD) Pharma 2007. 
Later, Pharmarack was incorporated in September 2015 as another separate entity. In 2021, 
AIOCD/AWACS and Pharmarack were merged to form a single unified entity under the name 
Pharmarack. 
The core business activities focus on data-driven analytics and digital platforms that support 
pharmaceutical companies in strengthening both top-line and bottom-line performance, with 
Pharmanalytics forming the foundation by providing PharmaTrac audit data that captures 
product-wise pharmaceutical sales projections. Building on these insights, Pharmconnect 
automates transactions such as orders, returns, ledgers, and reconciliation between 
distributors and CFAs. Pharmretail enables retailers to place orders with distributors while 
supporting digital brand promotion and retailer engagement initiatives. Pharmscan digitizes 
stock return (expiry and breakage) management through mobile-based scanning, and 
Pharmsupply streamlines discounted pharmaceutical sales to prevent revenue leakage and 
operational inefficiencies. 
The leadership structure of Pharmarack comprises a Board of Directors with four members. 
The investors of the company are Aarogya Bharat Digital LLP (formerly Digi Health 
Technologies LLP) and Trikaal Medi Infotech Pvt. Ltd. 
The Promoter in Pharmarack Technologies Pvt. Ltd. is Aarogya Bharat Digital LLP (formerly 
known as Digi Health Technologies LLP). The Aarogya Bharat Digital LLP is the shareholder 
of Pharmarack Technologies Private Limited.” 
91. The Committee further desired to be apprised regarding details of (i) size of the company of 
the investors and promoters of Pharmarack and whether these promoter/investor companies are 
Listed companies; (ii) Manpower in Pharmarack; and (iii) auditing and validation of the data collection 
process and accuracy, robustness and neutrality of data collected by Pharmarack. In this regard, the 
Department submitted as under: 
“(i)    As per the information provided by the Pharmarack, the investors in the Pharmarack 
Technologies Pvt. Ltd. are Aarogya Bharat and Trikaal Medi Infotech Pvt. Ltd. who are not 
listed. The size of the above investor companies by capital is ₹  750 crore. 
(ii) The manpower in Pharmarack is 468 as on 30th November, 2025. 
(iii) Pharmarack ensures accuracy and neutrality through automated data collection from 
nearly 16,000 stockists via 100+ ERP integrations, eliminating manual intervention. With 
coverage of 70% of the Indian Pharmaceutical Market (IPM), data from 2,000+ corporates 
and 3 lakh SKUs, and strengthened validation processes post the AWACS– Pharmarack 
merger, the system provides comprehensive, reliable, and unbiased market information.” 

34 
 
92. When asked which authority in the Department/Ministry had authorised to take services of a 
private agency for providing data on such an important issue, the Department submitted as under: 
“NPPA can source the market-based data which shall be available with the pharmaceutical 
market data specializing companies. Further, NPPA fixes the ceiling prices and retail price of 
drugs for which the data on stock keeping unit, MRP, price to stockist/ distributor, price to 
retailer, sales quantity and sales value is required. Hence, to address data requirements, 
NPPA issues tenders as per extant rules for inviting companies/agencies who can provide 
data and information related to pharmaceutical products. The service provider was selected 
though open and competitive tendering process through the Central Public Procurement 
Portal with due approvals from competent authorities.”  
93. When asked whether the Department relied upon the data/information provided by the agency 
or it cross-checked/verified from other sources also, the Department submitted as under: 
“NPPA also cross-verifies the data against other sources, as and when required.”  
94. When asked to explain the methodology used for data collection from manufacturers, 
distributors, retailers and other supply-chain participants, the Department submitted as under: 
“As per the information provided by Pharmarack, it captures real-time data from an integrated 
network of digitally enabled distributors across the Country through 100+ ERP integrations, 
covering approximately 16,000 stockists and eliminating manual intervention. Primary sales, 
representing transactions from pharmaceutical companies to distributors, form a key 
component of the data shared with NPPA. The data also captures secondary sales, reflecting 
stock movement and liquidation from distributors to retailers. With coverage of about 70% of 
the Indian Pharmaceutical Market (IPM), the data spans 2,000+ corporates and nearly 3 lakh 
Stock Keeping Units (SKUs).” 
95. When queried whether it could be said that Pharmarack was not independent of pharma 
influence, directly or indirectly, as Pharmarack was dealing with all the distributors or suppliers from 
where it is collecting the data, the Department submitted as under: 
“As per the information provided by the Pharmarack, Pharmarack collects data from a wide 
base of distributors, stockists across the pharmaceutical supply chain. The data collection by 
Pharmarack is fully automated from nearly 16,000 stockists via 100+ ERP integrations.” 
96. To a pointed query of the Committee that whether it could be said that Pharmarack did not 
have an independent revenue model, the Department submitted as under: 
“As per the information provided by the Pharmarack, the company has an independent 
revenue model by providing services of data and analytics products and B2B Commerce 
platform Software as a Service (SaaS) Revenue.” 
97. The Committee further sought details regarding main users of Pharmarack platform and user 
charges. In this regard, the Department submitted as under:- 
“As per the information provided by the Pharmarack, subscribers of the Pharmarack products 
which includes the Pharma Companies, investing institutions, Rating Agencies, 
Consulting/Research firms, NPPA, DCGI, IPA, USAID, BMGF, AIIMS, Educational institutions, 

35 
 
etc. are the main users of the platform. Charges depend on required data & subscription 
period.” 
98. As regard details of the geographical coverage and product coverage of Pharmarack’s 
network, the Department submitted as under: 
“As per the information provided by Pharmarack, it captures pharmaceutical sales data across 
22 region and 78 markets, spanning the North, East, West, and South Zones. The data 
includes granular market-level information across over 78 markets, with regional data 
contributing to nearly 90% of the Indian Pharmaceutical Market (IPM). This zonal, state-wise, 
and regional granularity enables comprehensive pharmaceutical distribution insights and 
allows Pharmarack to provide strong and reliable national market coverage. Pharmarack 
covers about 70% of the Indian Pharmaceutical Market (IPM) data, sourced from 2,000+ 
corporates and approximately 3 lakh Stock Keeping Units (SKUs). It achieves maximum and 
highly reliable data coverage from regions that are digitally enabled and actively use ERP or 
order-management systems.”  
99. To a specific query of the Committee regarding gaps in data coverage pertaining to 
pharmaceutical sector in rural and remote areas of the Country, the Department submitted as under: 
“Non-digitised rural and remote areas may face challenges such as manual operations and 
limited connectivity, which can impact data availability. However, as these areas continue 
adopting digital tools, data coverage from these regions is steadily improving.” 
100. When asked whether Pharmarck was able to capture/collect data pertaining to the entire 
pharmaceutical market in the Country efficiently, the Department submitted as under: 
“As per the information provided by the Pharmarack, the company efficiently captures real-
time data from its integrated network of digitally enabled distributors and retailers across the 
Country. Currently, it collects around 70% of real-time market data, which is projected to 100% 
using robust state-level projection methodologies to account for regions with lower digital 
adoption. Overall, Pharmarack provides strong and reliable national market coverage, with 
continuous improvement as more distributors and regions are onboarded into the digital 
ecosystem. The audit by Pharmarack does not capture: 
 Specific Stockist Sell Out to: Hospitals, Dispensing Doctors, Generic, Jan Aushadi 
 Direct Company to Online platform   
 Direct to Patient Supplies” 
 
101. The Committee were informed that there were 30,000 distributors out of which data regarding 
16000 distributors was captured by Pharmarack, which contributed to 70 percent of the Indian 
pharma market. When asked how the Department of Pharmaceuticals gets data for the remaining 
30 percent market, the Department submitted as under: 
“ As per NPPP, 2012, the prices are fixed on the basis of market-based data. Considering the 
volume of industry and large number of partner in trade channel, Pharmarack collects data 
from around 16,000 distributors for about 98000 SKUs which contributes to 70% of the Indian 
pharma market. It is extrapolated by using time tested scientific statistical models to arrive at 
representative prices of pharma industry. Prices worked out by using such data is expected 

36 
 
to be representative of Indian Pharma industry. Other economics indices like GDP7 
calculation etc, also use the extrapolation techniques to arrive at final value.” 
102. The Committee were informed that Pharmarack did not capture data pertaining to segments 
such as hospitals, dispensing doctors, Jan Aushadhi, trade generics and direct to e commerce 
supplies. When asked whether lack of data pertaining to these segments had any impact on fair 
price fixation of medicines, the Department reiterated the reply given to above query. 
 
103. When asked about the global practice in this regard, it was submitted that the Department 
was not aware of such practice. 
 
 
104. Regarding following CVC guidelines during the tender process, the Department submitted as 
under: 
“It is submitted that all applicable provisions of the General Financial Rules (GFR), relevant 
CVC guidelines, and the Manual for Procurement of Consultancy Services were duly adhered 
to. 
Further, an adequate response period of three weeks was provided in the advertised open 
tender, thereby ensuring full compliance with the principles outlined in Rule 173—
transparency, competition, fairness, and elimination of arbitrariness in the procurement 
process—as well as the requirements stipulated under Rule 161 ‘Advertised Tender Enquiry’.” 
105. When asked whether the ‘single-bid’ tender process for engaging Pharmarack was 
undertaken by NPPA, the Department submitted as under: 
“The tender was not processed under a ‘single-bid’ system. It was floated as an open tender 
following the ‘Two-Bid System’, and the QCBS evaluation methodology was adopted in strict 
accordance with the provisions of the GFR, 2017 and the Manual for Procurement of 
Consultancy Services.” 
106. When asked whether any CVC observations were received regarding the process for 
engagement of Pharmarack by NPPA, the Department replied in negative. 
 
107. During evidence, the representative of Pharmarack submitted that they captured the most 
commonly reported pricing by the stockists in their database. When asked about the reason of 
stockists giving different prices of same medicines to Pharmarack and method of fixation of price of 
the medicine when stockists provide different rates, the Department submitted as under: 
“At a particular point of time, diﬀerent batches of the same medicines of same company with 
diﬀerent prices may be available in the market. 
Pharmarack reports to NPPA the price details which are commonly reported by stockist. 
Accordingly, as per the methodology provided under DPCO, 2013, NPPA fixes ceiling prices 
of scheduled formulations and retail prices of new drugs based on market data considering 
PTR of all brands of such drug having 1% or more market share of that drug and adding 16% 
margin to it.”  
108. During oral evidence, the Committee were informed that data from 3 crore sources is 
collected/processed by Pharmarack every month and turnover of the company last year was ₹ 40 
 
7https://www.mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/publication_reports/Methodology_doc_for_compilation_qrt_GDP_14aug13.pdf  

37 
 
crore with manpower of around 500. When asked how Pharmarack was able to execute and manage 
collection/processing of such huge amount of data in a month with around 500 employees, the 
Department submitted as under: 
“As per the information provided by the Pharmarack, the company efficiently manages and 
process approximately 3 crore records every month with a manpower strength of around 500 
employees due to automated data ingestion, processing and mapping framework. 
The entire process, starting from data flow from stockist ERP systems to the servers and 
followed by data cleaning and processing, is automated. Through APIs, all stockist files 
received from ERP systems are automatically saved in an S3 Bucket. From the S3 Bucket, 
these files are continuously processed through Python scripts which is being called by Glue 
Jobs to load the data into Snowflake. Once the data resides in Snowflake, it undergoes a 
structured Data Cleaning and Mapping process aimed at aligning distributor- level product 
data with Pharmarack’s Golden Master records. 
The mapping workflow is executed in two stages. Auto-Mapping is carried out using an 
advanced matching engine that processes distributor product names using complex patterns. 
This process is currently being enhanced with an AI-based engine to further improve accuracy 
and reduce manual eﬀort. Manual Mapping is undertaken for unmapped or ambiguous 
records, which are routed to a dedicated Data Steward team. These records are reviewed 
and mapped manually through a specialized front-end interface and then tagged to the 
Golden Master records.” 
109. To a pointed query of the Committee that whether there was any possibility of vulnerability to 
data manipulation or any fudged data that is put/supplied to Pharmarack database to follow a certain 
direction or certain trend for a medicine, the Department submitted as under: 
“As per the information provided by Pharmarack, the possibility of vulnerability to data 
manipulation or submission of fudged data to influence any specific direction or trend for a 
medicine is minimal. Pharmarack’s system directly and automatically captures data points 
from stockist ERP systems.” 
110. When asked whether safeguards were employed by Pharmarack to detect if pharmaceutical 
companies/stockists/distributors tried to manipulate data intentionally to influence pricing or demand 
patterns, the Department submitted as under: 
“As per the information provided by the Pharmarack, the company employs the following 
safeguards to detect and prevent intentional data manipulation by pharmaceutical 
companies, stockists, or distributors: 
i. Independent Panel Stockists: The identities of panel stockists used for projections are 
not disclosed to anyone. 
ii. Automated Data Validation Checks: The system runs automated checks to flag 
abnormal entries such as sudden price jumps, unusual quantities, mismatched pack sizes, or 
deviations from historical patterns. Using Techniques such as Box Whisker and Factor 
Distancing. 
iii. Pharmarack employs automated outlier detection, pattern analysis, and consistency 
checks to identify unusual demand or pricing trends. 

38 
 
iv. All data entries carry traceable audit logs, timestamps, and source-level attribution, 
making manipulation easily detectable. 
v. Periodic data-quality audits, ERP integration, and RBAC-based access controls 
ensure only authentic, validated data influences market insights.” 
111. When asked about the existing mechanism to validate the accuracy, completeness and 
neutrality of Pharmarack-generated data prior to its use for price fixation by NPPA, the Department 
submitted as under: 
“Presently, pricing is done based on market-based data provided by the pharmaceutical 
market data specializing company i.e., M/s. Pharmarack Technology Pvt. Ltd. The draft 
worksheets uploaded on NPPA’s website are keenly examined by the industry and other 
stakeholders. In case any discrepancy is observed, NPPA takes up the matter with M/s 
Pharmarack for reverification of the same. The data available with the Integrated 
Pharmaceutical Database Management System 2.0 (IPDMS 2.0), a cloud-based application 
developed by NPPA, is also used for cross verification. In addition, as and when required 
information is sought from manufacturers. Further, as per the directions issued by the 
government when no market data is available, the ceiling price may be calculated on the 
basis of institutional data obtained from one central government hospital, two state 
government hospital with at least 500 bed capacity and two private sector hospitals with at 
least 500 bed capacity. Further, in case of retail prices, where no market data is available, 
retail prices are recommended by Standing Committee of Experts based on principles of 
“Pharmacoeconomics” as per the provisions of DPCO, 2013.” 
 
112. When asked how NPPA verified the data provided by Pharmarack and whether there is any 
provision/contractual safeguard to fix accountability of the data provider if the data is found to be 
inaccurate or manipulated or some discrepancies are found after cross-verification by NPPA, the 
Department submitted as under:  
“Price fixation is done by NPPA in a fair and transparent manner. The ceiling price/ retail prices 
are calculated based on the methodology provided under DPCO, 2013 which is available in 
the public domain. The draft worksheets are uploaded on NPPA’s website which are keenly 
examined by the industry and other stakeholders. Based on the representations or suo-moto 
examination, NPPA seeks clarification from the M/s Pharmarack. In addition, as and when 
required clarification is sought from manufacturers and also validated with the data available 
on IPDMS. 
Thus, this mechanism of uploading the draft worksheets ensures transparency and 
discrepancy in the data, if any, is brought out and interest of all stakeholders including the 
general public are protected. 
Further, there is a clause in Point c under Point 3- OWNERSHIP AND WARRANTIES of the 
service agreement eﬀective from 1.11.2025 to 31.10.2026 stating that-. 
“The Disclosing Party warrants that all information, data, documents, etc, furnished or made 
available, as per clauses 1 & 2 of this agreement, to the Recipient party are true, correct, 
complete, and reliable to the best of its knowledge as on the date of such disclosure. The 
Disclosing Party further undertakes that, prior to disclosure, it shall carry out reasonable 
checks, validations, in accordance with its knowledge, expertise, and standard practices, to 
ensure the accuracy reliability and integrity of such information, data, documents, etc.” 

39 
 
113. On being asked how the data captured and provided to NPPA by Pharmarack was beneficial 
in controlling the prices of medicines in the Country, the Department submitted as under:  
“Analysis of data provided by the Pharmarack helps NPPA in monitoring compliance of price 
related provisions of DPCO, 2013. Whenever any violation is observed through monitoring of 
Pharmarack data or references received from other sources, action is initiated against such 
manufacturers in accordance with DPCO, 2013. 
114. As regard the details regarding specific enforcement actions and price monitoring reductions 
that were initiated/undertaken by NPPA based on data provided by Pharmarack in the last three 
years, the Department submitted as under: 
“During the last three years (01.04.2022-31.03.2025), 349 cases involving overcharged 
amount along with Penalty/ Interest of ₹ 206.34 crores have been initiated based on data 
provided by Pharmarack and ₹3 7.09 crores have been recovered.” 
115. When asked how the data collected was validated for accuracy by Pharmarack, the 
Department submitted as under: 
“As per the information provided by Pharmarack, the data is updated and validated on a 
monthly basis. Pharmarack ensures accuracy and neutrality through fully automated data 
collection from nearly 16,000 stockists through 100+ ERP integrations, eliminating manual 
intervention. With coverage of about 70% of the Indian Pharmaceutical Market (IPM), data 
from 2,000+ corporates and 3 lakh Stock Keeping Units (SKUs), and strengthened validation 
processes post the AWACS– Pharmarack merger, the data provided is comprehensive, 
reliable and unbiased. The accuracy is maintained through confidential panel stockists, 
automated validation and outlier checks, traceable audit logs, and periodic data-quality audits 
with Role-Based Access Control (RBAC).” 
116. To a pointed query of the Committee regarding Pharmarack Technologies ensuring security 
and confidentiality of sensitive pharmaceutical data shared with NPPA, the Department submitted 
as under: 
“As per the information provided by Pharmarack, the data confidentiality is ensured through 
industry-standard encryption, secure APIs, and controlled data transfer channels. The data 
shared with NPPA is customized data as per requirements of NPPA/DoP, it is not shared with 
industry. The NPPA file is exclusive for use of NPPA/DoP only. Access to NPPA-related data 
is strictly governed through role-based access controls, authentication, and continuous 
monitoring. Additionally, the platform follows ISO 27001-aligned practices, audit logging, and 
periodic security assessments to prevent unauthorized access or misuse.” 
117. It was submitted by the Department of Pharmaceuticals that the market data available with 
NPPA (i.e., Pharmarack database) captured the price points only at the level of distributor and 
retailer, and not for intermediate dealers in the trade channel such as stockists and wholesalers. 
When asked whether the lack of data regarding intermediate dealers in the trade channel such as 
stockists and wholesalers affected the NPPA's ability in any manner to formulate trade margin 
rationalization approach, the Department submitted as under: 
 

40 
 
“As per the price fixation framework, NPPA fixes ceiling prices/retail prices based on average 
Price to Retailer. Trade margin is the difference between the MRP (excluding taxes) and Price 
to Distributor (PTD). All these data points are available in the database obtained from 
Pharmarack.” 
 
118. When categorically asked whether there were any limitations in Pharmarack’s data or 
services that might affect NPPA’s functions, the Department submitted as under: 
“NPPA fixes the ceiling and retail prices based on market data provided by Pharmarack. The 
market-based data covers 16,000 stockists and 70% of the Indian Pharmaceutical Market. 
However, the data shared with NPPA does not capture stockist sell-out to hospitals, 
dispensing doctors, generic outlets, and Jan Aushadhi stores, nor does it include direct 
company sales to online platforms or direct-to-patient supplies.” 
119. When asked whether there were other competitors in this field who could collect data 
pertaining to pharmaceutical sector, as done by Pharmarack and make it available to the market, so 
that people can take maximum advantage of it for their businesses, the Department submitted as 
under: 
“NPPA issues tenders in accordance with the General Financial Rules (GFR), 2017 for inviting 
companies/agencies who can provide data and information related to pharmaceutical 
products. The service provider is selected through an open and competitive tendering 
process. In the previous tender floated by NPPA, two bidders, M/s Pharmarack Technologies 
Pvt. Ltd. and M/s Marg ERP Ltd. participated, out of which M/s Pharmarack Technologies Pvt. 
Ltd. was found to be technically qualified.” 
 
120. When further asked that whether there was any Government agency at present available in 
the Country to provide market data related to Pharmaceutical sector as it is currently being provided 
by Pharmarack, the Department submitted as under: 
 
“NPPA has informed that to the best of its knowledge, there is no government agency that 
may provide data required by NPPA on pharmaceutical products.” 
121. When asked about rationalization for fixing the prices of medicines on reports from the market 
and from the private agency Pharmarack, the Department submitted as under: 
“The present price fixation methodology of market-based pricing under DPCO, 2013 is based 
on the principles derived from the National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy, 2012. Under 
market-based pricing, price fixation is based on widely available information in the public 
domain as against individual manufacturer’s costing data, which results in more transparent 
and fair pricing. Paragraph 9(1) of DPCO, 2013 provides that NPPA may source market-
based data available with pharmaceutical market data specialising companies. In pursuance 
of this provision, NPPA has engaged Pharmarack through a competitive bidding process.”  
122. The Committee were informed that NPPA wanted to replace Pharmarack with Integrated 
Pharmaceutical Database Management System (IPDMS) eventually. When asked that by what 
target year NPPA plans to achieve this objective, the Department submitted as under: 

41 
 
“IPDMS is a digital database management platform developed by NPPA to collect 
pharmaceutical data as per the forms specified under Schedule II of DPCO, 2013 and also 
supports drug price regulation and monitoring. As on 30.11.2025 the details of companies 
registered on IPDMS are as under: 
Particular Number 
No. of registered companies 2344 
No. of Forms (I-VI) submitted (January-November, 2025) 1,89,628 
 
DPCO, 2013 specifies that the Government may in due course of time come out with other 
appropriate mechanism of collecting/ obtaining the market data relating to drugs. Accordingly, 
IPDMS is envisaged to replace Pharmarack so as to facilitate streamlined, transparent, 
updated and wider coverage of drug price data. NPPA is making earnest eﬀorts by holding 
consultation, discussion sessions, workshops with stakeholders like Industry Associations, 
pharma companies to resolve the issues, if any, being faced by them in submission of data 
through IPDMS 2.0.” 
 
Q. Availability of medicines 
123.  The mandate of NPPA is not only to ensure affordability of drugs, but also to ensure the 
availability of drugs. The steps taken by NPPA to ensure availability are stated to be as under: 
(a) Any manufacturer of scheduled formulation, intending to discontinue any scheduled 
formulation from the market has to seek permission from NPPA. There exists a set of 
guidelines that need to be complied with before discontinuation of the scheduled formulations. 
In certain cases, paragraph 3 of DPCO, 2013 is also invoked for issuing directions for 
continued manufacturing/importing the drugs. Action can also be initiated under DPCO, 2013 
and Essential Commodities Act, 1955 for any violations. 
(b) As and when the reports of shortages of particular drug(s) in any part of the Country are 
received, the concerned companies are immediately asked to send stocks to the affected 
areas and to make the drugs available. In cases where shortages are apprehended, NPPA 
also directs the companies to continue or increase the production under paragraph 3 of 
DPCO, 2013. 
(c) During the COVID-19 pandemic in the Country, NPPA played an active role in addressing 
the exigencies arising out of the pandemic and undertaking necessary measures to ensure 
continued availability of life-saving essential medicines and medical devices throughout the 
Country. NPPA had extensive interactions with Industry, manufacturers, All India Organisation 
of Chemists and Druggists, State Drug Controllers, District Magistrates etc., to ensure that 
supply chains were not compromised. 
(d) While ensuring affordability, access cannot be jeopardized and the life-saving essential 
drugs must remain available to the general public at all times. Therefore, unviability of 
formulations should not lead to a situation where these drugs become unavailable in the 
market and the public is forced to switch to expensive alternatives. Hence, NPPA in public 
interest invoked paragraph 19 under DPCO, 2013 in the following instances: 

42 
 
(i) Allowed 50% increase on 21 formulations of 12 medicines on the then applicable ceiling 
price to ensure the availability of medicines (notified vide S.O. 4461(E) dated 13.12.2019). 
(ii) Allowed 50% increase on 9 scheduled formulations of 3 drugs on the then applicable 
ceiling price (notified vide S.O. 2654(E) dated 1.7.2021). 
(iii) 11 scheduled formulations of 8 drugs were given one-time increase of 50% of the present 
applicable ceiling price (notified vide S.O. 4498(E) dated 14.10.2024). 
124. The Committee learnt that for incentivising research and innovation, DPCO, 2013 under 
paragraph 32 provides for exemption of drugs from price control for certain period subject to 
fulfilment of certain conditions as specified in the DPCO, 2013. Till date, exemption under paragraph 
32 have been granted to 11 companies by NPPA. 
 
125. The Committee were informed that the overall framework of price regulation and monitoring 
has ensured the availability of medicines, both scheduled and non-scheduled, at one of the lowest 
prices globally, to the public in India. In this connection, it was submitted that in a study done through 
IQVIA, a leading global life sciences consulting firm, Indian prices were compared with those of three 
other low and middle income countries, viz., Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and Brazil for top- selling dosage 
forms (tablets, liquids, capsules and injections) of top-selling therapeutic categories (anti-infective, 
anti-cancer, cardiovascular and hormonal drugs). The study revealed that the prices of both 
scheduled and non-scheduled formulations in India were comparatively lower. 
 
126. The Committee were informed that the complaints regarding non-availability of a medicine in 
the market were received by NPPA through various sources viz., State Drugs Controllers (SDCs), 
Pharma Jan Samadhan Portal, NPPA Helpline and public grievance portals like PMOPG/ 
CPGRAMS and individuals. When asked whether NPPA maintained a centralised database of all 
such complaints/grievances received, including source-wise classification, dates, action taken 
thereon and closure status, it was submitted that NPPA maintained a consolidated record of all 
complaints received from these sources. 
 
 
127. The Department further submitted that action was taken immediately upon receiving a 
complaint. When queried about any official SOP in this regard, the Department submitted as under: 
“NPPA monitors availability of drugs in the Country and takes remedial measures whenever 
issue of non-availability of any medicine is brought to its notice. NPPA takes immediate 
measures in coordination with the State Authorities and the manufacturer of the drugs 
concerned to ensure availability of the said drug in the said region/ State. The complaints are 
generally resolved within seven days of receipt.” 
 
128. The Committee learnt that NPPA responded to reported shortages of drugs by directing 
companies to supply stocks to the places of reported shortage, increase production, and submit 
detailed production and sales data to assess supply gaps. Paragraph 3 of DPCO, 2013 empowers 
NPPA to direct any manufacturer to increase production and sell such formulations, with a view to 
achieve adequate availability and regulate distribution of drugs in case of emergency. NPPA 
informed that companies generally comply with directives issued by NPPA in this regard. 
 

43 
 
129. When asked about the number of such directives issued by NPPA in the last three years and 
follow up enforcement actions, the Department submitted as under: 
“In three cases such directives have been issued by NPPA in the last three years. The 
directives issued by NPPA are complied with by the manufacturers, and no instances of non-
response have been observed in such cases.” 
130. On being further asked about enforcement mechanisms in place for pharmaceutical 
companies that failed to comply with NPPA’s production increase directives in cases of critical 
shortages of medicines, the Department submitted that violation of the provisions of DPCO, 2013 
may attract penalty under section 7 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955.   
 
131. When asked about the digital systems/ platforms used by NPPA for monitoring the availability 
of medicines across the Country, the Department submitted as under: 
“NPPA monitors the availability of medicines through its IPDMS platform and Pharmarack 
data. It also monitors availability of scheduled formulations through submissions made by 
manufacturers in Form-III, pursuant to the requirement under paragraph 21(1) of DPCO, 
2013, regarding data on production and sales and production capacity of scheduled 
medicines on quarterly basis.” 
132. NPPA had informed that real-time tracking of medicine availability across entire supply chain 
is not feasible at present. When asked about the constraints being faced by NPPA in this regard, the 
Department submitted as under: 
“Considering the magnitude of pharma industry comprising of around 10,500 manufacturing 
units, 60,000 distributors and around 12,00,000 pharmacies and hospitals at primary, 
secondary and tertiary levels, the real-time tracking of medicine availability across entire 
supply chain is not feasible.” 
 
133. It was submitted during the course of briefing on the subject that sometimes shortages arise 
not from manufacturing gaps but from tender delays in Government hospitals and Health 
Departments. In this regard, when asked about proportion of complaints pertaining to non-availability 
of medicines received in the last three years which were attributable to procurement/tender delays 
rather than manufacturing or distribution issues, the Department submitted as under: 
“As informed by MoHFW, procurement in Central Government Hospitals, Institutes etc. is 
decentralized to ensure timely procurement. NPPA also receives issues regarding shortages 
of drugs in Government Hospitals, which do not fall under the purview of NPPA. However, 
whenever a complaint regarding shortage or non-availability of drugs in Government 
Hospitals is received, the same is forwarded to the concerned authorities for appropriate 
action.” 
 
R. Price Monitoring and Resource Units 
134. The Committee learnt that Consumer Awareness, Publicity and Price Monitoring (CAPPM), a 
Central Sector Scheme of NPPA, has two components, viz. (i) Assistance to set-up Price Monitoring 
and Resource Units (PMRUs) in the States / UTs, and (ii) Advertisement and Publicity for CAPPM. 
PMRUs are societies registered under the Societies Registration Act, having their own Memorandum 

44 
 
of Association/ Bye laws, and they function under the direct supervision of the concerned State Drug 
Controllers for increasing the outreach of NPPA. Under this scheme, 100 percent funds are provided 
to PMRUs for their recurring and non-recurring expenditure. 
  
135. NPPA is stated to be in the process of establishing Price Monitoring and Resource Units 
(PMRUs) in all 36 States / UT. As on 31.3.2025, Price Monitoring & Resource Units (PMRUs) had 
been set up in 31 States / UTs, namely Kerala, Gujarat, Odisha, Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, 
Tripura, Nagaland, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Mizoram, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, 
Telangana, Maharashtra, Goa, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Puducherry, West 
Bengal, Ladakh, Himachal Pradesh, Bihar, Uttarakhand, Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Chandigarh, Assam, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Daman & Diu, and Lakshadweep. Subsequently, 
Delhi PMRU was established on 11.6.2025, thereby increasing the total number of PMRUs to 32. 
Accordingly, as of 18.12.2025, a total of 32 PMRUs have been established across the Country. The 
setting up of PMRUs in the remaining States/UTs is at various stages of progress. 
 
 
136. The Committee desired to know that how effective have PMRUs been in assisting NPPA and 
State Drug Controllers (SDCs) in enforcing drug price regulation and monitoring medicine availability 
at the grassroots level. They also sought details regarding measurable improvements in drug price 
transparency and consumer grievance redressal observed since the establishment of PMRUs in 
respective States/UTs. In this regard, the Department submitted as under: 
“PMRUs are set up in the States/UTs under the direct supervision of the State Drug 
Controllers as NPPA’s key collaborating partners at the grass roots level, and to provide 
necessary assistance to NPPA in monitoring of compliance with prices, ensuring availability, 
market-based data collection and sample collection. PMRUs have been effective in 
identification of likely violation cases and thereby, has assisted NPPA in ensuring monitoring 
of price regulation.  
PMRUs conduct Information, Education and Communication (IEC) Activities in the States/ 
UTs by way of seminars, webinars, training session, nukkad nataks, etc. to educate 
consumers, industry representatives, and institutions about the price fixation and other 
initiatives of NPPA. PMRUs also spread awareness about the ‘Pharma Jan Samadhan’ (PJS) 
Portal and ‘Pharma Sahi Daam’ (PSD) mobile App, which may be accessed by consumers to 
know the prices of the formulations. This also enables the consumers to report any likely 
violation cases to NPPA.” 
137. When asked about best practices which can be identified from PMRUs that have shown 
significant impact and how can these be scaled to States/UTs where PMRUs are yet to be 
established or are newly operational, the Department submitted as under: 
“Till 30.9.2025, PMRUs have been established in 32 States/UTs. Vigorous efforts are being made 
to set up PMRUs in the remaining States, i.e., Sikkim, Manipur, Tamil Nadu, and the UT of 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, at the earliest. NPPA regularly reviews the performance of 
PMRUs on various parameters such as IEC activities conducted, market surveys undertaken, 
and overall physical and financial progress. Some of the best practices that have been observed 
and are being adopted by other PMRUs are given as below:  
(a) PMRU, Jammu and Kashmir and PMRU, Tripura conduct regular executive committee 
meetings and make a plan and set targets for conducting market surveys for monitoring of 

45 
 
prices tend to identify and report more instances of likely price violations. This structured and 
planned approach towards identification of formulation for which surveys are to be conducted 
and setting a periodical target has proven to be one of the best practices that is being adopted 
by other PMRUs as well and may be implemented in States/UTs where PMRU is in the 
process of setting up. 
(b) Some PMRUs have conducted IEC activities regularly and at grassroot level. PMRU, Tripura 
has been conducting IEC activity at hospital, block and gram panchayat level while interacting 
with locals and educating them about the Pharma Sahi Daam app and other initiatives of 
NPPA. Similarly, PMRU, Jammu and Kashmir and PMRU, Kerala have been reaching to the 
rural population for disseminating the information. Such wider coverage has resulted in 
increased awareness which also reflects in the identification of likely violation cases and 
ultimately results in compliance by companies. 
(c) Some PMRUs have conducted IEC activities in an innovative manner which led to increased 
reach and interest from the audience. Goa PMRU conducted a reel-making competition on 
mobile where participants made reels on initiatives of NPPA and the best content was played 
and circulated among the students and staff of the local institute. This has also increased the 
reach of NPPA initiatives over social media. Such best practices may also be adopted by 
other PMRUs and may be extended to PMRUs of remaining States/UTs where it would be 
set up later. 
(d) To promote cross-learning, NPPA organises seminars and webinars where all PMRUs 
participate and share their experiences and best practices. These interactions help newly 
established PMRUs adopt successful strategies demonstrated by the more effective ones, 
thereby improving overall performance and consistency across States and UTs.” 
138. When asked whether any efforts are being made by NPPA for enhancing the monitoring and 
reporting capacity of PMRUs, the Department submitted as under: 
“Yes, continuous efforts are made by the NPPA for enhancing the monitoring and reporting 
capacity of PMRUs which, inter alia, include the following: 
(a) Developed a training manual for the training of the officials of PMRUs;  
(b) Conduct training, webinars and interactive sessions with all PMRUs from time to time;  
(c) Prepared templates for IEC activities and shared with PMRUs;  
(d) Field visits by its officials to oversee the functioning of PMRUs; and 
(e) PMRUs have been integrated in the NPPA’s online portal, i.e., Integrated Pharmaceutical 
Database Management System 2.0 (IPDMS 2.0), for effective and online reporting.” 
 
139. When further asked about the manner in which PMRUs handled discrepancies or violations 
identified during price and availability surveys and the follow-up process with NPPA or State Drug 
Controllers, the Department submitted as under: 
“PMRUs monitor the prices of drugs and medical devices by conducting regular market 
surveys for scheduled and non-scheduled drugs and medical devices, and submits the likely 
violation report to NPPA through the IPDMS 2.0 portal. The same are examined by NPPA, 
and action is initiated against the companies as per the provisions of the DPCO, 2013, where 
prima facie violation is observed.” 
 

46 
 
140. On being queried about challenges or resource constraints being faced by PMRUs facing in 
conducting regular market surveys and price monitoring activities, especially in remote or 
underprivileged areas, the Department submitted as under: 
“While formulating the CAPPM Scheme, the States/UTs were categorised into three 
categories (Category I, II and III) based on the population and resources were allocated 
accordingly. As per the CAPPM Scheme Guidelines, three staff are to be deployed for 
Category III States/UTs, five staff are to be deployed for Category II States/UTs, and seven 
staff are to be deployed for Category I States/UTs. 
Further, based on regular monitoring of the activities of PMRU through monthly reports and 
performance review of all PMRUs, NPPA identifies the issues, if any, raised by the PMRUs 
and the same are addressed suitably. “ 
 
S. Pharma Jan Samadhan (PJS) Portal  
141. Pharma Jan Samadhan (PJS) serves as a robust e-governance tool for protection of 
consumer interest through effective implementation of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 2013 with 
the objective to put in place a speedy and effective complaint redressal system with respect to 
availability of medicines, overpricing of medicines, sale of ‘new drugs’ without prior price approval 
(WPA) and refusal to supply or sell medicines. Complaints can be registered under PJS link available 
at the NPPAs website i.e. www.nppaindia.gov.in or on Pharma Sahi Daam App and also at the toll 
free number 1800111255 & Email – monitoring-nppa@gov.in. Any individual or consumer 
organisation or stockiest / distributor / dealer / retailer or State Drug Controller can lodge complaints 
online to NPPA through PJS.  
 
142. The details regarding total complaints which have been received through PJS portal since its 
inception were stated to be as under: 
Financial year Number of complaints recd 
through PJS portal 
Total No. of complaints 
from all sources including 
PJS. 
2022-23 22 308 
2023-24 27 360 
2024-25 9 374 
2025-26 (till 7.11.2025) 8 274 
Total 66 1316 
 
143. The Committee were informed that the top three categories of complaints received on PJS 
portal related to overcharging, non-availability of medicines and refusal to sale. All the complaints 
received till date were stated to be resolved. 
144. When asked about the manner in which NPPAs used grievance data from PJS to inform policy 
revisions, price control decisions or enforcement actions, the Department submitted as under: 
“NPPA receives complaints through different channels such as CPGRAMS, individuals, 
Organisations, and emails. This information helps NPPA to take necessary actions for 
ensuring compliance to DPCO, 2013.” 

47 
 
145. When asked about the initiatives undertaken by NPPA to boost outreach and awareness 
efforts to increase consumer utilisation of the PJS portal, the Department submitted as under: 
“ NPPA has taken several steps to make consumers aware of the PJS portal, including media 
campaigns, local outreach through state authorities, and workshops. Price Monitoring 
Resource Units, established across 32 states also widely disseminate information about the 
PJS portal. These eﬀorts help ensure that consumers across India can easily access the 
portal and protect themselves from unfair pricing.” 
 
T. Integrated Pharmaceutical Database Management System (IPDMS) 2.0 
146. Integrated Pharmaceutical Database Management System was launched by NPPA in 2015 
which was further upgraded to a more responsive, cloud-based version, IPDMS 2.0 and launched 
on 29.8.2022. It is a system for online information collection, processing and communication portal 
to monitor and regulate the prices of medicines and medical devices, to ensure availability and 
affordability of drugs and medical devices in the Country. 
 
147. On being asked whether any feedback has been taken from the pharmaceutical companies, 
especially small and medium enterprises, regarding facilitation of ease of doing business and 
regulatory compliance on IPDMS 2.0, the Department submitted as under: 
“Prior to the launch of IPDMS 2.0, wide consultations were done with stakeholders like 
industry associations, pharmaceutical companies, etc., wherein the proposed modules of 
IPDMS was displayed and based on the feedback received, necessary modifications were 
made so as to enable ease of doing business through IPDMS 2.0. Further, to ease the 
process of transition of companies from IPDMS 1.0 to IPDMS 2.0 and address incidental 
operational issues, following measures were implemented: 
(a) Periodic feedback was taken from stakeholders and the ATR/inputs of NPPA, in this 
regard was updated on official website of NPPA. 
(b) Discussion sessions/ workshops were organised to hand hold and assist Pharma 
companies to register and operate on IPDMS. 
To understand user challenges, gather suggestions and identify areas for improvement in the 
data submission and regulatory reporting processes, the feedback received from 
pharmaceutical companies, including Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) through multiple 
channels such as user interactions/meetings, email communications, and training and 
awareness sessions conducted by NPPA, have been examined. Based on the feedback 
received, necessary improvements / changes have been incorporated for system 
enhancements to ensure ease of doing business and regulatory compliance through IPDMS 
2.0. Some of these enhancements are: 
(a) Simplification of data submission forms by reducing manual entry, introducing validations 
and consistency checks. 
(b) Regular updating of user manual, based on evolving processes and systems.  
(c) Improving system performance so as to handle bulk data uploads and improve response 
time. 

48 
 
Presently, NPPA is in the process of implementing system generated feedback forms to 
regularly capture feedback of registered companies. Based on the feedback, necessary 
modifications may be undertaken.” 
148. When asked about the mechanisms within IPDMS 2.0 to ensure data accuracy, prevent 
duplication and detect anomalies in price filings, the Department submitted as under: 
“IPDMS 2.0 incorporates several in-built mechanisms to ensure data accuracy, prevent 
duplication, and detect anomalies in price filings. These include automated data validation 
checks at the time of submission, verifying mandatory fields, numerical consistency, format 
compliance, unique identification parameters such as product IDs, company registration 
numbers, OTP based forms submission, etc. to avoid duplication, and system-based cross-
verification of submitted information with existing records. In addition, analytical dashboards 
and reports are used by NPPA for periodic review and detection of inconsistencies or 
abnormal trends in price data.” 
149. When further asked whether IPDMS 2.0 has contributed to NPPA’s capacity to achieve time-
bound pricing decisions and reduce administrative delays in price fixation processes, the 
Department submitted as under: 
“IPDMS 2.0 is NPPA’s effort to build up its own database. Presently, it supplements the 
market data provided by a third-party agency (Pharmarack) engaged by NPPA. In the long 
term, NPPA endeavours to further strengthen IPDMS 2.0 as its independent database.” 
150. The Committee were informed that NPPA had taken up the matter regarding integration of 
Integrated Pharmaceutical Database Management System (IPDMS) 2.0 with SUGAM portal of 
Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation. The current progress of the proposed integration 
between IPDMS 2.0 and the SUGAM portal was stated to be as under: 
“The integration of IPDMS with SUGAM portal was envisaged to enable seamless data 
sharing of detailed list of manufacturers of drugs and medical devices licensed by CDSCO. 
This would enable wider coverage of drug price data information on IPDMS. Presently, 
CDSCO has provided a login ID to NPPA for viewing the list of manufacturers of Medical 
Devices only, that are present on the SUGAM Portal.” 
U. Manpower strength in NPPA 
151. When asked whether there existed any gap between sanctioned and actual strength in NPPA, 
the Department submitted as under: 
“At present, 15 posts are vacant out of 48 sanctioned posts of NPPA. Efforts are being made 
to fill up these vacancies by taking up the matter with the cadre controlling authorities, i.e., 
the Department of Fertilizers and the Department of Expenditure, for early action. 
Contractual/outsourced staff have also been engaged, wherever possible, to ensure 
continuity of essential work.” 
 
 
 

49 
 
152. When further asked about efforts being made to plug this gap, the Department submitted as 
under: 
“Considering the scope and extent of responsibility of NPPA as a regulatory body, a proposal 
for creation of 59 additional posts has been moved and is under examination of the 
Department of Expenditure.”  

50 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 
Review of categorization and price fixation of formulations 
The Committee note that the entire edifice of price control exercised by the National 
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) rests upon the National List of Essential Medicines 
(NLEM) as this List is adopted as the primary basis for determining essentiality and is 
incorporated in the Schedule-I of the DPCO, 2013, as scheduled medicines for the purpose 
of price control. Under the current NLEM, 2022, there are 388 medicines specified which 
correspond to over 900 formulations.   
The Committee, during examination of the subject, deliberated upon the larger 
question of whether the extant system of multiple categories of medicines, essential/non-
essential, scheduled/non-scheduled, ought to give way to a more unified regulatory 
framework to enhance clarity, transparency and ease of enforcement of price controls. The 
Committee take note of the Department's submission in this regard that the National 
Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012 (NPPP, 2012) strives to achieve a balance between 
affordability and availability of drugs on the one hand and promotion of growth of industry 
on the other and price regulation across the board on a particular sector could affect 
investment, innovation and industrial growth. However, the Committee cannot help but note 
that the huge market share (approximately 82%) belongs to the non-scheduled formulations 
whose prices are fixed by manufactures themselves and NPPA only monitors prices as per 
the provisions of DPCO 2013, under which manufacturers are required to not increase the 
maximum retail price (MRP) of such formulations by more than 10% of the MRP during 
preceding 12 months. The Committee opine that this mechanism may allow manufacturers 
to launch non-scheduled formulations at arbitrary points. In this regard, the Committee 
desire that the Department undertake, alongwith the Ministry/Department concerned and 
other stakeholders, a comprehensive review of the extant categorization of medicines to plug 
any possibility of arbitrary or unjustified fixation in initial prices of non-scheduled 
formulations. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
Shift from cost-based pricing to market-based pricing  
2. The Committee learn that DPCO, 2013 marked a shift from cost-based pricing to 
market-based pricing. As per the existing framework of the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing 
Policy, 2012, prices of a formulation are fixed based on market data, by considering the 
average Price to Retailer (PTR) of all brands having a market share equal to or more than 1% 

51 
 
of that formulation and adding a margin of 16% to it. The methodology for price fixation is 
laid down in DPCO, 2013 and there is no concept of backward working in DPCO, 2013. There 
is also no provision in DPCO, 2013 to consider cost-audit-based data for price fixation. The 
Committee are of the considered view that sole reliance on market data i.e. PTR for price 
fixation may not be, in some cases, able to detect price distortions caused by market 
monopolies and unjustified or excessive markups at various levels of multi-layered 
pharmaceutical supply chain. In light of the above, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry may examine the feasibility of reintroducing cost-based pricing mechanism, through 
suitable statutory amendments, in cases where significant price disparities or abnormally 
high markups are observed or brought to notice of the Department. The Committee desire 
that they be apprised of the steps taken in this regard by the Ministry. 
 
Public participation in fixation of Retail prices of new drugs by NPPA 
3. The Committee note that NPPA fixes the retail price of ‘new drugs’ based on market 
data as per the formulae provided in the Drug (Prices Control) Order, 2013. As per paragraph 
2(1)(u) of DPCO, 2013, the expression ‘new drug’ means a formulation launched by an 
existing manufacturer of a drug of specified dosages and strengths as listed in NLEM by 
combining such drug with another drug that may or may not be listed in NLEM, or a 
formulation launched by changing the strength or dosages or both of the same drug of 
specified dosages and strengths as listed in the NLEM. Based on an application received 
from the manufacturer of a ‘new drug’, a draft working sheet of the retail price proposed is 
uploaded on the website of NPPA for 10 working days for information of general public and 
to invite comments. The comments and representations received, if any, are examined and 
considered before the prices are notified. Till 23.10.2025, NPPA has fixed approximately 3,570 
retail prices of new drugs under DPCO, 2013.  
Regarding the number of comments/representations received by NPPA on draft 
working sheets of the retail price of new drugs proposed during the 10-working days window 
in the last three years and effect of these comments/representations in the final price 
notification, the Department submitted that during the period from 01.12.2022 to 30.11.2025, 
1426 draft working sheets were uploaded on website for 10 working days seeking comments. 
Approximately 30 comments/ representations were received by NPPA on the same, out of 
which 29 representations were received from pharmaceutical companies and 1 
representation from industry association. This led to revision in calculations of draft 
worksheet in respect of 6 cases. The Committee, from the data furnished by the Department, 

52 
 
observe that the process for fixation of retail price of ‘new drugs’ undertaken by NPPA has 
not elicited participation of patients, consumer groups or the general public at all during the 
period from 01.12.2022 to 30.11.2025. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department of Pharmaceuticals and NPPA undertake steps to increase participation of 
general public in the process for fixation of retail price of ‘new drugs’. The Committee may 
be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
Margins in Sale of Certain Medicines 
4. It came to notice of the Committee that several hospitals and retailers offered 
discounts on medicines ranging from 20% to 60% on Maximum Retail Price (MRP), which 
indicates the existence of inbuilt margins across the supply chain. In this regard, the 
Department has submitted that under DPCO 2013, the NPPA regulates scheduled and new 
drug prices, while non-scheduled formulation price increases are capped at 10% annually. 
Trade margins for non-scheduled drugs vary based on factors like dosage form, sales 
volume, ex-factory price, and marketing and distribution model. Further, discounts offered 
by hospital and retailers are guided by marketing and cost considerations of various 
business entities in the supply chain. However, in the view of the Committee, the 
Department's own admission that “something needs to be done to contain these huge 
margins that are there in the distribution channel in some cases”, warrant that the 
Department should look into the matter and initiate ameliorative steps in this regard. The 
Committee would like to be apprised regarding the steps taken by the Department. 
Identifying and broadening data coverage for uncaptured Formulations 
5. To a specific query of the Committee regarding difference between Price to Stockist 
(PTS) and Maximum Retail Price (MRP) of Labocof, the Department submitted that Labocof 
is not a scheduled formulation. The formulation is not captured in Pharmarack, the principal 
source database used for monitoring market information in respect of over 14,000 
formulations. In this regard, the Committee recommend that the Department undertake an 
assessment to identify other such uncaptured formulations as well as reasons for this 
database gap, and work towards broadening its data coverage and eliminate existing blind 
spots. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard 
at the earliest. 
 
 

53 
 
 
TRADE MARGIN RATIONALISATION (TMR) APPROACH  
6. The Committee note that Trade margin rationalisation (TMR) approach for regulating 
prices is undertaken by the Department by exercising extraordinary powers available under 
paragraph 19 of DPCO, 2013 for a limited period. TMR approach of capping trade margin had 
been implemented as a pilot in respect of 42 high-priced anti-cancer medicines. Further, TMR 
was also implemented on six covid-related devices during the pandemic. Also, the 
Department has held extensive consultations with all stakeholders on various issues 
concerning the existing pricing framework including, inter alia, incorporation of a suitable 
enabling provision in DPCO, 2013 for a TMR approach. The Committee have been apprised 
that while various stakeholders have supported the TMR proposal, concerns have also been 
raised by some stakeholders regarding certain implementation aspects, including the span 
and extent of TMR and by associations of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) 
pharmaceutical manufacturers regarding applicability of TMR on non-scheduled 
formulations. To a pointed query from the Committee about the expected timeline for 
finalizing the policy decision on TMR integration into DPCO, 2013, the Department submitted 
that there was no set time frame for finalising the policy decision on TMR integration into 
DPCO, 2013 and the matter was under active examination of the Department. The Committee 
express concern over this inordinate delay in institutionalising the TMR framework and are 
of the firm view that while it is important to address the concerns of stakeholders and MSME 
pharmaceutical manufacturers, the objective of providing medicines at affordable prices for 
the common man, must remain paramount and should not suffer due to prolonged 
deliberations. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department finalise, 
within a clearly defined timeframe, the proposed enabling provision for incorporating a 
permanent Trade Margin Rationalisation framework in DPCO, 2013 after expeditiously 
concluding stakeholder consultations. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken 
in the matter. 
MONITORING OF UNFAIR PRACTICES THAT HAVE COME TO NOTICE OF NPPA 
7. The Committee note that some instances of unfair practices being employed by certain 
pharmaceutical companies to escape/violate NPPA enforcement that have come to notice of 
NPPA are stated to be sale of drugs above the ceiling prices fixed by NPPA, especially sale 
of pre-manufactured stocks at pre-revised maximum retail price (MRP); launch of a new drug 
by the existing manufacturer of scheduled formulation without prior price approval from 
NPPA; increase of the price of non-scheduled formulation by more than 10% over the period 

54 
 
of preceding 12 months; and misclassification of a scheduled drug as a non-scheduled drug 
based on claim of such drug having a novel drug delivery system. As per the data furnished 
by the Department, from the period of 1st April, 2020 to 31st March, 2025, the highest number 
of such violation cases belong to the category of Ceiling Price Violation (including pre-
manufactured stock). The Committee further note the Department’s own suggestion that 
further strengthening of PMRUs at the grassroots level, creation of more awareness among 
consumers, enhanced collaboration with other stakeholders such as the Directorate General 
of Health Services (DGHS), Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, Central Drugs Standard 
Control Organisation (CDSCO) etc., may help in better compliance of provisions of DPCO, 
2013. In this regard, the Committee recommend that the Department take concrete measures 
to implement each suggestion to help in better compliance of provisions of DPCO, 2013 and 
apprise the Committee accordingly. 
 
RECOVERY OF OVERCHARGING AMOUNT FROM THE VIOLATORS 
8. The Committee note that as on 30.9.2025, a substantial portion of the overcharging 
demand amount i.e. ₹ 8,526.10 crore out of ₹ 10,013.30 crore (around 85%) remains 
outstanding. It is further noted that out of the overcharging demand amount of ₹ 8,526.10 
crore, ₹ 2,581.94 crore is non-litigated outstanding demand amount, which includes amount 
referred to the District Collectors for initiating recovery proceedings and amount disputed 
by the companies against whom the demand notices had been issued. In this regard, the 
Committee recommend that a time-bound, fast-track dispute resolution mechanism may be 
instituted by the Department to finalize recovery cases outside of active court litigation. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
9. The Committee note that as on 30.9.2025, out of the overcharging demand amount of 
₹ 8,526.10 crore, an amount of ₹ 5,944.16 crore i.e. 70 percent of the total overcharging 
demand amount was under litigation at various stages in the High Court / Supreme Court.  
The Committee find that a significant number of these litigation cases i.e. 280 out of 345 
cases, have been pending for over 6 to more than 20 years. The Committee, in this regard, 
recommend the Department and NPPA take urgent measures to ensure expeditious disposal 
of these cases. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
 
 

55 
 
Creation of a Dedicated Legal Cell in NPPA 
10. The Committee learn that to assist the NPPA in legal work, consultants are hired on 
contractual basis with the approval of Government. The Committee, taking into account the 
magnitude of pending litigation cases and corresponding overcharging demand amount, 
recommend that the Department may examine the feasibility of creation of a dedicated legal 
cell within NPPA for effective and timely disposal of the litigation cases. The Committee may 
be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
Enhancing procedural clarity to minimize Overcharging Disputes 
11. The Committee note that an amount of ₹ 2,358.20 crore is outstanding in respect of 436 
cases in which Demand Notices have been issued. As submitted by the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, in these cases, the companies have disputed the demand on various 
grounds including non-acceptance of violation, dispute in data considered for calculation, 
classification of drugs as scheduled drugs, deduction of trade margin from overcharging 
amount, calculation of interest from the date of demand notice instead of date of 
overcharging. To a pointed query from the Committee as to whether any loopholes had come 
to the notice of the DoP/NPPA which were being exploited by these companies, the 
Department replied in the negative. However, the Committee are of the view that the various 
grounds for disputes which include non-acceptance of violation, dispute in data considered 
for calculation, classification of drugs as scheduled drugs, deduction of trade margin from 
overcharging amount, calculation of interest from the date of demand notice instead of date 
of overcharging warrant that there are some areas where administrative and procedural 
clarity could be further enhanced by the DoP and NPPA. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP), in coordination with the National 
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA), take proactive steps to establish unambiguous 
rules/guidelines for these grounds of disputes in order to reduce the scope for litigation and 
expedite the recovery of outstanding dues in a timely manner. The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
PHARMARACK TECHNOLOGIES PRIVATE LIMITED 
Uncovered Pharma Segments 
12. The Committee note that the Pharmarack is a third-party pharmaceutical market data 
specialising company hired, through open and competitive tendering process, by NPPA since 
2021 for sourcing market-based data and information relating to pharmaceutical products. 

56 
 
This includes reports on Sales values, Sales Quantity, Moving Annual Turnover (MAT) Units, 
MAT Values, MRP, Price to Retailer (PTR), Price to Stockists (PTS) Trend Reports, Price 
violation reports and market statistics reports on monthly basis through email and Compact 
Disk. Pharmarack covers about 70% of the Indian Pharmaceutical Market (IPM) data, sourced 
from 2,000+ corporates and approximately 3 lakh Stock Keeping Units (SKUs). However, the 
Committee note that data pertaining to segments such as hospitals, dispensing doctors, Jan 
Aushadhi, trade generics and direct to e- commerce supplies is not captured by Pharmarack. 
It indicates that the current framework may not be able to fully track affordability and 
availability of medicines across all healthcare delivery channels and consumer touchpoints. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that concerted efforts be made to incorporate these 
segments into the data collection framework and the Committee be apprised accordingly. 
13. To a specific query of the Committee regarding gaps in data coverage pertaining to 
pharmaceutical sector in rural and remote areas of the Country, the Department has 
submitted that non-digitised rural and remote areas may face challenges such as manual 
operations and limited connectivity, which can impact data availability. Acknowledging these 
infrastructure-related challenges, the Committee are of the view that a lack of reliable data 
from rural and remote regions, where a vast majority of the Country's population still resides, 
leaves a gap in evaluating medicine availability and regional price variations at the 
grassroots level. In this regard, the Committee recommend that a targeted strategy, 
leveraging ongoing digital health initiatives, may be formulated to improve data capture from 
such regions in order to ensure wider national coverage. The Committee may be apprised of 
the action taken in the matter. 
 
Real-Time Tracking Mechanism regarding availability of medicines 
14. The Committee note that the mandate of NPPA is not only to ensure affordability of 
drugs, but also to ensure the availability of drugs. The Department of Pharmaceuticals has 
submitted that NPPA monitors the availability of medicines through its Integrated 
Pharmaceutical Database Management System (IPDMS) platform and Pharmarack data. It 
also monitors availability of scheduled formulations through submissions made by 
manufacturers in Form-III, pursuant to the requirement under paragraph 21(1) of DPCO, 2013, 
regarding data on production and sales and production capacity of scheduled medicines on 
quarterly basis. However, as informed by NPPA, real-time tracking of medicine availability 
across entire supply chain is not feasible at present considering the magnitude of pharma 
industry comprising of around 10,500 manufacturing units, 60,000 distributors and around 

57 
 
12,00,000 pharmacies and hospitals at primary, secondary and tertiary levels. While 
acknowledging the magnitude of the pharmaceutical supply chain in the Country, the 
Committee are of the view that real-time tracking of availability of life-saving and critical care 
medicines will prove to be a useful tool in the interest of public health, especially during 
pandemics or shortages of critical drugs. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the 
Department and NPPA may examine the feasibility of inventing a real-time inventory tracking 
mechanism for essential, life-saving and critical care medicines and apprise the Committee 
accordingly. 
PHARMA JAN SAMADHAAN (PJS) PORTAL 
15. Pharma Jan Samadhan (PJS) portal is stated to serve as a robust e-governance tool 
for protection of consumer interest through effective implementation of the Drugs (Prices 
Control) Order, 2013 with the objective to put in place a speedy and effective complaint 
redressal system with respect to availability of medicines, overpricing of medicines, sale of 
‘new drugs’ without prior price approval and refusal to supply or sell medicines. However, 
the Committee note that that the number of complaints registered directly on the PJS portal 
from FY 2022-23 to FY 2025-26 (till 7.11.2025) remains relatively low compared to the total 
complaints received through other sources. In this regard, the Committee recommend that 
the Department intensify its targeted awareness campaigns and leverage digital platforms, 
healthcare institutions and pharmacies to augment visibility and accessibility of the PJS 
portal. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
INTEGRATED PHARMACEUTICAL DATABASE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (IPDMS) 2.0 
16. The Committee learn that Integrated Pharmaceutical Database Management System 
(IPDMS) was launched by NPPA in 2015 which was further upgraded to a more responsive, 
cloud-based version, IPDMS 2.0 and launched on 29.8.2022. It is a system for online 
information collection, processing and communication portal to monitor and regulate the 
prices of medicines and medical devices, to ensure availability and affordability of drugs and 
medical devices in the Country. The Committee have been apprised that IPDMS 2.0 is NPPA’s 
effort to build up its own database and presently supplements the market data provided by a 
third-party agency (Pharmarack) engaged by NPPA. The Committee, in this regard, 
recommend that efforts to further strengthen IPDMS 2.0 into a robust and independent 
database may be expedited in order to eliminate or reduce NPPA’s dependence on third-party 
data providers. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
  

58 
 
MANPOWER STRENGTH IN NPPA 
Filling Vacancies in NPPA 
17. The Committee note that at present, 15 posts are vacant out of 48 sanctioned posts in 
NPPA. As per the Department’s written submission, efforts are being made to fill up these 
vacancies by taking up the matter with the cadre controlling authorities, i.e., the Department 
of Fertilizers and the Department of Expenditure, for early action. Contractual/outsourced 
staff have also been engaged, wherever possible, to ensure continuity of essential work. The 
Committee recommend that matter of filling up existing vacancies through regular 
appointments be regularly pursued with the cadre controlling authorities and the Committee 
be apprised of the progress made at the time of furnishing Action Taken Notes by the 
Department. 
Creation of Additional Posts in NPPA 
18. The Committee further note that a proposal for creation of 59 additional posts in NPPA 
is under examination of the Department of Expenditure. In this regard, the Committee 
recommend that the Department of Pharmaceuticals may pursue the matter with urgency to 
secure expeditious approval of the proposal of creation of 59 additional posts in NPPA 
commensurate with mandate and responsibilities of NPPA. The Committee may be apprised 
of the action taken in the matter. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                     AZAD KIRTI JHA 
3 August, 2026                                                                                           Chairperson 
12 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                                                                      Standing Committee on 
                                                                       Chemicals and Fertilizers 

59 
 
APPENDICES 
 
              STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2025-26) 
Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 3rd November, 2025 from 1515 hrs to 1700 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
                                     PRESENT 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
3. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
4. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang  
5. Shri Praveen Patel 
6. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
7. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
8. Shri Nalin Soren 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
10. Shri Arun Singh 
11. Shri Tejveer Singh 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1.   Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2.   Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
   

60 
 
  
 WITNESSES 
 
Representatives of Department of Pharmaceuticals  
 
1. Shri Amit Agarwal, Secretary (Pharma) 
2. Shri Awadhesh Kumar Choudhary, Senior Economic Adviser 
3. Shri Satyaprakash T L, Joint Secretary 
 
Representatives of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
 
1. Shri P. Krishnamurthy, Chairman (NPPA) 
2. Smt. S. Ahlladini Panda, Member Secretary, NPPA 
3. Shri Sanjay Kumar, Advisor NPPA 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) to the Sitting convened to have a 
briefing on the subject ‘Review of Role, functions and duties of National Pharmaceutical Pricing 
Authority (NPPA) with specific reference to increase in prices of medicines in the Country’. 
Drawing the attention of the representatives of the DoP to Direction 55(1) of the ‘Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, the Chairperson 
asked them to brief the Committee on the subject particularly regarding affordability and accessibility 
of medicines for every citizen, especially those in rural and underprivileged areas and further 
strengthening NPPA’s regulatory capacity and effectiveness in the changing pharmaceutical 
landscape. 
 
3. The Chairman, NPPA accordingly, briefed the Committee through a Power Point Presentation 
on various aspects highlighting regulatory framework for drugs, functions of NPPA, Price regulation 
under Drugs Price Control Order (DPCO), 2013, impact of price regulation on commonly used 
dosage forms, monitoring of prices by NPPA, measures for ensuring availability of medicines and 
India’s drug prices vis-à-vis other low and middle income countries. 
 

61 
 
4. Thereafter, the Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised several issues/points, as 
indicated below and sought clarifications/information from the representatives of the Department 
thereon: 
(i) Data regarding savings accrued to the consumers vide price regulation by NPPA and 
Jan Aushadhi Kendras; 
(ii) Huge difference between Price to Supplier (PTS) and Maximum Retail Price (MRP) in 
case of certain medicines, as detailed in the list which was earlier supplied to the 
Department, reasons for such increase and mechanism to control the prices; 
(iii) Measures being taken to promote the growth of Pharmaceutical Industry in the country;  
(iv) Delay in implementation of Trade Margin Rationalisation in non-scheduled formulation 
sector; 
(v) Need to undertake backward cost analysis and cost audit to trace profit margins across 
manufacturer, distributor and retailer level in pharmaceutical sector; 
(vi) NPPA’s dependence on a private data firm, Pharmarack, for market data and fixing 
prices of medicines on basis of this data; 
(vii) Authorization of 50% price increase by NPPA on certain scheduled formulations 
invoking Para 19 under DPCO 2013; 
(viii) Rationale for maintaining dual categories of essential and non-essential drugs and 
need for unified price control under DPCO; 
(ix) Strengthening of Pharmaceutical Public Sector Undertakings for drug and medicine 
manufacturing to reduce dependence on private firms; 
(x) High discount being provided to hospitals and retailers yet charging MRP from the 
consumers, reflecting inflated retail pricing practices;  
(xi) Reported persistent instances of pharmaceutical companies overcharging for 
scheduled price-controlled drugs across the country, with the Government reportedly 
pursuing recovery of the overcharged amounts; 
(xii) Preventive measures or monitoring system in place to ensure that pharmaceutical 
companies do not overcharge for medicines in the first place; 
(xiii) Reported violations of ceiling prices by pharmaceutical companies despite NPPA’s 
mandate to make medicines accessible and affordable in the country and status of 
recoveries from the violator companies; 
(xiv) Relevance of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy 2012 and DPCO 2013 in 
contemporary pharmaceutical landscape; 
(xv) Data regarding comparison of medicine prices of India with other countries in the world; 
(xvi)  Details of real-time systems used by NPPA to monitor drug availability; and 

62 
 
(xvii) Compliance of NPPA directives regarding ensuring availability of medicines by the 
pharmaceutical industries and steps to ensure elimination of banned and unsafe drugs 
from production and distribution. 
 
 
5. The representatives of the Department of Pharmaceuticals and NPPA responded to certain 
queries raised by the Members. On the points requiring detailed information which was not readily 
available and to the queries raised by the Members which remained unanswered during the 
Sitting, the Chairperson asked the Secretary, DoP  to furnish written replies at the earliest. The 
Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Department for appearing before the Committee 
and responding to the queries of the Members. 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record. 
 
 

63 
 
              STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2025-26) 
Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 24th November, 2025 from 1500 hrs to 1700 hrs in 
Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
                                     PRESENT 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
4. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
5. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
6. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
7. Shri Praveen Patel  
8. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
9. Shri Eatala Rajender 
10. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
11. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
12. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
13. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
14. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
15. Shri Arun Singh 
16. Shri Tejveer Singh 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
1.   Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2.   Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
   

64 
 
  
 WITNESSES 
 
Representatives of Department of Pharmaceuticals 
 
1. Shri Amit Agrawal, Secretary 
2. Shri Awadhesh Kumar Choudhary, Sr. Economic Adviser 
3. Shri Satyaprakash T L, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Suvasis Das, Deputy Secretary 
5.  Ms. Khayi Leishingam, Joint Director 
 
Representatives of National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) 
 
1. Shri P. Krishnamurthy, Chairman 
2. Smt. S. Ahlladini Panda, Member Secretary 
3. Shri Sanjay Kumar, Advisor 
 
Representative of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
 
1.  Dr. Rajeev Singh Raghuvanshi, Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI), Central Drugs 
Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) 
 
Representatives of Pharmarack Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 
 
1. Mr. Dhruv Gulati, CEO 
2. Ms. Sujata G, Vice President 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Department of Pharmaceuticals (DoP) to the Sitting convened to have oral 
evidence on the subject ‘Review of Role, functions and duties of National Pharmaceutical Pricing 
Authority (NPPA) with specific reference to increase in prices of medicines in the Country’. Drawing 

65 
 
the attention of the representatives of the DoP and other Ministry and organization to Direction 55(1) 
of the ‘Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the 
Committee, the Chairperson asked them to brief the Committee on the subject particularly regarding 
progress and major issues being encountered by the Department with regard to finalization of Trade 
Margin Rationalization (TMR) approach, steps taken by the Department to remove ‘anomaly’ in price 
fixation of medicines, categorisation of medicines as essential and non-essential, scheduled and 
non-scheduled, data collection and price fixation process with regard to scheduled and non-
scheduled formulations, the role of the private partner in ensuring accurate and neutral market 
information, and the need for review, revision, and updating of the extant National Pharmaceutical 
Pricing Policy, 2012 and Drugs Pricing Control Order, 2013 to reflect current realities. 
3. The Secretary, DoP accordingly gave a brief oral submission before the Committee which 
included aspects of provisions of affordable healthcare which include direct Government healthcare, 
insurance and Jan Aushadhi pharmacy network etc., examination of concerns of the stakeholders 
to make suitable policy and regulatory provisions for Trade Margin Rationalisation (TMR), average 
mark-up for common dosage forms of non-scheduled drugs - tablets, capsules, sachets, gums and 
strips, which is around 43 per cent when taken collectively across distributors, stockists, wholesalers 
and retailers and relative pricing of non-scheduled drugs in the Country compared with other 
manufacturing countries. 
 
4. Thereafter, the representatives of Pharmarack Technologies Pvt. Ltd. briefed the Committee 
through a Power Point Presentation on various aspects highlighting origin, background and objective 
of Pharmarack, engagement by NPPA tendered through open competitive bidding, efforts for 
digitalization of the pharmaceutical distribution ecosystem, data collection and coverage and reach, 
price capturing methodology, data projection and extrapolation, data sharing with NPPA and data 
security. 
 
5. The Chairperson and Members of the Committee raised several issues/points, as indicated 
below and sought clarifications/information from the representatives of the Department of 
Pharmaceuticals, NPPA, CDSCO and Pharmarack Technologies Pvt. Ltd. thereon: 
i. Investors/Promoters of Pharmarack and its revenue model; 
ii. Accuracy, neutrality and reliability of data coverage by Pharmarack and direct consumer 
benefit from data collected by Pharmarack; 
iii. Tendering process for selecting Pharmarack as NPPA’s data provider and compliance with 
Central Vigilance Commission norms; 

66 
 
iv. Huge difference between Price to Supplier (PTS) and Maximum Retail Price (MRP) in case 
of certain medicines;  
v. Development of a policy/framework for fixation of price of medicines so that States and other 
Government Departments need not issue separate tenders for medicines; 
vi. Composition, role and responsibility of NPPA’s ex-officio members and norms/benchmark set 
by NPPA; 
vii. DCGI’s role in NPPA;  
viii. Medical stores giving huge discounts on MRP of medicines; 
ix. Policy for destroying/handling expired medicines especially the ones accumulated in 
Government Hospitals;  
x. Measures being taken to promote the growth of Pharmaceutical Industry in the Country; and 
xi. Price fixation of non-scheduled drugs. 
 
6. The representatives of the Department of Pharmaceuticals, NPPA, CDSCO and Pharmarack 
Technologies Pvt. Ltd responded to the above queries raised by the Members. On the points 
requiring detailed information which was not readily available and to the queries raised by the 
Members which remained unanswered during the Sitting, the Chairperson asked the Secretary, DoP  
and DCGI to furnish written replies at the earliest. The Chairperson also requested the Members to 
go through the replies given by the DoP on the List of Points on the subject, and send further 
questions/supplementary questions, if any, to the Secretariat for onward submission to the DoP. The 
Chairperson thanked the representatives of the DoP and other accompanying Officers for appearing 
before the Committee and responding to the queries of the Members. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept on record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

67 
 
 
              STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2025-26) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-sixth Sitting of the Committee 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 03rd August, 2026 from 1500 hrs to 1530 hrs in Committee 
Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman 
7. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
8. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
9. Shri Praveen Patel 
10. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
11. Shri Eatala Rajender 
12. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
13. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
  
RAJYA SABHA  
 
14. Shri Naresh Bansal 
15. Shri Subhash Barala 
16. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
17. Shri Arun Singh 
18. Shri Tejveer Singh 
19. Shri L. K. Sudhish 
SECRETARIAT  
1.        Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2.   Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Abhishek Kumar  - Joint Director 

68 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for consideration and adoption of the following seven draft Reports: 
i. XXXXXX 
ii. XXXXXX 
iii. XXXXXX 
iv. XXXXXX 
v. XXXXXX 
vi. Thirty-third Report on the subject ‘Review of Role, functions and duties of National 
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA) with specific reference to increase in prices of 
medicines in the Country’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department 
of Pharmaceuticals; and 
vii. XXXXXX 
3. After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee 
with slight amendments. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and 
present/lay them in both the Houses of Parliament in the ongoing Monsoon Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXXXX  Does not pertain to the Report 
 
 