i 
 
   
13 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
    
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
HEALTH HAZARDS DUE TO USE OF COMPROMISED/SUBSTANDARD 
QUALITY OF FOOD-GRADE PLASTICS AND THEIR EXPOSURE TO 
EXTREME INDIAN CLIMATIC CONDITIONS  
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2025/   SHRAVAN, 1947 (SAKA) 
 
   


ii 
 
CC&F.No. 193 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICALS) 
 
HEALTH HAZARDS DUE TO USE OF COMPROMISED/SUBSTANDARD 
QUALITY OF FOOD-GRADE PLASTICS AND THEIR EXPOSURE TO EXTREME 
INDIAN CLIMATIC CONDITIONS  
(2024-25) 
  
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20 August, 2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20 August, 2025 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2025/   SHRAVAN, 1947 (SAKA) 
  


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2024-25) (iv)  
INTRODUCTION (v) 
Acronyms/Abbreviations  
 
REPORT 
 
PART – I                  NARRATIVES 
 
I Introductory  
II Regulatory measures to control use of compromised/ 
substandard quality of food-grade plastics 
 
III Study on adverse effects of the plastic  
IV Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018  
V Study on Rats  
VI Research and Development on Jute Bags  
PART- II OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  
 ANNEXURE  
I. Food safety and standards (packaging) regulations, 2018  
II. Action against non-compliance reported during fy 2023-24  
 
APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 6th January, 2025.  
 
II. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 9th May, 2025.  
 
II. Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals & 
Fertilizers (2024-25) held on 18th August, 2025. 
 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2024-25) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
21. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Subhash Barala 
23. Dr. Bhagwat Karad* 
24. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
25. Shri Naresh Bansal& 
26. Shri Sanjay Raut 
27. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
28. Dr. Kalpana Saini 
29. Shri Arun Singh 
30. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
31. Shri Tejveer Singh 
. 
 
 SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Maya Lingi   : Joint Secretary  
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam  :  Director  
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  : Deputy Secretary  
 
 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals & Fertilizers (2024 -25) 
having been authorized by the Committee do present on their behalf, this Thirteenth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Health hazards due to use of 
compromised/substandard quality of food -grade plastics and their exposure to 
extreme Indian climatic conditions’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals).  
2. The Committee had a briefing by the representatives of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals on 6 th January, 2025 and oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, the Bureau of 
Indian Standards (BIS) and Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) on 
the subject on 9th May, 2025.  
3.  The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
18th August, 2025.  
4.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India for tendering evidence and 
placing before the Committee all the requisite information related to examination of 
the subject.  
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the valuable 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to 
the Committee.  
6. For ease of reference and convenience, the Observations/ Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; Azad Kirti Jha 
18 August, 2025 Chairperson, 
27 Shravan, 1947(Saka) Standing Committee on 
 Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
 

1 
 
 
REPORT 
Part – I  
 
NARRATIVES 
 
“Food grade” means material made of substances which are safe and suitable 
for food packaging applications  and shall not endanger human health or result in 
unacceptable change in the composition of the food or properties such as taste, 
smell, sight etc. 
 
2. The Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers have informed that p ackaging of foodstuffs is a universally accepted 
method for avoiding contamination, maintenance of hygienic conditions, 
conservation and also for ease of transport, handling and sale of foodstuffs. Usage 
of plastics for food packaging is increasing both in quantum as well as in variety. A 
number of plastics raw materials are available in various forms such as sheets, 
sachets, containers of various shapes and sizes, both ordinary as well as co -
extruded/composite type. Since there is always a possibility of migration of a part of 
the packaging material to the contents of the packed material due to intimate 
contact, it is essential that the formulation of the package should be selected with 
care to ensure that any such migration is at a minimum and substances which do 
migrate from the package to the packed material are within limits and cause no toxic 
hazards when consumed. 
 
3. Regulatory measures to control use of compromised / substandard 
quality of food-grade plastics: 
 
I. To consolidate the laws relating to food and to establish the Food Safety 
and Standards Authority of India for laying down science -based standards 
for articles of food and to regulate their manufacture, storage, distribution, 
sale and import, to ensure availability of safe and wholesome food for 
human consumption and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 was enforced. Under 
the act Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 
2018(attached at Annexure-III) are issued to ensure that various 
packaging materials coming in contact with food materials are of standard 
quality and safe to use.  
 
4. Study on adverse effects of the plastic: 
 
Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) has funded a project 
entitled "Micro -and nano -plastics as emerging food contaminants: 
Establishing validated Methodologies and understanding the prevalence in 
different food. matrices".  The project was started in March, 2024 to develop 

2 
 
and validate analytical methods to detect micro and nano -plastics in various 
food products and assess their prevalence and exposure levels in the country. 
The project duration is for 02 years and sanctioned to 03 research institutes: 
 1. CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow  
2. ICAR-Central institute of Fisheries Technology (ICAR-CIFT), Kochi 
3. Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS). Pilani  
Objectives of the project: 
1. Development and validation of analytical methods for identification and 
quantification of micro/nano- plastics in foods matrices  
2. Inter - and intra -laboratory comparison of developed methods in identified 
food matrices  
3. Surveillance and determination of exposure levels of micro-/nano-plastics in 
identified foods matrices 
Deliverables: 
• Development of standard protocol and preparation of SOPs for micro -
/nano-plastics analysis  
• Information on prevalence of micro -/ nano -plastics in various foods 
matrices.  
• Better understanding of the exposure levels to micro -/nano-plastics in 
consumers.  
• May help regulatory bodies for formulation of regulations and 
legislations. 
The research project is under progress. Method validation for microplastic 
detection (PC, PET and Polystyrene) in packaged animal products (Chicken, 
Meat and Fish), beverages and packaged drinking water is completed. 
Sampling and analysis of the packaged food products from Rajasthan, Kerala 
and Uttar Pradesh is under progress.  
 
5. Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018:  
 
The Regulations provide for general packaging requirements including 
the materials or metals used and for packaging requirements for specific food 
products. The salient features of the regulations are: 
 
• Every food business operator shall ensure that the packaging material used 
shall be in accordance with these regulations:  
• Any material which comes in direct contact with food or likely to come in 
contact with food and used for packaging, preparation, storing, wrapping, 
transportation and sale or service of food shall be of food grade quality. 
• Packaging materials shall be suitable for the type of product, the conditions 
provided for storage and the equipment for filling, sealing and packaging of 
food as well as transportation conditions. 

3 
 
• Packaging materials shall be able to withstand mechanical, chemical or 
thermal stresses encountered during normal transportation. In case of 
flexible or semi-rigid containers, an overwrap packaging may be necessary. 
• Food products shall be packed in clean, hygienic and tamper -proof 
package or container. 
• Every food business operator shall obtain the certificate of conformity 
issued by NABL accredited laboratory against these regulations for the 
packaging material which comes in direct contact with food or layers likely 
to come in contact with food to be used. 
 
6. The Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018 have been 
issued to ensure that various packaging materials coming in contact with food 
materials are of standard quality and safe to use on being asked as to how the 
provisions of th ese Regulations are being implemented so that the food standards 
are enforced in the way it was contemplated,  the Department submitted that Food 
Safety and standards Authority of India (FSSAI) ha d put the following safeguards in 
place, to minimize use of compromised and substandard quality of food grade 
plastics: 
 
a) FSSAI has notified Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulation, 
2018. The regulation specifies the standards for the packaging materials 
for food inter alia plastic packaging material. 
b) This regulation mandates that every Food Business Operators (FBOs) 
shall obtain the certificate of conformity for the packaging material which 
comes in direct contact with food or layers likely to come in contact with 
food. The certificate of conformity issued by NABL accredited laboratory 
for food grade material ensures that the substances used in material are 
safe and suitable for their intended use, and shall not endanger human 
health or result in unacceptable change in the composition of the food or 
organoleptic characteristics in Indian climatic conditions. 
c) As per Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food 
Businesses) Regulation, 2011, only food grade packaging materials are to 
be used for primary packaging which comes in direct contact with the food.   
d) The specific standards of different kind of plastic materials used for the 
manufacturing of containers for packing or storing the food products shall 
conform to either of the Indian Standards specifications as provided in 
Schedule – III (Annexure-D) of the ibid regulation.  
e) The provisions under Schedule IV of Food Safety and Standards 
(Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) Regulation, 2011 
explicitly provides that the food material be it raw, food ingredients or 
finished goods to be stored in appropriate conditions in controlled 
temperature, humidity and other environmental conditions to ensure food 
safety. 

4 
 
f) The Licensing Regulation also specifies that the storage instructions over 
food packaging should be followed by theFoodBusiness Operators (FBOs) 
at all stages in the food supply chain. 
g) Furthermore, the Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) 
Regulations, 2020 makes it mandatory for the labels to display the storage 
instructions in order to maintain the safety and integrity of food. 
h) All these provisions are statutory in nature and are to be followed by the 
Food Business Operators, failing which attracts regulatory actions under 
the FSS Act 2006.  
i) A stringent enforcement mechanism is in place to check & verify the 
compliance by the Food Businesses with the set standards, specification 
and requirements under the act.  
j) FSSAI through its regional office and states/UTs regularly conducts 
inspections, audits, random sampling and surveillance. During these 
inspections, food grade packaging materials are also monitored. In all 
cases where non -compliance is observed during inspection, improvement 
notices are issued.  
(Reply to Q. No. 1) 
 
7. When asked as to h ow many cases of violation of provisions of the Food 
Safety and Standards (Packaging)) Regulations, 2018 have come to notice since the 
year 2018 and action taken for non-compliance it was submitted that FSSAI through 
its Regional Office and States/UTs regularly conducts inspections, audits, 
monitoring, random sampling and surveillance to check & verify compliance to the 
provisions as laid down under the Act and its regulations including the Food Safety 
and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018. 
 
8. In case of non -compliances observed during inspections, Improvement 
notices are issued and it is ensured that corrective measure are taken by the Food 
Business Operations (FBO) as per the provision under sec 32 of the Food Safety 
and Standards Act.  During the year 2023 -24, 5453 cases of non -compliance were 
found. The action taken on the non-compliance is placed at Annexure - II. 
(Reply to Q. No. 2) 
 
9. When asked to state the exact role and responsibilities of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals in the implementation of the Food Safety and 
Standards (Packaging) Regulations,  2018 the Department submitted that t he 
Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals is entrusted with the responsibility of 
planning, development, control and assistance for the chemicals, petrochemicals, 
man-made fibres, synthetic rubber and plasticindustries. Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals does not have any role in the implementation of the Food Safety 
and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018. FSSAI is the implementing authority 
for Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018.  
(Reply to Q. No. 3) 
 

5 
 
10. On a pointed query of number of cases of food safety hazards arising out of 
substandard packaging in plastic containers have come to the notice of the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, the action taken by the Department in 
those cases and  steps taken to stop recurrence of such unfortunate incidents in 
future. The Department in a written reply submitted that  FSSAI is the implementing 
authority for Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018. DCPC is 
not entrusted with the implementation of FSSAI Regulation 2018. 
(Reply to Q. No. 5) 
 
11. On the role of FSSAI in the implementation of Food Safety and Standards 
(Packaging) Regulations, 2018, the Department submitted as follows:- 
1. FSSAI plays a substantive role in the implementation of Food Safety and 
Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018by  
 
a) Notifying Regulations or by bringing amendment in regulations time to 
time. 
b) Verifying the compliance with the set standards through inspections 
and surveillance. 
c) Creating awareness through training of food handlers. 
 
2. FSSAI through its regional office and states/UTs regularly conducts 
inspections, audits, monitoring, random sampling and surveillance to check & 
verify compliance to the provisions as laid down under the Act and its 
regulations including the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) 
Regulations, 2018. 
In case of non -compliance regulatory actions are taken under the provisions 
of the Food Safety and Standards Act and rules laid down there under. 
3. Creating awareness through training of food handlers on usage of food grade 
material for packaging of food items. Since 2017, FSSAI has trained around 
22 lakhs Food handlers under Food Safety Training and Certification 
(FoSTaC) program which educates food handlers on usage of food grade 
material for packaging of food items as one of the important topic of training. 
(Reply to Q. No. 6) 
 
12. When asked as to how t he Department coordinates with the FSSAI for 
effective implementation of the Food Safety and Standard s (Packaging) Regulations, 
2018, it was replied that t he Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 was made for 
laying down the science -based standards for articles of food and to regulate their 
manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import, to ensure availability of safe and 
wholesome food for human consumption and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. The Food Saf ety and Standards Authority of India is established 
and entrusted with the responsibility of FSS Act.  An expert committee has been 
constituted by FSSAI to develop a guideline/ advisory document regarding use of 
safe food packaging materials by various food service establishments like hotels/ 

6 
 
restaurants / street venders etc.The department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals is 
participating in the same and assisting the FSSAI. 
 
13. On being asked whether the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is also 
involved in the implementation of the provisions of Food Safety and Standards 
(Packaging) Regulations, 2018 , it was submitted that the Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare is not directly involved in the implementation of the provision of Food 
Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulation, 2018 and comes under the purview of 
FSSAI, which is a statutory body under the administrative control of Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare.  
(Reply to Q. No. 8) 
 
14. As regard s the demarcation in the roles and responsibilities of the 
Department, the FSSAI and the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in the 
implementation of the provisions of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) 
Regulations, 2018, the Department submitted as follows:- 
 
(i) Role of Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals(DCPC): 
  
The Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals is entrusted with the 
responsibility of planning, development, control and assistance for the 
chemicals, petrochemicals, man -made fibres, synthetic rubber and plastic 
industries. Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals does not have any 
role in the implementation of the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) 
Regulations, 2018.  
 
(ii) Role of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI): 
 
1. FSSAI plays substantive role in the implementation of the provisions of 
Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018 by : 
 
a) Notifying Regulations or by bringing amendment in regulations time 
to time. 
b) Verifying the compliance with the set standards through inspections 
and surveillance. 
c) Creating awareness through training of food handlers. 
 
2. Further, FSSAI through its regional office and states/UTs regularly 
conducts inspections, audits, monitoring, random sampling and 
surveillance to check & verify compliance to the provisions as laid 
down under the Act and its regulations including the Food Safety and 
Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018.  In case of non -compliance 
regulatory actions are taken under the provisions of the FSS Act and 
rules laid down there under. 
 

7 
 
3. Creating awareness through training of food handlers on usage of food 
grade material for packaging of food items. Since 2017, FSSAI has 
trained around 22 lakhs Food handlers under Food Safety Training and 
Certification (FoSTaC) program which educates food handlers on 
usage of food grade material for packaging of food items as one of the 
important topic of training. 
 
(iii) Role of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare:  
 
15. The implementation of provisions related to Food Safety and Standards 
(Packaging) Regulations, 2018 comes under the purview of FSSAI, which is a 
statutory body under the administrative control of Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare.  
(Reply to Q. No. 9) 
 
16. When asked whether the Department was facing any problems/bottlenecks in 
the implementation of Food Safety and Standard s (Packaging) Regulations, 2018, it 
was submitted that Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals does not have any 
role in the implementation of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 
2018.  
(Reply to Q. No. 10) 
 
17. When asked w hether the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) 
Regulations, 2018 are sufficient enough to eliminate or minimize the health hazards 
due to the use of compromised/substandard quality of food grade plastics and their 
exposure to extreme Indian climatic conditions, it was replied that as  per the General 
Requirements of the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018, any 
material which comes in direct contact with food or likely to come in contact with food 
used for packaging, preparation, storing, wrapping, transportation and sale or service 
of food  shall be of food grade quality.  Further, clause (b) of sub -regulation 4(4) of 
these regulations specifies that all packaging materials of plastic origin shall pass the 
prescribed overall migration limit of 60mg/kg or 10mg/dm2 when tested as per IS 
9845 with no visible colour migration. 
  
18. Additionally, as per clause (c) of    sub-regulation 4(4) of these regulations, 
plastic materials and articles shall not release the following substances in quantities 
exceeding the specific migration limits. 
  
SI. No. Substances Maximum Migration Limit (mg/Kg) 
1. Barium 1.0 
2. Cobalt 0.05 
3. Copper 5.0 
4. Iron 48.0 
5. Lithium 0.6 

8 
 
6. Manganese 0.6 
7. Zinc 25.0 
8. Antimony 0.04 
 
9. 
Phthalic acid, bis (2- ethylhexyl) 
ester (DEHP) 
 
1.5] 
  
Furthermore, Schedule IV of these regulations provide the suggestive list of 
the packaging materials for food articles suitable in Indian climatic conditions. 
(Reply to Q. No. 12) 
 
19. When specifically asked about the provision of penalty/punishment to the 
defaulters, the Department replied as under:- 
 
a)     Section 48-67 describe the penalties for the production, sale, storage etc. 
of food which is in contravention of the FSS Act, 2006, the rules and 
regulations thereunder and includes the provision of penalties and criminal 
prosecution in cases of unsafe food. 
• Section 50:  Penalty for selling food not of the nature or substance or 
quality demanded:  not exceeding five lakh rupees. For Petty Food 
Business Operators not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees. 
• Section 51: Penalty for sub-standard food: may extend to five lakh rupees. 
• Section 52: Penalty for misbranded food: may extend to three lakh rupees. 
• Section 54: Penalty for food containing extraneous matter: may extend to 
one lakh rupees. 
• Section 55: Penalty for failure to comply with the directions of Food Safety 
Office: may extend to two lakh rupees. 
• Section 56:  Penalty for unhygienic or unsanitary processing or 
manufacturing of food: may extend to one lakh rupees. 
• Section 57:  Penalty for possessing adulterant: not exceeding two lakh 
rupees; (ii) if adulterant is injurious to health, a penalty not exceeding ten 
lakh rupees. 
• Section58: Penalty for contraventions for which no specific penalty is 
provided: may extend to two lakh rupees. 
• Section 59. Punishment for unsafe food: 
(i) imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months and also 
with fine which may extend to three lakh rupees; 
(ii) in case of a non -grievous injury, imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year and also with fine which may extend to three lakh 
rupees; 
(iii) in case of a grievous injury, imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six years and also with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees; 
(iv) in case of death, imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and also with 
fine which shall not be less than ten lakh Rupees. 

9 
 
• Section 60. Punishment for interfering with seized items: imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to six months and also with fine which may 
extend to two lakh rupees. 
• Section 61 . Penalty for false information. liable to penalty which may 
extend to ten lakh rupees. 
• Section 62.  Punishment for obstructing or imper sonating a Food Safety 
Officer imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months and 
also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. 
• Section 63.  Penalty for carrying out a business without licence. liable to 
penalty which may   extend to ten lakh rupees. 
• Section 64.  Punishment for subsequent offences: twice the punishment, 
which might have been imposed on a first conviction, subject to the 
punishment being maximum provided for the same offence; (ii) a further 
fine on daily basis which may extend up to one lakh rupees, where the 
offence is a continuing one. 
(Reply to Q. No. 14) 
 
20. With regard to the issue of  the extant enforcement regime  to ensure zero 
tolerance for compliance in so far as standards on food safety , the Department 
submitted, that the Food Safety and Standards (Labelling and Display) Regulations, 
2020 makes it mandatory for the labels to display the storage instructions in order to 
maintain the safety and integrity of food. Accordingly, Food Business Operators are 
required to comply with the appropriate storage conditions.  The provisions under 
Schedule IV of Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food 
Businesses) Regulation, 2011 explicitly provides that the food material be it raw, 
food ingredients or finished goods to be stored in appropriate conditions in controlled 
temperature, humidity and other environmental conditions to ensure food safety.  All 
these provisions are statutory in nature and are to be abided by the Food Business 
Operators, failing which regulatory actions are taken  under the FSS Act 2006. If 
during inspections, any violations related to above are observed, instructions are 
issued to the FBO through Improvement Notice under Sec 32 of FSS Act 2006.The 
Product standard (IS 14625:2015) also prescribes the requirements of plastic 
materials in contact with food under high temperature condition.  Moreover, BIS has 
granted Licenses to domestic as well as foreign manufacturers for this product 
standard. Post grant of license a mechanism for surveillance both at factory & 
market exists for monitoring the quality compliance of product as per relevant Indian 
standards. 
(Reply to Q. No. 16) 
 
21. On being asked whether the companies/distributors/individuals engaged in 
packaging of food items in plastic containers have to seek any prior permission from 
the Department or they inform the Department Suo motto regarding their packaging 
activities, it was submitted that FSSAI was  the authorized government agency for 
implementation of FSS Regulation 2011. As per regulation no 2.1.1 & 2.1.7 & 

10 
 
Schedule 2, FSS (Licensing & Registration of food Businesses) Regulation 2011) a 
declaration was to be submitted to the authority by the applicant while applying for 
the license that- the food business to be conducted shall conform to the FSS Act and 
regulations made there under/ bye -laws enacted thereunder. By virtue of this, all the 
FBOs were required to abide by the statutory provisions including packaging 
material.  
 
22. In addition to this, every Food Business Operator (FBO)  shall obtain the 
certificate of conformity for the packaging material which comes in direct contact with 
food or layers likely to come in contact with food. The certificate of conformity issued 
by NABL accredited laboratory for food grade material ensures that the substances 
used in material are safe and suitable for their intended use, and shall not endanger 
human health or result in unacceptable change in the composition of the food or 
organoleptic characteristics in Indian climatic conditions. 
(Reply to Q. No. 18) 
 
23. The Committee desired to know the level of inter Ministerial - Departmental 
coordination carried out by the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, FSSAI 
and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare coordinate with each other for effective 
implementation of the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018.  
In reply, it has been stated that  Food Safety and Standards Authority of India 
(FSSAI) invites the DCPC during the meeting with FBO industry/packaging material 
manufacturer on related issues.  
 
24. An Expert Committee has been constituted by FSSAI to develop a guideline/ 
advisory document regarding use of safe food packaging materials by various food 
service establishments like hotels/ restaurants / street venders etc. The Department 
of Chemicals & Petrochemicals was participating in the same and assisting the 
FSSAI. 
 
25. During the course of oral evidence , the Committee desired to know about the 
methodology being developed to tackle the menace of micro and nano plastics which 
were emerging as food contaminants. In this regard the representatives of the 
Department apprised the Committee as follows: 
 
“माइक्रो और नैनो प्लास्टिक जो फ ू ड क ं टेमनेंट्स क े  तौर पर उभर रहे हैं, उसक े  बारे 
में मैथडोलॉजी डेवलप करने क े  ललए लक क ै से इनका पता लगाया जाए और वे लकतने लडफरेंट 
फ ू ड आइटम्स में पाए जाते हैं? इसकी िडी फसाई करा रही है। इंलडयन इंिीट्यूट ऑफ 
टॉस्टिकोलॉलजकल ररसर्च, लखनऊ, आईसीएआर का इंिीट्यूट सेंट र ल इंिीट्यूट ऑफ 
लफशरीज़ टेक्नोलॉजी कोस्टि और लबट्स लपलानी, ये तीन इंिीट्यूट लमलकर इसे कर रहे हैं। 
यह मार्च, 2024 में शुरू हुआ। इसमें यह है लक एक िैंडडच प्रोटोकॉल डेवलप करेंगे लजससे लक 
माइक्रो और नैनो प्लास्टिक का एनालललसस हो पाए लक क ै से पता लगाया जा सक े  लक फ ू ड में 
लकतना मैटेररयल है। इसक े  बाद लडफरेंट फ ू ड्स जो लबकते हैं, उसमें लकतना माइक्रो और नैनो 

11 
 
प्लास्टिक है, यह िडी उसका पता करेगी और एिपोजर लेवल ट ू  माइक्रो नैनो प्लास्टिक ट ू  
क ं ज्यूमसच का क्या एिपोजर लेवल्स हैं, उसक े  बारे में पता लगाएगी। फाइनली जब िडी क े  
ररजल्ट्स आए ं गे, तो रेगुलेटरी बॉडी को बेटर रेगुलेशन्स फ्र े म करने में मदद होगी। अभी ररसर्च 
प्रोजेक्ट को  9 महीने ही हुए हैं, यह अंडर प्रोग्रेस है। जो काम हो र्ुका है, वह है लक पीसी पैक्ट 
और पॉललि र ीन को क ै से पता लगाया जाए, उसका मैथड वैललडेशन हो र्ुका है। सैंपललंग 
एनालललस स ऑफ पैक े ज्ड फ ू ड प्रोडक्ट्स - राजस्थान, क े रल और उत्तर प्रदेश से सैंपललंग करना 
और एनालललसस करना अभी प्रोग्रेस में है। 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 06.01.2025 Proceeding Pg. 8) 
 
26. During the Oral  Evidence, the representatives of the Department informed 
about the inspections  conducted by FSSAI. The total number of Food Businesses 
Licensed as on 31.12.2024 were stated to be 11.49 Lacs. and total number of 
manufacturers and restaurants/food vending establishments using packing material 
were about 3.99 lacs. It was submitted that during the financial year 2023 -2024 
overall inspections conducted on licensed food business operators were 2,32,638. 
Out of these overall inspections non compliance cases observed regarding food 
grade packing material were informed to be 4,765.  Similarly during the Financial 
Year 2024-2025 (as on 02.01.2025) overall inspections conducted on licensed Food 
Business Operators were 1,68,000 and non compliance observed regarding Food 
Grade Packing material was 3,063.    
 
27. On aspects of Inspection the representative of FSSAI submitted that they visit 
the kitchen, factories etc. wh ere they were being manufactured. The representative 
submitted that there are two categories one is the manufacturer where pickles were 
prepared and the second was food vending establishment i.e, restaurants etc. The 
representative submitted that they inspect the restaurants and they have 44 List of 
Points to inspect.  
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 06.05.2025 Pg. No. 8-13)  
 
28. On being asked whether they conduct surprise visit also , the representative 
submitted in  affirmative and wherever they found objectionable things/ adulterated 
spices etc. they were destroyed and such drives were conducted regularly. 
 
29. As regard s the role and functions of the Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals, the representative submitted as follows:  
 
“Sir, the plastic, as a subject comes under the Department of Chemicals 
and Petrochemicals. So, the entire value chain up to the level of plastic, यह रॉ 
मटेररयल से शुरू होता है। यह पेट र ो क ै लमकल्स की पूरी र्ेन है। रॉ मटेररयल से होते हुए लाि 
में प्लास्टिक की मैन्युफ ै क्चररंग यूलनट्स इसमें आती हैं। बेलसकली, हमारे मैनडेट क े  लहसाब से 
manufacturing of different products in the entire value chain को प्रमोट करते हैं। 
अगर रॉ मटेररयल वगैरह नहीं है तो उस पर ड्यूटीज लकतनी होनी र्ालहए, वह कहां से आ 

12 
 
सकता है और क ै से उसका इम्पोटच होना र्ालहए, इन र्ीजों को हम लोग प्रमोट करते हैं। जहां 
पर आवश्यकता महसूस होती है, वहां पर हम उसकी क्वाललटी को भी प्रमोट करते हैं लक उसमें 
अच्छी क्वाललटी क े  रेलजन्स वगैरह यूज हों। वह बहुत बड़ी इंडि र ी है। बेलसकली यह प्रोडक्ट 
एग्रीकल्र्र में, हेल्थक े यर में, क ं ि र क्शन लबजनेस में, ऑटोमोलटव्स में और क ं ज्यूमर गुड्स 
इंडि र ी में यूज होता है। यह एक बहुत बड़ा इंडि र ी है। इसमें अलग-अलग यूजेज क े  लहसाब से 
जो भी िैंडड्चस लगाए जाने होते हैं, वे लगते हैं। जैसे हमारे पास एक लसपेट इंस्टिट्यूट है, जो 
इंस्टिट्यू ऑफ प्लास्टिक इंजीलनयररंग ए ं ड पेट र ो क ै लमकल इंजीलनयररंग है, उनक े  पास भी बहुत 
सारी सरकारी स्कीम्स में जो प्रोलवजन होता है लक अगर आप कोई खरीद कर रहे हैं या इवेन 
प्राइवेट इंडि र ीज क े  ललए भी अगर उनको अपने पेट र ो क ै लमकल प्रोडक्ट की क्वाललटी और 
िैंडडच र्ेक करवानी होती है तो वे इनक े  पास आते हैं और जो िैंडडच ले डाउन होता है, उसक े  
लहसाब से वे र्ेलक ं ग करक े  उसको दे देते हैं। फ ू ड ग्रेड प्लास्टिक इसी का एक लबल्क ु ल अलग 
सेगमेंट है, लजसकी हम बात कर रहे हैं। फ ू ड ग्रेड प्लास्टिक और जो ह्यूमेन हेल्थ है, वह हेल्थ 
लमलनि र ी क े  अंडर आता है। उसक े  िैंडड्चस वही ले डाउन करते हैं। उन्ीं का एक्ट है। वही 
इसमें र्ेलक ं ग करते हैं और इम्प्प्लीमेंटेशन करते हैं। इसीललए, आज हमने एफएसएसएआई क े  
प्रलतलनलियों को भी बुलाया है। िैडड्चस बीआईएस बनाता है। वह क ं ज्यूमर अफ े यसच लडपाटचमेंट 
क े  अंडर आता है। िैंडडच रूल्स सारे बनाते जाते हैं, लेलकन उसमें से लजनको नोलटफाई लकया 
जाता है, वे इम्प्प्लीमेंटेबल हो जाते हैं। वह नोलटलफक े शन हेल्थ लमलनि र ी क े  अंडर में 
एफएसएसएआई करता है। इसीललए, उनका जो एक्ट था, उसक े  तहत इनका लक्रएशन हुआ है 
और जो पूरा लसिम है, उसकी मॉलनटररंग ये करते हैं। आज जो ज्यादातर प्रश्न आए हैं, वे फ ू ड 
ग्रेड पैक े लजंग मटेररयल से ररलेटेड हैं या जो खाने-पीने की र्ीजें हैं, उसमें जो कॉन्टेलमनेशन या 
एडल्टरेशन हो रहा है, उससे ररलेटेड हैं और ह्यूमेन हेल्थ से भी ररलेटेड है। उसक े  िैंडडच वे 
बनाते हैं।  
 मैं इनसे ररक्व े ि करू ं गी लक इनका जो मॉलनटररंग का पूरा लसिम है लक क ै से-क ै से जब ये 
लाइसेंस देते हैं, तो क्या -क्या र्ेक करते हैं, कहां से उनको सलटचलफक े ट लमलता है। उसक े  बाद, 
मॉलनटररंग क ै से करते हैं। आप उसक े  बारे में बता दीलजए।“ 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 06.01.2025 Pg. No. 15-16)  
 
30. On the precise steps taken by the Department to protect the Human Health  
from the har mful effects of plastic which migrates/melts into the food/pickles etc. 
stored in it and exposed to high temperature  and the steps taken to protect the 
human health from the bad effects of ‘Gutkha’, the representatives submitted that 
Gutkha does not comes under the  purview of FSSAI. The representative further 
submitted as follows: -  
 
“सर, एक्चुअली हम दो -तीन फ्र ं ट्स पर साइमलटैलनयसली काम करते हैं। जैसा हमने 
बताया लक हम इंस्पेक्शन करते हैं, जब हम इंस्पेक्शन करते हैं तो सलटचलफक े ट ऑफ 
एनालललसस क े  बारे में हमेशा पूछते हैं लक आप पैक े लजंग क े  ललए जो प्लास्टिक का मटेररयल 
यूज कर रहे हैं, उसका आपक े  पास एनएबीएल एक्र े लडटेड लैब से है या नहीं। ये हमने जो 
इंिैंसेज बताए हैं, ये वो हैं, जहां पर उनक े  पास लैब का सलटचलफक े ट नहीं होता है। उसक े  बाद 

13 
 
हम उनक े  अगेंि एक्शन लेते हैं।  Most of the time, they have certificate of analysis. 
सबको पता है लक माक े ट में फ ू ड ग्रेड प्लास्टिक से पैक े लजंग करना है।  
 द ू सरा, जो स्मॉल टाइम प्लेयसच होते हैं, जैसे जो छोटा ढाबा वाला, र्ाय वाला या लकसी ने अपना 
एक छोटा िॉल बनाया है, लजसमें वह दाल -र्ावल बना रहा है, उनक े  ललए हम ट रेलनंग देते हैं। 
उसको हम फॉिैक ट रेलनंग कहते हैं। इस साल हमने कम से कम पांर् लाख लोगों को ट रेलनंग दी 
है। In the next two years, we want to take it up to 25 lakh. उस ट रेलनंग में हम बताते हैं 
लक आपको ट रैलडशनल पैक े लजंग यूज करना र्ालहए and not any kind of plastic. वे वेंडसच 
होते हैं, ि र ीट फ ू ड वेंडसच होते हैं, वे छोटे टाइप क े  प्लेयसच होते हैं, a lot of time, they are 
floating also. उनको हम सेंलसटाइज करते हैं। उसक े  बाद हमने क ु छ थडच पाटी ऑलडटसच 
और हाइजीन रेलटंग ऑलडटसच इंगेज लकए हैं। वे जाकर हमारे लबहॉफ पर ट रेलनंग करवाते हैं। इस 
साल अभी तक हमने थडच पाटी ऑलडट तकरीबन पांर् हजार करवा ललये हैं और हाइजीन रेलटंग 
ऑलडट भी तकरीबन पंद्रह हजार करवा ललये हैं। उसमें सभी छोटे मैन्युफ ै क्चरसच हैं। जो सेल्फ 
हेल्प ग्रुप्स होते हैं, पापड़, आर्ार, लजसको मलहलाए ं  घरों में बनाती हैं और गााँव में भी बनाती हैं, 
उनक े  ललए हम सेंलसटाइजेशन वक च शॉप करते हैं।“ 
 
31. The representative further added as follows:  
 
“जैसा लक मैंने पहले बताया है, राज्यों में हमारे एफडीए क े  लवभाग होते हैं। हमारे जो 
एफएसएसएआई क े  सीईओ हैं, प्रत्येक लतमाही उनकी अध्यक्षता में एक सेन्ट र ल एडवाइजरी 
कमेटी की मीलटंग होती है। उस मीलटंग क े  तहत हम राज्यों से हर लतमाही यही अपडेट्स लेते हैं 
लक आपने लकतने सैंपल्स उठाए हैं, लकतने इंस्पेक्शंस लकए हैं, आपक े  राज्यों की जो लैब्स हैं, 
उन्ोंने लकतने सैंपल्स का टेि लकया है, आपने लकतने क े सेज़ फाइल लकए हैं और लकतनी 
पेनल्टीज़ लगाई हैं। हम राज्यों क े  साथ रेगुलर मॉनीटररंग करते हैं और हम हमेशा उनसे यही 
कहते हैं लक जो भी ररक्त पद हैं, आप उनको भररए। ज्यादा से ज्यादा फ ू ड सेफ्टी अलिकाररयों 
को लनयुक्त कररए, समय पर लनयुक्त कररए और हम उनको रेगुलर ट रेलनंग भी देते हैं। हमारे जो 
फ ू ड सेफ्टी अलिकारी होते हैं, हम उनको रेगुलर ट रेलनंग क े  अलावा अपडेट्स भी देते हैं।“ 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 6.01.2025 Pg. 18-19)   
 
32. On the aspects pertaining to microwave bowels and standards governing 
them, the representative of the Department submitted that till n ow there was no 
standards laid down in this regard. The representative of the BIS submitted in this 
regard as follows: 
 
“महोदय, हमारे पास इस तरीक े  क े  िैंडड्चस नहीं हैं। हम फ ू ड ग्रेड कटलरी या बाउल 
की बात करें। हमारी जो कमेटी है, बिों क े  ललए फ ू ड ग्रेड कटलरी और फ ू ड ग्रेड बाउल्स और 
स्पून्स क े  ललए एक ड र ॉफ्ट िैंडडच बनाने पर काम र्ल रहा है। इसी तरीक े  से लसललकॉन रबड़ से 
बिों क े  इस्तेमाल क े  ललए जो कटलरी बनाई जाती है, हमारे यहां पर उसक े  ललए एक रबड़ 
सेक्शन कमेटी है, वह एक नया लवषय टेकअप करने का प्रपोजल र्ला रही है।“ 
(Verbatim proceeding dated 06.01.2025 Pg. 20)  

14 
 
 
33. On being asked specifically since when the proposal was under consideration 
of BIS, the representative submitted as follows:  
 
“महोदय, एक ड र ॉफ्ट िैंडडच बना था, लेलकन वह फाइनलाइज्ड नहीं हो पाया है। 
लपछले माह वह लवषय ड र ॉप हुआ था, क्योंलक जो प्रोडक्ट िैंडडच बना था, that was not 
meeting the requirements of the safety. जो िैंडड्चस थे, वे लसललकॉन और प्लास्टिक 
क े  ललए थे।“ 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 06.01.2025 Pg. 21) 
 
34. The representative further submitted as under:-  
 
“I would j ust like to point out some of the initiatives which have 
been done recently. The FSSAI is conducting a study on micro and nano -
plastics. So, basically in the project, validated methodologies and 
understanding the prevalence of micro and nano -plastic in different food 
items are to be studied, and this study is to be done by CSIR -Indian 
Institute of Toxicology Research, Lucknow; ICAR -Central Institute of 
Fisheries Technology Kochi, and  Birla Institute of Technology and 
Science, Pilani.  
 
The FSSAI has also constituted an expert Committee to examine 
the alternative packaging material for use by food service establishments. 
In the recent past, that is, in November, FSSAI has reclassified packaged 
drinking water and mineral water as ‘high risk’. So basically, that 
mandates stricter regulatory controls and annual inspections.  FSSAI has 
also conducted national stakeholder consultation on sustainable 
packaging on 16 th April 2025 where the significance of eco -friendly 
packaging solutions was discussed and highlighted to various 
stakeholders. FSSAI has notified another amendment in 2025 which has 
specified standards for the products made of recycled PET for packaging, 
storing, carrying or dispensing of food products. … …..BIS has also 
published the following Indian Standards to compostable plastics and 
biodegradable plastics in order to see that the products made out of that 
conform to quality. The first is compostable plastics standard, and then 
second is the assessment of biodegradability of plastics in varied 
condition. CIPET is the recognized lab which tests these products. 
 
Then, IIT Guwahati and IIT Madras have been established as 
centre for excellences. They are working on promoting bioplastics and 
their applications.Especially IIT Guwahati is developing the technology for 
production of polylactic acid and their products, and also the application 
development using Poly Lactic Acid (PLA). IIT Madras is working on 
developing packaging from biobased resources.  

15 
 
 
…… CIPET is also working on developing innovative solutions in 
the area of sustainable packaging of various food items using biopolymers 
like PLA, PBAT, and PHB. They are basically bio -compostable polymers. 
A dedicated microplastic analysis laboratory has been set up at CIPET to 
analyse the prevalence of microplastics in soil, sediments, marine 
environment, etc.They use the internationally available test protocols. 
CIPET offices are also participating in several committees of BIS to 
establish the standards in the domains of plastics and packaging.  
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg. 7 & 8) 
 
35. As regard s the standards of BIS , the representative submitted during oral 
evidence as follows:  
  
“महोदय, मैं  सभी माननीय सदस्ोों को  आश्वासन देना चाहोंगी कक  प्लास्टिक और  फूड  
पैकेक ोंग के  बारे  में  ो भारतीय  मानक  हैं, वे कवश्व स्तर के  मानक  हैं। बीआईएस के  साथ 
कमलकर  फूड  सेफ्टी एोंड िैंडडड  अथाररटी  के   ो रेगुलेशन्स हैं, वे बनाई  ाती है। हमारे  
रेगुलेशन्स में बहुत सारे  मानक  प्राथकमक तौर  पर  बीआईएस द्वारा बनाए गए हैं। पैकेक ोंग में 
हमें एक  बात और  ध्यान में रखनी  होगी कक  कसफड खाद्य पदाथों के  कलए ही देश में पैकेक ोंग नहीों 
बन रही  है, बस्टि कई  अन्य ची ोों के  कलए भी पैकेक ोंग बन रही  है इसकलए मैनुफैक्चसड द्वारा 
एक  ही प्रकार की  पैकेक ोंग बनाना मुस्टिल काम  है। फूड  के  कलए मैनुफैक्चरर ने पैकेक ोंग को  
ध्यान में रखा  है। इसके  कलए लाइसेंकसोंग रेगुलेशन  के  तहत एफबीओ के  कलए मैनडेटरी  है कक  
फूड  ग्रेड पैकेक ोंग का  ध्यान रखे  और  सालाना इोंस्पेक्शन्स में हम चैक  करते  हैं कक  उन्ोोंने फूड  
ग्रेड पैकेक ोंग का  इस्तेमाल ककया  है या नहीों। इसे हमें किकटकल  चैककोंग का  द ाड हमने कदया है। 
प्लास्टिक पैकेक ोंग के  बारे  में कपछली मीकटोंग में चेयरमैन  साहब ने  ो आदेश कदया था, हमने 
तुरोंत बदलाव ककया  है कक  प्लास्टिक की  इोंस्पेक्शन के  दौरान  मार्क्ड या वेटे  कदया करते  थे, 
उसे हमने डबल  कर  कदया है। इसका  मतलब यह है कक  यकद कोई  चूक  होती है तो वह हाई 
ररस्क केटेकगरी  की  बात हो गई है और  हमारी  इोंस्पेक्शन इस मुद्दे पर  बहुत टाइट हो गई है। 
वायलेशन के  बारे  में  ो बात पूछी गई है, उसके  बारे  में बताना चाहती हों। 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg. 10-11) 
 
36. On being asked about the number of non complian t cases the representative 
submitted as follows: 
“इसमें यह देखा गया कक  नॉन कम्प्प्लाएोंस ककतना  है। हमारे  इोंस्पेक्शन्स में  ो कनकल  
कर  आता है, वह 2.85 प्रकतशत नॉन कम्प्प्लाएोंस कनकल  कर  आता है। कसकवल और  किकमनल 
केसे  दायर  करने  के  बाबत हमने  ो एक्शन कलया, वर्ड 2023-2024 का   ो आोंकड़ा है, 
उसमें नम्बर ऑफ कोंकवक्शन्स 1,70,513 सैम्पल्स एनालाइ  ककए  गए और  क नमें से 33,808 
सैम्पल्स िैंडडडडस  को  कोंफमड कर  रहे  थे और  कोंकवक्शन के  केसे  29,586 पाए गए और  
पैनल्टी  74 करोड़  रूपये  के  करीब  रे  की  गई। इसमें किकमनल केसे  भी दायर  ककए  गए 
 ो 1161 हैं और  पैनल्टी  भी रे  की  गई हैं।“ 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg.11) 

16 
 
 
37. On a specific query on  the quantum of plastic m aterial imported in the 
Country. The representative submitted that it was a deregulated sector and imports 
were being made. As regard quantum of PVC imported , it was submitted that it was 
around 2.8 million metric ton and it was not only used in Packing but also in 
manufacturing of polythenes.  
 
38. When asked about  the details of funds given to CIPET for  manufacturing a n 
alternative to the plastic , the representative submitted during oral evidence as 
follows  
 
“सर, इसमें हम लोगों को लवभाग से प्लान फ ं ड में करीब साल में सौ करोड़ रुपये 
इंफ्राि र क्चर क े  ललए लमलता है। साथ में हमारी जो तीन लैबोरेट र ीज़ हैं, वे अलिक ृ त हैं, लजसमें हम 
लोग लवलभन्न प्रयोलजत प्रोजेक्ट्स हैं, उसमें ले कर, उसमें करने क े  ललए। तो इसमें हम लोग 
स्पेशली, जैसे सीपेट, भुवनेश्वर में हम लोगों का काफी अच्छा काम हो रहा है और साथ में 
बैंगलूरू की लैबोरेट र ी में भी। इसमें सीपेट भुवनेश्वर में जो ऑल्टरनेलटव प्रोडक्ट रीडेवल्पमेंट क े  
बारे में भी काफी हम लोग तेज़ी से उसमें कायच कर रहे हैं। साथ में िेंडडसच पर भी हम लोग 
इसमें कायच कर रहे हैं। लजतनी हमारी क्षमता है, उसक े  लहसाब से लवभाग से सहयोग लमल रहा 
है।“ 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg. 15) 
 
39. When asked about research and development being done by the Department 
of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, the representative submitted as follows. 
 
“जैसे लक पहले भी बताया था लक हम लोगों ने दो जगहों पर सेंटर फॉर एस्टि लेंलसस 
शुरू लकए हैं। We give them Rs. 5 crore for development of infrastructure and 
equal amount the institute contributes, and on top of that they can take 
projects from industries.” 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg. 15) 
 
40. On being  enquired since when the COEs are functioning in this regard and 
whether any breakthrough has been made, representative submitted as follows: 
 
“सर, पीएलए जो एक होता है, पॉललइलेस्टक्ट क एलसड कर क े  एक होता है, वह 
बायोलडग्रेडेबल तो नहीं है, कम्पोिेबल है। तो उसकी उन्ोंने इंलडलजनस टैक्नोलॉजी डेवल्प की 
है। अब हम उसकी पायलट स्क े ल टेस्टिंग कर रहे हैं” 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg.16) 
 
41. The representative further submitted that plastic was being used in everything 
from automotive to medical instruments to packing material till polythene and in bags 
of foodgrains, automobile construction, shoes etc. On the aspect of wide use of 

17 
 
plastic and their harmful effect on human health and need to control harmful effect of 
the plastic on the environment, the representative submitted during oral evidence as 
follows:-  
 
“सर, मुझे ऐसा लगता है लक लसंगल यूज्ड प्लास्टिक को हम क ं ट र ोल करने में सफल हों, 
उस पर थोड़ा-सा अपना फोकस बढ़ाए ं , ररसाइकललंग को बहुत ज्यादा बढ़ावा दें तो उसमें 
बहुत सारी प्लास्टिक जो हम यूज कर रहे हैं अगर वह ररसाइकल होगी तो अल्टीमेटली उसका 
यूजेज भी कम होगा। अगर हम इन दो र्ीजों पर ध्यान दें और थोड़ा-सा अवेयरनेस बढ़ाने पर 
ध्यान दें तो हम इसको कम कर सकते हैं। बाकी जो अल्टरनेलटव मैटेररयल वगैरह डेवलप्ड हो 
रहे हैं उसमें थोड़ा टाइम लगेगा। हम बायो -वेि डेवलप कर भी ले रहे हैं तो उसक े  ललए रॉ 
मैटेररयल भी उतनी ही मात्रा में र्ालहए होगा। जैसे- एक बार यह र्ला था लक जेट र ोफा से हम जो 
ऑयल बनाते थे, तब उसक े  ललए उतनी बड़ी क्वांलटटी में जेट र ोफा की खेती करनी है और 
उसका पौिा उपलब्ध हो, तब उससे बनाए ाँ गे। उन सब र्ैलेंजेज को भी जब तक हम नहीं 
टैकल कर पाने वाली स्टस्थलत में हम ररसर्च कर लेंगे, तब तक थोड़ा -सा टाइम लगेगा। 
टेक्नोलॉजी का डेवलपमेंट एक तरफ र्लता रहे और द ू सरी तरफ ररसाइकललंग पर भी और 
क ं ट र ोल पर भी हम ध्यान दें तो अगर ये ट ू  प्राम्प्ट अप्रोर् रहेगी तो मुझे लगता है हम सफल होंगे।” 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05. 2025 Pg. 20)     
 
42. The Commit tee then enquired from the representatives of BIS as to how to 
get rid of the menace of plastic, the representatives submitted as follows: 
 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg. 22) 
 
“टेस्टक्नकल कमेटी ने इसक े  िैण्डड्चस बनाए हैं। लपछली बार आपने जो लनदेश लदए थे, 
उसक े  पहले ही एक वलक िं ग पैनल का गठन लकया था, जो हमारा आईएस 9845 है उसक े  
ररवीजन क े  ललए और अब उसक े  स्कोप में यह बात भी डाल दी गई है लक एक्स्ट् र ीम 
क्लाइमेलटक क ं डीशन्स में प्लास्टिक पर क्या असर होता है, उसको भी हम िडी करेंगे तो 
हमारा लवर्ार यही है लक हम माक े ट से काफी बड़ी संख्या में ऐसे सैम्पल्स लेकर, उनको टेि 
करेंगे। हमारी जो एफीललयेटेड या बीआईएस की ररकानाइज्ड लेबोररटीज हैं, उनमें टेि करक े  
हम देखने की कोलशश करेंगे लक कोई लललर्ंग या क ं टैलमनेशन की समस्या हाई टैम्प्रेर्र पर उस 
तरह से होती है या नहीं। हमारे िैण्डड्चस में जो टेि मैथड्स प्रेस्क्राइब्ड हैं, उनसे इंश्योर होता 
है लक यह समस्या नहीं होनी र्ालहए।   
 हमारे पास इसका कोई इमपेररकल िडी नहीं है, एिट र ीम कन्डशीन्स वास्तव में क्या 
होता है? अलिक से अलिक दो महीने में हम इस िडी को कम्पलीट कर लेंगे और िैन्डडच को 
ररवाइज कर देंगे।”  
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg. 22) 
 
43. STUDY ON RATS 
 
On the study on Rats t he representative of Indian Medical Council Research 
submitted during ;oral evidence as follows: 

18 
 
 
“आईसीएमआर ने एलनमल िडीज रैट पर लकया है, लप्रललमनरी िडी हुआ है, ह्यूमन पर अभी 
िडी नहीं लकया है। हमने जो रैट का जेिेशनल पीररयड होता है, उस समय बीपीओ और 
बीपीएस जो क े लमकल प्लास्टिक बनाने में यूज होता है, उसका एिपोजर लदया, हमने 
लप्रलललमनरी िडी में देखा लक जो ऑस्टरंग हुए, उसमें मेटाबोललक और ररप्रोडस्टक्टव फ ं क्शन्स 
में फक च  आया?”  
 
44. The representatives further submitted as follows: 
 
“उनक े  जो बोन लमनरलाइजेशन है, क ै स्टल्सयम का बोन लमनरलाइजेशन बहुत ज्यादा 
था, जो लक सामान्य तौर पर नहीं होता है। उसी तरह से उनक े  ररप्रोडस्टक्टव फ ं क्शन थे, वह भी 
कम्प्रोमाइज था, यह लप्रलललमनरी फाइंलडंग्स है। हमें एक और वैललडेट करने क े  ललए एलनमल 
पर बड़ा िडी करना पड़ेगा और ह्यूमन पर भी बड़ा िडी करना है, वह नहीं लकया है।”  
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg. 22) 
45. On the aspects of Bisphenol A (BPA) and Bisphenol S (BPS) used in plastics, 
the representative submitted during oral evidence as follows: 
 
“Sir, there have been some studies, most of them from abroad. About BPA, it 
has been seen that 60 per cent of food containers in India have BPA. इससे 
ररप्रोडस्टक्टव हेल्थ  इश्यूज भी होता है, फलटचललटी  इश्यूज भी होता है, क ैं सर का भी ररस्क होता है, 
It is known to cause obesity also. जहां-जहां लजस क ं ट र ी में ज्यादा प्लास्टिक यूज होता है, 
वहां पर डायलबलटज भी ज्यादा है, ओलबलसटी भी ज्यादा है, ररप्रोडस्टक्टव इश्यूज भी ज्यादा है। 
पीवीसी के फलेिीबल  फ ू ड कन्टेनसच होते हैं, इसमें सेलेड्स  होत हैं, which are also linked 
to increase body fat especially in children. हमारे देश में बिों काफी ओबेलसटी ज्यादा 
होती है।……………Also, there is styrene, which is seen as a group 28 carcinogen. 
यह भी बहुत सारे फ ू ड क ं टेनसच में होते हैं, क ैं सर की घटना भी हमारे यहां ज्यादा बढ़ रही 
है।………. There is a study. पॉललिरीन या फ ू ड क ं टेनसच या लडसपोजेबल कटलरीज होते हैं, 
So, this was also linked with increased carcinogen consumption by the public.  
इसी तरह से हीट एिपोजर होता है तो बहुत सारी लवनाइल क्लोराइड माइग्रेशन होती है, 
from the plastic into the food. It is especially seen in high fatty food अंर्ार क े  
बारे में बताया, नॉन-वेलजटेररयन फ ू ड, So, that also is linked with increased risk of 
cancer.………. Yes, Sir. So, these are all real risks. These diseases we are seeing 
in our society. वेि में क ैं सर ज्यादा होता था, अब अपने यहां भी बहुत ज्यादा हो गया है। 
ओबेलसटी भी है, डायलबलटज भी है, So, these metabolic syndromes may be linked to 
the consumption of microplastics.”  
 (Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg. 23, 24) 
 
46. The representative further submitted as under:-  

19 
 
 
“Sir, PET exposure has been seen to cause DNA damage also. So, DNA 
exposure can lead to some antenatal, especially in babies, बिा पैदा होने से पहले  
एिपोजर हो तो बेबी में क ु छ प्रॉब्लम हो सकती है। Sir, there is a study that shows that 
microplastics are found in human placenta also now. ……सर, हमारे यहां 
क्लाइमेलटक कन्डीशन ऐसी होती है बहुत ज्यादा गमी होती है, बहुत ज्यादा सदी होती है, बहुत 
ह्यूलमलडटी है, इन सबसे प्लास्टिक की समस्या बढ़ जाती है।” 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg. 24) 
 
47. The representative further submitted as under: 
सर, हमारा काम सवेलेंस  करना है, जो आउटब्रेक होते हैं उनको ररस्पांड करना, हम 
बायो मोलनटररंग का एक प्रोग्राम इलनलशएट करना र्ाह रहे हैं, इसमें हम सवेलेंस  से िाटच कर 
रहे हैं, हैवी मेटल , माइक्रो प्लास्टिक और नैनो प्लास्टिक पर भी हमने सोर्ा है लक 
एनवायरमेंटल सेंपल  स्वॉयल  ए ं ड अदसच, हमने उसक े ललए  लाि  ईयसच कन्सलटेशन  लकया था, 
लकन्तु प्रोग्रेस स्लो  है, हम उस पर काम कर रहे हैं तालक हमारे पास बडचन भी रहे और जैसे 
हमने देखा है लक इंलडयन िडीज कम है, हम उसको देख पाए ं और उसक े ललए  आगे डाटा के 
आिार पर क्या-क्या ि रेटजी बना सकते हैं।  
 प्लास्टिक पर बहुत कम लोग  काम कर रहे थे, अभी मैडम ने बताया, आईआईटीआर 
क ु छ काम कर रहे हैं, आइजर जो पूणे में है, वह काम कर रहा है। ओलसयन वाटर पर क्या 
इफ े क्ट आएगा।   
 How will it enter into the food chain? सर, हमारी एक ररपोटच है, लजसमें ललखा  
हुआ है लक कौन लकस पर काम कर रहा है। हम उसको आपसे शेयर कर लेंगे।  अभी हमने 
जि काम िाटच लकया है। हमने लेबोरेट र ीज की मैलपंग की है लक कौन-सी लेबोरेट र ीज कौन-कौन 
सी क ै लमकल् स पर काम कर रही हैं, तालक वहां एनवॉयरमेंटल सैंपल्स  की टेस्टिंग हो जाए, फ ू ड 
की भी जाए और ह्यूमेन सैंपल्स, जैसे ब्लड  सैंपल्स की उनमें what is the risk and what 
are the levels available. 
 Sir, this is a part of surveillance.” 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg. 25-26) 
 
48. On the bad effects of plastic o n human body, the representative from CIPET 
submitted during oral evidence as follows: 
 
“I want to understand one thing from them. Like, Madam has talked 
about the animal studies. I want to understand as to what is the dosage that is 
creating that impact on the animals. When we are talking about the products 
and the standards, everything is having the limitations. For example, Madam 
was talking about PVC where the vinyl chloride monomer is leaching from the 
plastics. For example, we have a PVC pipe wherein we will be estimating as 
to what is the vinyl chloride monomer content from the pipe, an d the standard 
is prescribing the limitation. So, I mean we just want to understand as to what 

20 
 
is the dosage of the microplastics or the plastic particles which is creating 
such kind of an impact.” 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg. 26) 
 
49. On the doses of Bisphenol A (BPA), it was submitted as follows: 
 
“There were three groups in the experiment. One was control. The 
other was given .4 microgram per kilogram body weight of BPA and the third 
was given the same dose of BPS.” 
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg.27) 
 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT ON JUTE BAGS 
 
50. During the course of oral evidence the Committee desire d to know whether 
the Department has given money for finding alternative to the plastic and for 
research and development of Jute Bags.  In reply  the representative of the 
Department submitted as follows:   
 
“र्ूंलक  प्लास्टिक का यूसेज इतना ज्यादा वाइड है लक हमारी लाइफ क े  लगभग हर 
सेक्टर में लकसी न लकसी रूप में यूज़ हो ही जा रहाहै।  उसकी रीसाइस्टक्लंग क े  ललए प्रयास 
लकया जा रहा है और रीसाइस्टक्लंग इंडि र ी भी हमारे यहां डेवल्प हो रही है। उसक े  अलावा जो 
तीसरा प्रयास लकया जा रहा है, वह नए मटीररयल को डेवल्प करने का है , जो लक नॉन -
प्लास्टिक, जो लक  बायो वेि ग्रीन मटीररयल डेवल्प लकया जाए, जो लक प्लास्टिक को ररप्लेस 
कर सक े । तो सीपेट और हमारे सेंटर ऑफ एस्टिलेंस तो इसमें काम कर ही रहे हैं। लेलकन 
यही ऑगचनाइज़ेशंस ही नहीं है, जो लक इस पर काम कर रहे हैं। जैसे आई आई टी वगैरह और 
बहुत सारे और साइंलटलफक ऑगचनाइज़ेशंस और प्राइवेट इंडि र ी भी अपने तौर पर ररसर्च कर 
रही है लक ऐसा मटीररयल जोलक  कॉिइ फ े स्टक्टव भी हो और एनवायरमेंट क े  ललए भी अच्छा 
हो, हम लोग उसको डेवल्प कर सक ें । ररसर्च एण्ड डेवल्पमेंट में जनरली भी एक लाख करोड़ 
रुपये का जो अनुसंिान फ ं ड लडक्लेयर हुआ है, तो हमें उम्मीद है लक उसमें से क ु छ लहस्सा 
हमारी इस ररसर्च में भी ज़रूर जाएगा, क्योंलक वह जो इस समय की ज्वलंत आवश्यकता है , 
उसी पर ररसर्च में वह खर्च होगा तो अलग-अलग लैवल पर प्रयास लकए जा रहे हैं, इसमेंअलग -
अलग तरह का सॉल्युशन ढ ूंढने क े  लजससे लक सारे प्रयास लमलकर क ु छ न क ु छ तो इंपैक्ट 
करेंगे। पर ररसर्च ए ं ड डेवल्पमेंट में थोड़ा टाइम लगता है क्योंलक लगातार काफी समय तक 
करते रहना होता है।  

21 
 
उस प्रयास में हमारे यहां सीपेट क े  सेन्टर ऑफ एिीलेंस लगे हुए हैं और हमारी यही कोलशश 
है लक हम जल्दी से जल्दी अल्टरनेलटव मैटेररयल डेवलप कर सक ें । हम एम ओई एफसीसी से 
भी बात कर रहे हैं जो लसंगल यूज प्लास्टिक को बैन करने क े  प्रयास में लगे हुए हैं।पॉल्यूशन क े  
जो और सोसेज हैं, उनको भी लकसतरीक े  से टेकल लकया जाए, उस पर लवर्ार र्ल रहा है और 
बहुत सारे मेजसच क े  साथ वे सामने आ रहे हैं।होपफ ु ली हम क ु छ न क ु छ इसमें आने वाले समय 
में इंपैक्ट करने में सफल होंगे। ऐसीहमेंआशाहै।”  
(Verbatim Proceeding dated 09.05.2025 Pg.17-18) 

22 
 
Observations/Recommendations 
STUDY TO DETECT PLASTICS AND NANO PLASTICS 
 
1. The Committee note that the Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India (FSSAI) is funding a project w.e.f March, 2024  entitled “Micro and Nano -
plastics as Emerging Food Contaminants: Establishing Validated Methodology 
and U nderstanding the Prevalence in Different Food Matrices” . While t he 
objective of the project is statedly to develop and validate analytical methods 
to detect micro and nano -plastics in various food products and assess their 
prevalence and exposure levels , the duration of the project is t wo years and 
sanctioned to three (03) research institutes namely (i) CSIR -Indian Institute of 
Toxicology Resear ch, Lucknow, (ii) ICAR -Central I nstitute of Fisheries 
Technology (ICAR -CIFT), Kochi ; and (iii) Birla Institute of Technology and 
Science (BITS), Pilani. The Committee note that a considerable time period of 
more than one year have already elapsed and while the research project was 
under progress, the method validation for microplastic detection (PC, PET and 
Polystyrene) in packaged animal products , beverages and packaged drinking 
water was reportedly  completed. The Committee , therefore,  desire  that 
findings of the research  projects as and when  completed may be furnished by 
the Department/FSSAI  highlighting the actionable points ther eon for tackling 
the menace of plastics and nano-plastics; and protection of human health from 
the use of compromised/substandard quality of food grade plastics and their 
exposure to extreme Indian climatic conditions. The Committee find that 
sampling and analyzing of the packaged food products from Rajasthan, Kerala 
and Uttar Pradesh was under progress. The Committee desire that the same 

23 
 
may be put to a fruitful completion and findings/recommendations alongwith 
the details of steps taken/proposed to be taken by the Department/FSSAI/BIS 
in pursuance of those findings  may be furnished within the timeline s set.  The 
Committee further desire that feasibility of adequate publicity of these 
research findings may also be explored so that they are disseminated to all the 
citizens. 
SUBSTANTIVE ROLE OF FSSAI IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF FOOD SAFETY 
AND STANDARDS PACKAGING REGULATIONS 2018 
2. The Committee note that FSSAI has been entrusted with the 
responsibility for the implementation of the Food Safety and Standards 
(Packaging) Regulations, 2018  by way of notifying (i) Regulations or by  
bringing amendments; (ii) by verifying the compliance through inspection and 
surveillance; and (iii) by creating awareness through training of food handlers. 
In this connection, the Committee further note that  FSSAI through its regional 
offices wa s regularly conducting inspections, audits, monitoring, random 
sampling and surveillance and have trained around twenty two lakhs Food 
handlers under Food Safety Training and Certifications (FoSTaC) program. 
Though the Committee are of the view that training of food handlers was one 
of the steps which could lead to minimization of harmful effects of use of 
compromised / substandard quality of food grade plastics and needs more 
intensification, the Committee feels that much more needs to be done by the 
FSSAI. It appears to the Committee that FSSAI has failed to play a substantive 
role in the implementation of the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) 
Regulations, 2018  and the Food  Safety a nd Standards Act, 2006 was not 
enforced effectively and failed to counter use of compromised and 
substandard quality of food grade plastic. The Committee, therefore, 

24 
 
 
 desire that FSSAI should come out with a roadmap to implement the  Food 
Safety and Standards (Pac kaging) Regulations, 2018  strictly and bring forth 
requisite amendments to the Regulation as may be deemed fit in the interest of 
ordinary citizens.  
COORDINATION BETWEEN FSSAI AND DCPC FOR EFFECTIVE 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS PACKAGING 
REGULATIONS, 2018 
3. The Committee note that, there is lack of  coordination between Food 
Safety and standards Authority of India (FSSAI)  and the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals ( DCPC) for effective implementation of the 
Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulation 2018. The Food Safety and 
Standards Authority of India  (FSSAI) was established and entrusted with the 
responsibility of implementation of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 
(FSS Act ).  The Committee note that though FSSAI was established and 
entrusted with responsibility of implementation of the Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006 but ufortunately it has a long way to go. The Committee 
note with concern that no  other concrete actionable mechanisam of a robust 
coordination between the FSSAI and the Department exists. The Committee , 
therefore recommend that the Department and FSSAI should work in close 
tandem and bring out a robust coordination mechanisam for effective 
implementation of the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulation, 
2018. The Committee further note that a n expert committee was constituted by 
FSSAI to develop guidelines/advisory document regarding use of safe    
food    packaging    materials    by   various    food     service establishments 
like hotels/ restaur ants / street vend ors etc.  wherein the  Department of 

25 
 
Chemicals & Petrochemicals  (DCPC) also participated. The Committee desire 
the details of the expert Committee , its mandate, composition , work done , 
recommendations given etc. may be furnish to the Committee.  
 
FSSAI’S SCIENTIFIC PANEL ON PACKAGING  
4. The Committee note that the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) 
Regulations, 2018, focus largely on packaging materials such as glass, met al, 
paper, and plastic. However, a comprehensive framework for safety of 
biodegradable and compos table plastics, testing methods  and long -term 
performance and migration limits for emerging chemicals from food 
packaging, such as: Bisphenol A (BPA), per fluorinated Alky l substances 
(PFAS), phthalates  and other harmful chemicals found in plastic packaging 
were under deliberations of FSSAI’s Scientific Panel on Packaging. The 
Committee desire that the findings of Scientific Panel on Packaging on 
elimination of the harmful effects of plastic s on human health  be furnished to 
the Committee at the earliest . The Committee further recommend that FSSAI 
come out with a comprehensive framework for zero tolerance of plastic 
contamination in food packaging processes. 
 
MIGRATION OF PLASTIC AND NANO PLASTIC IN THE FOOD CONTENTS 
5. The Committee find that FSSAI ha d submitted that inspections are 
carried out on outlets of manufacturer where pickle etc are prepared and food 
vending establishment i.e, Restaurants etc on the 44 List of Points drawn up 
for inspection of these units . The Committee are of the considered view that 
while the pickle manufactured may qualify the quality test of the FSSAI but 
instances of contamination may occur while they are packed/stored or 

26 
 
transported and exposed to high temperature when plastic migration occurs in 
the pickle from its plastic container.  This exposure can also affect  bottled 
water etc. The Committe finds that no specific authority has been assigned to 
check contamination when migration of the plastic occurs. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that a specific authority should  ensure that the migration was 
as per permissible limits and the pickle was fit for human consumption . The 
Committee also recommend that foolproof measures need to be initiated at the 
earliest to ensure that pickle stored and sold in plastic containers are  indeed 
fit for consumption by human beings. To this extent the Committee desire that 
concrete actionable steps to protect  human health from the ill effects of 
plastic/nano plastic  contamination be taken at the earliest . The Committee 
desire that information regarding the steps taken firstly by the Department, 
secondly by FSSAI and thirdly by BIS may be furnished to them at the earliest. 
  
DEVELOPMENT OF ALTERNATIVES TO PLASTIC 
6. As regard s development of alternative s to plastic  use, the Committee 
find that Central Institute of Petrochemicals Engineering & Technology (CIPET) 
was granted Rs.100 Crore as planned fund for infrastructure  development and 
it has authorized three laboratories. The Committee was apprised that work in 
this reagard was in progress in CIPET Bhubneshwar and CIPET, Bangaluru  
with full support of the Department . The Committee desire  that the work  of 
developing alternatives to the Plastics is very important and imperative to help 
curb plastic usage and its ill effect on human health and therefore urges CIPET 
to complete the project and comeforth with a concrete alternatives. 
 

27 
 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT TO MINIMISE HARMFUL EFFECTS OF 
PLASTIC AND NANO PLASTICS 
7. The Committee note that two Centre of Excellence ( CoEs) have been 
entrusted the work of finding alternative s to the plastic s. The Committee 
further note with concern that these CoEs were engaged  long back about six 
years ago for the purpose but two COEs could manage to come out with only 
one Polylactic acid which was not biodegradable but compostable and 
indigenous technology have since been developed for which pilot scale testing 
was under progress. The  Committee are however dismayed that these  CoEs 
have not been able to make any breakthrough even after a laps of a 
considerable time period of over six years. The Committee observe that the 
slow pace of work being carried out by the two CoEs  need thorough review as 
to whether these centres are indeed delivering excellent work as expected. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the functioning of these CoEs may be 
reviewed as per the extant benchmarks set for CoEs. The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
REVISION OF STANDARDS BY Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 
8. The Committee note with serious concern that BIS does not have 
standards governing microwave bowels  as admitted by the representative of 
BIS during oral evidence. The Committee, however find that BIS was working 
to make standards for Food grade bowels and spoons but could not be 
finalized as it could not pass the requirements of requisite safety standards,  
but on the intervention of the Committee, BIS constituted a working panel to 
revise ISI 9845 standards and also put in its scope to study the harmful effects 
emanating from use of plastics when exposed to extreme climatic conditions. 

28 
 
The Committee were apprised that the  working panel was expected to 
complete its study in about two months time period to revise the standard. The 
Committee, therefore, urges the BIS to expedite the findings of the panel and 
complete the study within the stipulated time period of two months as assured 
to the Committee.  The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this 
matter. 
9. As regard provisions of Penalty/punishment to defaulters /violators of 
Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018, the Committee find 
that provisions for penalties  have been given in Sections 48 to 67 of the Foo d 
Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018 . The Penalties provided 
for the production, sale, storage etc . of food which was in contravention of the 
Regulations includes both fines as well as imprisonment.  For instance under 
Section 54,55,56,57,58,61 and 63 of the regulations penalty can be levied for 
contravention of provisions of the Regulation and under Section 59 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months a nd also with fine 
which may exte nd to three lac rupees can be imposed. The Committee desire 
that they may be furnished data on levy of fine/ penalties/imprisonment for 
violation of these regulations  for the last three years.  The Committee also 
desire that these provisions of the Regulation s may be implemented in letter 
and spirit by the FSSAI. 
10. The Committee  are dismayed to note the figures of inspections  of 
licenced food business operators conducted viz-a-viz the figures of non 
compliance reported as they are not proportionate . Out of the overall 
inspections conducted on 2,32,638 licensed food business operators , non-
compliance reported was only 4,765 cases during the year (2023 -24) and only 
3,063 cases  during the year (2024 -25) out of 1,68,000 overall inspections 

29 
 
conducted on licensed food business operators. The Committee observe  that 
the figures sighted on non -compliance does not appear to be realistic for the 
whole country for one full year. The Committee therefore desire that the basis 
of these data may be re -visited and reasons furnished for such non -
compliance figures be furnished. The Committee are of the considered view 
that adequate number of inspections were not conduct ed specially in those 
areas/sectors where there is non-compliance to the regulations. To this extent, 
the Committee strongly recommend that a robust inspection mechanisam with 
specific periodicity inspections and stipulated to cover all sectors may be put 
in place to overcome the present lacuna.  
 
STUDY BY ICMR ON EXPOSURE OF BISPHENOL A (BPA) AND BISPHENOL S 
(BPS) ON RATS 
11. The Committee note that Indian Council for Medical Research ( ICMR) 
has conducted a preliminary study on Rats exposed to Bisphenol A (BPA) and 
Bisphenol S ( BPS) chemicals used in manufacturing plastic and  the study 
found that there were serious ill effects of said exposure on Rats to the extent 
that their metabolic and reproductive functions were altered. The Committee 
have also been apprised that to validate the findings of the preliminary study, a 
bigger study on animals and human beings need to be con ducted, which has 
not yet been done. The Committee are of the considered view that the harmful 
effects of exposure to plastic were very serious and an imminent danger  to 
mankind as evidenced by the findings of the preliminary study on Rats.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that s tudies be conducted so that reliable 
data on the harmful i mpacts of plastic conta mination be collated. The 

30 
 
Committee recommend that the Department, FSSAI, BIS should collectively 
come out with a concrete actionable so lution to address the alarming situation 
being faced by present day citizens. 
ILL EFFECTS OF PLASTICS ON HUMAN HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENT 
12. As regard s ill-effects of plastic and nano -plastic on human health , the 
Committee note that in the Country 60% of our food containers have BPA 
which causes not only reproductive and fertility issues but also causes cancer. 
Further BPA wa s also responsible for obesity particularly among st children. 
The Committee further finds that “styrene”, a group of 28 carcinogen was 
apparently responsible for increase d cases of cancer in the country. In a 
nutshell, metabolic syndromes like obesity, reproductive as well as fertility 
issues, cancer may be linked to the consumption of microplasti cs. Apart from 
these risks studies have shown microplastics being found in human placenta 
indicating wide spread migration of plastics in the human body . The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that elimination of the Plastic and nano -
plastic from our day to day life is the dire need of the hour to tackle the plastic 
menace which is looming large over the country . The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that to curb the menace collective wisdom of the Department, BIS 
and FSSAI  may result in a roadmap with concrete measures and 
implementation in letter and spirit  of the present regulations are requird  to 
save the citizens and also their future generations.  
13. The Committee note that the Department is taking steps to minimize the 
use of plastic and also to minimize the harmful effects of it by taking a slew of 
measures which include to recycle the plastic, to develop new material which 
would be non-plastic and bio-wastegreen material which could replace plastic , 

31 
 
several IITs and scientific organisations as well  as private industries are also 
doing research to develop a material which would be cost effective and good 
for environment . Further,  the Department is taking up the matter with the 
Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change to ban  the use of single 
use plastic.  The Committee are deeply concerned to note that nothing 
concrete has emerged so far from the  various steps stated to be taken by the 
Department. The Committee desire that th e matter may be taken at the hi ghest 
level and vigorously  pursued with all concerned Ministries/Organisations etc. 
to find a concrete solution of the plastic menace .  T he Committee further find 
that nothing is being done for manufacturing and promotion of Jute bags as an 
alternative to the plastic. The Committee are of the view that Jute bags may be 
an alternative to the plastic. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; Azad Kirti Jha 
18 August, 2025 Chairperson, 
27 Shravan, 1947(Saka) Standing Committee on 
 Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 

32 
 
ANNEXURE- I 
Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018 
 
1. Short Title and Commencement. - (1) These regulations may be called the Food Safety and 
Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018. 
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette and Food 
Business Operator shall comply with all the provisions of these regulations by 1st July, 2019. 
 
2. Definitions. - (1) In these regulations unless the context otherwise requires: - 
(a) “Act” means the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (Act 34 of 2006); 
(b) “food grade” means material made of substances which are safe and suitable 
for their intended use, and shall not endanger human health or result in 
unacceptable change in the composition of the food or organoleptic characteristics; 
(c) “multilayer/composite food packaging” means a food packaging material 
composed of two or more layers of same or different types of packaging 
materials specified under these regulations; 
(d) “overall migration limit” means the maximum permitted amount of non- volatile 
substances released from a material or article into food simulants; 
(e) “package or container” means a pre-packaged box, bottle, casket, tin, barrel, 
case, pouch, receptacle, sack, bag, wrapper or such other things in which an article 
of food is packed; 
(f) “packaging material” means materials such as cardboard, paper, glass, metal, 
plastic, multi-layer packaging material used for packaging of food products; 
(g) “primary food packaging” means packaging material in direct contact with 
food products; 
(h) “secondary food packaging” means packaging material which encloses the 
primary food packaging and does not come in direct contact with food products; 
(i) “specific migration limit” means the maximum permitted amount of a given 
substance released from a material or article into food or food simulants. 
(2) All other words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in the Act, 
rules or regulations made thereunder, shall have the meanings assigned to them in the Act, 
rules or regulations, respectively. 
 
3. General Requirements. - (1) Every food business operator shall ensure that the packaging 
material used shall be in accordance with these regulations: 
Provided where Indian Standards are not available, then relevant International Standards 
may be complied with. 
(2) Any material which comes in direct contact with food or likely to come in contact with food used 
for packaging, preparation, storing, wrapping, transportation and sale or service of food shall be of 
food grade quality. 
(3) Packaging materials shall be suitable for the type of product, the conditions provided for storage 
and the equipment for filling, sealing and packaging of food as well as transportation conditions. 
(4) Packaging materials shall be able to withstand mechanical, chemical or thermal stresses 
encountered during normal transportation. In case of flexible or semi-rigid containers, an overwrap 
packaging may be necessary. 
(5) Food products shall be packed in clean, hygienic and tamper-proof package or container. 

33 
 
(6) The sealing material shall be compatible with the product and the containers as well as the 
closure systems used for the containers. 
(7) Tin containers once used, shall not be re-used for packaging of food. 
 
(8) Plastic containers of capacity 5 litre and above and Glass bottles, which are reused for packaging 
of food, shall be suitably durable, easy to clean or disinfect. 
(9) Printing inks for use on food packages shall conform to IS: 15495. 
 
(10) Printed surface of packaging material shall not come into direct contact with food products. 
(11) Newspaper or any such material shall not be used for storing and wrapping of food. 
 
(12) In case of multilayer packaging the layer which comes in direct contact with food or layers 
likely to come in contact with food shall meet the requirements of packaging materials specified 
in Schedule I, II and III of these regulations. 
(13) The materials listed in Schedule I, II and III of these regulations shall be compatible with their 
intended use as a packaging material so as not to alter the quality and safety of the food product. 
(14) Every food business operator shall obtain the certificate of conformity issued by NABL 
accredited laboratory against these regulations for the packaging material which comes in direct 
contact with food or layers likely to come in contact with food to be used. 
4. Specific Requirements for Primary food packaging. - (1) Paper and board 
materials intended to come in contact with food products- 
 
(a) Paper and board material shall be of uniform formation, thickness and substance. 
 
(b) It shall be free from visible specks, grease marks, cuts, pinholes and other   blemishes. 
 
(c) The paper used for the manufacture of boxes, cartons, plates, cups and paper lids or paper 
which are meant to be direct in contact with food shall be of food grade and shall be free from 
contaminants. 
(d) Paper and board materials used for the manufacturing of containers for packing or storing the 
food products shall conform to either of the Indian Standards specifications as provided in Schedule – 
I. 
(2) Glass containers intended to come in contact with food products- (a) As far as possible, 
they shall be free from blisters, mould marks, stones and chippings and as far as possible shall be 
free from cords, seeds and other visible defects. 
 
(b) They shall have a smooth surface without cracks, pinholes and sharp edges. 
 
(c) The sealing surface shall be free from hairline cracks and prominent seam marks. 
 
(3) Metal and Metal Alloys intended to come in contact with food products- 
 

34 
 
(a) A utensil or container made of the following materials or metals, when used in the 
preparation, packaging and storing of food shall be deemed to render it unfit for human 
consumption: - 
(i) containers which are rusty; 
 
(ii) enamelled containers which have become chipped and rusty; 
 
(iii) copper or brass containers which are not properly tinned. 
 
(b) Appropriate grades of metal and metal alloys where applicable shall be used for packing 
or storing of food products. 
(c) Metal and metal alloys used for the manufacturing of containers for packing or storing 
the food products shall conform to either of the Indian Standards specifications as 
provided in Schedule – II. 
(4) Plastic materials intended to come in contact with food products- 
 
(a) Plastic materials used for the manufacturing of containers for packing or storing the food 
products shall conform to either of the Indian Standards specifications as provided in 
Schedule – III: 
Provided that Drinking Water (both Packaged and Mineral Water) shall be packed 
in colourless, transparent and tamper-proof bottles or containers made of polyethylene (PE) 
conforming to IS: 10146 or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) conforming to IS: 10151 or 
polyalkylene terephthalate (PET and PBT) conforming to IS: 12252 or polypropylene  (PP)  
conforming to IS: 10910 or food grade  polycarbonate conforming to IS: 14971 or 
polystyrene conforming to IS: 10142 or sterile glass bottles only. The transparency of a 
container shall not be less than 85 percent in 
light transmittance: 
Provided also that all pigments or colorants as specified in Indian Standard IS: 9833 
may be allowed in plastic containers of five litre and above made of Polycarbonate 
and Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) used for packaging of mineral water and packaged 
drinking water. The transparency of such containers shall not be less than 85 percent in light 
transmittance. 
1[Provided further that food grade packaging materials as specified in regulation 4(1) to (3), 
which may or may not contain plastic as component compatible with 
the water to be packaged may also be used. In such cases requirements of 
transparency would not apply.] 
(b) All packaging materials of plastic origin shall pass the prescribed overall migration limit 
of 60mg/kg or 10mg/dm2 when tested as per IS 9845 with no visible colour migration. 
(c) Plastic materials and articles shall not release the substances in quantities exceeding 
the specific migration limits listed under Table 1. 
(d) Pigments or Colorants for use in plastics in contact with food products and drinking water 
shall conform to IS: 9833. 
(e) Products made of recycled plastics including carry bags shall not be used for  
packaging, storing, carrying or dispensing articles of food. 

35 
 
 
Table 1 
Requirement for specific migration limits of substances from plastic materials intended to be in 
contact with articles of food 
SI. No. Substances Maximum Migration Limit (mg/Kg) 
1. Barium 1.0 
2. Cobalt 0.05 
3. Copper 5.0 
4. Iron 48.0 
5. Lithium 0.6 
6. Manganese 0.6 
7. Zinc 25.0 
8. Antimony 0.04 
 
9. 
Phthalic acid, bis (2- 
ethylhexyl) ester 
(DEHP) 
 
1.5] 
5. A list of suggestive packaging materials which may be used for packaging of food products 
falling under the specified categories is provided in Schedule – IV: 
Provided that this is an indicative list not restricting the use of any other packaging material 
complying with the specified standards. 
Schedule – I 
Paper and board materials intended to come in contact with food products 
 
SI. No List of Standards 
1. Grease proof paper – IS 6622 
2. Vegetable parchment or Grease proof paper or Aluminium Foil Laminate – IS 7161 
3. Aluminium Foil Laminates for Packaging – IS 8970 
4. General purpose packing or wrapping Paper – IS 6615 
Substitution of highlighted provision 
[(e) Products  made  of  recycled  plastics  including  carry  bags  may  be  used  for 
packaging, storing, carrying or dispensing of food products as and when standards and 
guidelines are framed by the Food Authority. Such packaging materials shall also comply 
with any other national standards/regulations as applicable.] [Operationalized w.e.f. 18th 
January, 2022 vide Direction F.No.STD/SC/A-40 dated 18th January, 2022 

36 
 
5. Folding Box Board, uncoated – IS 1776 
6. Corrugated Fibre Board Boxes- Specification (Part 1) – IS 2771 
Note: The wax used for coating the paper or board shall be paraffin wax conforming to Type I of IS 
4654. 
Schedule – II 
Metal and Metal Alloys intended to come in contact with food products 
SI. No List of Standards 
1. Cold-reduced Electrolytic Tinplate – IS 1993/ISO 11949 
2. Cold reduced Electrolytic Chromium or Chromium Oxide – Coated Steel - IS 
12591/ISO 11950 
3. Wrought  Aluminium  and  Aluminium  Alloy  Sheet  and  Strip  for  General 
Engineering – IS 737 
4. Aluminium and Aluminium Alloy Bare Foil for Food Packaging – IS 15392 
5. Specification for Crown Closures – IS 1994 
6. Specification for Round Open Top Sanitary Cans for Foods and Drinks – IS 9396 
(Part 1) 
7. Specification for Round Open Top Sanitary cans for Foods and Drinks – IS 9396 
(Part 2) 
Schedule – III 
Plastic Materials intended to come in contact with food products 
SI. No. List of Standards 
1. Specification for Polyethylene for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water – IS 10146 
2. Specification  for  Polystyrene  for  its  safe  use  in  contact  with  foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water – IS 10142 
3. Specification for Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) and its copolymers for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water – IS 10151 
4. Specification for Polypropylene and its copolymers for its safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water – IS 10910 
5. Specification for Ionomer Resins for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water – IS 11434 

37 
 
6. Specification for Ethylene Acrylic Acid (EAA) copolymers  for their safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water – IS 11704 
7. Specification for Polyalkylene Terephathalates (PET & PBT) for their safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water - IS 12252 
8. Specification for Nylon 6 Polymer for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water – IS 12247 
9. Specification for Ethylene Vinyl Acetate (EVA) copolymers for its safe use in contact 
with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water – IS 13601 
10. Specification for Ethylene Metha Acrylic Acid (EMAA) copolymers and terpolymers 
for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water – IS 
13576 
11. Specification for Polycarbonate Resins for its safe use in contact with foodstuffs, 
pharmaceuticals and drinking water – IS 14971 
12. Specification for Flexible Packaging Materials for packaging of Edible Oils, Ghee and 
Vanaspati - IS 14636 
13. Specification for Polyalkylene Terephthalates (PET & PBT) for Moulding and Extrusion 
– IS 13193 
14. Specification for Polyethylene Films and Sheets – IS 2508 
15. Specification for Linear Low Density Polyethylene (LLDPE) Films – IS 14500 
16. Specification  for  High  Density  Polyethylene  Materials  for  Moulding  and 
Extrusion – IS 7328 
17. Specification for Melamine-Formaldehyde Resins for its safe use in contact with 
foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals and drinking water – IS 14999 
18. Low Density Polyethylene Films – IS 2508 
19. Blow Moulded Polyolefin Containers - Part 2 : Over 5 Litres, Up to and 
Including 60 Litres Capacity – IS 7408 
20. Stretch Cling Films – IS 14995 
Schedule – IV 
List of suggestive packaging materials 
SI.No. Product Category Types of Packaging materials 
1. Milk and milk products • Glass bottle with metal caps or plastic (polypropylene (PP) 
or High-density polyethylene (HDPE)) caps. 
  • Rigid Plastic container made of PET with plastic 
(polypropylene (PP) or High-density polyethylene (HDPE)) 

38 
 
caps. 
• Rigid Plastic container made up of High density 
polyethylene (HDPE) or Polypropylene (PP) or Polystyrene 
(PS) with Plastic (PP or High-density polyethylene (HDPE) 
caps. 
• Flexible plastic pouch made of polyethylene (PE) or 
Polypropylene (PP) based co-extruded multilayered material. 
• Aseptic and flexible packaging material (Paper board or 
Aluminium foil or polyethylene) based multilayered 
structure. 
• Tin plate container. 
• Paper based lined cartons with liner made of aluminium foil 
based laminated structure. 
• Plastic based polypropylene (PP) or polystyrene (PS) cups 
with paper or Peel-off lid. 
• Wax coated paper butter wrappers. 
• Paper and Paper Board based folding carton inside butter 
wrapped with butter paper. 
• Metal Containers with plastic polypropylene (PP) caps or 
metal or plastic lid. 
• Plastic pet container with plastic lid. 
• Thermoform cup or tray with paper or peel-off lids. 
• Paper and Paper Board setup boxes with or without 
lamination –plastic film inside. 
• Paper and Paper Board setup boxes with or without grease 
proof paper placed inside. 
 
 
 
 • Plastic Based multi layered flexible laminated heat sealed 
pouch. 
• Mud or clay pots. 
• Thermoformed Plastic container (blister pack) with 
aluminium foil or polyethylene (PE) based lid 
2. Fats, oils 
emulsions 
and fat • Tin plate container. 
• Glass bottle with metal caps or plastic polypropylene (PP) 
or High-density polyethylene (HDPE) caps. 
• Plastic rigid container (jar) made of High-density polyethylene 
(HDPE). 
• Plastic bottle or Jar Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) with 
plastic caps. 
• Plastic Pouch made of Multi layered laminated or co-extruded 
structure. 
• Aseptic and flexible packaging material (Paper board or 
Aluminium foil or polyethylene) based multilayered 
structure. 
• Plastic laminated pouch in duplex board box (Bag in Box). 
• Thermoformed plastic based jar with plastic caps. 
• Paper based lined cartons with liner made of aluminium foil 
based laminated structure. 

39 
 
3. Fruit
 
& products 
Vegetable • Glass bottle with metal caps or plastic (polypropylene (PP) 
or High-density polyethylene (HDPE) caps. 
• Aluminium can with easy open end. 
• Tinplate container. 
  • Aseptic and flexible packaging material (Paper board or 
Aluminium foil or polyethylene) based multilayered 
structure. 
• Plastic rigid container (jar) made of either High- density 
polyethylene (HDPE) or Co-extruded structure with Plastic 
(polypropylene (PP) or High-density polyethylene (HDPE) 
caps. 
• Stand up Pouch made up of Plastic based structure with 
plastic spout. 
• Flexible Plastic pouch made of either polyethylene (PE) or 
Laminated structure. 
• Thermoformed Plastic container (blister Pack) with 
aluminium foil or polyethylene (PE) based lid. 
• Plastic jar (Co-extruded) with metal caps. 
• Plastic trays with overwrap. 
• Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) or polypropylene (PP) or 
Poly Vinyl Chloride (PVC) Punnets 
4. Sweets and Confectionery • Metal Containers with plastic polypropylene (PP) caps or 
metal or plastic lid Plastic based multilayered laminated Heat 
sealed pouches. 
• Composite containers made up of Paper Board or Aluminium 
foil or plastic base films with plastic or metal lids. 
• Plastic based rigid containers. 
• Foil wrap. 
• Plastic film based twist wraps (Polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET) or polypropylene (PP) or Poly Vinyl Chloride (PVC)). 
• Thermoformed tray and punnet with lid. 
• Glass bottle with metal or plastic caps. 
  • Plastic cups with film lid. 

40 
 
5. Cereals and cereal 
products 
• Tin container. 
• Aluminium Foil Based laminated pouch in metal container. 
• Wrapper made of wax coated paper. 
• Wrapper made of three layered laminated 
structure. 
• Plastic based multilayered laminated pouch (heat sealed). 
• Plastic based thermoform container with plastic lid. 
• Lined carton with liner made  of  multi layered laminated 
structure. 
• Plastic based multilayered laminated structured Zipper pouch. 
• Thermoform trays with plastic lids or over wraps. 
• Glass bottle with metal caps. 
• Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) or Plastic  based rigid 
containers with metal or plastic (polypropylene (PP) or 
High-density polyethylene (HDPE) caps 
• Plastic films or co-extruded film or  polypropylene 
(PP) or polyethylene (PE) 
6. Meat and Meat Products or 
Poultry Products 
• Glass  jars  with  plastic  (polypropylene  (PP)  or High-
density polyethylene (HDPE) caps. 
• Metal Containers with metal lid (lacquered tin containers). 
• Plastic based flexible pouches in paper & paper Board 
carton. 
• Plastic based multilayered flexible laminates heat sealed 
pouches. 
• Plastic tray with overwrap. 

41 
 
 
  • Aluminium foil wrap. 
• Polyethylene  terephthalate   (PET)   punnets   or containers 
with plastic caps 
7. Fish and fish products or 
Seafood 
• Glass   jars   with   plastic   (PP   or   High-density 
polyethylene (HDPE) caps. 
• Metal Containers with metal lid (lacquered tin containers). 
• Polyethylene  terephthalate   (PET)   punnets   or containers 
with plastic caps. 
• Plastic based multilayered flexible laminates heat sealed 
pouches. 
• Plastic tray with overwrap. 
8. Sweetening agents 
including Honey 
• Glass bottle with Metal Caps or Plastic (polypropylene (PP) 
or High-density polyethylene (HDPE) Caps. 
• Plastic based Thermoformed container. 
• Blister Pack with foil or polyethylene lid. 
• Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) container with Plastic Caps. 
• Plastic laminated Tube. 
9. Salt,  spices,  Condiments 
and related products 
• Glass bottle with metal lid or plastic (polypropylene (PP) or 
High-density polyethylene (HDPE) caps. 
• Plastic based rigid container with Plastic cap (Polyethylene 
terephthalate (PET) and High- density polyethylene (HDPE) 
Containers). 
• Paper & Paper board or Aluminium foil or Plastic Film based 
Composite Container. 
• Folding cartons with Plastic based flexible laminated 
structure (heat sealed) pouch placed inside. 

42 
 
 
 
  • Plastic  based  multilayered  layered  laminated pouch (heat 
sealed). 
10. Beverages (other than Dairy 
and Fruits & vegetables 
based) 
• Plastic bottles made of either Polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET) or Polycarbonate (PC) with Plastic (Polypropylene 
(PP) or High-density polyethylene (HDPE) or Aluminium 
caps. 
• Heat sealed Plastic pouches made of Polyethylene (PE). 
• Glass bottles with metal caps or plastic caps. 
• Plastic pouches made up of Polyethylene (PE) in Corrugated 
fibre board Boxes. 
• Aluminium can with easy open end. 
• Tin plate container. 
• Plastic pouch made of laminated structure. 
• Aseptic and flexible packaging material (Paper board or 
Aluminium foil or polyethylene) based multilayered 
structure. 
• Plastic based multi layered structure heat sealed pouches. 
• Plastic based multi layered structure heat sealed Zipper 
pouches or stand up pouches. 
• Metal Containers with plastic or Polypropylene (PP) caps 
or metal or plastic lid, Rigid Plastic container with plastic 
caps (Polypropylene (PP) Caps). 
• Wooden cask (for wines). 
Note. - The Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018 were published in the 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part III, Section 4 vide notification number File No. 1- 
95/Stds/Packaging/SP(L&C/A)/FSSAI-2017, dated the 24th December, 2018 and subsequently 
amended vide notification numbers: 
1.   F. No. Std/SP-08/A-1.2019/N-01, dated 25th January 2022. 
2.   F.No. Std/SP-20/T(Migration-N), dated 30th August 2022. 
 
 

43 
 
 
Annexure-II 
 
Action against non-compliance reported during FY 2023-24 
State Inspection 
Conducted 
Non-Compliance w.r.t 
Packaging material 
Improvement Notice 
Issued 
Andaman And Nicobar 
Islands 900 26 7 
Andhra Pradesh 5,146 272 129 
Arunachal Pradesh 235 0 0 
Assam 2,127 18 14 
Bihar 272 30 0 
Chandigarh 1,162 33 1 
Chhattisgarh 4,203 29 16 
Dadra And Nagar Haveli 387 5 3 
Delhi 1,084 22 10 
Goa 417 11 11 
Gujarat 18,268 205 166 
Haryana 1,727 47 30 
Himachal Pradesh 1,710 42 20 
Jammu and Kashmir 6,260 32 30 
Jharkhand 584 4 4 
Karnataka 7,188 225 225 
Kerala 36,468 565 15 
Ladakh 189 0 0 
Lakshadweep 5 0 0 
Madhya Pradesh 7,780 74 49 
Maharashtra 10,175 1163 22 
Manipur 90 0 0 
Meghalaya 112 1 0 
Nagaland 45 0 0 
Odisha 7,418 118 48 
Puducherry 21 2 0 
Punjab 3,962 52 7 
Rajasthan 3,948 35 30 
Sikkim 433 3 3 
Tamil Nadu 65,866 1763 1671 
Telangana 1,661 58 25 
Tripura 267 7 1 
Uttar Pradesh 20,890 258 136 
Uttarakhand 1,472 14 14 
West Bengal 18,440 321 44 

44 
 
 
State Inspection 
Conducted 
Non-Compliance w.r.t 
Packaging material 
Improvement Notice 
Issued 
Railways/Airport/Seaport 1,622 18 01 
Total 2,32,534 5453 2732 
 
Action against non-compliance reported during FY 2024-25 
State Inspection Conducted Non-Compliance w.r.t. 
Packaging material  
Improvement 
Notice Issued 
Andaman And Nicobar 
Islands 736 16 8 
Andhra Pradesh 1,141 18 12 
Arunachal Pradesh 383 4   
Assam 1,517 10 10 
Bihar 123 4 1 
Chandigarh 999 36 1 
Chhattisgarh 3,957 34 20 
Dadra And Nagar Haveli 201 3   
Delhi 614 33 22 
Goa 272 14 14 
Gujarat 15,446 258 215 
Haryana 1,088 38 14 
Himachal Pradesh 1,401 60 38 
Jammu and Kashmir 4,105 25 24 
Jharkhand 374 1 1 
Karnataka 6,915 282 282 
Kerala 23,276 233 36 
Ladakh 195 0 0 
Lakshadweep 4 0 0 
Madhya Pradesh 7,817 85 2 
Maharashtra 6,415 1008 21 
Manipur 253 7 4 
Meghalaya 223 1 0 
Mizoram 3 0 0 
Nagaland 10 0 0 
Odisha 3,972 63 35 
Puducherry 37 0 0 
Punjab 2,040 39 10 
Rajasthan 4,846 105 88 
Sikkim 170 4 4 
Tamil Nadu 43,373 497 427 

45 
 
 
State Inspection Conducted Non-Compliance w.r.t. 
Packaging material  
Improvement 
Notice Issued 
Telangana 1,151 63 101 
Tripura 169 2 1 
Uttar Pradesh 17,682 201 108 
Uttarakhand 1,090 15 15 
West Bengal 13,150 257 16 
Railways/Airport/Seaport 1,795 26 10  
Total 1,66,943 3442 1540 
 

46 
 
 
APPENDIX-I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2024-25) 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 6 th January, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 
hrs. in Committee Room 074, Parliament Library Building (PLB), New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha– Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.     Shri Ajay Bhatt 
3.     Shri Robert Bruce C. 
4.     Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
Shri Praveen Patel 
Dr. Sambit Patra 
Shri Balram Naik Porika 
12. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Subhash Barala 
14. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
15. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
16. Shri Tajveer Singh 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora   - Additional Secretary 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh   - Deputy Secretary  
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
1. Ms. Nivedita Shukla Verma, Secretary (C&PC) 
2. Shri Deepak Mishra Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Ganga Kumar DDG, DCPC  
4. Ms Vandana Director, DCPC  

47 
 
 
5. Ms. Shalini Mahajan Joint Director, DCPC 
6. Shri Chitvan Singh Dhillon, Dy Director, DCPC  
7. Shri Kheem Singh Chauhan, Section Officer, DCPC 
8. Shri Rajesh Kumar Mishra, Director 
9. Dr. Alka Rao Adviser, FSSAI  
10. Ms. Inoshi Sharma, Executive Director,  
11. Dr. R. S. Dhaliwal, Scientist G & Head, Division of Non-Communicable Diseases, ICMR 
12. Dr. Amita Bali, DDG(P)- CMO(SAG), Dte.GHS 
13. Dr. Meera Dhuria Joint Director,  
14. Shri Rajeev Sharma Scientist G & DDG, Standardization-I, BIS 
15. Shri Chinmay Dwivedi Scientist E and Head PCD, BIS 
16. Shri Shivam Dwivedi Scientist C/DD, PCD, BIS 
  
 
Representatives of CIPET  
1. Dr. Shishir Sinha DG, CIPET  
2. Dr. Smita Mohanty Principal Director & Head, CIPET 
 
Representatives of MoHFW  
1. Shri Rajiv Wadhwan Advisor Cost, MOHFW 
2. Shri G.A. Raghuvanshi, Deputy Secretary, MOHFW 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
the representatives of the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC), 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers to the sitting of the Committee convened for 
briefing on the subject ‘Health hazards due to the use of compromised/substandard 
quality of food -grade plastics and their exposure to extreme Indian climatic 
conditions’. Drawing the attention of the witnesses to Direction 58 of the ‘Directions 
by the Speaker’ regarding confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, the 
Chairperson asked them to apprise the Committee about the subject particularly 
regarding the safeguards put in place to eliminate or to minimize the health hazards 
due to the use of compromised/substandard quality of food grade plastics and their 
exposure to extreme Indian climatic conditions.      
 
3. The Secretary, accordingly, briefed the Committee about the initiatives taken 
by them to eliminate the health hazards due to the use of compromised/substandard 

48 
 
 
quality of food -grade plastics in accordance with the provision made in the Food 
Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulations, 2018 and Food Safety and 
Standards Act, 2006 
4. The Committee, then, sought clarifications on various issues viz. (i)  
Implementation and enforcement of standards of quality of plastics particularly in 
remote/rural areas (ii) inspection of quality packaging by food business operators 
(FBO’s) (iii) Harmful effects of plastic containers on pickles food substances in which 
they are packaged particularly when exposed to high temperature (iv) Harmful 
effects of the use of thin plastic packets for packaging milk and other food material 
particularly on human health and animal health etc. 
 
5. As some points required detailed information, the Chairperson asked the 
representatives to furnish detailed replies thereon within two weeks.   
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
    ******* 

49 
 
 
APPENDIX-II 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2024-25) 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 9th May, 2025 from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in 
Committee Room ‘2’, EPHA, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha– Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
3. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
4. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
5. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
6. Shri Praveen Patel 
7. 
8. 
Shri Balram Naik Porika 
Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
9. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
  
                              RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
 
 
 
 
1.  
Shri Subhash Barala 
Dr. Kalpana Saini 
Shri Arun Singh 
Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
Shri Tejveer Singh 
 
                       SECRETARIAT 
 
Smt. Maya Lingi               -       Joint Secretary 
      2. 
 
Shri Kulvinder Singh        -       Deputy Secretary 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals  
 
1. Ms. Nivedita Shukla Verma Secretary (C&PC), DCPC 
2. Shri Deepak Mishra Joint Secretary, DCPC 
3. Dr.Shishir Sinha DG, CIPET 
4. Ms. DivyaParmar EA, DCPC 
5. Shri Rajiv Wadhawan, Adviser (Cost), MoHFW 

50 
 
 
6. Ms Vandana Director, DCPC 
7. Shri Chitvan Singh Dhillon, Dy Director, DCPC 
8. Dr.SmitaMohanty Principal Director & Head, CIPET 
9. Dr. Vishal Verma Director (TSS&BD), CIPET 
10. Dr. K. P. Bhuvana Manager, CIPET 
11. Dr. Priyanka Bansal, Scientist E, ICMR 
12. Dr.Amita Bali, DDG(P)- CMO(SAG), Dte. GHS 
13. Dr.Meera Dhuria Joint Director, NCDC 
Representatives of Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) 
1. Dr. Alka Rao, Advisor, S&S, FSSAI 
2. Mr. Rakesh Director, FSSAI 
Representatives of Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 
1. Shri Pramod Kumar Tiwari Director General, BIS 
2. Shri Chinmay Dwivedi Scientist E and Head PCD, BIS 
3. Shri Shivam Dwivedi Scientist C/DD, PCD, BIS 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
representatives of the Department of Chemicals & Petrochemicals, the Bureau of 
Indian Standards (BIS) and Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) to 
the Sitting of the Committee convened to take oral evidence  on the subject ‘Health 
hazards due to the use of compromised/substandard quality of food -grade plastics 
and their exposure to extreme Indian climatic conditions’. Drawing the attention of 
the witnesses to Direction 55 of the ‘Directions by the Speaker’ regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee, the Chairperson asked them to 
apprise the Committee about the subject particularly regarding the safeguards put in 
place to eliminate or to minimize the health hazards due to the use of 
compromised/substandard quality of food grade plastics and their exposure to 
extreme Indian climatic conditions.      
 
3. The Secretary, accordingly, briefed the Committee about the initiatives taken 
by them to eliminate the health hazards due to use of compromised/substandard 
quality of food -grade plastics and Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) 
Regulations, 2018 as well as Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006.  The Secretary 
briefed the Committee regarding health concerns from Food Grade Plastics; 
regulations for food -grade plastics; evolution of Food Safety and Standards 
(Packaging) Regulations; salient features of the Regulations; specific requirements 
of plastic packaging materials under Regulations; safeguards against extreme Indian 
Climatic conditions; studies, R&D and initiatives on Food Grade Plastic; studies, 

51 
 
 
Research and initiatives on Food Grade Plastic; etc, 
4. The Committee, then, sought clarifications on certain issues related viz. the 
details about the Food Safety and Standards (Packaging) Regulation, 2018 that 
have been issued that various packing materials used for packing food are of 
standard quality and does not contaminate the packed food;  the Food Safety and 
Standards (Packaging) Regulation, 2018 are enough or not to control the health 
hazards arising out of use of compromised/substandard quality of food -grade 
plastics; the meaning of ‘requirement for careful selection of packaging materials as 
it is not specific’; the number of complaints received regarding milk packaged in 
plastic bags;  the information regarding the quality of polythenes and packaging 
material available in the market ]being checked  randomly or not;  the details about 
plastic containers used for juice, ice -cream, boxes of take away items, plastic 
containers of pickles etc;  the procedure for obtaining license for a Food Business 
Organization (FBO) the data regarding packaging imported from other countries and 
its annual quantum; the information regarding missing license number of some 
laboratories testing packaging material;  the reasons for laxity in controlling the 
health problems being posed by the use of compromised/substandard quality of 
food-grade plastics; the exact rule and responsibilities of the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals in the implementation of Food Safety and Standards 
(Packaging) Regulation, 2018;  the reasons for availability of plastic bags etc. in the 
market despite ban/regulation on them and what action the Department is taking for 
research and development etc. 
 
5. As some points required detailed information, the Chairperson asked the 
representative to furnish detailed replies thereon within two weeks.  They assured to 
comply. 
 
The Chairperson thanked the representatives of the Department, FSSAI and 
BIS for appearing before the Committee and responding to the queries of the 
Members. 
A copy of the verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
 
(The witness then withdrew). 
 The Committee then adjourned. 
****** 

52 
 
 
APPENDIX- III 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2024-25) 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 18 th August, 2025 from 1500 hrs.  
to 1700 hrs. in the Committee Room ‘2’, EPHA, New Delhi. 
  
PRESENT 
 
     SHRI AZAD KIRTI JHA -    CHAIRPERSON 
 
     MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
6. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
7. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
8. Shri Praveen Patel  
9. Dr. Sambit Patra  
10. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
11. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
12. Shri Eatala Rajender 
13. Shri Nalin Soren 
14. Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri Subhash Barala 
16. Dr. Bhagwat Karad 
17. Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli 
18. Shri Naresh Bansal 
19. Shri Sanjay Raut 
20. Shri Meda Raghunadha Reddy 
21. Shri Arun Singh 
22. Shri Tejveer Singh 
  
SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Maya Lingi   - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Nagendra Suman  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Panna Lal   - Deputy Secretary 
6. Shri Abhishek Kumar  -  Deputy Director 
7. Ms. Neelam Bhave   - Under Secretary 

53 
 
 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following Draft 
Reports:  
(i) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
(ii) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
(iii)   XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
(iv)   XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX 
(v)  Thirteenth Report on the subject ‘Health hazards due to use of 
compromised/substandard quality of food -grade plastics and their 
exposure to extreme Indian climatic conditions’ pertaining to the 
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of Chemicals 
and Fertilizers. 
(vi) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
(vii) XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
(viii)      XXXX  XXXX   XXXX   XXXX  
 
3. Giving an overview of the important Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the draft Reports, the Chairperson solicited the views/suggestions of the 
Members. 
 
4.      After some deliberations the Committee decided to Adopt five (05) Draft 
Reports viz, 03 ATRs and 02 subject Reports i.e, the Ninth, Tenth, Eleventh, Twelfth 
and Thirteenth draft Reports. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to 
finalize the Reports and present/lay the Reports in the ongoing Session in both the 
Houses of Parliament.  
 
5.  The Committee decided to consider Draft Report No. Fifteenth and Sixteenth 
for adoption in the next Sitting of the Committee to be held on 19.08.2025 at 1600 
hrs. onwards. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 