i 
 
 
 
 
 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
           MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
   (DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Self-sufficiency in production of fertilizers with a view to curb import of 
fertilizers — review of constraints thereof’ , pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
  JULY, 2026 / SRAVANA 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 
25 
 


ii 
 
CC&F NO. 205 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) 
on ‘Self-sufficiency in production of fertilizers with a view to curb import of fertilizers — review 
of constraints thereof’ , pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of 
Fertilizers) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27 July, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27 July, 2026 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
  JULY, 2026 / SRAVANA 1948 (SAKA) 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26) (iv) 
Introduction (v) 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
11 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
48 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration 
55 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
61 
 
APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2025-26) held on 29th June, 2026 
66 
II Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report of 
the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Self -sufficiency in production of fertilizers with a view to 
curb import of fertilizers — review of constraints thereof’, pertaining to 
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) 
68 
 
  

iv 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
21. Vacant* 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
25. Shri Manmohan Samal& 
26. Shri Arun Singh 
27. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
28. Shri Tejveer Singh 
29. Shri L. K. Sudhish%  
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant  
* Vacant vice Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon, MP(LS), passed away on 19.02.2026 vide LS Table Office Notification No.21/4(8)/2026/TO(B) 
dated 20.02.2026. 
& Nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 04.06.2026 Para No. 5267.  
% Nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 04.06.2026 Para No. 5267. 
Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli, MP(RS) retired from the membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 21.06.2026 vide RS Bulletin Part II No. 66058 dtd 
09.01.2026   
 Dr. Bhagwat Karad, MP(RS) retired on 02.04.2026 vide RS Bulletin Part II No. 66058 dtd 09.01.2026   
 Shri G.K. Vasan, MP(RS) retired on 02.04.2026 vide RS Bulletin Part II No. 66058 dtd 09.01.2026   
 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam - Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Abhishek Kumar - Joint Director 
  

v 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Twenty-fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) on ‘Self-sufficiency in production of fertilizers with a view to curb import of fertilizers — review 
of constraints thereof’, pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers). 
2.  The Fifteenth Report was presented to  Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 4 th October, 2025, 
presented to Lok Sabha on 1 st December, 2025 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 21 st August, 2025. The 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers, furnished their replies in 23rd February, 
2026 indicating Action Taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report. 
The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 29th June, 2026. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifteenth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in 
bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                                                                                      Azad Kirti Jha 
29 June, 2026                                                                                             Chairperson, 
08 Ashadha, 1948 (Saka)                                                                             Standing Committee on 
     Chemicals and Fertilizers 
  
 
  

 1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (1 8th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on 'Self-sufficiency in production of fertilizers with a 
view to curb import of fertilizers — review of constraints thereof’, pertaining to the 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers).  
1.2  The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 25.07.2025. It contained 31 Observations / Recommendations. Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the recommendations have been received and are 
categorized as follows: 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government (Chapter II): 
Rec. Sl. No. 1, 3, 6, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 23, 24, 26, 28, 29, 
30 and 31                  (Total =19) 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s reply (Chapter III): 
Rec. Sl. No. 15, 17, 19, 21 and 27                (Total-05)                                         
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter 
IV):  
Rec. Sl. No. 4, 5, 9 and 25                                                      (Total-04)     
 (iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are of interim nature (Chapter V): 
           Rec. Sl. No. 2, 7 and 10                                              (Total-03)
  
1.3 The Committee desire that the Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and 
the final replies in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Chapter IV for which interim reply has been furnished by the Ministry may 
be furnished to them at the earliest.  

 2 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with some of their earlier 
Observations/Recommendations which either require reiteration or merit further 
comments. 
RECOMMENDATION SL. No. 4 
 
 Revival of Closed Units of FCIL and HFCL 
1.5  Noting the status of revival of closed units of Fertilizer Corporation of India 
Ltd. (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Ltd. (HFCL) aimed at 
augmenting domestic urea production, the Committee recommended as under: - 
        “The Committee find that five units of Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd 
(FCIL) at Sindri (Jharkhand), Talcher (Odisha), Ramagundam (Telangana), 
Gorakhpur (Uttar Pradesh) and Korba (Chhattisgarh) and three units of 
Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Ltd (HFCL)  at Durgapur, Haldia (both in West 
Bengal) and Barauni (Bihar) were closed down since September, 2002 due to 
obsolete technology and high energy consumption of plants and economic 
unviability. However, to increase Urea production in the Country, the 
Government, approved revival of Talcher and Ramagundam units of FCIL in 
2011 by setting up gas-based fertilizer plants of 1.27 MMTPA capacity.  Further, 
the Government, in Year 2016, approved revival of Gorakhpur & Sindri units of 
FCIL and Barauni unit of HFCL b y setting up gas -based fertilizer plants of 1.27 
MMTPA capacity each. The Committee are happy to note that the Ramagundam, 
Gorakhpur, Barauni and Sindri fertilizer plants have started urea production 
whereas the Talcher plant is under execution phase.  The Committee, further find 
that the Talcher project was being set up as a greenfield urea plant through coal 
gasification technology, utilizing the abundantly available domestic coal for Urea 
production. Statedly, on completion of the project, the production  of urea in the 
Country will increase and it will also provide security in feedstock supply as coal 
would be sourced domestically and provide alternate route for urea production. 
The Committee note that against the urea consumption of 388 LMT, the 
indigenous production of Urea was 307 LMT during 2024 -25 and the demand is 
expected to increase to 444 LMT by 2035 -36. With a view to enhance the Urea 
production in the Country and achieve self -reliance in its production, the 
Committee, strongly, recommends for ta king timely effective policy initiatives to 
facilitate early revival of Durgapur and Haldia units of HFCL and Korba unit of 
FCIL by leveraging their strategic locations and existing infrastructure, and 
utilizing the coal-gasification route, etc. which woul d reduce the demand supply 
gap of urea and enhance domestic production capacity. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the progress made by the Department in this regard.” 
 

 3 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
1.6  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of 
the Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under: - 
“Government of India mandated revival of Ramagundam (Telangana), 
Gorakhpur (Uttar Pradesh), Sindri (Jharkhand) and Talcher (Odisha) units of 
Fertilizer Corporation of India and Barauni (Bihar) unit of Hindustan Fertilizer 
Corporation Limited through Joint V enture Company of nominated PSUs for 
setting up new ammonia -urea plants of 12.7 LMTPA capacity each. The 
revival of Talcher unit of FCIL is under execution stage and after 
operationalization of Talcher unit, a total of 63.5 LMTPA of domestic 
production wo uld be added.  In addition, a new fertilizer plant at Namrup, 
Assam of 12.7 LMTPA capacity has been approved and JV agreement 
signed. Therefore, decision on revival of other units of FCIL and HFCL would 
be taken based on the demand supply gap of urea after  operationalization of 
all these plants.  
 It is mentioned that the previous submissions to the Standing 
Committee included land details and revival possibilities for Haldia and 
Durgapur plants vide Department of Fertilizers' letters, dated 18.02.2025 and 
05.06.2025. Revival decisions are continge nt to urea supply demand 
dynamics in the country; however, the recommendations of the Committee 
have been noted. Towards this direction, a VC meeting was held on 
04.09.2025 between CMD HFCL -cum-Addl. Secretary, Department of 
Fertilizers and CEO, ADDA confi rming payment position on part of HFCL with 
the request to execute the lease deed in favour of HFCL in Durgapur. This 
has been followed by a request, dated 04.11.2025 to the State Government 
of West Bengal for early finalization of the matter. ” 
    
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.7 The Committee note that the Department’s reply effectively defers a 
decision on the revival of the Durgapur and Haldia units of HFCL and the 
Korba unit of FCIL to a future stage, based on the demand supply gap of urea 
after the operationalization of existing plants. No concrete timeline, techno 
economic feasibility study, or policy framework has been provided for these 
idle units. While the Committee note that a video conference meeting was 
held on 04.09.2025 regarding the Durgapur lease deed and that a request 
was made to the Government of West Bengal on 04.11.2025, these remain 

 4 
 
preliminary administrative steps and fall short of the timely and effective 
policy initiatives envisaged by the Committee.  The Committee note that 
domestic urea production stood at 307 LMT against consumption of 388 LMT 
in 2024–25, with demand projected to rise to 444 LMT by 2035 –36. In this 
context, the Committee are of the view that existing idle infrastructure may 
merit closer consideration in the overall strategy for enhancing domestic 
capacity. The Korba unit of FCIL, despite its locational advantage i n 
Chhattisgarh, has not been specifically addressed in the Government’s 
reply. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government may 
consider examining the feasibility of revival of the Durgapur, Haldia and 
Korba units in a time bound manner, in alignment with evolving demand 
supply dynamics. The Department may also consider commissioning techno 
economic feasibility studies for these units, including assessment of 
appropriate technological options such as coal gasification for Korba, and 
appraise the Committee of the outcomes. The Committee would also 
appreciate being kept informed of the progress regarding finalization of the 
Durgapur lease deed with the Government of West Bengal. 
RECOMMENDATION SL. No. 5 
  
Production Continuity Clause for Sale/Disinvestment of Fertilizer Units 
1.8   Noting the decline in domestic urea production and the adverse impact of 
sale of a private fertilizer plant on national production capacity , the Committee 
recommended as under: - 
 
      “The Committee note that the production of Urea during 2023-24 was 314 
LMT and it has come down to 307 LMT during the year 2024-25.  
The Committee were further note that the decrease in production capacity was 
because one private plant with an annual capacity of 12 LMT has been sold and 
is out of Urea.  As the Country is dependent on imports in the sector, the 
Committee are of the opini on that the Government may formulate its policies to 
regulate the sale/ disinvestment process of fertilizer units, etc. so as to mandate 
production continuity clause(s) which may require the purchaser(s) to continue 
with the production of Urea/ other fertilizer, so that the production capacity of the 
Country remains maintained and the import burden gets reduced. The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in this matter.” 
 

 5 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT   
1.9  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
“With regard to Urea, the Government had announced New Investment 
Policy (NIP) – 2012 on 2nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7th October, 
2014 to facilitate fresh investment in the Urea sector and to make India self -
sufficient in the Urea sector. Total 6 new Urea units have been set up under NIP-
2012 which includes 4 Urea units set up through Joint Venture Companies (JVC) 
of nominated PSUs and 2 Urea units set up by the private companies. The units 
set up through JVC are Ramagundam Urea unit of Ramagundam Fertilizers and 
Chemicals Ltd (RFCL) in Telangana and 3 Urea units name ly Gorakhpur, Sindri 
and Barauni of Hindustan Urvarak & Rasayan Limited (HURL) in Uttar Pradesh, 
Jharkhand and Bihar, respectively. The units set up by private companies are 
Panagarh Urea unit of Matix Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. (Matix) in West 
Bengal; and Gadepan-III Urea unit of Chambal Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. 
(CFCL) in Rajasthan. Each of these units has installed capacity of 12.7 Lakh 
Metric Tonne per annum (LMTPA). These units are highly energy efficient as they 
are based on latest technology. Therefore, these units have together added Urea 
production capacity of 76.2 LMTPA, thereby total indigenous Urea production 
capacity (Reassessed Capacity, RAC) has increased from 207.54 LMTPA during 
2014-15 to 283.74 LMTPA during 2023 -24. Further, an exc lusive policy for the 
revival of Talcher unit of FCIL through JVC of nominated PSUs namely Talcher 
Fertilizers Limited (TFL) by setting up a new Greenfield Urea plant of 12.7 LMTPA 
at coal gasification route has also been approved. Recently, the Union Cabi net 
has approved the proposal for setting up of a new Brownfield Ammonia -Urea 
Complex of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonnes (LMT) annual capacity of Urea production 
within the existing premises of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited 
(BVFCL), Namrup, Assam which will be named as Assam Valley Fertilizer and 
Chemical Company Ltd. (AVFCCL). These two projects are under execution 
phase. 
In addition, the Government also notified the New Urea Policy (NUP) – 
2015 on 25th May, 2015 for the existing 25 gas-based Urea units with one of the 
objectives of maximizing indigenous Urea production beyond RAC.  The NUP -
2015 has led to additional production of Urea by 20-25 LMT as compared to the 
production during 2014-15 annually. 
Above steps together have facilitated increase of Urea production from 
level of 225 LMT per annum during 2014-15 to 306.67 LMT of Urea during 2024-
25.” 
 

 6 
 
 OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.10  The Committee note with concern that the Government’s reply does 
not adequately address the specific issue raised, namely the need for a 
policy provision mandating production continuity clauses in the event of 
sale or disinvestment of fertilizer units. The Committee had highlighted the 
case of a private plant with an annual capacity of 12 LMT which ceased urea 
production following its sale, contributing to a decline in national 
production from 314 LMT in 2023 24 to 307 LMT in 2024 25. However, the 
reply reiterates general information regarding NIP 2012 and capacity 
additions under the joint ventur e route, without addressing the regulatory 
gap identified. The Committee observe that there appears to be no clearly 
defined mechanism at present to ensure continuity of urea or other fertilizer 
production after the transfer or sale of such units. The reply has neither 
clarified this position nor indicated any specific remedial framework. In this 
context, the Committee recommend that the Government may consider 
examining the feasibility of introducing appropriate policy provisions to 
ensure production continuity in cases of sale, disinvestment, or change of 
use of fertilizer manufacturing units. This may include suitable 
modifications to existing policy frameworks such as NIP 2012, the Fertilizer 
Control Order, or other relevant instruments. 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. No. 9 
  
Development of Indigenous Technology for Fertilizer Manufacturing:  
1.11   Highlighting India’s continued dependence on foreign licensors for 
fertilizer plant technology despite strong domestic technical capacity , the 
Committee recommended as under: - 
 
      “The Committee find that despite having an excellent pool of engineers 
and managers in Urea plants, the Country still depend upon foreign companies 
for the basic license of running, repairing and making the plant with everything 
kept in the hands of the lic ensor. Admittedly, the indigenous ‘Chemical Process 
Technology Development for fertilizers’ encompasses various stages, from initial 
laboratory research to pilot testing to scale up and finally full -scale plant 
operation, often involving iterative c ycles of refinement entailing involvement of  
a massive investment in R&D in the field of synchronized pipe-based technology 

 7 
 
based on advance metallurgy, design and fabrication of all connected to overall 
objective to achieve better energy efficiency to minimize production costs. This 
integrated approach requires multiple institutional participation as Individual 
Companies on th eir own may not be suitable to develop end -to-end solution 
having competitive advantage and energy savings. Keeping in view the present 
constraints, the Committee feels the need to develop a self-sufficient indigenous 
eco system with integration of institu tions to develop a process technology for 
urea and complex fertilizers. The Committee were apprised by the Department’s 
representative during oral evidence that there were four Companies from the 
Netherlands, the USA, Italy and Japan which have authority t o grant the license 
in India. The Committee, therefore, feel the urgent need for development of 
indigenous technology for setting up fertilizer plants and maintaining them, 
through an integrated approach by engaging the best of institutions and technical 
experts in the field, backed by suitable Budgetary support and Government 
patronage, which will remove the technical constraints and dependence and 
speed up self -reliance in the sector. The Committee recommend that a special 
high power task force be constituted for this purpose at the earliest.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT   
1.12  In their action taken reply to the afore-mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
“Under NIP-2012, total 6 new Urea units have been set up which includes 4 Urea 
units set up through Joint Venture Companies (JVC) of nominated PSUs and 2 
Urea units set up by the private companies. The units set up through JVC are 
Ramagundam Urea unit of Ra magundam Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd (RFCL) 
in Telangana and 3 Urea units namely Gorakhpur, Sindri and Barauni of 
Hindustan Urvarak & Rasayan Limited (HURL) in Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and 
Bihar, respectively. The units set up by private companies are P anagarh Urea 
unit of Matix Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. (Matix) in West Bengal; and Gadepan-
III Urea unit of Chambal Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. (CFCL) in Rajasthan. 
Each of these units has installed capacity of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonne per annum 
(LMTPA). These units are highly energy efficient as they are based on latest 
technology. Therefore, these units have together added Urea production capacity 
of 76.2 LMTPA, thereby total indigenous Urea production capacity (Reassessed 
Capacity, RAC) has increased  from 207.54 LMTPA during 2014 -15 to 283.74 
LMTPA during 2023-24.” 
 OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.13  The Committee note that the Government’s reply does not address 
the specific recommendation regarding the constitution of a High Power 

 8 
 
Task Force for the development of indigenous process technology for urea 
and complex fertilizers. The response is confined to capacity additions 
under NIP 2012 and does not engage with the issue of technological 
indigenization highlighted by the Committee.  The Committee had drawn 
attention to India’s continued reliance on a limited number of foreign 
licensors for core technology in urea plant design and operations. This 
dependence has implications for long term self-reliance and technological 
capability in the fertilizer sector. In this context, the Committee are of the 
view that capacity augmentation, while important, may be complemented 
by parallel efforts towards strengthening indigenous technological 
capabilities. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government 
may consider examining the feasibility of constituting an appropriate 
institutional mechanism, such as a High -Power Task Force, with 
participation from the Department of Fertilizers, leading scientifi c and 
research institutions, and industr y stakeholders, to explore the 
development of indigenous process technologies for urea and complex 
fertilizers. Such a mechanism may also outline a phased research and 
development roadmap, identify resource requirements, and facilitate 
coordinated efforts across institutions. The Committee would appreciate 
being apprised of the steps taken in this regard, along with a more focused 
response on the issue of technological indigenization. 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. No. 25 
 
Central Monitoring Mechanism Against Fertilizer Shortage and Black -
Marketing:  
1.14   Expressing concern over fertilizer shortages and instances of black-
marketing arising from shortfall in imports and international supply disruptions,  
the Committee recommended as under: - 
 
      “The Committee note that only 19.7 LMT of P&K fertilizers were imported 
during the year against the targeted import of 30 LMT by the companies under 
Open General License, due to their financial compulsions. This resulted in the 
shortage of DAP in the Countr y and led to its black marketing.  Moreover, there 
was shortage of fertilizers especially, DAP in the Country, due to international 

 9 
 
factors, as a particular Country did not supply fertilizers to India. Keeping in view 
that the matter is of serious concern, the Committee desire that a Central 
monitoring mechanism be developed to take timely effective actions during such 
emergent situati ons and a policy be framed for suitable action against the 
defaulting agencies, etc.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT   
1.15  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
“In case of Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers, Government has 
implemented Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy w.e.f. 01.04.2010. Under the 
policy, a fixed amount of subsidy, decided on annual/bi-annual basis, is provided 
to manufacturer / importer on notified P&K fertilizers depending on their nutrient 
content i.e. N itrogen (N), Phosphorus (P), Potassium (K) and Sulphur (S) to 
improve availability of fertilizers to farmers. In view of price volatility in 
international prices of key fertilizers and raw materials, the Government 
subsumes fluctuations, if any, while fixi ng NBS rates for P&K fertilizers 
annually/bi-annually Under the NBS policy, P&K fertilizers are covered under 
Open General License (OGL) and companies are free to import /produce these 
fertilizers as per their business dynamics. However, the suggestion of the 
committee has been noted for necessary compliance.” 
 OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
1.16  The Committee note that the reply furnished by the Government does 
not adequately address the specific recommendations made. The response 
largely reiterates the provisions of the NBS policy framework and the OGL 
regime, which are already on record, and does not engage with the issues 
raised by the Committee regarding the need for a central monitoring 
mechanism during emergent shortage situat ions and a policy framework 
to address instances of non fulfilment of import commitments. The 
observation that the suggestion of the Committee has been noted does not 
provide clarity on the action proposed to be taken.  The Committee note 
with concern that the shortfall of nearly 10.3 LMT against the targeted 
import of 30 LMT of P and K fertilizers contributed to supply constraints, 
adversely affecting availability during the cropping season. The existing 
framework, wherein OGL importers operate based on com mercial 
considerations, may benefit from suitable safeguards to ensure timely and 

 10 
 
adequate availability in critical periods.  In this context, the Committee 
recommend that the Government may consider strengthening the existing 
framework by examining the feasibility of instituting a suitable monitoring 
arrangement to track import trends and anticipate potential shortages. The 
Committee also suggest that appropriate policy options may be explored 
to address situations where import commitments are not met, and to 
ensure timely corrective measures. Further, the possibility of developing 
contingency arrangements, including alternative sourcing mechanisms 
through public sector entities or other channels, may also be examined to 
mitigate supply disruptions.  The Committee would appreciate being 
apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 11 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation Sl. No. 1 
Promotion of fertilizers production: Need for Enhancing Domestic 
Production Capacity (Urea, DAP, NPK, SSP) 
 
2.1 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as 
under: – 
          “The Committee are happy to find record production of fertilizers during 
the FY 2024-25 viz production of P&K fertilizers (NPKS + DAP) increased from 
138 LMT in 2021 to 158.78 LMT in 2024 -25; SSP production increased from 
49.35 LMT to 52.44 LMT; with a record total overall domestic production of 
fertilizers (Urea + P&K + SSP) increase d to 517.89 LMT which is statedly the 
highest ever. The Committee note that against the Urea consumption of 388 LMT 
during the year 2024-25 the indigenous production has been only 307 LMT. The 
consumption of Urea is projected to be 444 LMT during the year 2035-36. The 
Committee further find that while the consumption of P&K fertilizers is projected 
to increase from 246 LMT during 2024 -25 to 305 LMT during 2035 -36 . 
Admittedly, to meet the requirements, India currently imports a significant share 
of its fertilizers, particularly potash and phosphate-based fertilizers along with raw 
materials like Natural gas used in urea production, thereby, exposing the Country 
to global market shocks, geopolitical risks and currency fluctuations. The 
Committee, are of the v iew that achieving self -sufficiency through domestic 
production, diversified sourcing and indigenous R&D can only help reduce these 
vulnerabilities and enhance strategic autonomy, while stabilizing subsidies and 
ensure timely availability of fertilizers to  farmers during critical crop seasons. In 
view of the foregoing, the Committee are, therefore, of the considered view that 
the Government need to augment capabilities in this sector to increase 
indigenous production of fertilizers in the Country through pr omotion of R&D in 
fertilizer sector and also plugging the present deficiencies in this sector through 
a holistic review of all inter related sectors with a view to attain self -sufficiency. 
The Committee also desire that, keeping in view of the import depen dence of 
fertilizer raw materials, the Government must further diversify its sources of 
import so as to offset the geopolitical compulsions.” 
 
 

 12 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 2.2  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“With regard to Urea, the Government had announced New Investment 
Policy (NIP) – 2012 on 2nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7 th October, 
2014 to facilitate fresh investment in the Urea sector and to make India self -
sufficient in the Urea sector. Total 6 new Urea units have been set up under NIP-
2012 which includes 4 Urea units set up through Joint Venture Companies (JVC) 
of nominated PSUs and 2 Urea units set up by the private companies. The units 
set up through JVC are Ramagundam Urea unit of Ramagundam Fertilizers and 
Chemicals Ltd (RFCL) in Telangana and 3 Urea units namely Gorakhpur, Sindri 
and Barauni of Hindustan Urvarak & Rasayan Limited (HURL) in Uttar Pradesh, 
Jharkhand and Bihar, respectively. The units set up by private companies are 
Panagarh Urea unit of Matix Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. (Matix) in West 
Bengal; and Gadepan -III Urea unit of Chambal Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. 
(CFCL) in Rajasthan. Each of these units has installed capacity of 12.7 Lakh 
Metric Tonne per annum (LMTPA). These units are highly energy efficient as they 
are based on latest technology. Therefore, these units have together added Urea 
production capacity of 76.2 LMTPA, thereby total indigenous Urea production 
capacity (Reassessed Capacity, RAC) has increased from 207.54 LMTPA during 
2014-15 to 283.74 LMTPA during 2023 -24. Further, an exclusive policy for the 
revival of Talcher unit of FCIL through JVC of nominated PSUs namely Talcher 
Fertilizers Limited (TFL) by setting up a new Greenfield Urea plant of 12.7 LMTPA 
at coal gasification route has also been approved. Recently, the Union Cabinet 
has approved the proposal for setting up of a new Brownfield Ammonia -Urea 
Complex of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonnes (LMT) annual capacity of Urea production 
within the existing premises of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited 
(BVFCL), Namrup, Assam which will be named as Assam Valley Fertilizer and 
Chemical Company Ltd. (AVFCCL). These two projects are under execution 
phase. 
In addition, the Government also notified the New Urea Policy (NUP) – 2015 on 
25th May, 2015 for the existing 25 gas-based Urea units with one of the objectives 
of maximizing indigenous Urea production beyond RAC.  The NUP-2015 has led 
to additional production of Urea by 20 -25 LMT as compared to the production 
during 2014-15 annually. 
Above steps together have facilitated increase of Urea production from level of 
225 LMT per annum during 2014 -15 to 306.67 LMT of Urea during 2024 -
25.                                                                      

 13 
 
In case of Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers, Government has 
implemented Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy w.e.f. 01.04.2010. Under the 
policy, a fixed amount of subsidy, decided on annual/bi-annual basis, is provided 
to manufacturer / importer on notified P&K fertilizers depending on their nutrient 
content i.e. Nitrogen (N), Phosphorus (P), Potassium (K) and Sulphur (S) to 
improve availability of fertilizers to farmers. Under the NBS policy, P&K fertilizers 
are covered under Open General License (OGL) and companies are free to 
import /produce these fertilizers as per their business dynamics. In order to boost 
fertilizer production and make country Atmanirbhar in fertilizer sector, the 
following measures have been taken by the Government: 
 (i) Based on the requests,  the new manufacturing units or increase in 
manufacturing capacity of existing units have been recognized / taken on record 
under the NBS subsidy scheme. 
(ii) The number of P&K fertilizers covered under NBS policy has increased from 
22 grades in 2021 to 28 grades.  
(iii) Freight Subsidy on SSP, which is an indigenously manufactured fertilizer, has 
been approved  since Kharif, 2022 to promote SSP usage for providing 
Phosphatic or 'P' nutrient to the soil. 
 Further, DoF on 18.01.2024 issued new Reasonability guidelines w.e.f. 
01.04.2023 to ensure reasonableness of MRP, encourage domestic production, 
enhancement of new domestic production capacity in the country, reduce the 
fixed cost per ton via increasing capacity utilization of existing plants, encourage 
balanced fertilization of soil, self -reliance in the P&K fertilizers, ease of doing 
business, enhance transparency etc. 
 As a result of all above steps, fertilizer companies have undertaken substantial 
investments in expanding domestic capacities. New DAP/NPK plants and 
expansions of existing units with a total annual capacity of 56.35 LMT are 
currently under construction a nd expected to be completed between 2028 and 
March 2030. In addition, companies are setting up intermediate plants 
(Phosphoric Acid/Sulphuric Acid) with a combined annual capacity of 44.11 LMT, 
also scheduled for completion during 2028 to March 2030. Capac ity 
enhancement by the industry is a continuous process and is undertaken as per 
their business plans.” 
 
 
 
 

 14 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.3 
Ensure timely Commissioning of New Urea Plants:  
 
2.3 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as 
under: – 
        “The Committee are happy to note that in the Union Budget 2025 -26, the 
Government had announced targets for attaining Atmanirbharat in Urea 
production. Accordingly, to further augment Urea supply, a plant with annual 
capacity of 12.7 lakh metric tons was to  be set up at Namrup, Assam with 
tentative overall time schedule for commissioning of the proposed Namrup -IV 
Project kept at 48 months. Statedly, the energy efficiency and expected life shall 
be in line with the modern -day fertilizer plants. The C ommittee have also been 
informed that Government have mandated revival of Talcher unit of M/s FCIL, 
through a Joint Venture Company with production capacity of 12.7 LMTPA Urea 
by using coal gasification technology which is under execution phase and has 
achieved an overall physical progress of 67.06 % as on 30th May, 2025. The 
Committee find that on completion of the projects, it was projected that  the 
production of urea in the Country will subsequently increase and help maximizing 
indigenous production of Urea.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Government take concrete steps and provide support at all levels for the 
commissioning of the Namrup-IV Plant and Talcher Unit within the stipulated time 
period without cost overruns, so as to meet the urea demands of the Country and 
help reduce the subsidy burden. The Committee may be apprised of the action 
taken in this regard.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.4  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“Talcher Fertilizer Ltd. has informed that the TFL Project is still under 
execution phase and has achieved an overall physical progress of 70.22% as on 
30th November, 2025. The project is scheduled to be completed by December 
2027. TFL have further informed that TFL and its project management consultant 
PDIL are making all efforts for completion of the project within timeline. On 
completion of the project, the production of urea in the country will subsequently 
increase and help maximizing indigenous production of Urea. 
 The Cabinet in its meeting held on 19.03.2025 approved the proposal for setting 
up of a new Brownfield Ammonia -Urea Complex of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonnes 
(LMT) annual capacity of Urea production within the existing premises of 
Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited (BVFCL), Namrup, Assam, at 

 15 
 
an estimated total project cost of Rs.10601.40 Crores with Debt Equity ratio of 
70:30 through a Joint Venture (JV), under the New Investment Policy, 2012 read 
with its amendments on 7th October, 2014. BVFCL’s 11% share is in lieu of 
tangible assets to be t ransferred to the Joint Venture company. The tentative 
overall time schedule for commissioning of the Project is 48 months.  
 The project is being implemented through incorporation of a new Joint Venture 
Company, namely, Assam Valley Fertilizer and Chemical Company Limited 
(AVFCCL). The Cabinet-approved equity pattern of the JV is: 
 
   S.No. JV Partner  Equity Share 
(%) 
1 Government of Assam  40% 
2 Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited 
(BVFCL) 
 11% 
3 Hindustan Urvarak & Rasayan Limited (HURL)  13% 
4 National Fertilizers Limited (NFL)  18% 
5 Oil India Limited (OIL)  18% 
  
Joint Venture Agreement (JVA) has been signed by all the equity stakeholders 
on 04.07.2025 and a Joint Venture Company (JVC) with nomenclature “Assam 
Valley Fertilizer and Chemical Company Limited (AVFCCL)” has been 
incorporated on 25.07.2025. On 5th August, 2025, the Department of Fertilizers, 
in consultation with the Government of Assam, assigned the additional charge of 
the post of MD, AVFCCL to Shri Siba Prasad Mohanty, MD, Hindustan Urvarak 
& Rasayan Limited (HURL) for a period of one year.  With the approval of the 
Board of AVFCCL in its first meeting held on 13th August, 2025, AVFCCL, on 28th 
August, 2025, appointed Projects & Development India Limited (PDIL) as Project 
Management Consultant (PMC) for providing Pre -LSTK Award Project 
Management Services for the proposed Ammonia -Urea Project at Namrup 
(Assam).  
 Hon’ble Prime Minister has laid the foundation stone of Ammonia-Urea Fertilizer 
Project of Assam Valley Fertilizer and Chemical Company Limited at Namrup in 
Dibrugarh, Assam on 21.12.2025. 

 16 
 
 The Namrup-IV Fertilizer plant has been envisaged for strengthening fertilizer 
security in the North-Eastern region and enhancing domestic urea self -reliance. 
It will add energy -efficient urea production capacity, bridge domestic demand –
supply gap, utilis e nearby natural gas resources, and stimulate industrial and 
economic development in the North Eastern Region. 
Recommendation Sl. No.6 
 Urgent need for upgradation/ modernization/ revival of aging Urea plants.  
2.5 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee note that out of the 33 Urea plants in the Country; 27 units 
are over 25 years old and 07 units are over 50 years old.  The Committee further 
note that these old plants are regularly upgrading and revamping themselves 
through the NUP-2015 which has enhanced their Energy efficiency and savings. 
Admittedly, even though the life of a Urea plant is 35 years, Plants with  50 years 
are still working  beyond that lifetime due to good maintenance. However, as 
admitted by the Department during evidence, in the next five years, transition to 
new technology and replacement would be the biggest need of this Sector. The 
Committee observe that the fertilizer industry is capital intensive and one new 
Urea plant costs about Rs. 10,000 crores with production c apacity of 12.7 LMT 
per annum and has rated life of more than 35 years. Statedly, the plants presently 
operating have huge costs of operation and maintenance, which make them, to 
some extent, unviable. Keeping in view the urgent need to augment the domestic 
production of fertilizers in the Country to meet the growing requirements over the 
years, the Committee recommend that a special task force be constituted for up-
gradation/ modernization/ revival of these aging Urea plants with the latest state 
of art technology, in a time bound manner, focusing on enhancing their energy 
efficiency and production capacity and make them globally competitive. The 
Committee further desire that in order to meet the ever -increasing demand for 
fertilizers, Government may come u p with new Green field and brown field 
fertilizer projects to minimize import requirements so that requisite fertilizers may 
be supplied well ahead of time and a buffer stock also maintained.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVENMENT 
2.6  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“An Expert Group was constituted to recommend energy norms for Urea 
units w.e.f. 01.04.2025 and other associated issues under the chairmanship of 
Dr. V.K. Saraswat, Member, NITI Aayog. The Expert Group has submitted its 
recommendations. Expert Group has inter-alia recommended for Constitution of 

 17 
 
a Multi-Disciplinary Committee of Technical Experts,  having prior experience in 
the urea sector. The mandate of the Committee would be to undertake a one -
year study/review of all old plants to ascertain their remaining economic life. 
Based on the Committee ’s report, a decision regarding the continuation or 
discontinuation of such plants may be taken. Accordingly, the Committee is being 
constituted in the Department of Fertilizers. 
Further, for meeting the ever -increasing demand for fertilizers, the revival of 
Talcher unit of FCIL through JVC of nominated PSUs namely Talcher Fertilizers 
Limited (TFL) by setting up a new Greenfield Urea plant of 12.7 LMTPA at coal 
gasification route h as also been approved. Recently, the Union Cabinet 
has approved the proposal for setting up of a new Brownfield Ammonia -Urea 
Complex of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonnes (LMT) annual capacity of Urea production 
within the existing premises of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited 
(BVFCL), Namrup, Assam which will be named as Assam Valley Fertilizer and 
Chemical Company Ltd. (AVFCCL). These two projects are under execution 
phase.” 
Recommendation Sl. No.8 
  2.7 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had recommended as 
under:– 
“The Committee have been apprised that BVFCL’s production and energy 
performance has been affected due to ageing of the plants and obsolescence of 
equipment/ unavailability of spare parts of the equipment. However, PDIL has 
been approached for Performance S tudy of Namrup -III plants of BVFCL, 
identification of weak areas and recommendation for remedial measures so that 
Plants may become capable of operating optimally.   Further, both the units of 
RCF, i.e., RCF Thal Unit and RCF, Trombay are in operation for m ore than 40 
years which results in some unforeseen breakdown leading to production 
interruption. However, regular preventive maintenance activities are planned to 
avoid any major breakdown. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Department of Fertilizer s take cogent measures for effective action after the 
completion of the Performance Study of Namrup-III Plant of BVFCL and steps for 
the comprehensive upgradation of RCF Thal and RCF, Trombay Units, so that 
these plants become operational at optimum effici ency within the timelines 
stipulated.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.8  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  

 18 
 
“Union Cabinet, in its meeting held on 19.03.2025, approved the 
establishment of a Brownfield Ammonia-Urea Complex (12.7 LMTPA capacity of 
Urea production) at Namrup within BVFCL premises, with a project cost of 
₹10,601.40 Crores and a debt -equity ratio of 70:30,  through a Joint Venture. 
The Performance Study of the Namrup -III Plant of BVFCL  by M/s PDIL, has 
already been completed and the Final Report was submitted by them in August, 
2025. 
The report has  recommended specific remedial measures for improving 
operational efficiency, energy performance, and reliability of the plant, involving 
an estimated financial investment of approximately  Rs. 500 Crore proposed to 
be released in two phases, as detailed below: 
1.       Phase-1: for which procurement / remedial action shall be initiated in year 
2025-26 for safe & sustained operation of Namrup-III plant. 
2.       Phase-2: for which procurement / remedial action shall be initiated in year 
2026-27 for increasing the efficiency of Namrup-III plant.  
Implementation of these recommendations will enable Namrup-III Unit to operate 
on a sustainable basis for a further period of 4-5 years. 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCFL) 
Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCFL) has taken due care for timely 
upgradation and upkeeping of the existing plants and equipments. RCF’s 
Suphala spherodizer technology is unique and is one of its kind using rock 
phosphate route for production of NPK, while the new plants use phosphoric acid 
as an input, most of it is imported. It has been noted that due to supply constraints 
and opportunistic pricing of phosphoric acid, these new generation plants face 
severe constraints in sustained production of NPK/DAP. The uniqueness of RCF 
technology has ensured sustained availability of NPK fertilizer, in the true spirit 
of Atmanirbhar Bharat, by providing around 6 lakh MT per annum of NPK fertilizer 
operating at a more than 100% capacity. RCF has instal led and commissioned 
Nano Urea plant of capacity 75 KLPD at RCF Trombay Unit. In view of the 
national vision of “Atmanirbhar Bharat” and to meet the growing domestic 
demand for organic fertilizers, RCF has set-up “Phosphate Rich Organic Manure 
“PROM” plant  at Trombay Unit. RCF has also Developed the process and is 
manufacturing Sulphur Coated Urea (SCU). Development of New Alternative 
Value-added Fertilizers like Bio -fertilizer named “Biola”, liquid micronutrient 
fertilizer named “Microla” (a mixture of mic ronutrients), RCF is setting-up a new 
NPK fertilizer plant of 1200 MTPD (DAP basis) capacity at its Thal unit. 
At RCF, due care is taken for timely upgradation and upkeeping of the existing 
plants and equipment’s. RCF has implemented various revamp activities in its 

 19 
 
Ammonia-Urea plants ensuring that the operations remain energy efficient, safe 
and competitive.” 
Recommendation Sl. No.11 
Secure Long-Term Overseas Agreements 
2.9 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee further note that, due to fundamental deficiency of 
Phosphate and Potash raw material in the Country, these are imported making 
self-reliance in the P&K fertilizers a far cry. Regarding the import dependency in 
the Sector, the Committee have been informed that the Country imported 70 LMT 
of urea during 2023-24 i.e. 39.7 percent of requirement, while imported 106 LMT 
of P&K fertilizers during 2023-24, which is 60.3 percent of total demand. As India 
imports a significant share of its fertilizer  requirements and raw material, the 
Committee find that the dependence exposes the Country to global market 
shocks, exchange rate fluctuations and delicate geo political situation which also 
affects the optimal operation of fertilizer plants to their insta lled capacity.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government should consider 
facilitating establishment of long term agreements and joint venture projects with 
Countries rich in fertilizer resources, especially in case of P&K fertilizers; for 
establishment of production facilities with buy back arrangements; access to 
acquisition of fertilizer raw materials abroad and for supply of fertilizers and their 
raw materials so as to secure regular resource access and supply chain stability 
for timely su pply of requirements at most competitive rates and to avoid price 
volatility. The Committee are of the considered opinion that this will also facilitate 
the fertilizer units to operate at optimum capacity without supply hindrances and 
effectively reduce th e subsidy burden. The Committee may be apprised of the 
action taken in the matter.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 2.10  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under:  
“India is heavily dependent on the import of fertilizers to meet the domestic 
demand. In 2025 -26 (till December, 2025), India imported 79.97 LMT of Urea, 
58.62 LMT of DAP, 30.39 LMT of NPK and 15.54 LMT of MOP.   
 2.        To enable these imports, the Government is actively facilitating the 
establishment of Long-Term Agreements (LTAs) and Joint Venture (JV) projects 
between the Indian fertilizers -companies and suppliers from resource -rich 
countries to ensure a co ntinuous and reliable supply of fertilizers and their raw 

 20 
 
materials in the country, while safeguarding domestic fertilizer availability against 
global market disruptions. 
 3.        In this regard, for the supply of Diammonium Phosphate (DAP) and NPK 
fertilizers in 2025 -26, Indian fertilizer companies entered into LTAs/MoUs with 
suppliers from Saudi Arabia, the Russian Federation, the United Arab Emirates, 
and Morocco for annual supply of 90.60 LMT to India. 
  4.    For import of Muriate of Potash (MOP) in 2025-26, LTAs/MoUs have been 
established with suppliers from Jordan, the Russian Federation, Turkmenistan, 
Canada, Israel, and Belarus for annual supply of 21- 22 LMT to India. 
 5. Further, Indian fertilizer companies have secured LTAs/MoUs for raw 
materials required for fertilizer production. These agreements cover annual 
supply of 24.90 – 26.90 LMT of Rock Phosphate from Jordan, Morocco, Togo, 
and Mauritania; 11.50 LMT – 12.0 LMT of Phosphoric  Acid from Morocco, 
Tunisia, and Senegal; and 10.15 LMT – 11.00 LMT of Ammonia  from Saudi 
Arabia, Oman, Japan, and Malaysia in 2025-26. 
6.   Beyond these agreements, Indian fertilizer companies have also entered into 
joint ventures with foreign companies to ensure a long-term, consistent supply of 
both fertilizers and raw materials. For MOP, a joint venture has been established 
with Canada, while for Ammonia and Urea, joint venture is in place with Oman. 
Additionally, for Phosphoric Acid and Rock Phosphate, joint ventures have been 
formed with companies from Jordan, Senegal, Tunisia, Morocco, and South 
Africa.” 
Recommendation Sl. No.12 
Introduction and promotion of new varieties of indigenous fertilizers, viz 
Sulphur Coated Urea “Urea Gold”. 
 2.11 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee note that Sulphur Coated Urea (SCU) with the name of 
“Urea Gold” was launched during 2023-24 and the cost of its 40Kg bag is similar 
to the cost of 45 Kg bag of Neem Coated Urea. During 2024 -25, a total 26,085 
MT of Urea Gold was produced in the Country. The Committee were apprised 
that all the Urea manufacturing companies were requested to explore the 
feasibility of starting production of Sulphur Coated Urea vide DoF’s Letter dated 
6th September, 2023. Subsequently,  RCF-Trombay has commenced  SCU 
production from October, 2023 and NFL -Panipat from July, 2024.  The total 
production of SCU in FY 2024 -25 (till 31.01.2025) was 20,947 MTs and total 
sales was 16,154 MTs. The Committee observe that Urea Gold will also promote 
Nutrient Use Efficiency with potential  to decrease Urea consumption to some 

 21 
 
extent and is expected to result in reduction of import dependence.   The 
Committee are, therefore, of the considered view that the Government should 
further promote its production and use as an alternative fertilizer to Urea, through 
effective its policy initiatives.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.12  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“Department of Fertilizers has set up a tentative Target of Sulphur Coated 
urea (Urea Gold) production of 10 LMT per Annum by the end of March 2027. 
Against this target the timelines from the Urea manufacturers have been received 
in the Department and compiled in the following table. 
TIMELINE FOR PRODUCTION OF SCU 
 

 22 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Company 
Timeline for Production of SCU 
01. RCF RCF has already set up a SCU production plant of a capacity 
of 150-170 MTPD at its Trombay Unit and so far, has produced 
around 34000 MT of SCU, so far. 
In addition to that, RCF is planning for improvement in the 
infrastructure & process stabilization thereby increasing the 
production capacity of Urea Gold in phase manner as detailed 
below: 
  
Sl. No. Description       Timeline 
             
01.        
Phase-1: Increase in SCU production 
capacity upto 200 MTPD 
July 2026 
02.        Phase-2: Increase in SCU production 
capacity upto 335 MTPD 
December 
2026 
03.        Phase-3: Increasing SCU Production 
capacity upto 550 MTPD 
March 2027 
  
02. NFL NFL has already set up a SCU product plant of a capacity of 
5000 MTPD at Panipat Unit, which has already produced 25 
MT of SCU, so far. 
In addition to that, NFL has provided the following timelines 
for production of SCU to the capacity of 550 MTPD at NFL 
Units 
S. 
No. 
Production Target Remarks 
  MTPD Date   
1 15 31.10.2025 10 MTPD at Nangal 
05 MTPD at Panipat 
2 30 31.03.2026 20 MTPD at Nangal 
10 MTPD at Panipat 
3 40 30.06.2026 30 MTPD at Nangal  
10 MTPD at Panipat 
4 250 31.12.2026 New SCU plant of capacity 250 
MTPD to be installed at Nangal 
Unit 
5 550 31.03.2027 Another SCU stream of capacity 
300 MTPD at Nangal/ Vijaipur Unit 
  

 23 
 
03. HURL HURL will be collaborating with RCF and shall plan to install 
Sulphur Coated Urea manufacturing units at Barauni and 
Sindri Units to meet the capacity of 550 MT each day by the 
end of March 2027. The following is the proposed timeline: 
  
Timeline Mar 2026 Sep 2026 Mar 2027 
Milestone Award of work 
for setting up 
the plant 
50% Project 
progress 
Commissioning and 
Commencement of 
production 
  
In line with the above target, proposal shall be put up for the 
approval of Board of Directors. 
04. MFL The proposed timeline for achieving this target is as follows: 
  
Stage Activity Completion 
by 
1. Feasibility study, Technology Selection/ 
Development and Board approval 
Feasibility. 
March 2026 
2. Engaging PMC, Basic and Detailed 
Engineering study. 
September 
2026 
3. Procurement of Equipment's, erection and 
project completion. 
March 2027 
4. Stabilization and commencing commercial 
production. 
May 2027 
  

 24 
 
                                                       
Department of Fertilizers has set up a tentative Target of Sulphur Coated urea 
(Urea Gold) production of 10 LMT per Annum by the end of March 2027. In order 
to achieve the same, units have been directed to set up a Urea Gold production 
facility of 550 MTPD by end of March 2027. 
 Price notification of Sulphur Coated Urea is under consideration of DA&FW. The 
file has been submitted to Legislative Department Ministry of Law and Justice for 
vetting of notification” 
Recommendation Sl. No.13 
 Support production of indigenous Single Super Phosphate (SSP) fertilizer. 
 2.13 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee note that Single Super Phosphate (SSP) fertilizer is 
indigenously manufactured in the Country and provides Phosphorus and Sulphur 
nutrients to the soil. Statedly, the production of SSP in the Country has increased 
from 49.35 LMT in 2021 to 52 .44 LMT in 2024 -25 by 104 SSP manufacturing 
units.  Further, the installed capacity of SSP has increased from 96.07 LMT 
during 2014-15 to 126 LMT as on 31.01.2025. The Committee are happy to note 
05. IFFCO IFFCO would do the best to meet the indicative timeline of 
March 2027 as suggested by DoF subject to techno -economic 
feasibility, as above. 
06. KRIBHCO After the techno commercial study, the project shall be taken up 
for the next phase of implementation to achieve the target date 
of March 2027. 
It is to assure that the SCU project shall be taken up diligently by 
KRIBHCO and, unless found techno -commercially unviable, 
KRIBHCO shall set -up a SCU project of about 550 MT/day by 
the targeted timeline of March 2027. 

 25 
 
that to increase the manufacturing capacity of new P&K products and make the 
Country self-reliant, Freight Subsidy on SSP has been approved on pilot basis 
from Kharif,  2022 and made applicable from Rabi, 2022 onwards to  help in 
promotion of SSP usage for providing Phosphatic or “P” nutrient to the soil. 
Relaxation to the minimum production criteria of 50,000 MTPA for availing 
subsidy by SSP manufacturing units has also b een extended up to 31.3.2026. 
Three new SSP Manufacturing units have been inducted under  NBS Scheme 
with a capacity of 1,00,000 MTPA each (Total 3,00,000 LMTPA) to enhance the 
capacity of SSP. Approval to the existing SSP Manufacturing units have also 
been granted for capacity enhancement. The Committee were apprised during 
evidence that, as the Country does not have reserves of raw Phosphate and 
Potash, therefore, every bag of DAP was imported. Appreciating the measures 
taken by the Department to increase the production and use of SSP in t he 
Country, the Committee call upon the Department to intensify their efforts to 
support setting up of new SSP units by extending the freight subsidy on SSP and 
other policy measures, with a view to enhance Phosphate availability for the 
farmers and reduce its import. The Committee may be apprised of the acti on 
taken in the matter.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 2.14  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“To enhance the Phosphate availability for the farmers and reduce its 
import, four new SSP Manufacturing units have been inducted under NBS 
Scheme with total capacity of 4,64,500 MTPA. Relaxation to the minimum 
production criteria of 50.000 MT PA for availi ng subsidy by SSP manufacturing 
units has also been extended up to 31.03.2026.” 
Recommendation Sl. No.14 
Encourage production and use of PDM. 
2.15 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee note that Potash Derived from Molasses (PDM), a 100% 
domestically manufactured fertilizer, is rich in potassium and derived from ash in 
molasses-based distilleries as a by-product of sugar-based ethanol industry. The 
potash-rich ash generated when burnt can be processed to produce PDM having 
14.5% potash content and is used by farmers as an alternative to MOP (Muriate 
of Potash with 60% potash content). Currently, potash as a fertilizer is totally 
imported in the form of MOP. Presently about 5 LMT of Potash Ash generated 
from ethanol distilleries is being sold domestically whereas the current potential 

 26 
 
to produce this is about 10-12 LMT. Technically, 4 bags of PDM or lesser number 
may be  required per hectare as compared to one bag of MOP for providing 
equivalent potash to the soil and getting the similar yield. The Committee are 
happy to learn that the D epartment has notified PDM under the Nutrient Based 
Subsidy (NBS) scheme w.e.f. 13.10.2021.   Moreover, six units have been 
inducted under NBS scheme for PDM. The Joint Working Group constituted by 
the Government consisting of representatives from the D/o F ood and Public 
Distribution & D/o Fertilizers have fixed a suggestive price of Rs. 4263/Ton 
(inclusive of bagging, loading and taxation) of PDM which has been agreed by 
the Indian Sugar Mills Association (ISMA) as well as Fertilizer Companies. 
Moreover, Workshops were conducted by DoF for sugar units to familiarize sugar 
mills/distilleries with NBS subsidy claiming process under iFMS. Statedly, the 
Government was also encouraging promotion of PDM through regular publicity 
campaigns across various media plat forms. As a result of sustained efforts for 
promotion, sales of PDM stood at 3.03 LMT during 2023 -24 and 3.91 LMT in 
2024-25. During the ongoing FY -2025-26, 45831.55 MTs PDM sales has been 
registered till 31.05.2025.   Keeping in view that PDM has come up a s an 
alternative to MOP and is biotic, the Committee, hope that the Department will 
further encourage Sugar mills and fertilizer companies throughout the Country to 
make concerted efforts to increase its production capacity upto 10 -12 LMT per 
annum. The Committee, further, desire that the Department should facilitate 
inclusion of many more Units under NBS for production of PDM which will reduce 
import dependency and make it domestically available to the farmers.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.16  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“With a view to promote PDM and encourage more sugar units/distilleries 
to seek induction under the NBS framework, the Department has been holding 
regular meetings with the industry, organising workshops to familiarise 
manufacturers with the subsidy -claiming process on the iFMS platform, and 
facilitating resolution of operational issues through a Joint Working Group 
comprising representatives of DoF and DFPD. These concerted efforts have 
contributed to steady growth in PDM sales in recent years. The Departm ent 
remains committed to supporting the expansion of PDM production capacity, 
enhancing participation of additional units under the NBS scheme, and thereby 
contributing to reduced import dependence for potassic fertilizers and improved 
domestic availability for farmers.” 
  
 

 27 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.16 
 Conduct long-term trials on Nano fertilizers to establish their efficacy, etc. 
2.17 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
       “The Committee were informed that an MoU was signed on 5th March, 2024 
between National Productivity Council (NPC) of India and Department of 
Fertilizers to undertake the study of Nano Urea so that its efficacy, impact and 
potential to replace the conventio nal Urea can be ascertained. Further, ICAR is 
undertaking the project titled "Effect of Nano Urea and DAP and Popularization 
of its Use in Crop Production" which has been approved by ICFFTR, during the 
period from 2024 to 2026, at a cost of Rs.160 lakh to evaluate the impact of Nano 
Urea and DAP on crop growth, soil health, and nutrient uptake across various 
agro-ecological zones in India. As Nano Urea has been Notified recently in year 
2021 and subsequent Nano fertilizer products are being develope d by the 
fertilizer companies through research, the Committee desire that long -term field 
trials of application of nano fertilizers may be got conducted by the Department 
on various crops throughout the Country in coordination with various research 
organizations, KVK’s, etc. to thoroughly assess and validate   the merits and 
demerits of use of Nano fertilizers in terms of crop productivity, nutritional quality 
of crop produced, soil health, etc.; so that it may be optimally adopted by the 
farmers as replacement to conventional fertilizers.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.18  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“The Department of Fertilizers (DoF) has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with the National Productivity Council (NPC) on 5 March 
2024 to undertake a study assessing the efficacy, utility, and impact of Nano Urea 
vis-à-vis conventional urea, at a cost of ₹99.96 lakh with a timeline of seven 
months. Subsequently, the scope of the study was expanded to include two 
additional States, namely Rajasthan and Haryana, involving an additional 
expenditure of ₹22.90 lakh, for which an addendum to the MoU was executed on 
11 June 2025. Further, DoF signed another MoU with NPC on 14 November 2025 
to conduct a study titled “Evaluating the extent of replacement of conventional 
urea by Nano Urea”, at a cost of ₹61.52 lakh with a duration of five months. 
In addition to this, a 2024–26 project funded by the Indian Council for Fertilizers 
and Fertilizer Technology Research (ICFFTR), with a total outlay of ₹160 lakh, 
aimed at evaluating the impact of nano fertilizers on crop growth, soil health, and 
nutrient uptake across diverse agro -ecological zones, involving several 

 28 
 
collaborating agricultural institutions, has been signed with the Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR). 
 Additionally, ICAR’s Network Project on “Evaluation of Nano Urea on crop 
productivity and nitrogen use efficiency in diverse Agro-Ecological Zones of India” 
was signed on 3rd November 2025, with a total cost of ₹21.20 crore (inclusive of 
18% GST) and a duration of five years, jointly funded by fertilizer 
PSUs/cooperatives namely National Fertilizers Limited (NFL), Rashtriya 
Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF), Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore 
Limited (FACT), Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL), and Indian Farmers Fertiliser 
Cooperative Limited (IFFCO). 
 The Government affirms its commitment to keeping the Hon’ble Committee fully 
informed. The study on Nano Urea research in the fertilizer sector is still ongoing 
and is being carried out with thoroughness. Upon completion and finalization of 
the study/project, its findings will be compiled in a comprehensive manner and 
shared with the Committee.” 
Recommendation Sl. No.18 
 Provision of sufficient number of Drones for application of Nano fertilizers 
2.19 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee note that for the ease of application and utilization of 
Nano fertilizers such as Nano Urea through foliar spraying, various initiatives 
have been undertaken which include the promotion of ‘Kisan Drones’ and the 
distribution of battery-operated sprayers at retail outlets. Moreover, pilot training 
and custom hiring services through Village Level Entrepreneurs (VLEs) are being 
actively encouraged to support last -mile delivery.   In this direction, the 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) is implementing the 
Namo Drone Didi Scheme, a Central Sector initiative approved by the Cabinet 
which aims to provide 15,000 drones to Women Self Help Groups (SHGs) over 
a three -year period (2023 -24 to 2025 -26). Supporting this initiative, the 
Department of Fertilizers, has also through fertilizer companies, facilitated the 
distribution of 1,094 drones to SHGs under the Namo Drone Didi Scheme. Of 
these, 500 drones have been distributed as part of a pilot initiative. So far, 909 
Drone Didi’s have act ively deployed these drones for spraying Nano fertilizers. 
Taking note of the measures taken, the Committee urge the Government to 
provide/ make   available sufficient number of agricultural drones/ other sprayers 
to the farmers at subsidized/ convenient rates in each village/ Block level through 
SFGs, etc. so as to facilitate and encourage the    farmers to switch over to use 
Nano fertilizers, on large scale. The Committee feels that more drone should be 
introduced at war footing.” 

 29 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.20  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“The Government of India has launched the Namo Drone Didi Scheme, a 
Central Sector initiative under the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(DA&FW), with the objective of empowering Women Self -Help Groups (SHGs) 
by providing them with drones. With a total allocation of ₹1,261 crore for the 
period 2023 -24 to 2025 -26, the scheme aims to distribute 15,000 drones to 
selected SHGs under the Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana – National Rural 
Livelihoods Mission (DAY -NRLM) to promote sustainable livelihoods and rural 
entrepreneurship. 
             During 2023-24, as part of the initiative, the first batch of drones were 
delivered on 13th March 2024 at Pusa. The Department of Fertilizers, in 
collaboration with 15 Fertilizer Manufacturing Companies (FMCs) i.e., IFFCO, 
CIL, FACT, PPL, HURL , KRIBHCO, RCF, NFL, CFCL, IPL, INDORAMA, 
GNVFC, GSFC, BVFCL, and MATIX, distributed 1098 drones to SHG members, 
designated as Namo Drone Didis. Out of these 1098 drone distributed to drone 
didis, 500 drones have been distributed under the Namo Drone Didi Scheme and 
remaining 598 drones have been provided by Fertilizer Companies to Women 
SHGs. 
             Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) vide its 
notification dated 28.10.2024, released Operational Guidelines for implementing 
the Namo Drone Didi Scheme, detailing the framework, objectives, and 
processes for effective grassroots execution. As per the Operational Guidelines, 
an 80% subsidy on the drone package cost (up to ₹8.00 lakh per SHG) is to be 
provided by the government and the balance 20% is to be contributed by the 
SHGs or their respective Cluster Level Federations (CLFs). 
     For spraying liquid-fertilizers, several types of equipment can be used, 
including knapsack sprayers, boom sprayers, and drones, each with specific 
advantages and recommended dosages. Drones are particularly useful for large-
scale applications. The market rates of these equipments vary widely based on 
type, size, and features. The Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(DA&FW) does not directly control the rates of agricultural machines. However, 
in order to make agricultural machinery more access ible and affordable for 
farmers, financial assistance is provided under Sub -Mission on Agricultural 
Mechanization (SMAM), which is being implemented as Centrally Sponsored 
component of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY). The rate of financial 
assistance provided under SMAM is indicated in Annexure-l.  

 30 
 
   In order to promote use of drones in agriculture, under SMAM, financial 
assistance @ 100% of the cost of drone up to a maximum of Rs. 10 lakhs per 
drone is provided for its purchase and demonstration on the farmers' fields by the 
institutes under Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), Farm Machinery 
Training & Testing Institutes, Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), State Agriculture 
Universities (SAUs), State and other Central Government Agricultural 
Institutions/Departments and Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) of Government 
of India engaged in agricultural activities. The Farmers Producers Organizations 
(FPOs) are provided grants up to 75% of the cost of Kisan Drone for its 
demonstrations on the farmers' fields. In order to make available drone servi ces 
to farmers on rental basis, financial assistance @ 40% up to a maximum of Rs. 
4.00 lakhs are provided for purchase of drones by CHCs under Cooperative 
Society of Farmers, FPOs and Rural entrepreneurs. Agriculture graduates 
establishing CHCs are eligible to receive financial assistance @ 50% of the cost 
of drone up to a maximum of Rs.5.00 lakhs per drone. For purchase of drones 
on individual ownership basis, the Small and Marginal, Scheduled 
Caste/Scheduled Tribe, Women and North Eastern State farmers ar e provided 
financial assistance @ 50% of the cost up to a maximum of Rs. 5.00 lakhs and 
other farmers @ 40% up to a maximum of Rs. 4.00 lakhs per drone. Total 2122 
Numbers of Drones approved /distributed under Sub Mission on Agricultural 
Mechanization The Government has approved 'Namo Drone Didi' as Central 
Sector Scheme with an outlay of Rs. 1261 Crores for a period of 3 years (2023 -
24 to 2025-26) with the major aims and objectives promoting advance technology 
in agriculture for improved efficiency, enhanc ed crop yield and reduced cost of 
operation and to empower Women Self Help Groups (SHGs) as drone service 
providers for increasing their income and providing livelihood support to them. 
1094 drones have been distributed to SHGs by the Lead Fertilizer Companies in 
2023-24 by utilizing their internal resources. Out of these 1094 drone, 500 drones 
have been distributed to SHGs under Namo Drone Didi scheme. The 
Government will provide an 80% subsidy on the drone package (up to a 
maximum of ₹8.0 lakh per SHG), a nd the remaining 20% will be borne by the 
SHGs.They may also take a loan under Agri Infra Financing (AIF) with 3% interest 
subvention. Under the scheme not only the drone but drone as a package is 
provided which consist of basic drone with spray assembly f or spraying liquid 
fertilizers and pesticides, Drone carrying box, standard battery set, downward 
facing camera, dual -channel fast battery charger, battery charger hub, 
anemometer, pH meter and 1 year onsite warranty on all items. The package 
also includes 04 spare battery sets, one spare propeller set (each set contains 6 
propellers), nozzle set, dual channel fast battery charger, battery charger hub, 15 
days training for drone pilot and 5 days training for drone assistant, one year 
comprehensive insurance, 2 years annual maintenance contract plus applicable 
GST.” 
 

 31 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.20 
Popularization of the features/ benefits of use of Nano fertilizers. 
2.21 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee note the measures being taken by the Department of 
Fertilizers to popularize the features/ benefits/ mode of application, etc. for use 
of Nano fertilizers amongst the farmers throughout the Country which include 
awareness camps, webinars, Nuk kad-Nataks, field demonstrations, Kisan 
Sammelans and films in regional languages, etc. Admittedly, the Government of 
India has pursued with the States on use of Nano fertilizer at various forums. 
DA&FW during the Rabi, 2024 -25 season assessed the require ment of Nano 
Urea and Nano DAP. Further, Nano Urea has been included under monthly 
supply plan issued by Department of Fertilizers.   While appreciating the efforts 
being made by the Department of Fertilizers to promote the use of Nano fertilizers 
amongst the farmers, the Committee feel that a lot of work still need to be done 
in this direction by popularizing their benefits on account of added income 
through more produce, less transportation cost, eco -friendly product, precise 
spray in less time, etc.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.22  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“Fertilizer companies have informed that they have undertaken large -
scale promotional and extension activities to create awareness and facilitate 
adoption of nano fertilizers across major agricultural states. These efforts 
primarily comprise farmer meetings , crop seminars, field demonstrations, and 
field days conducted at the village and block levels. Collectively, a substantial 
number of on -field demonstrations, institutional trials, and farmer interactions 
have been undertaken to communicate product usage , nutrient efficiency, cost 
benefits, and observed crop performance under varied agro-climatic conditions. 
In addition, fertilizer companies have collaborated with ICAR institutes, Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras (KVKs), State Agricultural Universities, and State Agriculture 
Departments to conduct institutional trials, on-station research, and agro-climatic 
zone evaluati ons. Structured training programmes have been organized for 
extension personnel, cooperative staff, retailers, and channel partners to ensure 
dissemination of standardized technical recommendations and correct 
application practices. 

 32 
 
Further, wide -ranging mass media and digital outreach initiatives have been 
undertaken by Fertilizer Companies to enhance visibility and farmer awareness. 
These include regional and national television campaigns, participation in Kisan 
Melas and agricultur al exhibitions, wall paintings, hoardings, dealer -level 
displays, mobile campaigns, and distribution of printed literature in local 
languages. Digital platforms such as YouTube & Facebook have been used for 
dissemination of farmer testimonials, explainer v ideos, crop advisories, and 
promotional content. Special initiatives such as Kisan Goshthis, Viksit Bharat 
Sankalp Yatra activities, and village-level adoption programmes have also been 
implemented to support localized outreach and adoption. 
Furthermore, Department of Fertilizers (DoF), in collaboration with fertilizer 
companies, initiated a Maha Abhiyan for adoption of Nano DAP in all 15 agro -
climatic zones of the country through consultations and field level 
demonstrations. DoF has also launched campaign for field level demonstrations 
and awareness programs of Nano Urea plus in 100 districts of the country. 
 During the Co -ordination meeting held on 12.06.2025 between DA&FW and 
DoF, it was agreed that ICAR would examine the feasibility of developing 
common specifications and also formulate Packages of Practices (PoP) for nano 
fertilizers use. 
 Further, DoF vide DO letter dated 06.08.2025 has been requested to ask the 
fertilizers companies (including those in public &cooperative sector) to sponsor 
the fund for the proposed project of ICAR under title “Evaluation of Nano Urea on 
Crop Productivity and Nitrogen Use Efficiency in Diverse Agro-Ecological Zones 
of India”. This research would further validate efficacy of nano fertilizers and 
helps to develop clear and specific Packages of Practices for agroecological zone 
for the nation. 
 DA&FW requested ICAR for the formulation of package of practice in different 
agro climatic zone on use of Nano fertilizer. Once it will be received, DA&FW will 
take necessary actions through State Government to make the farmers aware of 
it.” 
Recommendation Sl. No.22 
Promotion of production and use of Organic & bio-fertilizers. 
 2.23 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
       “The Committee learn that to make fertilizer production more 
environmentally sustainable in India, two new additional components viz. PM 
Programme for Restoration, awareness Generation, Nourishment   and 
Amelioration of Mother Earth (PMPRANAM) and Market Development 

 33 
 
Assistance (MDA) have been introduced to promote organic Fertilizers with a 
view to save the health of soil by way of promoting natural farming, 
balanced/sustainable use of chemical fertilizers, and proactively promote 
alternate fertilizers.  Further, the Government has approved Market Development 
Assistance to promote organic fertilizers produced at plants under the umbrella 
GOBARdhan initiative covering different Biogas/ CBG support schemes/ 
programs to promote sale of soil organic Carbon enhancers like F ermented 
Organic Manure (FOM),  Liquid Fermented Organic Manure (LFOM) and 
Phosphate rich FOM, etc.   As submitted, the policy on promotion of organic 
fertilizers is a new scheme approved by the CCEA in its meeting held on 28th 
June, 2023 wherein MDA @ Rs.1500/MT has been provided to promote organic 
fertilizers with total outlay of Rs. 1451.84 crore (FY -2023-24 to 2025-26), which 
includes a corpus of Rs. 360 Crore for research gap funding, etc. The Committee 
further learnt that an exercise is underway for eva luation of the scheme for 
extension beyond 31.03.2026.  Moreover, to promote use of organic fertilizers in 
the Country, Government is promoting organic farming through the scheme of 
Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) in all the States/UTs (except Nort h 
Eastern States). For North Eastern States, Mission Organic Value Chain 
Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) scheme is being 
implemented. Both the Schemes stress on end -to-end support to farmers 
engaged in organic farming i.e. from production t o processing, certification & 
marketing and post -harvest management training and capacity building.   While 
appreciating the efforts of the Government for promotion of Organic and bio -
fertilizers in the Country, the Committee desire that Government may prio ritize 
their production and use at each village and block level through enhanced rates 
of Market Development assistance/special incentives, etc. as this will reduce the 
use of Chemical fertilizers, improve the soil health and strengthen the rural 
economy. The Committee are also optimistic that the Department would pursue 
with the concerned Ministry for the continuance of the Schemes for promotion of 
manufacturing and sale of Organic fertilizers beyond March, 2026.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 2.24  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
          “The Government has approved the Market Development Assistance 
(MDA) @ ₹ 1500/MT to promote organic fertilizers produced at plants under 
GOBARdhan initiative covering different biogas/CBG support 
schemes/programmes of stakeholders Ministries/ Departments to  promote sale 
of soil carbon enhancers like Fermented Organic Manure (FOM), Liquid 
Fermented Organic Manure (LFOM) and Phosphate Rich Organic Manure 
(PROM)  at the total outlay of ₹1451.84 crore (FY 2023 -24 to 2025 -26), which 
includes a corpus o f ₹360 crore for research gap funding etc. It will promote 

 34 
 
integrated nutrient management and reduce overuse of chemical fertilizers 
ensuring sustainability, soil health and better use efficiency of inputs. 
          The Government has also approved the PM Programme for Restoration, 
Awareness Generation, Nourishment and Amelioration of Mother Earth (PM -
PRANAM) for three years (FY 2023 -24 to 2025-26) to incentivize States/UTs to 
promote alternative fertilizers and balanced use of chemical fertilizers. This will 
incentivize the farmers to reduce the overall consumption of fertilizers for 
improving soil health and fertility and sustainable productivity. 
               The ‘Policy on Promotion of Organic Fertilizer’ and the ‘Guidelines on 
MDA to promote Organic Fertilizers’ have been issued on 20th September, 2023. 
Marketing of Fermented Organic Manure (FOM) / Liquid Fermented Organic 
Manure (LFOM) and Phosphate Rich Organic Manure (PROM) has been initiated 
by 111 CBG plants under MDA programme.   The total sales of 
FOM/LFOM/PROM since launch of the s cheme in 2023, w.e.f. 20.9.2023 is 
10,80,150.59 MT by CBG operators & FMCs as on 16.10.2025.  To promote the 
sale 44 MoUs have been signed by FMCs with CBG units for marketing of 
FOM/LFOM/PROM.     
The Department of Fertilizers is pursuing with Department of Expenditure for 
continuation of the policy on promotion of organic fertilizers scheme beyond 
30.3.2026.  The scheme is being evaluated by NITI Aayog alongwith urea 
subsidy scheme for extension beyond 31st March, 2026.  An EFC note would be 
prepared on receipt of evaluation report from NITI Aayog for appraisal for 
continuation of the scheme beyond 31st March, 2026.     
Recommendation Sl. No.23 
 Need for continuance of Urea Subsidy Scheme. 
  2.25 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
     “The Committee note that Urea Subsidy Scheme is a Central Sector Scheme 
of the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers is wholly financed by the Government 
of India through Budgetary Support. Urea Subsidy Scheme has three 
components, i.e., Indigenous Urea, Imported Urea and Uniform Freight Subsidy. 
Indigenous urea subsidy is administered to the urea units towards indigenous 
urea production. Admittedly, Imported Urea subsidy is directed towards imports 
made to bridge the gap between assessed demand and indigenous  production 
of urea in the Country. Both components also include freight subsidy for 
movement of urea across the Country under the Uniform Freight Subsidy Policy. 
The objectives of Urea Subsidy Scheme are to ensure timely availability of 
adequate quantity of urea at statutory controlled price to the farmers across the 
Country; to optimize indigenous urea production and to rationalize the subsidy 

 35 
 
outgo of the Government.  The Scheme also enables the urea units in sustaining 
their operations and energy efficiency. Under the Scheme, Urea is presently 
provided to the farmers at a statutorily notified Maximum Retail Price (MRP) of 
Rs.242 per bag of 45 kg urea (exclusive of charges towards neem coating and 
taxes as applicable). Admittedly, all farmers of the Country are beneficiaries of 
this Scheme. According to the Report of the Third-party evaluation got conducted 
by the Ministry regarding the need for continuance of Urea Subsidy Scheme; due 
to the scheme, under New Urea Policy 2015 (NUP-2015), the production of urea 
increased from 225.8 LMT in 2014 -15 to 244.75 LMT in 2015 -16 and it also led 
to improvement in Energy efficiency of urea industries at par  with global 
standards. It resulted in increased crop yield and reduced the expenditure of 
farmers for cultivation due to use of less amount of urea in cultivation. The study 
recommended for commissioning of five manufacturing units under public sector 
so as to attain self -sufficiency and the necessity for continuation of the urea 
subsidy scheme to help the urea industries, farmers, and the agriculture sector. 
The Committee were apprised that the evaluation for review of the continuation 
of Urea Subsidy Sch eme beyond 31.03.2025, is under consideration in the 
Department. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department to take a 
holistic view for continuance of the Urea subsidy policy, in view of its numerous 
benefits to all stakeholders including the fa rmers; and further aiming to promote 
the use of desired proportion of Nitrogen, Phosphate and Potash (4:2:1) in 
farming, in our Country.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.26  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“Urea Subsidy Scheme which is a Central Sector Scheme of the Ministry 
of Chemicals & Fertilizers, subsidized urea at statutorily notified MRP is provided 
to the farmers across the country. Urea Subsidy Scheme has three components, 
i.e., Indigenous Urea, Imp orted Urea and Uniform Freight Subsidy. Indigenous 
urea subsidy is administered to the urea units towards indigenous urea 
production. Imported Urea subsidy is directed towards imports made to bridge 
the gap between assessed demand and indigenous productio n of urea in the 
country. Both components also include freight subsidy for movement of urea 
across the country under the Uniform Freight Subsidy Policy. 
  The subsidy is paid to the urea manufacturing units through concession rates 
(Normative Cost of production under extant Urea Policies) comprising of two 
major components namely Fixed Cost and Variable Cost. Fixed Cost is the total 
cost of fixed cost comp onents such as conversion cost, capital related charges 
and selling expenses. The variable cost includes cost of packing material (Bag), 

 36 
 
water, energy (feedstock and fuel), Central/State levies on actual/normative 
basis. 
 Under this Scheme, Urea is presently provided to the farmers at a statutorily 
notified Maximum Retail Price (MRP). The MRP of 45 kg bag of urea is Rs.242 
per bag (exclusive of charges towards neem coating and taxes as applicable). 
The difference between the delivered cost of urea at farm gate and net market 
realization by the urea units is given as subsidy to the urea manufacturer/importer 
by the Government of Indi a. Accordingly, all farmers of the country are being 
supplied urea at the subsidized rates and thereby are beneficiaries of this 
scheme. 
Further, EFC in the meeting held on 22.09.2025 considered the proposal for 
Continuation of Urea Subsidy Scheme for FY 2025-26, and Continuation of Urea 
Subsidy Scheme for FY 20256-26 is under submission for CCEA approval.” 
Recommendation Sl. No.24 
Nutrient Based Subsidy policy – P&K fertilizers 
2.27 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee note that the Government has implemented Nutrient 
Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy w.e.f. 01.04.2010 for Phosphatic and Potassic 
(P&K) fertilizers. Under the policy, a fixed amount of subsidy, decided on 
annual/bi-annual basis, is provided to manuf acturer/ importer on notified P&K 
fertilizers depending on their nutrient content i.e. Nitrogen (N), Phosphorus (P), 
Potassium (K) and Sulphur (S) to improve availability of fertilizers to farmers. As 
a result of steps taken by the Government, production of DAP has increased to 
37.69 LMT in 2024-25. Similarly, the production of NPKs has increased to 113.28 
LMT in 2024-25 by 22 P&K fertilizer manufacturing units and production of SSP 
has increased to 52.44 LMT in 2024 -25 by 104 SSP manufacturing units. The 
main objectives of NBS Scheme are as to promote balanced use of fertilizers; 
rationalize impact of subsidy on the Government; improve availability of fertilizers 
to farmers and to encourage competition amongst the fertilizer companies.The 
Committee are sat isfied to note that a Third -party evaluation of the Nutrient 
Based Subsidy scheme has shown that use of Phosphatic & Potassic (P&K) 
fertilizers helped in improving productivity in the farm land and multi -nutrient 
deficiency of the soil. Further, the product basket under NBS has increased from 
22 grades in 2021 to 28 grades at present.   The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the present system of Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy in 
P&K fertilizers may be continued and measures be taken to make it more 
effective by increasing the number of P&K fertilizers under NBS policy with the 

 37 
 
approval of FCO, rationalization of prices of P&K fertilizers, etc. with a view 
to boost manufacturing and encourage its use by the farmers.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.28 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“The Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Scheme, implemented w.e.f. 
01.04.2010, has contributed significantly toward improving the availability of 
Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers, promoting balanced nutrient 
application, and supporting domestic productio n. In this regard, it is submitted 
that, as per the provisions of the NBS Policy dated 04.03.2010, inclusion of any 
new fertilizer grade under the NBS framework is undertaken strictly in 
accordance with clause (iv) of the policy. As stipulated, the proces s is initiated 
only upon receipt of an application from the concerned manufacturer/importer 
seeking eligibility for subsidy. Such proposals are thereafter examined by the 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) for agronomic appraisal of their 
need and suitability, following which the matter is placed before the Inter -
Ministerial Committee (IMC) for consideration and recommendation. 
The Department remains committed to strengthening the effectiveness of the 
NBS Scheme. Expansion of the product basket is an ongoing and demand-driven 
process, dependent upon applications received from manufacturers and 
subsequent statutory approvals. The Department continues its efforts to improve 
availability, promote balanced fertilizer use, and facilitate growth in domestic 
manufacturing in accordance with the objectives of the NBS Policy. 
Recommendation Sl. No.26 
2.29 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
  “The Committee find that the raw material for production of urea or the 
feedstock is basically Natural Gas, which constitutes 90 percent of the cost of 
Urea and the remaining 10 percent is the cost like bagging cost, water cost, fixed 
cost, etc. All the 33 plants operating presently are Natural Gas based. Out of the 
total requirement, 74 per cent of the gas is imported through long -term 
agreements and the remaining 26 per cent of the gas is from the domestic 
sources which is cheaper. Since the import of g as depends upon a lot of 
geopolitical factors, international relations, etc., the Committee recommends that 
policy reforms be made in the Gas procurement mechanism so as to ensure its 
constant and uninterrupted supply at most competitive prices which will also 
result in reduction in subsidy outgo.   The Committee, further, desire that the 
Department may pursue with the concerned Ministries to expedite the exploration 

 38 
 
and extraction of oil and natural gas within the Country and for prioritizing 
allocation of domestic Natural gas to the urea manufacturing companies, which 
will reduce import burden and also decrease the cost of production.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.30 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“As per inputs received from M/o PNG, It is to inform that: 
 To achieve competitive pricing for the fertilizer sector, the government has taken 
several initiatives, including the implementation of a fertilizer pooling mechanism 
for gas pricing. Under this mechanism, a pooled price has been introduced for 
the fertilizer sector by blending domestic gas and RLNG to ensure uniformity of 
the gas price and reduction of cost disparities among units. 
 Further, Government have placed Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) under the Open 
General License (OGL) category, thereby allowing companies in private as well 
as public sector to secure long-term LNG contracts as per their requirements on 
mutually agreed commercial terms with suppliers. 
 Long-term gas supply contracts with fertilizer units have been executed on 
indexed-linked pricing mechanisms to mitigate price volatility. Long -term RLNG 
agreements provide protection against volatility and risks associated with spot 
market procurement. S uch back -to-back long -term contracts, aligned with 
upstream supply arrangements, have consistently proven to be reliable sources 
of natural gas and have ensured competitive pricing for the fertilizer sector, 
thereby facilitating efficient subsidy planning. 
 2.   The Government has undertaken various policy and technological 
initiatives to enable National Oil Companies (NOC) and other operators to 
discover new potential sources of crude oil and natural gas as well as to reopen 
closed oil/gas wells. These, inter-alia, include:           
i. Policy for Relaxations, Extensions and Clarifications under PSC regime 
for early monetization of hydrocarbon discoveries, 2014. 
ii. Discovered Small Field Policy, 2015. 
iii. Hydrocarbon Exploration and Licensing Policy (HELP), 2016. 
iv. Policy for Extension of PSCs, 2016 and 2017. 
v. Policy for early monetization of Coal Bed Methane, 2017. 
vi. Setting up of National Data Repository, 2017. 

 39 
 
vii. Appraisal of Un -appraised areas in Sedimentary Basins under National 
Seismic Programme, 2017. 
viii. Policy to Promote & Incentivize Enhanced Recovery Methods for Oil & 
Gas, 2018. 
ix. Policy Framework for exploration and exploitation of Unconventional 
Hydrocarbons under Existing Production Sharing Contracts (PSCs), Coal 
Bed Methane (CBM) Contracts and Nomination Fields, 2018. 
x. Natural Gas Marketing Reforms, 2020. 
xi. Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules (PNG), 2025 
xii. Hydrocarbon Exploration and Licensing Policy (HELP), 2019 facilitating 
lower Royalty Rates, zero Revenue Share (till Windfall Gain) and no 
drilling commitment in OALP Blocks under Category II and III basins to 
attract bidders. 
xiii. Release of about 1 Million Sq. Km. (SKM) ‘No-Go’ area in offshore which 
were blocked for exploration for decades in 2022. 
xiv. Government is also spending about Rs.7500 Cr. for acquisition of seismic 
data in on land and offshore areas and drilling of stratigraphic wells to 
make quality data of Indian Sedimentary Basins available to bidders. 
Government has approved acquisition of a dditional 2D Seismic data of 
20,000 LKM in on land and 30,000 LKM in offshore beyond Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ) of India. 
xv. New technologies like Airborne Gravity Gradiometry and Gravity Magnetic 
Survey, Passive Seismic Tomography (PST), Low -Frequency Passive 
Seismic (LFPS) Surveys have been implemented to acquire high quality 
data for processing and interpretation. 
 The Government has also awarded 144 blocks under eight rounds of Open 
Acreages Licensing Policy (OALP) biddings resulting in 13 hydrocarbon 
discoveries. Government has launched OALP Bid Round -IX covering 28 blocks 
having spread over an area of 1,36,596Sq Km. Further, Government has 
approved 20% premium over Administered Price Mechanism (APM) price for gas 
production obtained from new wells or well interventions in Nomination fields 
which has led to 2280 well interventions across the country. 
Government has taken various steps to stimulate investment and production in 
India's oil and gas sector which inter -alia includes shift from Production Sharing 
Contracts (PSCs) to Revenue Sharing Contracts (RSCs), streamlining processes 
and creating a more  investor-friendly environment. Other key Reforms and 
Incentives inter-alia includes reduced royalty rates, no oil cess, pricing freedom, 
and flexible block selection under Hydrocarbon Exploration Licensing Policy 
(HELP), single license for conventional an d unconventional resources, 

 40 
 
exploration permissions throughout the contract period and self -certification 
&digitalization. 
3.   The total Natural Gas consumption in the Country has been increasing 
over the years. It has increased from 128.6 Million Metric Standard Cubic Meter 
per Day (MMSCMD) in FY 2014-15 to 195.38 MMSCMD in FY 2024-25. Natural 
Gas is either domestically sourced or imported as Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG). 
Domestic gas is priced as per the Government guidelines or competitive prices, 
whereas, prices of Regasified LNG is commercially agreed upon between buyer 
and seller in the international market. The allocatio n of Domestic Gas is being 
made as per the Government policy which places CNG (Transport) and PNG 
(Domestic) segment of CGD sector as top priority followed by Fertilizer, LPG and 
Power. The details of domestic /RLN Gas Consumption in Fertilizer Sector during 
last 3 years is tabulated below: 
  
Details of domestic/RLN Gas Consumption in Fertilizer Sector during last 3 
Years (in MMSCM) 
  
FY 2022 -
2023 
FY 2023 -
2024 
FY 2024 -
25 
Domestic Gas 4085 3029 2876 
RLNG 15315 18006 17607 
Total Gas Consumption in Fertilizer 
Sector 19400 21035 20483 
 Explore availability of raw materials in the Country, need to diversify sources of 
import, etc. 
Recommendation Sl. No.28 
 Strengthening   Fertilizers supply, allocation and distribution system. 
2.31 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
 “The Committee find it encouraging that the Integrated Fertilizer 
Management System (iFMS) is a comprehensive, all-integrated system covering 
all functionalities in the fertilizer supply chain. This system covers the entire 
supply chain, meticulously captur ing transactional data from raw material 
procurement, imports to fertilizer production and transportation via rail or road 
from plants, rake houses, ports to district warehouses, and finally sale at PoS 

 41 
 
enabled retailers. Everything is aligned with monthly supply plans at district level 
and the movement of fertilizers is being captured in real time. Various modules 
under iFMS have been developed to ensure capture and maintain the fertilizers 
movement and sale data accurately in a secured manner.   The Committee, 
observe that in order to ensure the adequate and timely availability of good 
quality of fertilizers to the farmers, Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
assess the requirement of major fertilizers, namely Urea, DAP, MOP, complexes 
and SSP fertilizers, before each cropping season (viz.  Rabi and Kharif) in 
consultation with DOF, State Governments/UTs.   The Committee feel that the 
Department should further strengthen their iFMS System through upgrading the 
digital tool so that the farmers may also get access to the real -time movement/ 
availability of fertilizers in their respective States/UTs so as to curb pilferages and 
ensure timely availability, as per the requirements and supply plan put in place. 
Besides, it is imperative that the mechanism for assessment of requirement of 
fertilizers by the States and UTs should be made more accurate so that the 
allocation of State specific Fertilizers was real istic and they get adequate and 
timely supply.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.32 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“Under the relevant provision of FCO, 1985, all fertilizer retailers are 
mandated to display their daily opening stock position on a board. Violation or 
non-compliance is appropriately punishable under the relevant provisions of 
FCO, 1985. Being the licensi ng authority, it is the statutory obligation of the 
Department of Agriculture of respective State Governments to ensure 
compliance of FCO, 1985 by retailers in their respective States.It has also been 
noted for further strengthen of iFMS System through upgrading the digital tool. 
As far as accurate assessment of fertilizer requirement is concerned, it is stated 
that before the commencement of each cropping season, the Department of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW), in consultation with all the State 
Governments, assesses the  requirement of fertilizers. The requirement is 
assessed taking into account the projected gross cropped area, irrigated area, 
last three seasons’ consumption pattern and crop wise recommended dose of 
fertilizers as per soil health fertility status etc. Ba sed on the month -wise and 
State-wise projections furnished by DA&FW, the Department of Fertilizers 
allocates adequate quantities of fertilizers to the States by issuing monthly supply 
plans. 
 

 42 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.29 
 Ensuring sufficient buffer stock in all regions. 
2.33 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee have been informed that the storage arrangements and 
capacities in respect of fertilizers are overseen by the respective State 
Governments and the fertilizer companies; while the Department of Fertilizers 
ensures suitable supply of fertilizers in the States through indigenous production 
as well as imports. As a result, sufficient stocks get pre -positioned in the States 
before the start of each cropping season. The Committee desire that the 
Department should develop a fool-proof mechanism to constantly monitor on a 
real time basis, the buffer stock and availability of various types of fertilizers as 
per their specific requirements, well before the start of each cropping season, in 
all the States/UTs of the Country to guarantee that affordable fertilizers reaches 
the last farmer in the Country. The Committee may be apprised of the action 
taken in the matter.”  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.34 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“Department of Fertilizers has ensured adequate availability of fertilizers 
in the States during the Kharif 2025 and ongoing Rabi 2025 -26 season as well. 
The Stocks of fertilizers available in the States at the end of a particular season 
acts as an opening stock for subsequent season. This data along with the data 
of requirement, availability and sales of fertilizers is constantly monitored by DoF 
and States on real-time basis through iFMS.” 
Recommendation Sl. No.30 
Need to Promote balanced use of Fertilizers. 
2.35 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee find that Urea was the most dominant element in 
fertilizers and in order to control its over-use and save the soil, different kinds of 
biotic inputs, better soil practices, better way of cultivation in the natural 
application of organic fertilizer have to be put in place. The Committee find that 
the indiscriminate and imbalanced use of chemical fertilizers coupled with low 
addition of organic matter and neglect of micro and secondary nutrients, over the 
years is causing multi -nutrient deficien cies and deterioration of soil health. 

 43 
 
Admittedly, the Government of India was implementing the Soil Health & Fertility 
Scheme since 2014-15. Under the Scheme, the Soil Health Cards are issued to 
farmers for providing information on fertility status of soils and recommends crop 
specific dosage of fertilizers.  Further, the National Mission on Natural Farming 
(NMNF) was approved on 25th November 2024 as a Centrally sponsored 
scheme to encourage farmers to promote Natural Farming (NF) across the 
Country. While appreciating these steps, the Committ ee desire that the 
Department also take concrete requisite measures to train the farmers about 
balanced/ appropriate use of fertilizers as per crop and soil type, crop rotation, 
use of different kinds of biotic inputs, Natural farming, organic farming, etc. which 
will maintain soil health and reduce fertilizers dependency.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.36 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“Government promotes judicious use of fertilizer through Soil Health & 
Fertility scheme. The scheme is being implemented since 2014-15 to provide Soil 
Health Cards (SHCs) for all farm holdings, to promote balanced and integrated 
nutrient management for improving productivity and soil fertility. Soil samples are 
processed as per standard procedures and analyzed for parameters such as pH, 
Electrical Conductivity, Organic Carbon, available Nitrogen, Phosphorus, 
Potassium, Sulphur, and micronutrients (Zinc,  Copper, Iron, Manganese & 
Boron). The  diagnostic soil health assessment of farmer fields is taken up 
periodically so as to issue SHCs at least once in 3 years. 
Since 2014-15, 25.61 crore Soil Health Cards have been generated/ distributed 
as on date across the country. Under the scheme, Rs. 1970 Crore fund has been 
released so far since inception. 93781 farmer’s trainings, 6.80 lakh 
demonstrations, 7425 farmer’s m elas/ campaigns on soil health card 
recommendations have been organized across the country.  
National Productivity Council (NPC), New Delhi carried out a study 'Soil Testing 
Infrastructure for Faster Delivery of SHC in India' in 2017 in 76 districts of 19 
States covering 170 soil testing labs and 1700 farmers. As a result of application 
of fertilizer and micronutrients as per SHC recommendations, there has been a 
decrease of use of chemical fertilizer application in the range of 8 -10% was 
found. Overall 5 -6% increase in the yield of crops was reported, due to 
application of fertilizer and micronutrients as per SHC. 
An impact study of  Soil Health & Fertility Scheme (November 2017) 
was conducted by National Institute of Agricultural Extension Management 
(MANAGE), Hyderabad. As per report, about 62.8% of the farmers use fertilizers 

 44 
 
according to the recommendations on the SHC.  The cost per acre reduced by 4 
to 10 % due to low fertilizer use. Crop yields increased for majority of the crops, 
although moderately. Overall, paddy farmers reduced use of urea by 9%, 
Diammonium Phosphate (DA P)/Single Super Phosphate by 7%, but increased 
use of Potassium by 20%. There was substantial decline in fertilizer use 
especially urea and DAP in paddy and cotton resulted in decreased cost of 
cultivation per unit area. 
Also, integrated nutrient management is promoted through sustainable practices 
such as natural farming and organic farming. 
Organic farming as a sustainable alternative to chemical farming for soil, 
environment and human wellbeing. The Government of India is encouraging the 
use of organic fertilizer, Bio fertilizers. Government has been promoting organic 
farming in the country through Paramparagat Krishi Vikas Yojana (PKVY) in all 
the States/UTs other -than North Eastern States, and Mission Organic Value 
Chain Development for North Eastern Region (MOVCDNER) exclusively for 
North Eastern region. Farmers are provided assistance fro m production to 
marketing under the organic farming schemes. 
The National Mission on Natural Farming (NMNF) was approved by the Union 
Cabinet on 25.11.2024 to promote Natural Farming across the country. The 
Mission has been initiated to strengthen agriculture practices with scientifically 
backed agro ecological approaches towards sustainability, climate resilience and 
safe food. The Mission aims to reduce input cost of production to the farmers & 
dependence of farmers with the external markets, rejuvenate soil health & fertility, 
build resilience of the farm and farm ers against climate risks, and provide safe, 
healthy &nutritious food for the farmers, their families &the consumers. 
Kisan Sangoshthis are conducted by the fertilizer companies for extensive field 
interaction with farmers, local farmer cooperatives, panchayats etc. 25 Fertilizer 
Marketing Companies (FMCs) conducted 14,388 Camps/Kisan Sangoshthis 
across the country during February 2025 to December 2025. 
 This initiative focuses on critical areas such as balanced use of fertilizers, 
Integrated Nutrient Management (INM), promotion of organic farming, and soil 
health improvement. Awareness activities for farmers include demonstrations on 
the application of FOM, LFOM, PROM, PDM. This camps also feature technical 
sessions on appropriate fertilizer dosages, crop -specific application techniques, 
and the benefits of organic inputs. The program aims to enhance farmers 
understanding of INM, encourage adoption of bal anced nutrient practices, and 
strengthen outreach and credibility through demonstration plots and interactive 
farmer engagement.” 
 

 45 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.31 
 Efforts to stop mal-practices in the sale of Fertilizers. 
2.37 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee find that Fertilizers were declared as an essential 
commodity under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and notified under 
Fertilizer Control Order, 1985. State Governments are empowered to take action 
against persons involved in black -marketing/diversion/smuggling as per 
provisions of EC Act. Admittedly, complaints received at Department  
of Fertilizers   level regarding such cases is sent to concerned State Government 
to take appropriate action under Essential Commodities Act, 1955 and Fertilizer 
Control Order, 1985.   It has further been submitted that the Department of 
Fertilizers vide Circu lar dated 21.10.2016 notified that under Section 7 of 
Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and 
Services) Act, 2016, the individuals desirous of availing subsidized Fertilizers are 
required to furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar authentication or undergo 
Aadhaar authentication. Since, December, 2023 as per the suggestion of Cabinet 
Secretariat, the Aadhaar authentication is mandatory in all States and UTs. The 
Committee expressed their concern to the reported cases of Black marketing and 
diversion of fertilizers, etc. since a huge amount of subsidy is being provided on 
fertilizers by the Government. The Committee, therefore, trust that more stringent 
policies and guidelines be devised in consultation with all stakeholders a nd the 
State Governments to ensure proper sale/ distribution of fertilizers in the Country 
to completely stop the mal -practices such as black -marketing/ smuggling/ 
pilferage, at all stages and conduct random checks to ensure the quality and 
quantity. The Committee, further desire that a feasibility of establishing a network 
of labs throughout the Country to check the quality of fertilizers being sold and 
further desires that a grievance redressal mechanism be established for prompt 
action and resolution of complaints in this regard. The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in the matter.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.38 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“The Government of India is regularly monitoring the enforcement action 
taken by State Governments. Since April 2025 till 30.01.2026, total of 4,17,913 
raids have been conducted across the country with 15,139 show cause notices 
issued, 6,544 licenses suspen ded/ cancelled, and 786 FIRs registered against 
defaulters. 

 46 
 
 Further, if any person contravenes the provision of the Fertilizer (Control) 
Ordermade under Section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955, he shall be 
punishable under Section 7(1)(a) (ii) and attracts punitive action such as 
cancellation & suspension  of authorization letter and penal action under the 
Essential Commodities Act for imprisonment for a period of three months to 
seven years. 
 The standards of various fertilizers are specified in the respective schedule of 
FCO. Clause 19 of fertilizer control order strictly prohibits the sale of fertilizers 
which are not of prescribed standards. The State Government are the 
enforcement agency a nd adequately empowered to enforced the provisions of 
FCO. Every sample drawn by Inspector is analysed as per the methods of 
analysis given in FCO in a Laboratory notified by Central/State Government. 
Presently, there are 84 Fertilizer Quality Control Labo ratories (FQCLs) in the 
country with annual analyzing capacity to the tune of 1.76 lakh samples. Out of 
these, 4 laboratories viz. Central Fertilizer Quality Control & Training Institute 
(CFQC&TI) and its three Regional Fertilizer Control Laboratories (RFC Ls) 
located at Navi Mumbai, Chennai and Kalyani, are under the control of Central 
Government and the remaining are under the control of different State 
Governments. 
In order to ensure the adequate availability of good quality of fertilizers to the 
farmers, Government of India assess the requirement of major fertilizers, namely 
urea, DAP, MOP, complexes and SSP fertilizers, before each cropping season 
(viz. Rabi and Kharif). This assessment is made through "Zonal Conferences for 
Agricultural Inputs" organized by the Department of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare (DA&FW). The requirement of fertilizers assessed by DA&FW is 
intimated to the Department of Fertilizers to ens ure seamless availability of 
fertilizers before the cropping season starts. 
 In order to address the issues of diversion, hoarding, black-marketing and over-
pricing, fertilizers are declared as an essential commodity under the Essential 
Commodities Act, 1955 and notified under Fertilizer Control Order, 1985. State 
Governments are empowered to take action against persons involved in said 
malpractices, as per provisions of EC Act. Any complaints received at 
Department of Fertilizers level regarding these malpractices is sent to concerned 
State Government to take appropriate action un der Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 and Fertilizer Control Order, 1985. Accordingly, the details regarding 
enforcement measures taken by the States, as informed by them, from 
01.04.2025 to 30.01.2026, to curb these malpractices is placed at Annexure-II. 
 Further, in order to ensure the supply of quality fertilizers, the Fertilizer Control 
Order (FCO) -1985 has laid down fertilizer -wise detailed specifications. Any 
fertilizer, not meeting the said specifications, cannot be sold in the country for 
agricultural purpose. Clause 19 of FCO strictly prohibits the sale or manufacture 

 47 
 
of fertilizers which are not of prescribed standards. Any sale of substandard 
fertilizers is punishable under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955. 
 However, the Department had earlier issued D.O. letters of even number dated 
22.12.2025, 13.11.2025 and 17.07.2025, through which all States/UTs were 
advised to undertake stringent enforcement action at the State/UT level  to curb 
such malpractices.” 
 
 
  

 48 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
Recommendation Sl. No.15 
Enhance production of Nano fertilizers: 
  
3.1 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
 
       “The Committee were informed that Nano Fertilizers hold great promise for 
application in plant nourishment with Nano Urea & Nano DAP available in bottles 
at cheaper prices than conventional Urea & DAP. The Committee find that 
Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) has provisionally notified 
Nano Urea as Nano Nitrogen Fertilizers under the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 
1985, based on bio-efficacy trials conducted at multiple locations, along with bio-
safety test results. These trials, c onducted on various crops demonstrated that 
two foliar sprays of Nano Urea, when applied as a top dressing along with the 
recommended basal dose of nitrogen, resulted in comparable yields to those 
obtained with a full recommended nitrogen dose and led to a yield advantage of 
3-8% and a urea saving of 25-50% in various crops. Cost analysis studies have 
further shown that while the initial price of nano fertilizers may be higher than 
subsidized conventional fertilizers like urea, but ultimately, they are more  cost-
effective due to better nutrient uptake and reduced wastage, leading to higher 
crop yields with lower overall fertilizer usage and also indirect benefits in terms 
of reduction of soil -air-water pollution level. Nano Urea is rising as a very 
important supplement of the chemical fertilizer and during the last 2 ½ years, 9 
crore 32 lakh bottles of Nano Urea have been sold which is equivalent to 42 lakh 
tonnes of conventional Urea. Similarly, Nano DAP has found excellent 
acceptance by the farmers.   By the end of 2024, more than 3 crore bottles of 
Nano DAP have been produced and out of them 2.16 crore bottles have been 
sold which is equivalent to 10.82 LMT of conventional DAP which would have 
been imported.  The difference in price is very promising for the farmers because 
one bag of DAP costs Rs. 1,350 but one bottle of Nano DAP costs only Rs. 600. 
Two plants with 12 crore bottles capacity are coming up in 2025 -2026 and our 
PSUs are also entering into the field. Moreover, the production of Nano fertilizers 
requires very little of raw material because of its Nano size. The Committee were 
apprised that, to meet the growing demand for fertilizers and reduce import 
dependency, the Government of India is actively promoting the production and 
adoption of innovativ e Nano Fertilizers. The Committee are of the view that as 
production of Nano fertilizers require little quantity of raw materials, the 

 49 
 
Department may extend full support through its policies and programs to expand 
the production capacity of Nano  fertilizers including Nano Urea and Nano DAP, 
many fold so that it could significantly replace the use of conventional Urea/ P&K 
fertilizers over  the years and contribute to attaining self -sufficiency in 
fertilizers sector. The Committee trust that DoF would take concrete time bound 
and sincere steps in this direction, for meeting the fertilizers requirement, 
domestically.” 
  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
             
3.2 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“The Government of India is not directly involved in setting up of Nano 
Urea Plants. However, Department of Fertilizers (DoF) is actively encouraging its 
Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) and entrepreneurs to establish Nano 
Fertilizer Projects. At present, the Department of Fertilizers does not provide any 
subsidy for nano fertilizers. 
           As regards the PSUs under the Department of Fertilizers, M/s. Rashtriya 
Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF) has informed that its Nano Urea (liquid) 
Fertilizer Plant, with a capacity of 75 KL per day at Trombay, Mumbai, was 
successfully commissioned in February 2025. However, commercial production 
is yet to commence, pending inclusion of the product under the Fertilizer Control 
Order (FCO). Whereas M/s. National Fertilizers Limited (NFL) has informed this 
department that they are in the proce ss of implementing Hi -Tech Nano Urea 
project (with more Nitrogen content, which will give more benefit to the farmers) 
in their Nangal (Punjab) Unit at the earliest. However, no specific timeline has 
been received from NFL for the same. 
  As far as "long-term trials on Nano fertilizers"  is concerned, a MoU has 
been signed with ICAR on the subject “Evaluation of Nano Urea on crop 
productivity and nitrogen use efficiency in diverse Agro-Ecological Zones of India” 
on 3rd November 2025 with a total cost of ₹21.20 crore (inclusive of 18% GST)  
for a duration of five years jointly funded by fertilizer PSUs/cooperatives namely 
National Fertilizers Limited (NFL), Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited 
(RCF), Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT), Madras Fertilizers 
Limited (MFL), and Indian Farmers Fertiliser Cooperative Limited (IFFCO). 
Nevertheless, the recommendation of the Committee has been duly noted for 
compliance. 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.17 
  
 Vigorous R&D in nano fertilizers for introduction of more variants. 
  

 50 
 
3.3 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee note that the broad varieties of chemicals fertilizers being 
used by the farmers in the Country are Urea, DAP, MOP, NPKS and SSP. During 
evidence a representative of the Department admitted about the limitations of the 
Country due to dependence on import of fertilizers and raw materials because of 
which lot of planning is to be done to bring a non -volatile availability at a price 
that is competitive. Any disruption in supply may lead to plant utilization 
deficiency. Against this background, it is satisfying to note that Nano Fertilizers 
hold great promise for application in plant nourishment because of the size -
dependent qualities, high surface -volume ratio and unique optical properties. 
Nano Fertilizers viz Nano Urea & Nano DAP, which are available in bottles are 
at cheaper prices than conventional Urea & DAP. Studies undertaken by ICAR 
have shown that a single 500 ml bottle of Nano Urea can replace an entire 45 kg 
bag of conventional urea, significantly reducing transportation and handling 
costs. It helps farmers lower input costs by 20 -25% while maintaining or even 
enhancing crop productivity.   Moreover, it’s use r educes the soil -air-water 
pollution level. As per the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), 
preliminary field trials conducted on select crops indicated that Nano DAP, when 
used as a seed treatment and foliar spray, can significantly reduce the 
requirement for conventional granular DAP. Further, field trials have shown that 
Nano DAP, when used as a seed treatment and foliar spray, can significantly 
reduce the requirement for conventional granular DAP. Due to ongoing research 
in the field, the Gove rnment of India has notified Nano Urea with varying 
specifications and nitrogen content during the last few years. In view of the 
numerous benefits and advantages of Nano fertilizers, the Committee, strongly 
recommend that the Government may encourage vigorous Research in the field 
to promote development of more such Nano fertilizers variants (Macro and Micro 
nutrient grades)  through coordinated approach involving both the Public and 
Private sector companies, in order to ensure self -sufficiency in fertilizers for 
sustainable agriculture.   The Committee further desire that the Department of 
Fertilizers may work-out and seek for allocation of sufficient funds for developing 
innovative nano fertilizers so that it gets focused attention and ensure regular 
supply of various fertilizers at reasonable rates, ease subsidy burden and help 
save precious foreign exchange by reducing the import burden of the Country.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
3.4 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
 
“The Government of India is not directly involved in setting up of Nano 
Urea Plants. However, Department of Fertilizers (DoF) is actively encouraging its 

 51 
 
Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) and entrepreneurs to establish Nano 
Fertilizer Projects. At present, the Department of Fertilizers does not provide any 
subsidy for nano fertilizers. 
The Department of Fertilizers (DoF) has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with the National Productivity Council (NPC) on 5 March 
2024 to undertake a study assessing the efficacy, utility, and impact of Nano Urea 
vis-à-vis conventional urea, at a cost of ₹99.96 lakh with a timeline of seven 
months. Subsequently, the scope of the study was expanded to include two 
additional States, namely Rajasthan and Haryana, involving an additional 
expenditure of ₹22.90 lakh, for which an addendum to the MoU was executed on 
11 June 2025. Further, DoF signed another MoU with NPC on 14 November 2025 
to conduct a study titled “Evaluating the extent of replacement of conventional 
urea by Nano Urea”, at a cost of ₹61.52 lakh with a duration of five months. 
 In addition to this, a 2024–26 project funded by the Indian Council for Fertilizers 
and Fertilizer Technology Research (ICFFTR), with a total outlay of ₹160 lakh, 
aimed at evaluating the impact of nano fertilizers on crop growth, soil health, and 
nutrient uptake across diverse agro -ecological zones, involving several 
collaborating agricultural institutions, has been signed with the Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research (ICAR). 
Additionally, ICAR’s Network Project on “Evaluation of Nano Urea on crop 
productivity and nitrogen use efficiency in diverse Agro-Ecological Zones of India” 
was signed on 3rd November 2025, with a total cost of ₹21.20 crore (inclusive of 
18% GST) and a duration of five years, jointly funded by fertilizer 
PSUs/cooperatives namely National Fertilizers Limited (NFL), Rashtriya 
Chemicals and Fertilizers Limited (RCF), Fertilizers and Chemicals Travancore 
Limited (FACT), Madras Fertilizers Limited (MFL), and Ind ian Farmers Fertiliser 
Cooperative Limited (IFFCO). 
Nevertheless, the recommendation of the Committee has been duly noted.” 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.19 
3.5 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee are apprised that the Government and the Department of 
Fertilizers are supporting and promoting the use of drones and other agricultural 
sprayers for application of Nano fertilizers but they appear to be too less when 
compared to the vast requirement of the Country. The Committee are therefore, 
of the considered opinion that the Government may introduce Production Linked 
Incentive (PLI) scheme in fertilizers sector to incentivize/ augment domestic 
production of drones and fertilizer implement s which may enable the farmers to 
purchase them at a reasonable price and thus enhance the use of Nano fertilizers 
which will reduce demand for chemical fertilizers.”  

 52 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
3.6 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“The Government of India has launched the Namo Drone Didi Scheme, a 
Central Sector initiative under the Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare 
(DA&FW), with the objective of empowering Women Self -Help Groups (SHGs) 
by providing them with drones. With a  total allocation of ₹1,261 crore for the 
period 2023 -24 to 2025 -26, the scheme aims to distribute 15,000 drones to 
selected SHGs under the Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana – National Rural 
Livelihoods Mission (DAY -NRLM) to promote sustainable livelihoods and r ural 
entrepreneurship. 
            During 2023-24, as part of the initiative, the first batch of drones were 
delivered on 13th March 2024 at Pusa. The Department of Fertilizers, in 
collaboration with 15 Fertilizer Manufacturing Companies (FMCs) i.e., IFFCO, 
CIL, FACT, PPL, HURL,  KRIBHCO, RCF, NFL, CFCL, IPL, INDORAMA, 
GNVFC, GSFC, BVFCL, and MATIX, distributed 1098 drones to SHG members, 
designated as Namo Drone Didis. Out of these 1098 drone distributed to drone 
didis, 500 drones have been distributed under the Namo Drone Didi Scheme and 
remaining 598 drones have been provided by Fertilizer Companies to Women 
SHGs. 
            Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (DA&FW) vide its 
notification dated 28.10.2024, released Operational Guidelines for implementing 
the Namo Drone Didi Scheme, detailing the framework, objectives, and 
processes for effective grassroots execution. As per the Operational Guidelines, 
an 80% subsidy on the drone package cost (up to ₹8.00 lakh per SHG) is to be 
provided by the government and the balance 20% is to be contributed by the 
SHGs or their respective Cluster Level Federations (CLFs). 
Since adequate provisions already exist under ongoing schemes to promote the 
use of agricultural drones and sprayers, the introduction of a Production -Linked 
Incentive (PLI) scheme in the fertilizer sector to incentivize / augment domestic 
production of drones is not considered necessary at this stage.” 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.21 
  
Promotion of Research & Development in fertilizers - Need for sufficient 
Budgetary allocation/ support. 
3.7 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee note that to promote and facilitate research and 
development in the field of fertilizers, the Department of Fertilizers has 

 53 
 
established a dedicated national -level think tank, Indian Council for Fertilizers 
and Fertilizer Technology Research (ICFFTR) which was funded by the member 
companies, mostly PSUs. Under this endeavor, RCF has actively contributed by 
successfully developin g and commercializing two innovative fertilizers i.e., 
Organic Fertilizer (PROM) and Bio -stimulant fertilizer. The products developed 
are eco -friendly and align with the Government’s emphasis on sustainable 
agricultural practices.  Moreover, NFL is setting  up Sulphur Coated Urea (Gold 
Urea) plant having annual capacity of 5000 MT at its Panipat and Nangal Units 
under R&D Project. Further, as part of planned R&D activities, Indian Council of 
Agriculture Research (ICAR) and other research institutes, etc. have carried out 
Nano Urea (liquid) and Nano DAP trials on different crops covering  
15 agro-climatic zones.  In view of the non -availability of fertilizer raw materials 
in the Country the Committee stressed the need for R&D in the sector so that 
indigenous alternative materials could be developed which was already agreed 
to by the representatives of the Department during oral evidence.   The 
Committee therefore, recommend that the Department of Fertilizers should work 
in unison with the Fertilizer PSUs, Privat e and Cooperative sector and research 
institutes to promote and patronize targeted R&D activities in the field of 
Fertilizers for development of alternative indigenous, efficient, eco -friendly, 
varieties of nano fertilizers (Urea/ P&K/ macro &micro nutrien t grades), bio -
fertilizers, organic fertilizers, compost, bio -stimulants, etc, so as to facilitate 
achievement of the objective of self -sufficiency in the sector.   The Committee, 
also strongly desire that the results of R&D activities be shared amongst the  
fertilizer companies with a view to enhance the production of fertilizers, to meet 
the increasing demand of farmers.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
3.8 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“The recommendation has been duly noted for compliance and this 
department has requested all the PSUs to promote targeted R&D activities in the 
field of Fertilizers for development of alternative indigenous, efficient, eco -
friendly, varieties of Nano fertilizers (Urea/ P&K/ macro & micro nutrient grades), 
bio-fertilizers, organic fertilizers, compost, bio -stimulants, etc, so as to facilitate 
achievement of the objective of self-sufficiency in the sector.  
 RCF already has a latest state -of-the-art Research and Development 
department, primarily focused on innovations to develop new, efficient and safer 
processes, value added products. Through in -house R& D efforts, RCF has 
developed the process and is manufa cturing Sulphur Coated Urea (SCU), the 
production of bio fertilizers and also it has developed the formulation of Nano 
Fertilizer.” 

 54 
 
Recommendation Sl. No.27 
  
3.9 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
“The Committee note that India has relatively low reserves of economically 
extractable potash and phosphate rock, and is therefore, import dependent to 
meet its requirements. Most of the Country’s rock phosphate is low grade which 
requires benefaction before use.   Admittedly, as s ubmitted, there are 7 mining 
leases of Rock Phosphate out of which only 6 are working.   In case of potash, 
the blocks in India are deep seated.   The Committee are satisfied to note that, 
the Ministry of Mines with an objective of increasing production of f ertilizer 
minerals under 'Critical and Strategic Minerals' category, has included Phosphate, 
Potash and Glauconite (Potassic mineral) under “The Mines & Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Amendment (MMDR) Act, 2023”. The Committee 
are of the considered opinion that concrete measures be taken in collaboration 
with all concerned Minis tries and agencies for the exploration and mining of 
fertilizer raw materials in the Country, to enhance domestic production and 
achieve self- sufficiency in these minerals.   In view of the dependence on raw 
materials, the Committee also exhorts the Ministry to further diversify its sources 
of import and secure mining lease agreements with raw material rich countries 
for extraction/ refining/ manufacturing of fertilizers to ensure their stable supply 
at competitive prices, cushioning the cost fluctuations.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
  
3.10 In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: 
“The opinion of the Committee has been noted  for the exploration and 
mining of fertilizer raw materials in the country and outside country  in 
collaboration with all concerned Ministries and agencies.”  

 55 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. No. 4 
  
Revival of Closed Units of FCIL and HFCL 
4.1 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
        “The Committee find that five units of Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd 
(FCIL) at Sindri (Jharkhand), Talcher (Odisha), Ramagundam (Telangana), 
Gorakhpur (Uttar Pradesh) and Korba (Chhattisgarh) and three units of 
Hindustan Fertilizers Corporation Ltd (H FCL) at Durgapur, Haldia (both in West 
Bengal) and Barauni (Bihar) were closed down since September, 2002 due to 
obsolete technology and high energy consumption of plants and economic 
unviability. However, to increase Urea production in the Countr y, the 
Government, approved revival of Talcher and Ramagundam units of FCIL in 
2011 by setting up gas-based fertilizer plants of 1.27 MMTPA capacity.  Further, 
the Government, in Year 2016, approved revival of Gorakhpur & Sindri units of 
FCIL and Barauni u nit of HFCL by setting up gas -based fertilizer plants of 1.27 
MMTPA capacity each. The Committee are happy to note that the Ramagundam, 
Gorakhpur, Barauni and Sindri fertilizer plants have started urea production 
whereas the Talcher plant is under execution phase.  The Committee, further find 
that the Talcher project was being set up as a greenfield urea plant through coal 
gasification technology, utilizing the abundantly available domestic coal for Urea 
production. Statedly, on completion of the project, t he production of urea in the 
Country will increase and it will also provide security in feedstock supply as coal 
would be sourced domestically and provide alternate route for urea production. 
The Committee note that against the urea consumption of 388 LMT,  the 
indigenous production of Urea was 307 LMT during 2024 -25 and the demand is 
expected to increase to 444 LMT by 2035 -36. With a view to enhance the Urea 
production in the Country and achieve self -reliance in its production, the 
Committee, strongly, recommends for taking timely effective policy initiatives to 
facilitate early revival of Durgapur and Haldia units of HFCL and Korba unit of 
FCIL by leveraging their strategic locations and existing infrastructure, and 
utilizing the coal-gasification route, etc. which would reduce the demand supply 
gap of urea and enhance domestic production capacity. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the progress made by the Department in this regard.” 

 56 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
4.2  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of 
the Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of 
Fertilizers has stated as under: - 
“Government of India mandated revival of Ramagundam (Telangana), 
Gorakhpur (Uttar Pradesh), Sindri (Jharkhand) and Talcher (Odisha) units of 
Fertilizer Corporation of India and Barauni (Bihar) unit of Hindustan Fertilizer 
Corporation Limited through Joint Venture Company of nominated PSUs for 
setting up new ammonia -urea plants of 12.7 LMTPA capacity each. The 
revival of Talcher unit of FCIL is under execution stage and after 
operationalization of Talcher unit, a total of 63.5 LMTPA of domestic 
production would be added.  In addition, a new fertili zer plant at Namrup, 
Assam of 12.7 LMTPA capacity has been approved and JV agreement 
signed. Therefore, decision on revival of other units of FCIL and HFCL would 
be taken based on the demand supply gap of urea after operationalization of 
all these plants.  
 It is mentioned that the previous submissions to the Standing 
Committee included land details and revival possibilities for Haldia and 
Durgapur plants vide Department of Fertilizers' letters, dated 18.02.2025 and 
05.06.2025. Revival decisions are continge nt to urea supply demand 
dynamics in the country; however, the recommendations of the Committee 
have been noted. Towards this direction, a VC meeting was held on 
04.09.2025 between CMD HFCL -cum-Addl. Secretary, Department of 
Fertilizers and CEO, ADDA confi rming payment position on part of HFCL with 
the request to execute the lease deed in favour of HFCL in Durgapur. This 
has been followed by a request, dated 04.11.2025 to the State Government 
of West Bengal for early finalization of the matter. ” 
 
      COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. No. 5 
  
Production Continuity Clause for Sale/Disinvestment of Fertilizer Units 
4.3 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
      “The Committee note that the production of Urea during 2023-24 was 314 
LMT and it has come down to 307 LMT during the year 2024-25.  

 57 
 
The Committee were further note that the decrease in production capacity was 
because one private plant with an annual capacity of 12 LMT has been sold and 
is out of Urea.  As the Country is dependent on imports in the sector, the 
Committee are of the opini on that the Government may formulate its policies to 
regulate the sale/ disinvestment process of fertilizer units, etc. so as to mandate 
production continuity clause(s) which may require the purchaser(s) to continue 
with the production of Urea/ other fertilizer, so that the production capacity of the 
Country remains maintained and the import burden gets reduced. The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in this matter.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT   
4.4  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
“With regard to Urea, the Government had announced New Investment 
Policy (NIP) – 2012 on 2nd January, 2013 and its amendment on 7th October, 
2014 to facilitate fresh investment in the Urea sector and to make India self -
sufficient in the Urea sector. Total 6 new Urea units have been set up under NIP-
2012 which includes 4 Urea units set up through Joint Venture Companies (JVC) 
of nominated PSUs and 2 Urea units set up by the private companies. The units 
set up through JVC are Ramagundam Urea unit of Ramagundam Fertilizers and 
Chemicals Ltd (RFCL) in Telangana and 3 Urea units namely Gorakhpur, Sindri 
and Barauni of Hindustan Urvarak & Rasayan Limited (HURL) in Uttar Pradesh, 
Jharkhand and Bihar, respectively. The units set up by private companies are 
Panagarh Urea unit of Matix Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. (Matix) in West 
Bengal; and Gadepan -III Urea unit of Chambal Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. 
(CFCL) in Rajasthan. Each of these units has installed capacity of 12.7 Lakh 
Metric Tonne per annum (LMTPA). These units are highly energy efficient as they 
are based on latest technology. Therefore, these units have together added Urea 
production capacity of 76.2 LMTPA, thereby total indigenous Urea production 
capacity (Reassessed Capacity, RAC) has increased from 207.54 LMTPA during 
2014-15 to 283.74 LMTPA during 2023 -24. Further, an exclusive policy for the 
revival of Talcher unit of FCIL through JVC of nominated PSUs namely Talcher 
Fertilizers Limited (TFL) by setting up a new Greenfield Urea plant of 12.7 LMTPA 
at coal gasification route has also been approved. Recently, the Union Cabinet 
has approved the proposal for setting up of a new Brownfield Ammonia -Urea 
Complex of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonnes (LMT) annual capacity of Urea production 
within the existing premises of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited 
(BVFCL), Namrup, Assam which will be named as Assam Valley Fertilizer and 
Chemical Company Ltd. (AVFCCL). These two projects are under execution 
phase. 

 58 
 
In addition, the Government also notified the New Urea Policy (NUP) – 
2015 on 25th May, 2015 for the existing 25 gas-based Urea units with one of the 
objectives of maximizing indigenous Urea production beyond RAC.  The NUP -
2015 has led to additional production of Urea by 20-25 LMT as compared to the 
production during 2014-15 annually. 
Above steps together have facilitated increase of Urea production from 
level of 225 LMT per annum during 2014-15 to 306.67 LMT of Urea during 2024-
25.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. No. 9 
  
Development of Indigenous Technology for Fertilizer Manufacturing:  
4.5 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
 
      “The Committee find that despite having an excellent pool of engineers 
and managers in Urea plants, the Country still depend upon foreign companies 
for the basic license of running, repairing and making the plant with everything 
kept in the hands of the lic ensor. Admittedly, the indigenous ‘Chemical Process 
Technology Development for fertilizers’ encompasses various stages, from initial 
laboratory research to pilot testing to scale up and finally full -scale plant 
operation, often involving iterative cycles o f refinement entailing involvement of  
a massive investment in R&D in the field of synchronized pipe-based technology 
based on advance metallurgy, design and fabrication of all connected to overall 
objective to achieve better energy efficiency to minimize production costs. This 
integrated approach requires multiple institutional participation as Individual 
Companies on their own may not be suitable to develop end -to-end solution 
having competitive advantage and energy savings. Keeping in view the present 
constraints, the Committee feels the need to develop a self-sufficient indigenous 
eco system with integration of institutions to develop a process technology for 
urea and complex fertilizers. The Committee were apprised by the Department’s 
representative dur ing oral evidence that there were four Companies from the 
Netherlands, the USA, Italy and Japan which have authority to grant the license 
in India. The Committee, therefore, feel the urgent need for development of 
indigenous technology for setting up ferti lizer plants and maintaining them, 
through an integrated approach by engaging the best of institutions and technical 
experts in the field, backed by suitable Budgetary support and Government 

 59 
 
patronage, which will remove the technical constraints and dependence and 
speed up self -reliance in the sector. The Committee recommend that a special 
high power task force be constituted for this purpose at the earliest.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT   
4.6  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
“Under NIP-2012, total 6 new Urea units have been set up which includes 4 Urea 
units set up through Joint Venture Companies (JVC) of nominated PSUs and 2 
Urea units set up by the private companies. The units set up through JVC are 
Ramagundam Urea unit of Ramagundam Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd (RFCL) 
in Telangana and 3 Urea units namely Gorakhpur, Sindri and Barauni of 
Hindustan Urvarak & Rasayan Limited (HURL) in Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand and 
Bihar, respectively. The units set up by private companies are Panagarh Urea 
unit of Matix Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. (Matix) in West Bengal; and Gadepan-
III Urea unit of Chambal Fertilizers an d Chemicals Ltd. (CFCL) in Rajasthan. 
Each of these units has installed capacity of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonne per annum 
(LMTPA). These units are highly energy efficient as they are based on latest 
technology. Therefore, these units have together added Urea production capacity 
of 76.2 LMTPA, thereby total indigenous Urea production capacity (Reassessed 
Capacity, RAC) has increased from 207.54 LMTPA during 2014 -15 to 283.74 
LMTPA during 2023-24.” 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. No. 25 
 
4.7 The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: – 
 
      “The Committee note that only 19.7 LMT of P&K fertilizers were imported 
during the year against the targeted import of 30 LMT by the companies under 
Open General License, due to their financial compulsions. This resulted in the 
shortage of DAP in the Countr y and led to its black marketing.  Moreover, there 
was shortage of fertilizers especially, DAP in the Country, due to international 
factors, as a particular Country did not supply fertilizers to India. Keeping in view 
that the matter is of serious concern,  the Committee desire that a Central 
monitoring mechanism be developed to take timely effective actions during such 

 60 
 
emergent situations and a policy be framed for suitable action against the 
defaulting agencies, etc.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT   
4.8  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
“In case of Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers, Government has 
implemented Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy w.e.f. 01.04.2010. Under the 
policy, a fixed amount of subsidy, decided on annual/bi-annual basis, is provided 
to manufacturer / importer on notified P&K fertilizers depending on their nutrient 
content i.e. Nitrogen (N), Phosphorus (P), Potassium (K) and Sulphur (S) to 
improve availability of fertilizers to farmers. In view of price volatility in 
international prices of key fertilizers and r aw materials, the Government 
subsumes fluctuations, if any, while fixing NBS rates for P&K fertilizers 
annually/bi-annually Under the NBS policy, P&K fertilizers are covered under 
Open General License (OGL) and companies are free to import /produce these 
fertilizers as per their business dynamics. However, the suggestion of the 
committee has been noted for necessary compliance.” 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 61 
 
Chapter V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES ARE OF 
INTERIM NATURE 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 2 
 
Task Force for Time-Bound Strategy on Domestic Fertilizer Production 
 
5.1   The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: –      
“The Committee note that during the last financial year, 2024 -25, during 
Kharif and Rabi, India's consumption of fertilizers has reached 708 LMT for the 
first time. Out of this, about 387 LMT is Urea, and the consumption of MOP, NPK, 
DAP, and SSP, put together is 320 LMT. The Committee further note that during 
the year 2024 -25, the total production of Urea is 306.67 while that of P&K 
Fertilizers is 211.21 LMT.  Therefore, to ensure consistent and affordable access 
to key fertilizers - namely Urea, DAP (Di -Ammonium Phosphate) and NPK 
(Nitrogen, Phosphorus, Potassium) Complexes, the Country has to resort to 
import of these fertilizers which are vital to ensure that food production meets the 
domestic demand. The Committee note that there is a gap between domestic 
consumption and production of fertilizers in the Country. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Department of Fertilizers to constitute a Task force to chalk 
out a time bound targeted strategy with required budgetary support so as to 
enhance domestic Urea production through proactive implementation and 
promotion of the New Investment Poli cy (NIP)–2012 and its amendments; New 
Urea Policy, 2015 and also expand production capacity of P&K fertilizers through 
fiscal and tax incentives for setting up of new units and securing long term 
agreements with the resource rich countries to ensure secure  supply chain, at 
most competitive rates. The Committee trust that the Department would take 
concrete measures in this direction.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT   
5.2  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
“India is heavily dependent on the import of fertilizers to meet the domestic 
demand. In 2025 -26 (till December, 2025), India imported 79.97 LMT of Urea, 
58.62 LMT of DAP, 30.39 LMT of NPK and 15.54 LMT of MOP.   

 62 
 
2.        To enable these imports, the Government is actively facilitating the 
establishment of Long-Term Agreements (LTAs) and Joint Venture (JV) projects 
between the Indian fertilizers -companies and suppliers from resource -rich 
countries to ensure a con tinuous and reliable supply of fertilizers and their raw 
materials in the country, while safeguarding domestic fertilizer availability against 
global market disruptions. 
3.        In this regard, for the supply of Diammonium Phosphate (DAP) and 
NPK fertilizers in 2025 -26, Indian fertilizer companies entered into LTAs/MoUs 
with suppliers from Saudi Arabia, the Russian Federation, the United Arab 
Emirates, and Morocco for annual supply of 90.60 LMT to India. 
 4.    For import of Muriate of Potash (MOP) in 2025-26, LTAs/MoUs have 
been established with suppliers from Jordan, the Russian Federation, 
Turkmenistan, Canada, Israel, and Belarus for annual supply of 21 - 22 LMT to 
India. 
 5.   Further, Indian fertilizer companies have secured LTAs/MoUs for raw 
materials required for fertilizer production. These agreements cover annual 
supply of 24.90 – 26.90 LMT of Rock Phosphate from Jordan, Morocco, Togo, 
and Mauritania; 11.50 LMT – 12.0 LMT of  Phosphoric Acid from Morocco, 
Tunisia, and Senegal; and 10.15 LMT – 11.00 LMT of Ammonia from Saudi 
Arabia, Oman, Japan, and Malaysia in 2025-26. 
6.   Beyond these agreements, Indian fertilizer companies have also 
entered into joint ventures with foreign companies to ensure a long -term, 
consistent supply of both fertilizers and raw materials. For MOP, a joint venture 
has been established with Canada, while for Ammonia and Urea, joint venture is 
in place with Oman. Additionally, for Phosphoric Acid and Rock Phosphate, joint 
ventures have been formed with companies from Jordan, Senegal, Tunisia, 
Morocco, and South Africa.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 7 
 
Budgetary Support and Fiscal Incentives for Modernization of Aging Urea 
Plants 
5.3   The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: –    
     “The Committee were apprised that keeping in view the need for urgent 
need for replacement/ modernization/ revival of the aging 33 Urea Plants in the 
Country, the NITI Aayog has endorsed sufficient Budgetary support to help the 
producers go for modernization with the best of technology which may have an 
embedded energy-saving Scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 

 63 
 
for full -filling the ever -increasing demand for fertilizers in the Country, the 
Department may earnestly work out the budgetary requirements and project the 
same before the Ministry of Finance to provide fiscal support and incentives to 
the aging urea manu facturing units to ensure their immediate revival and 
modernization, so as to successfully accomplish the goals of Aatmanirbhar 
Bharat in the sector.” 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT   
5.4  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
“An Expert Group was constituted to recommend energy norms for Urea Units 
w.e.f. 01.04.2025 and other associated issues under the chairmanship of Dr. V.K. 
Saraswat, Member, NITI Aayog. The Expert Group has submitted its 
recommendations. Expert Group has inter-alia recommended for Constitution of 
a Multi-Disciplinary Committee of Technical Experts, having prior experience in 
the urea sector. The mandate of the Committee would be to undertake a one -
year study/review of all old plants to ascertain their remaining economic life. 
Based on the Committee’s report, a decision regarding the continuation or 
discontinuation of such plants may be taken. Accordingly, the Committee is being 
constituted in the Department of Fertilizers. 
Further, for meeting the ever -increasing demand for fertilizers, the revival of 
Talcher unit of FCIL through JVC of nominated PSUs namely Talcher Fertilizers 
Limited (TFL) by setting up a new Greenfield Urea plant of 12.7 LMTPA at coal 
gasification route h as also been approved. Recently, the Union Cabinet has 
approved the proposal for setting up of a new Brownfield Ammonia -Urea 
Complex of 12.7 Lakh Metric Tonnes (LMT) annual capacity of Urea production 
within the existing premises of Brahmaputra Valley Fertilizer Corporation Limited 
(BVFCL), Namrup, Assam which will be named as Assam Valley Fertilizer and 
Chemical Company Ltd. (AVFCCL). These two projects are under execution 
phase.” 
 
RECOMMENDATION SL. NO. 10 
 
Need to increase indigenous Production of P&K Fertilizers: 
5.5   The Committee, in their Fifteenth Report (18th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: –    
 

 64 
 
     “The Committee note that the Country is heavily dependent on imported 
raw materials for production of Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers; and it 
imports nearly 95% of its phosphate requirements and is 100% dependent on 
imports of Potash. The Committee observe that any increase in global prices of 
these raw materials exchange rate fluctuations and global supply chain 
disruptions due to geo -political reasons, impact the domestic cost of fertilizer 
production.  Admittedly, the domestic production capacity of P&K fertilizers 
(which includes DAP & NPK) in the Country is approx. 160 LMT per annum 
against the total requirement of 240 LMT per annum. The Committee have been 
apprised that the consumption of P&K fertilizers was expected to increase to 305 
LMT during 2035-36. The Committee, however, find that work for commissioning 
of some new units & capacity enhancement initiatives are plan ned/ in progress 
in the P&K Sector which include the RCF, Thal, DAP/NPK plant with annual 
capacity of 5 LMT and FACT, Kochi, DAP/NPK plant with annual capacity of 5.5 
LMT. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department to intensify the 
measures to f acilitate timely completion of the projects initiated and capacity 
expansion of the other existing plants by resorting to a coordinated, integrated 
approach; embracing perspective of the whole industry, which will enhance 
domestic production of P&K fertili zers and thus reduce import dependence and 
ensure affordable supply to the farmers.” 
REPLY OF THE GOVERMENT   
5.6  In their action taken reply to the afore -mentioned recommendation of the 
Committee, the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers 
has stated as under: - 
“In case of Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers, Government has 
implemented Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) Policy w.e.f. 01.04.2010. Under the 
policy, a fixed amount of subsidy, decided on annual/bi-annual basis, is provided 
to manufacturer / importer on notified P&K fertilizers depending on their nutrient 
content i.e. Nitrogen (N), Phosphorus (P), Potassium (K) and Sulphur (S) to 
improve availability of fertilizers to farmers. Under the NBS policy, P&K fertilizers 
are covered under Open General License (OGL) and companies are free to 
import /produce these fertilizers as per their business dynamics.  
To boost fertilizer production and make country Atmanirbhar in fertilizer 
sector, the following measures have been taken by the Government: 
(i) Based on the requests, the new manufacturing units or increase in 
manufacturing capacity of existing units have been recognized / taken on record 
under the NBS subsidy scheme. 
(ii) The number of P&K fertilizers covered under NBS policy has increased 
from 22 grades in 2021 to 28 grades.  

 65 
 
(iii) Freight Subsidy on SSP, which is an indigenously manufactured 
fertilizer, has been approved since Kharif, 2022 to promote SSP usage for 
providing Phosphatic or 'P' nutrient to the soil. 
Further, DoF on 18.01.2024 issued new Reasonability guidelines w.e.f. 
01.04.2023 to ensure reasonableness of MRP, encourage domestic production, 
enhancement of new domestic production capacity in the country, reduce the 
fixed cost per ton via increasing capacity utilization of existing plants, encourage 
balanced fertilization of soil, self -reliance in the P&K fertilizers, ease of doing 
business, enhance transparency etc. 
 As a result of all above steps, fertilizer companies have undertaken 
substantial investments in expanding domestic capacities. New DAP/NPK plants 
and expansions of existing units with a total annual capacity of 56.35 LMT are 
currently under construction a nd expected to be completed between 2028 and 
March 2030. In addition, companies are setting up intermediate plants 
(Phosphoric Acid/Sulphuric Acid) with a combined annual capacity of 44.11 LMT, 
also scheduled for completion during 2028 to March 2030. Capac ity 
enhancement by the industry is a continuous process and is undertaken as per 
their business plans.” 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;                                 AZAD KIRTI JHA 
29 JUNE, 2026 CHAIRPERSON, 
8 ASHADHA, 1948 (Saka) STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
 CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS. 
 
            
  

 66 
 
APPENDIX I 
   
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2025-26) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-second Sitting of the Committee 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 29th June, 2026 from 1100 hrs to 1130 
hrs in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
                                     PRESENT 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
4. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
5. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
6. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
7. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
8. Shri Praveen Patel  
9. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
10. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
11. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Naresh Bansal 
13. Shri Subhash Barala 
14. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
15. Shri Arun Singh 
16. Shri Tejveer Singh 
17. Shri L. K. Sudhish  
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT  
 
5.   Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
6.   Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
7. Shri Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
8. Shri Abhishek Kumar  - Joint Director 
   

 67 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt four draft Action Taken Reports of 
the Committee. The Chairperson, on behalf of the Committee, also welcomed  
Shri Manmohan Samal, MP (RS) and Shri L.K. Sudhish, MP (RS) who had been 
newly nominated to th e Committee w.e.f 3 rd June, 2026 . Thereafter, the 
Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports: 
 
(i)  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX; 
 
(ii) Twenty-fifth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government 
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the  Fifteenth Report (18th 
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals  and Fertilizers on ‘Self -
sufficiency in production of  fertilizers with a view to curb import of fertilizers -
review of  constraints thereof’ pertaining to the Ministry of Chemicals  and 
Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers; 
 
(iii)      XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX; and 
 
(iv)      XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX  XXXX; 
 
 
3. After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the 
Committee 
without any amendments. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports 
and 
present/lay them in both the Houses of Parliament in the upcoming Mons oon 
Session. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
XXXX Not related to the Report. 
  

 68 
 
APPENDIX II  
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTEENTH REPORT (EIGHTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) ON 'SELF-SUFFICIENCY IN PRODUCTION OF FERTILIZERS WITH A VIEW 
TO CURB IMPORT OF FERTILIZERS — REVIEW OF CONSTRAINTS THEREOF’  
PERTAINING TO THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT 
OF FERTILIZERS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total No. of Recommendations 31 
I. Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government: 
(Rec. Sl. No. 1, 3, 6, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 
23, 24, 26, 28, 29, 30 and 31)  
 
19 
Percentage: 61% 
II. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee 
do not like to pursue in view of the replies received 
from the Government: 
(Rec. Sl. No. 15, 17, 19, 21 and 27) 
 
05 
Percentage: 16% 
III. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
the replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee and which require reiteration:  
(Rec. Sl. No. 4, 5, 9 and 25) 
 
 
04 
Percentage: 13 %  
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
the replies of the Government are interim in nature:  
(Rec. Sl. No. 2, 7 and 10)  
 
03 
Percentage:  10%  