i 
 
 
 
 
 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
           MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
   (DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty -Second Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2026-27’ of the Ministry 
of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
AUGUST, 2026/ SRAVANA, 1948 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
  
32 
 


ii 
 
CC&F NO. 212 
 
 
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS 
(DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Second Report of the Standing Committee on Chemicals 
and Fertilizers (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2026 -27’ of the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals) 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06th August, 2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06th August, 2026 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
AUGUST, 2026/ SRAVANA, 1948 (SAKA) 


iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 PAGE 
Composition of the Committee (2025-26) (iv)  
Introduction (v) 
Chapter-I Report 1 
Chapter-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
20 
Chapter-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies 
31 
Chapter-IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
which require reiteration 
32 
Chapter-V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which the final 
replies of the Government are still awaited 
46 
 
APPENDICES  
I Minutes of Sitting of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers (2025-26) held on 03rd August, 2026. 
47 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty -Second Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and 
Fertilizers on ‘Demands for Grants 2026 -27’ of the Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers (D epartment of Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals). 
49 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS  (2025-2026) 
 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha - Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman  
7. Dr. Kalyan Vaijinathrao Kale 
8. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
9. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
10. Shri Utkarsh Verma Madhur 
11. Shri Praveen Patel  
12. Dr. Sambit Patra  
13. Shri Balram Naik Porika  
14. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
15. Shri Eatala Rajender 
16. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
17. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
18. Shri Tharaniventhan M.S. 
19. Shri Nalin Soren 
20. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
21. Vacant* 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Naresh Bansal 
23. Shri Subhash Barala 
24. Shri Ramesh Lingamaneni$ 
25. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
26. Shri Manmohan Samal& 
27. Shri Arun Singh 
28. Shri Akhilesh Prasad Singh 
29. Shri Tejveer Singh 
30. Shri L. K. Sudhish%  
31. Vacant 
 
*Vacant vice Dr. Ricky Andrew J. Syngkon, MP(LS), passed away on 19.02.2026 vide LS Table Office Notification 
No.21/4(8)/2026/TO(B) dated 20.02.2026. 
& Nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 04.06.2026 Para No. 5267.  
% Nominated w.e.f. 03.06.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 04.06.2026 Para No. 5267. 
$ Nominated w.e.f. 23.07.2026 vide L.S. Bulletin-Part II dated 24.07.2026 Para No. 5724. 
Shri Subhash Chandra Bose Pilli, MP(RS) retired from the membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 21.06.2026 vide Committee Branch 
note dated 19.02.2026.  
Dr. Bhagwat Karad, MP(RS) retired on 02.04.2026 vide Committee Branch note dated 19.02.2026.  
Shri G.K. Vasan, MP(RS) retired on 02.04.2026 vide Committee Branch note dated 19.02.2026. 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Maya Lingi   — Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam  —  Director 
3. Shri Kulvinder Singh  — Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Vandana Rawat  — Assistant Executive Officer 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers  
 (2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf this  
Thirty-Second Report on Action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty -second 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants 2026 -27’ pertaining to the 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals. 
2.  The Twenty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 13 th March, 2026. The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals, furnished their replies on 12 th June, 2026 indicating 
Action Taken on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -second 
Report. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their Sitting held on 03 rd 
August, 2026. 
3. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -second Report (Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
4. For ease of reference, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
03 August, 2026  Chairperson, 
12 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee On 
    Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
 

1 
 
 
 REPORT 
 
                CHAPTER–I 
 This Report deals with action taken by the Government on 
observations/recommendations of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
contained in their Twenty-Second Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on  ‘Demands for Grants 
2026-27’ pertaining to the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
 
1.2 The Twenty- Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 13th March, 202 6. It contained 1 7 Observations/Recommendations. The 
Replies of the Government in respect of all the Recommendations have been received 
and are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Rec. Para No. 1, 2, 3,4,6,7,13,15 and 16  
 
Chapter-II Total- 09 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s reply: 
                      Rec.   NIL                                                      
Chapter–III Total–‘NIL’ 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee which require 
reiteration: 
                      Rec. 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 17,  
Chapter-IV Total– 08 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
                      Rec.  NIL 
 
Chapter–V Total- ‘NIL’ 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in Chapter -I be furnished to them within three months of 
the presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4      The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments. 
 

2 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
Allotment of Plastic Parks 
1.5.   The Committee made the following recommendation concerning over the slow pace 
of allotment of Plots in the 10 Plastic Parks across India: 
 
The Committee note that the scheme of Plastic Park was introduced way back in 
the year 2013 with the objective to promote chemical industry. However, after a 
lapse of about 13 years, the Committee note with concern that the ten Plastic 
Parks approved are s till at various stages of implementation.  Further, the 
Committee have been apprised that only 309 out of 919 plots available in Plastic 
Parks could be allotted so far.  Moreover, out of the 309 plots allotted only 51 plots 
are stated to be functional in t erms of the total number of plots, only 6% are 
currently functional. It is further noted that no plots have been allotted in the Plastic 
Parks located in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and Deogarh. The Committee expresses 
serious concern over the slow progress in the establishment and allotment of plots 
in the Plastic Parks. The Committee therefore recommend that the Department 
should work in close coordination with the respective State Governments to allot 
the remaining plots across all Plastic Parks in a time bou nd manner.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.  
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“As on date, 316 Plots and 15 Sheds have been allotted out of a total of 919 Plots 
and 19 Sheds, of which, 49 Plots and 15 Sheds are operational. 
  
With regard to infrastructure development, four Plastic Parks viz., Tamot, Madhya 
Pradesh; Bilaua, Madhya Pradesh; Jagatsinghpur, Odisha; and Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh, have achieved 100% completion of physical infrastructure (civil 
works), while the remaining parks viz., Tinsukia, Assam; Deoghar, Jharkhand; 
Sitarganj, Uttarkhand; Ganjimutt, Karnataka; and Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh are at 
advanced stages of completion and are expected to be completed during the 
current financial year. 
  
The status of three Plastic Parks viz., Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Jharkhand are 
as under: 
I. Ganjimutt Plastic Park, Karnataka: The Park was approved in January 2022 
with completion date as January 2027.   The overall progress in physical 
infrastructure (Civil work) is 88%.   It is expected that most of the 
infrastructure creation would be completed by August 2026 and thereafter, 
the Park would get populated at the earliest. 
 
II. Tiruvallur Plastic Park, Tamil Nadu:  The project was due by September 

3 
 
2022, but on an appeal by Mr. K. Saravanan, the NGT ordered status quo 
on 18.01.2022. TPIPL challenged this in the Supreme Court. As of now, 
hearings on multiple dates were not taken up. After a new Chief Justice’s 
appointment on 24.11.2025, the SPV is pre paring to request an expedited 
hearing. The matter remains sub judice. 
 
III. Deoghar Plastic Park, Jharkhand:    In respect of the Plastic Park at 
Deoghar, Jharkhand, the process of allotment of plots has been temporarily 
affected due to proposed revisions in the State Government’s land 
allotment policy. During a recent review meeti ng chaired by the Secretary 
(Chemicals & Petrochemicals), representatives of the State Government 
informed that the revised policy is under finalisation.   
 
  Despite the above, it is pertinent to mention that an anchor unit with a 
proposed investment of approximately Rs.300 crore has expressed interest in 
setting up operations in the Plastic Park. This is expected to act as a catalyst in 
attracting further industrial investment once the policy framework is finalised. The 
Jharkhand Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation (JIIDCO), the nodal 
implementing agency, has assured that necessary infrastructure development will 
be completed at the earliest. 
  The Department is closely monitoring the progress of all Plastic Park projects 
through regular site visits, periodic review meetings at various levels, and 
continuous follow -up with State Governments and implementing agencies, 
including through D.O. letter s to Chief Secretaries and concerned authorities 
during April 2025, October, 2025 and April 2026.   
Further, Secretary (C&PC) reviewed the progress of all Plastic Parks during May, 
2026 in a meeting attended by the SPVs/key promoters of all Plastic Parks and 
the concerned Secretaries/Principal Secretaries (Industries) of the respective 
State Governments.  During the review, emphasis was laid on (i) expeditious 
completion of the remaining infrastructure works; and (ii) close monitoring of 
allotment and operationalisation of plots, to ensure timely industrial activity in the 
Plastic Parks. 
     
Further, various State Governments and implementing agencies have undertaken 
several initiatives to promote allotment of plots and operationalisation of the Plastic 
Parks. These include several promotional measures through promotional events, 
aggressive marketing and investor outreach efforts, such as participation in major 
plastic industry exhibitions organised by leading industry bodies, as well as the 
organisation of roadshows and regional industry conclaves to showcase 
investment opportunities. Continuo us promotional activities, including regular 
advertisements and stakeholder engagement, are also being carried out to attract 
prospective investors. 
Overall, the Department reiterates that sustained and coordinated efforts are being 
undertaken in close collaboration with State Governments and implementing 
agencies to resolve pending issues, expedite infrastructure completion, and 
ensure early operationalisation and optimal utilisation of the Plastic Parks”. 
 

4 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
1.7 The Committee had noted the delay in the allotment of plots and sheds in the Plastic 
Parks and had recommended that the department should work in close coordination with 
the respective State Governments to allot the Plastic Parks in a time bound manner. The 
Department in their Action  Taken Notes has submitted that as on date , 316 plots and 15 
sheds had been allotted out of a total of 919 plots and 19 sheds, of which 49 plots and 15 
sheds are operational. As regard s the Plastic Park at Ganjimutt, Karnataka, it has been 
submitted that the overall progress in physical infrastructure is about 88% and most of 
the infrastructure creation is likely to be completed by August 2026 and thereafter the park 
was likely to get populated at the earliest. As regards Plastic Park at Tiruvallur, Tamil Nadu 
the Department had submitted that the project was due for population in September, 2022 
itself however, on an appeal NGT has ordered status quo on 18.01.2022. Similarly, 
regarding Plastic Park at Deogarh, Jharkhand, it ha d been submitted that the process of 
allotment ha d been temporarily affected due to propose d revisions in the State 
Governments land allotment policy. The Department ha d further submitted that it was 
closely monitoring the progress of all the Plastic Parks and various state Governments 
and implementing agencies have undertaken several initiatives to promo te allotment of 
plots as well as operationalization of them. The Committee desire that these steps be 
implemented in letter and spirit and may be apprised accordingly.  
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
Ensuring Transfer of optimal Formulations to Industry 
1.8 The Committee made the following recommendation to ensure transfer of optimal 
formulation to Industry by the IPFT: 
“The Committee note that the IPFT have been in existence for the last 36 years. 
The Committee note with concern that during this time period of 36 long years, 
IPFT could formulate only 86 formulations. Moreover, out of the 86 formulations, 
only 64 could be transferred to the industry. In this regard, the Committee note 
that the formulations development by the IPFT is undertaken after assessment, 
technical evaluation and consultation with industry and the formulations are 
developed based on their existing and  emerging need. The Committee are 

5 
 
astonished to note the fact that even after developing the formation after assessing 
the need of the industry, IPFT is struggling to transfer its 22 formulations. In this 
regard, during oral evidence, the Committee have been informed that IPFT is now 
focusing on Bio pesticides which is a Research and Development activity. The 
Committee outrightly reject this contention of the IPFT and are of the view that the 
IPFT while focusing on Bio Pesticides should work equally towards transfer of its 
formulation. IPFT has also submitted that after development of formulations, it has 
to undergo laboratory trial for its efficacy and safety purpose. The Committee are 
of the view that the IPFT must streamline its functioning and expedite its functions 
related to transfer o f 22 remaining formulations. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Department as well as by the IPFT in this 
regard”.  
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The remaining 22 formulations could not be transferred due to various technical, 
regulatory, commercial, and market -related factors, evolving regulatory 
requirements, requirement of additional efficacy/safety validation data, 
commercial viability, and limited interest from industries for certain formulations. It 
is also pertinent to mention that formulation development and technology transfer 
involve multiple stages including laboratory development, stability studies, efficacy 
evaluation, toxicity/safety assessment, pilot-scale validation, and compliance with 
regulatory requirements before successful commercialization. 
 
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee is noted for greater emphasis for 
timely transfer and commercialization of technologies developed by IPFT. 
Accordingly, IPFT has initiated several measures to streamline and expedite the 
process of technology transfer of the remaining formulations. 
The following steps have been initiated by IPFT in this regard: 
1. Focused Industry Engagement:  IPFT has intensified interaction with 
agrochemical industries, MSMEs, startups, and stakeholders through Industry 
Interaction Meets, workshops, and targeted consultations to identify potential 
industry partners for pending formulations. 
2. Strengthening Validation and Scale -up Activities:  Efforts are being 
made to expedite efficacy studies, stability studies, pilot -scale validation, and 
generation of supporting technical data required for industry adoption and 
regulatory acceptance through biofoundry project sponsored by Department of 
Biotechnology, GoI under BioE3 policy, which is in progress at IPFT. 
3. Establishment of Biofoundry Facility: A dedicated Biofoundry Facility is 
being established at IPFT to facilitate faster development, validation, scale-up, and 
transfer of bio-pesticide and bio-botanical technologies to industry. 
4. Collaboration with Academic and Industrial Partners:  IPFT is 
strengthening collaborations with academic institutions, research organizations, 

6 
 
and industry partners to improve translational research and commercialization 
outcomes. 
The Department and IPFT remain committed towards accelerating formulation 
transfer activities, strengthening industry partnerships, and promoting 
environmentally sustainable technologies for the benefit of the agricultural sector 
and society at large”. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.10 The Committee had noted that out of 86 formulations developed by IPFT, 
only 64 formulations could be transferred and remaining 22 formulations could not 
be transferred. The Department in their Action taken Notes have submitted that the 
remaining 22 formulations could not be transferred due to various technical, 
regulatory, commercial and market -related factors, evolving regulatory 
requirements, requirement of additional  efficacy/safety validation data, 
commercial viability and limited interest from industries for certain formulations. 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that the reasons furnished appears 
to be well under the administrative control of the IPFT and the Department . The 
Committee, therefore, desire to know what steps have been  taken by IPFT to 
successfully transfer the 22 formulations to the industry the Committee therefore, 
desire that IPFT must undertake a critical review of its functioning and adopt a 
time-bound action plan to enhance its output and also recommend that IPFT must 
expedite the process of transferring 22 formulations to the industries in a  time 
bound manner and strict adherence to targets fixed for the completion of the entire 
process in consultation with the Department.  The Committee would like to  be 
apprised of the steps taken by the IPFT and the Department in this regard.   
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
Diversifying the role of IPFT/utilizing the full potential of IPFT 
1.11 The Committee made the following recommendation regarding  utilization of full 
potential of IPFT: 

7 
 
 
 The Committee note that the Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
was established in the year 1991 and engaged in development of user and 
environment friendly new generation pesticide formulation technologies, their 
analysis, efficacy and ph ytotoxicity studies. The Committee further note that the 
institute has three functional verticals, viz., Formulation Development, Analytical 
Characterization and Bioscience activities . And the ‘ Formulation Development’ 
vertical has pilot plant facilities t hat can scale up lab scale research to a 
commercial production with optimum budget and has the capacity to produce the 
formulations upto 100 kg per shift.  In this regard, the Committee were informed 
during oral evidence that the IPFT is a research and development institute and is 
not involved in the production and marketing of any formulations. Further, at IPFT 
the technologies of pesticide formulations are  developed and transferred to 
different industries for commercialization activities only.  Intriguingly, though IPFT 
is a research and development institute and not involved in the production and 
marketing of any formulation, its Formulation Development Vertical shows 
production capacity to manufacture the formulation upto 100 kg per shift.  
Apparently, the production facility at IPFT is lying idle.  The Committee desire that 
they be apprised of concrete reasons in this regard.  Un der these circumstances 
when the production facility already exist at IPFT, the Committee may recommend 
that it explore the ful l potential of the Formulation Development Vertical and 
consider the expansion of its activities from mere formulation development to 
actual production and its sale in the market.  
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“IPFT was established as a specialized Research and Development (R&D) 
institute with the primary mandate of developing user-friendly, safe, effective, and 
environmentally sustainable pesticide formulation technologies and transferring 
such technologies to industry for commercialization. Accordingly, the pilot plant 
facility available under the Formulation Development Vertical was created 
primarily for research, process optimization, pilot-scale validation, demonstration, 
training, and technology transfer purposes, and not for regular commercial -scale 
manufacturing and marketing activities. 
The pilot-scale facility with scale-up capability up to 100 kg per shift is mainly 
utilized for: 
(i) scale-up studies of newly developed formulations, 
(ii) process standardization, 
(iii) generation of data for efficacy and stability studies, 
(iv) validation and demonstration batches for technology transfer, 
(v) training and skill development programmes, and 
(vi) supporting startups, MSMEs, and entrepreneurs for proof-of-concept and 
pilot production activities. 

8 
 
The facility is therefore not lying idle; however, its utilization is aligned with the 
R&D mandate of the Institute rather than commercial production. The existing 
pilot-plant facility of the IPFT is under the refurbishment to align with the scale-up 
the biopesticides and their formulations from plant and microbial sources. Further, 
the IPFT has initiated measures to maximize the utilization of the pilot plant and 
formulation facilities through the following initiatives: 
1. Strengthening pilot-scale production and validation activities for faster 
technology transfer to industries. 
2. Providing incubation and pilot production support to startups, MSMEs, and 
entrepreneurs working in the area of agrochemicals and bio-pesticides. 
3. Expanding collaborative projects with industry and academic institutions for 
formulation development and scale-up studies. 
4. Establishment of Biofoundry facility for development and pilot -scale 
production of bio -pesticide and bio -botanical formulations through plant and 
microbial sources. 
5. Exploring possibilities for limited production of demonstration and validation 
batches for government -supported programmes, farmer outreach activities, and 
field evaluations, as per applicable rules and policy provisions”. 
Comments of the Committee 
1.13 The Committee had noted that IPFT had three functional verticals, viz., 
Formulation Development, Analytical Characterization and Bioscience activities 
and had pilot plant facility under the ‘Formulation Development Vertical’ but was 
never utilized for commercial production and had opined that IPFT should initiate 
steps for full capacity utilization of its installed capacities in so far as plants and 
laboratories were concerned.  The Department in their Action Taken Notes ha d 
submitted that the pilot plant facility available under the ‘Formulation Development 
Vertical’ was created primarily for research, process optimization, pilot -scale 
validation, demonstration, training and technology transfer purposes, and not for 
regular commercial-scale manufacturing and marketing activities and its utilization 
was aligned with the R&D mandate of the Institute rather than commercial 
production. The Department ha d further submitted that the existing pilot -plant 
facility of the IPFT was under refurbishment to align with the scal ing-up of the 
biopesticides and their formulations from plant and microbial sources. The 

9 
 
Committee do agree with the contention of the IPFT but at the same time desire 
that the Department must explore the full potential of the formulation Development 
Verticals and consider expansion of its activities from mere formulation 
development to actual production and sale in the market . The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard.  
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 Vacant Posts in IPFT 
1.14.   The Committee made the following recommendation regarding  filling of vacant 
posts in IPFT: 
 
The Committee note that IPFT had a total sanctioned strength of 40, out of which, 
13 posts have elapsed over a period of time and the working strength of the 
Institute at present is only 16, including 10 Scientific posts. Further, 10 posts are 
vacant for which recruitment process  is stated to be in progress. The Committee 
therefore, recommend that IPFT should fill up the vacant posts at the earliest to 
ensure that the functioning of the institute is not hampered due to shortage of 
officers/staff. The Committee also recommend that Department should also 
ensure timely completion of the recruitment process. 
1.15 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The observation of the Committee is highly encouraging with the note that the 
IPFT has been functioning with the limited regular manpower.  With regard to the 
recruitment process status for the 10 posts as pointed out by the Hon’ble 
Committee, it is to submit that, the recruitment process for 04 out of the 10 vacant 
posts has been completed and remaining 06 posts for which the recruitment 
process is in progress.  
In addition to regular manpower, the efforts has been made to optimize utilization 
of available resources, engage project staff and technical personnel for specific 
activities, and strengthen the Institute’s scientific and technical capabilities in 
emerging areas such as bio -pesticides, advanced formulations, analytical 
characterization, and regulatory support services.  The Department remains 
committed to strengthening the manpower position of IPFT for effective discharge 
of its mandate and for supporting t he growing research, development, and 
technology transfer activities of the Institute”. 
 

10 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.16 The Committee had noted that IPFT had a total sanctioned strength of 40 Posts and 
out of them, 13 Posts elapsed over a period of time. With regard to 10 vacant Post in IPFT 
the Department in their Action Taken Notes ha d submitted that the recruitment process 
for 04 Vacant Post had been completed and the recruitment process for the remaining 06 
Post was in progress. The Committee appreciate the steps taken by the IPFT to fill up the 
vacant Post s and desire that the recruitment process must be expedited to fill up the 
remaining Posts. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
Upgradation of CIPET as Central University 
1.17   The Committee made the following recommendation regarding upgradation of 
CIPET as Central University: 
 
The Committee note that the CIPET is a technical educational institution under the 
Department, engaged in skill development, technology support, as well as 
academic and research activities for the promotion of the petrochemical and allied 
industry in the country. Further, the CIPET has 48 Centr es across the country 
which includes 9 Institutes of Plastics Technology (IPTs), 32 Centres for Skilling 
and Technical Support (CSTS), 03 Schools for Advanced Research in Polymers 
(SARP) and 4 sub - centres. The Committee are of the view that a renewed vision 
of CIPET is required to cope with the modern day’s requirements of Research and 
Development with regard to the utility of plastics and polymers. The Committee are 
of the considered view that if CIPET is embossed with the status of Specialised 
Central University with due recognition by AICTE and UGC,  it has the potential of 
skilling youth by providing them with quality training and placement opportunities.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should explore the feasibility 
and apprise the Committee accordingly. 
 
1.18 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The Department noted the observations and recommendations of the Hon’ble 
Committee regarding the need for strengthening CIPET in view of the emerging 
requirements in the areas of plastics, polymers, petrochemicals, sustainability, 
advanced materials, recycling, and research & innovation. 
Established in 1968 at Chennai under the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, 
Government of India, CIPET has emerged as a premier national institution in the 

11 
 
field of Plastics Engineering and Technology. Over the years, CIPET has 
expanded its presence across the country through a network of 48 Centres 
comprising 32 Centres for Skilling & Technical Support (CSTS), 9 Institutes of 
Petrochemicals Technology (IPT),  3 Schools for Advanced Research in 
Petrochemicals (SARP), and 4 Sub-Centres. 
CIPET presently offers Undergraduate, Postgraduate, Doctoral, Diploma, Post -
Diploma, Post-Graduate Diploma, and Skill Development programmes in the fields 
of plastics engineering, polymer science, manufacturing technology, and allied 
disciplines. While CIP ET functions as an autonomous institution for conducting 
Diploma/Post Diploma/Post Graduate Diploma programmes, its UG and PG 
programmes are presently affiliated with various State Technical Universities.  
As, CIPET has developed significant academic, infrastructural, technical, and 
research capabilities over the years and possesses the potential to evolve into an 
independent specialised higher educational institution. In this context, the proposal 
for upgradation of CIPET as a Central University is being examined keeping in 
view the following broad objectives: 
I.To develop CIPET as a multidisciplinary Higher Educational Institution in the 
specialised domain of petrochemicals, polymers, plastics engineering, advanced 
manufacturing, skilling, and vocational education.  
II.To restructure and modernise existing academic programmes in alignment with 
the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020, including adoption of credit -based 
systems, academic bank of credits, and credit transfer mechanisms.  
III.To enable uniform curriculum and academic standards across all CIPET centres 
in the country with enhanced industry alignment and improved placement 
opportunities for students.  
IV.To strengthen research, innovation, and technology development in emerging 
areas such as advanced polymer science, biodegradable and sustainable plastics, 
circular plastics economy, plastic waste management, and sustainable materials.  
V.To enhance India’s global academic and research footprint in the specialised 
domain of petrochemicals and polymer science through international 
collaborations and attraction of global faculty and researchers.  
The Department is also examining the proposal in the context of other specialised 
Central Universities established in focused sectors, such as Gati Shakti 
Vishwavidyalaya, Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University, and Dr. Rajendra 
Prasad Central Agricultural University. 
The matter is under consideration of the Department in consultation with CIPET 
and other stakeholders, and further action shall be taken as per extant policy and 
statutory provisions”. 
 
 

12 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.19 The Committee in its 22 nd report had recommended that CIPET should be 
endowed with the status of Central University as it ha d the potential of skilling 
youth by providing them qualitative training and placement opportunities. The 
Department in its Action Taken Note have submitted that the Department was 
examining the proposal in the context of other specialized Central Universities 
established in focused sectors and the matter was under consideration of the 
Department in consultation with CIPET and other stakeholders and further ac tion 
shall be taken as per extant policy and statutory provisions. The Committee 
recommend that the matter may be pursued and brought to a logical conclusion at 
the earliest.  
(Recommendation No. 12) 
Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs)  
 
1.20  The Committee made the following recommendation on establishing PCPIRs: 
 
The Committee was informed that the Government of India notified the Petroleum, 
Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Region(s) (PCPIR) Policy, 2007 to attract 
investment and for generation of employment in the Petroleum, Chemical and 
Petrochemical Investment Region(s). The objective of PCPIR Policy 2007 was to 
promote the Chemical and Petrochemical sector in an integrated and environment 
friendly manner.  At present, three Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical 
Investment Regions (PCPIRs) are being implemented in the States of Andhra 
Pradesh (Vishakhapatnam), Gujarat (Dahej) and Odisha (Paradeep) to promote 
investment and industrial developm ent in these sectors.  It was further informed 
that till date, a total investment made in all three PCPIRs amounts to Rs. 3,49,192 
Crore. Despite this huge investment, there are no specific targets fixed for number 
of units, investments by the industry and employment in the PCPIR Policy. Further, 
the Department has submitted that so far it has not received any proposal from the 
State Governments for providing Viability Gap Funding under this Policy and ‘NIL’ 
budgetary allocation has been made and no expenditure has been incurred by the 
Department under the PCPIR Policy, 2007.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should seriously go into deeper introspection in 
coordination with the State Governments as well as investors/stakeholder involved 

13 
 
and come out with a solution.   The Committee would like to be apprised on the 
steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
1.21 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
Government of India has notified the Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical 
Investment Region(s) (PCPIR) Policy, 2007 to attract investment and for 
generation of employment in a cluster-based approach with common infrastructure 
and support services to provi de a competitive environment conducive for setting 
up businesses. The PCPIR Policy 2007 has provided a conducive and competitive 
environment for setting up businesses through creation of common infrastructure.  
 
As per the PCPIR Policy, the State Governments have been developing these 
PCPIRs at their end by providing various infrastructure facilities and basic utilities 
within these PCPIRs. Further, the Central Government has also been providing 
the funding support for development of these PCPIRs in the three states through 
its various infrastructural Ministries such as Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, Ministry of Ports, Shipping, and Waterways, Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways. This funding  support by the Centre has been provided by way of 
commissioning of various projects by these different central ministries in and 
around the PCPIR regions in the three states. 
 
Presently, the three PCPIRs have attracted total investment of Rs. 3,49,192 
Crores and 2,246 nos. of Chemical and petrochemical units have been set up in 
these, generating employment for 3,71,263 individuals. The recommendations of 
the committee have been duly noted. The department has been undertaking 
stakeholder consultations with the concerned state governments, as well as other 
stakeholders from the industry. As a result of these deliberations, it has emerged 
that, in addition to the various infrastruct ure projects already undertaken in these 
PCPIR regions, several additional infrastructure projects are currently at different 
stages of execution in these regions. Details of all such infrastructure projects, 
including those already existing region -wise in  the PCPIRs as well as the 
additional projects being initiated and currently in the pipeline, are provided in the 
Annexure-A. Consequently, as on date, the updated status of implementation and 
execution of PCPIR projects, along with details of investment, employment, and 
the number of chemical units region-wise, is as under: 
 
Indicator Gujarat Andhra Pradesh Odisha Total 
Location/ Region Dahej, 
Bharuch 
Vishakhapatnam– 
Kakinada Paradeep - 
Approval Feb, 2009 Feb, 2009 Dec, 2010 - 
MOA signed  Jan, 2010 Oct, 2009 Nov, 2011 - 
Total Area (Sq. 
kms.) 453.00 640.00 284.15 1377.15 
Anchor Tenant ONGC Petro 
Additions - Indian Oil 
Corporation - 

14 
 
Indicator Gujarat Andhra Pradesh Odisha Total 
Limited (OPaL) Ltd. (IOCL) 
Investments 
made (Rs.  in 
Crore) 
1,37,163 68,148 1,43,881 3,49,192 
Employment 
generated (No.) 2,45,140 86,123 40,000 3,71,263 
No. of Chemical 
Units 2079 154 13 2246 
 
Further, as a result of these stakeholder consultations with the concerned state 
governments, as well as with industry stakeholders, the need for establishing 
dedicated compact chemical parks was felt, in contrast to the existing large PCPIR 
regions. Consequently, in the recent Union Budget announced by the Union 
Finance Minister on 1 February 2026, the following announcement was made: 
 
“To enhance domestic chemical production and reduce import dependency, we 
will launch a Scheme to support States in establishing 3 dedicated Chemical 
Parks, through challenge route, on a cluster-based plug-and-play model”. 
Subsequent to the announcement in the Union Budget of FY 2026 –27, the 
proposed scheme for establishment of Dedicated Chemical Parks is currently 
under formulation”.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.22 With regard to establishment of PCPIR s, the Committee note with concern 
that even after lapse of about two decades, since PCPIR Policy was notified in the 
year 2007, the Department was struggling  to establish all the three PCPIRs viz  
Andhra Pradesh (Vishakhapatnam), Gujarat (Dahej) and Odisha (Paradeep)  
completely and even unable to secure an anchor tenant for the Vishakhapatnam 
PCPIR. Further,  Action Taken Notes stated that the Department ha d been 
undertaking stakeholder consultations with the concerned State Governments as 
well as other stakeholders from the industry. The Department further submitted 
that as a result of these stakeholder consultations with the concerned State 
Governments, as well as with industry stakeholders, the need for establishing 
dedicated compact chemical parks was felt, in addition to the existing large PCPIR 
regions. The Committee observe that while all the three PCPIRs are still under 

15 
 
process and could not be fully established new proposals for developing compact 
Chemical Parks may divert resource and time. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the Department should accord equal priority to all the three PCPIRs and 
concerted and collaborative efforts must be undertaken to ensure their full 
establishment thereby safeguarding past investments amounting to the tune of Rs. 
3,49,192 crore.  The Committee also recommend that the existing Policy be 
reviewed comprehensively so that inherent factors inhibiting the implementation 
of the PCPIR Policy may be resolved expeditiously so that the noble intention of 
the policy are adhered in letter and spirit. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
Filing of Patents and Development technologies by CoEs 
1.23  The Committee made the following recommendation  on filling pf patents and 
development technologies development by CoEs: 
 
 The Committee have been apprised that so far, the 18 CoEs  approved under the 
scheme could file 80 patents only and have developed 96 technologies/products, 
of which 35 have been transferred to the Industry. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the reasons for huge difference between the number of technolog ies 
developed and actual transferred to the industry. The Committee also recommend 
that appropriate initiatives may be taken to ensure that maximum number of 
technologies products may be transferred to the industry in near future. 
 
1.24 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“In total, these 18 CoEs, so far, as of March 2026, have filed 83 patents (of which 
41 are granted) and have developed 96 technologies/products, out of which 38 
are transferred/delivered to Industry.  
 With regard to the reasons for difference between the number of technologies 
developed and actual transferred to the industry, it is submitted that the 
development of a technology or filing of a patent marks the successful completion 
of the R&D phase, how ever, commercializing that technology is a multi -stage 
process and is faced by the following challenges among others, that are:   
i.Extended Validation and Gestation Periods: Transitioning a technology from a lab- 
scale prototype (TRL-4) to a market-ready commercial product (TRL-8/9) requires 
extensive validation, scale-up trials, and regulatory certifications;  

16 
 
ii.Validation & Compliance: Mandatory validation and safety testing are under 
progress and are inherently time-consuming  
iii.Financial Limitations of MSMEs and Start-ups: The primary adopters of niche CoE 
technologies are MSMEs and start-ups, however, these entities often face severe 
capital constraints. Procuring the technology through upfront licensing fees, 
followed by capita l expenditures to set up new manufacturing lines or procure 
advanced machinery, which is frequently beyond their immediate financial 
capacity and  
iv.Technologies require adaptation to specific industry use - cases, necessitating 
iterative engagement with stakeholders. 
  `Further, the Department, in November 2024 and December 2025, 
organised two editions of the Chemcon Innovation Conclave in collaboration with 
the Indian Chamber of Commerce (ICC) for the CoEs. The event, which brought 
together delegates from diverse sectors, including policymakers, industry leaders, 
researchers, academics, and entrepreneurs, provided a platform to exchange 
knowledge, foster collaborations, and discuss the latest trends and challenges 
shaping the chemical and petrochemical industries. The event highlighted how 
collaborations between the Centres of Excellence (CoEs) set up by the 
Department and the industry could accelerate the commercialization of research 
and foster innovative products, thereby enhancing the competitiveness of the 
Indian chemical and petrochemical industry. 
 With regard to initiatives/steps to ensure that technology transfer is maximised to 
the industry, it is mentioned that the Department regularly emphasises maximising 
the technology transfer during various interactions with CoEs, like review meetings 
and visits to the CoEs. Also, Joint Secretary (Petrochemicals) has written, in April 
2026, to the Head of the Institutions to strengthen the focus on technology transfer 
and to encourage researchers under CoE to actively engage with industry partners 
for effective commercialization of developed technologies. 
             Also, to enhance the collaboration between industry and academia in 
driving innovation and sustainable growth in the chemical and petrochemical 
sectors, the department has developed a dedicated platform, namely MITR 
Industry Academia Portal (h ttps://mitr.chemicals.gov.in/), which facilitates 
interactions, partnerships, and technology matchmaking between these 
stakeholders, including CoEs”. 
  
Comments of the Committee 
1.25 With regard to filing of patents and development of technologies by Centres 
of Excellence , the Committee noted that 18 CoEs ha d filed 83 patents and 
developed 96 technologies/products out of which only 38 could be transferred to 
Industry. The Committee were apprised that 58 technologies could not be 
transferred at all.  With regard to the reasons for difference between the number of 

17 
 
technologies developed and actual transferred to the industry, the Department had 
submitted that the development of a technology or filing of a patent marks the 
successful completion of the R&D phase, however, commercializing that 
technology was a multi-stage process with challenges viz extended validation and 
Gestation Periods, validation and compliance, financial limitation of MSMEs and 
start ups etc. The Committee desire that the Centres of Excellence  and the 
Department should make con certed efforts to  overcome these challenges and 
closely monitor the functioning of the Centres of Ex cellence through regular 
periodic visits and review meetings.  
 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
Farmers Training programs conducted by IPFT. 
1.26  The Committee made the following recommendation  on farmers training 
programs conducted by IPFT:- 
 
The Committee note that the IPFT had conducted 31 farmers training programmes 
during  the last three years. During the year 2023 -24, 2024-25 and 2025-26, the 
number of programmes conducted by IPFT is 20, 02 and 09 respectively.   The 
Committee note with concern that only 11 farmers training programmes were 
conducted by IPFT during the last two years whereas in t he year 2023-24, no. of 
progrmmes conducted by IPFT was 20. Moreover, the farmers training 
programmes were conducted in Assam, Meghalaya and Mizoram only whereas 
rest of the north east states have been completely left out.  Further, during the 
years 2024 -25 and 2025 -26, ‘Nil’ no. of farmers training programmes were 
conducted in the North East States.  The Committee therefore recommend that 
the Department as well as IPFT should conduct training programmes across Pan 
India including the north east States. The Committee may be apprised of the action 
taken in the matter. 
 
1.27 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
IPFT: 
IPFT has been actively conducting farmers’ awareness programmes on safe and 
judicious use of pesticides, biopesticides, nano -formulations, sustainable 
agricultural practices and related technologies. During the last three years, IPFT 
has conducted a total of 33 farmers’ awareness programmes across the country. 

18 
 
The figure of 31 programmes appears to have been based on information available 
up to 8th February 2026, whereas two additional farmers’ awareness programmes 
were organized subsequently on 24th February 2026 at Bharatpur, Rajasthan and 
on 28th February 202 6 at Banda, Uttar Pradesh. The observation of the Hon’ble 
committee for conducting such farmers awareness programs in other parts of the 
North-East states will be taken up with the coordination and support of the local 
authorities/groups. Department with IPFT shall make concerted efforts to enhance 
the frequency, geographical coverage for the farmers awareness programs during 
the coming years, including focused activities in the North Eastern Region.  
 
Chemical: 
It is submitted that the Department organizes Farmers Training Programmes 
under Chemical Promotion Development Scheme though through one of its PSUs 
HIL (India) Limited. They are organized on the issue of Safe and Judicious use of 
Pesticides in crops and creating awareness among farmers towards the adoption 
of Integrated Pest Management Practices to minimize pesticides residue in food 
grains, edible oils, fruits, and vegetables.  
 
In addition to the training programmes being organized through HIL, the 
Department also request IPFT to organize similar training programmes, even 
though IPFT is mainly dedicated for the purposes of research and development of 
pesticides and formulations.   
 
Accordingly, the Department has organized 177 training programs though HIL and 
IPFT, during last 3 FYs. 
 
S. No. Entity FTPs 
conducted 
in 2023-24 
FTPs 
conducted 
in 2024-25 
FTPs 
conducted 
in 2025-26 
1 HIL 25 62 58 
2 IPFT 20 02 10 
 Total 45 64 68 
 Grant Total 177 
 
Out of the above training programs conducted pan India by the Department, the 
number of training programs organized in the North East Region during the last 3 
FYs by both HIL and IPFT are as under : 
S. 
No. 
Entity FTPs 
conducted in 
2023-24 
FTPs 
conducted in 
2024-25 
FTPs 
conducted in 
2025-26 
1 HIL 4 15 17 
2 IPFT 4 0 0 
 Total 8 15 17 
 Grant Total 40 
 

19 
 
 From the above it may please be perused that for the FY 2024 -25 and FY 
2025-26, 15 and 17  training programs have been organized in the North East 
Region respectively. 
 Further, it is also submitted that as regards Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, 
Sikkim and Tripura, 1, 6 and 8 training programs organized have been organized 
in FY 2023-24, FY 2024-25 and FY 2025-26. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.28 Noting that IPFT had conducted only 31 farmers training  programmes in a 
span of three years  with NIL figure in North East States  the Committee had 
recommended that the IPFT should enhance their farmers training programmes 
pan India including the North East States. The Department in the Action Taken 
Notes have submitted that  besides the  31 Farmers Training Programm es 
conducted by IPFT during the last 0 2 years two additional Farmers Training 
Programmes were also conducted at Bharatpur, Rajasthan and at Banda, Uttar 
Pradesh raising the number to 3 3. The Committee are happy to find that the 
Department have given a ssurance for conducting Farmers Awareness 
Programmes in North East States with the coordination and support of the local 
authorities, groups and concerted efforts to enhance the frequency, geographical 
coverage of the Farmers Awareness Program during the coming ye ars including 
focused activities in the North Eastern Regions. The Committee hope and trust that 
the Farmers Awareness Programmes would be conducted accordingly and they be 
apprised thereof. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
Projected and Allocated BE for the year 2026-27 
2.1  The Committee in their Twenty-Second Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the Department sought  BE of Rs. 199.76 crore for the 
financial year 2026-27 but an amount of Rs. 185.72 crore has been allocated to it.  
The projected BE of the Department has been reduced by an amount of Rs. 14.04 
crore by the Min istry of Finance. The reduction of allocated funds may be seen 
under various heads/schemes. The Department sought BE of Rs. 61.00 crore for 
New Schemes of Petrochemicals but has been allocated a reduced amount of Rs. 
52.50 crore. Similarly, for IPFT, the Department sought an amount of Rs. 9.15 
crore which too has been reduced to Rs. 8.94 crore. The Committee desire that 
they may be apprised about the extent to which the New Schemes of 
Petrochemicals and functioning of IPFT would be affected due to reduced 
allocation of funds. At the same time, the Committee desire that the Department 
should analyze the reasons for the curtailment of funds sought by it for New 
Scheme for Petrochemicals (NSP) and IPFT.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised by the Department in this regard”. 
 
2.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
NSP:-  B.E. for 2026 -27 of Rs.55 crore was sought for committed expenditure 
towards already approved Plastic Parks and CoEs, including provision for 8 new 
CoEs (including 3 CoEs which were under consideration and were approved under 
previous SFC) and Rs. 15 crore were earmarked for release during FY 2026-27 to 
these new CoEs. However, the Department is presently focusing on the 
completion of the pending/ongoing CoEs and enhancement of the technology 
transfer. A  proposal for extension of the Scheme for Setti ng up of Centre of 
Excellence (CoE) by three years i.e. up to 31.03.2029 without additional financial 
outlay, to enable completion and release of balance funds / committed liabilities 
(of Rs.22.43 crore) to the pending CoEs, of the 18 Centres of Excellence  (CoEs) 
approved, has been sent to Department of Expenditure for their 
approval/concurrence. Hence, the Department is not considering new CoEs under 
the Scheme and the Department has to pay committed liabilities to the ongoing 
Plastic Parks and CoEs. Hence, B.E. allocated during 2026-27 i.e. Rs.47.55 crore 
will not affect the functioning of Plastic Parks and CoEs. 
 

21 
 
IPFT:- The Department has taken note of the observations and recommendations 
of the Hon’ble Committee regarding the reduction in Budget Estimates allocation 
IPFT during the financial year 2026 –27.Against the projected Budget Estimate of 
Rs. 9.15 crore for IPFT, an a llocation of Rs. 8.94 crore has been made. The 
marginal reduction in allocation is primarily due to overall budgetary rationalization 
and prioritization of available resources at the Government level. The Department 
and IPFT continuously review the financi al requirements of the Institute and, 
wherever necessary, additional requirements are taken up at appropriate stages 
as per Government procedures and availability of funds. 
In the RE meeting with DEA, MoF DCPC had projected an amount of Rs.61.00 
crores for NSP scheme and Rs.9.15 crore for IPFT. However, the actual allocated 
amount was Rs.52.50 crores for NSP scheme and Rs.8.94 crores for IPFT. In this 
regard, in the RE meeting DEA had stated that if the Department will need more 
budgetary allocation for the IPFT and NSP scheme, same may be taken into 
consideration by them at RE 2026-27 stage as per the actuals of the respective 
schemes. 
 (Recommendation No. 2) 
2.3  The Committee in their Twenty-Second Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: 
 “The Committee note that the Budget Estimates (BE) of Rs. 185.72 crore sought 
for the financial year 2026-27 is less than the BE sought in the previous financial 
years. As regards reasons for the same, the Department has submitted that the 
allocation during the financial years 2023 -24 and 2024 -25 was higher due to 
provision of Govt. Loan to HIL(INDIA) Ltd. Further, in addition to it, in financial year 
2026-27 there was less demand for funds from the autonomous bodies i.e. CIPET 
and IPFT. As such, the Committee would like be apprised of the reasons for the 
lesser requirement of funds by the autonomous bodies like CIPET and IPFT.  At 
the same time, the Committee recommend that as far as possible BE sought by 
the Department should be consistent. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the steps taken by the Department in this regard”.   
 
2.4 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 IPFT:  
 “The Department has taken note of the observations and recommendations of the 
Hon’ble Committee regarding the Budget Estimates and requirement of funds for 
IPFT during the financial year 2026 –27.The comparatively lower requirement of 
funds projected by IPFT  for FY 2026 –27 is primarily due to optimization of 
expenditure based on ongoing activities, phased implementation of certain 
projects, and increased emphasis on resource mobilization through externally 
funded projects, sponsored research, technical serv ices, training programmes, 
and industry collaborations. Further, in IPFT and CIPET capital expenditure 

22 
 
requirements undertaken during previous years have already been addressed, 
resulting in relatively lower projected requirements under certain budget heads 
during the current financial year. 
 The Department and IPFT remain committed to strengthening research, 
technology development, analytical services, and promotion of environmentally 
sustainable pesticide formulation technologies in the country. 
 In FY 2025-26, an amount of Rs.194.05 crore was allocated for BE. In FY 2026 -
27, Department had proposed an amount of Rs.199.76 crores, however DEA had 
allocated an amount of Rs.185.72 crore, therefore Department is making its best 
efforts to keep the Budget Estimates consistent throughout the years”. 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
2.5  The Committee in their Twenty-Second Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that BE sought by the Department during the year 2023 -24 
was Rs. 173.45 crore which was enhanced to 572.63 crore at RE stage. As 
regards this enhancement, the Department has submitted that it was due to budget 
provision of Govt. loan of Rs. 486.74 crore to HIL India Limited. If, this loan amount 
of Rs. 486.74 is deducted from the RE which is 572.63, the RE of the Department 
comes to just Rs. 85.89 crore only. Similarly, during the financial year 2024 -25, 
the Department sought BE of Rs. 25 9.11 crore which was enhanced to 261.99 
crore and as regards this enhancement, the Department has again submitted that 
it contains a loan component of Rs. 120.06 crore as Govt. loan to HIL (India) Ltd. 
And after deducting this loan component the RE of the Department for the year 
2024-25 comes to Rs. 141.93 crore and for the year 2025 -26, the BE sought by 
the Department is Rs. 194.05 crore which is reduced to Rs.185.57 crore. Thus 
during the year 2023-24, the RE of the Department was just 85.89 crore which has 
enhanced subsequently in the years 2024 -25 and 2025-26 to Rs 141.93 crore & 
Rs. 185.57 crore respectively. The Committee would like to know the huge 
difference between the RE 2023-24 and RE for the year 2024-25 and 2025-26”. 
 
2.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
The increase in the RE figures of CIPET and NSP over the years is mainly due to 
utilization of funds under scheme, the details are as under:- 
(Rs. In crores) 
FY (RE)  CIPET NSP 
2023-24 7.28 18.00 
2024-25 44.20 33.50 
2025-26 76.35 45.50 
  
 During the FY 2023 -24, huge unspent balances were lying pending with CIPET, 
therefore Department requested CIPET to first utilize their unspent balances and 

23 
 
then they sought budgetary allocation from GoI. Thereafter, CIPET utilize d the 
unspent balances and thereafter an amount of Rs.44.20 crore was allocated in FY 
2024-25 which was again increased to Rs.76.35 crore in FY 2025 -26 ( at RE 
stage). 
  
 GoI implemented Central Nodal Agency (CNA) procedure for the schemes under 
the Departments/Ministries w.e.f. 01.04.2022. Accordingly, the Department 
implemented the revised procedure and also adopted the single Central Nodal 
Agency (CNA) system for release of funds. However, the process of getting the 
requisite bank accounts opened took some time and the actual release under NSP 
was Rs. 18.00 crore only (full amount of allocated RE was released). Thereafter, 
in the coming FYs the RE was subsequently increased to Rs.33.50 c rores in FY 
2024-25 and Rs.45.50 crores in FY 2025 -26 to meet out the carry over liabilities 
as mentioned in the table above.  
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
2.7  The Committee in their Twenty-Second Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: 
“As regards the actual expenditure, the Committee note that it has been less than 
the allocated RE for the last three financial years consecutively. The RE for the 
year 2023 -24 was 572.63 crore but the actual expenditure stood at Rs.474.67 
crore and an amount of Rs. 97.96 crore remained unspent. Similarly for the year 
2024-25, the RE was Rs. 261.99 crore but the actual expenditure was Rs. 256.38 
crore and an amount of Rs. 5.61 crore remained unspent.  For the year 2025 -26 
too, out of the allocated RE of Rs.  185.57 crore, an amount of Rs. 149.45 crore 
could be spent as on 20.02.2026.  In this regard, the Department has submitted 
that the actual expenditure for the last three years is in accordance to the RE 
allocation and since the RE for the FY 2023 -24 and 2024 -25 were having a 
onetime budget provision of Loan to HIL (India) ltd, hence it appears to be in the 
higher side in comparison  to FY 2025 -26. An amount of Rs.256.38 crore was 
utilized for the FY 2024 -25 against the allocated RE of Rs.261.99 crore which is 
approx. 97.85% of the allocated RE 2024-25.  The Department has also submitted 
that it will make its best efforts to fully utilize the funds allocated at RE 2025 -26.  
The Committee hope and trust that the Department would initiate steps for optimal 
utilization of the allocated funds in future”. 
 
2.8 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“It is submitted that the budget utilization in r/o CPDS and BGLD for the year 2025-
26 is 97% and 94% respectively. The major portion of the BGLD budget is for the 
payment of ex -gratia compensation to the victims of Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster. 
Since the disbursement is dependent on the number of cases received during the 
course of the year and therefore could not be predicted accurately, some of the 
amount remained unspent during the last year. 
The Department has noted the observations and recommendation of the Hon’ble 
Committee regarding optimal utilization of allocated funds. In this regard, 

24 
 
necessary steps are being taken to further strengthen expenditure planning and 
monitoring mechanisms. 
 
An amount of Rs.185.57 crores was allocated during the RE 2025-26 out of which 
an amount of Rs.180.77 crores was utilized by the Department (97.41% of the 
allocated RE). Further, an amount of Rs.185.72 crores is allocated in BE 2026-27 
and the Department is regularly monitoring the pace of expenditure through SoM 
meetings chaired by Secretary(C&PC). The Department will make its best efforts 
to fully utilize the allocated budgetary allocations by the end of current FY”. 
 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
Allotment of Parks to the Real users 
2.9  The Committee in their Twenty-Second Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: 
The Committee had raised apprehensions that several investors purchase plots 
for investment purposes, thereby depriving genuine end users of the opportunity 
to get benefit from the scheme.  However, the Department has clarified that no 
such instances of investors obtaining plot allotments in Plastic Parks in violation 
of the prescribed norms have come to the notice of the Department. The allotment 
of plots in Plastic Parks is undertaken by the respective State Governments and/or 
the Special P urpose Vehicles  (SPVs) in accordance with their approved land 
allotment policies, guidelines, and eligibility criteria. These policies generally 
require applicants to demonstrate their intent and capacity to establish and operate 
manufacturing units as per their guidelin es.  The Committee desire that utmost 
care be taken in allotment of plots so that only the genuine users get the allotment 
of plots in the Plastic Parks. 
 
2.10 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
    “The Department has taken note of the concerns expressed by the Hon’ble 
Committee regarding the possibility of investors acquiring plots in Plastic Parks for 
speculative purposes, thereby limiting access for genuine end users. 
 
    In this regard, it is submitted that the allotment of plots in Plastic Parks is carried 
out by the respective State Governments and/or the Special Purpose Vehicles 
(SPVs) constituted for the implementation of the projects. These entities follow 
their duly approved land allotment policies, guidelines, and eligibility criteria, which 
are designed to ensure that only eligible and bona fide applicants with the intent 
and capability to establish manufacturing units are considered for allotment. 
 
    Further, it is informed that no instances of allotment of plots to non -genuine or 
ineligible entities, in violation of the prescribed norms, have come to the notice of 
the Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals (DCPC). 
     Secretary (C&PC) also reviewed the progress of all Plastic Parks during May, 2026 

25 
 
in a meeting attended by the SPVs/key promoters of all Plastic Parks and the 
concerned Secretaries/Principal Secretaries (Industries) of the respective State 
Governments. During the review, emphasis was laid on close monitoring of 
allotment and operational isation of plots, with particular focus on allotment to 
genuine investors/entrepreneurs to ensure timely industrial activity in the Plastic 
Parks. 
The Department will continue to impress upon the State Governments and SPVs 
the importance of exercising due diligence and maintaining strict adherence to the 
prescribed guidelines to ensure that allotments are made only to genuine end 
users, in line with the objectives of the Plastic Parks Scheme”. 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
Promoting the use of  Bio Pesticides 
2.11  The Committee in their Twenty-Second Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: 
The Committee note that the Bio -pesticides are environment friendly and yield 
long-term benefit but are slow to act whereas Chemical pesticides, act -fast but 
have adverse effects on the soil and human health over prolonged use. The 
Committee, in this regard, had noted during oral evidence that though the farmers 
are ready to use the Bio Pesticides but Bio Pesticides are not readily available in 
the market.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should 
work towards promoting the use of Bio-Pesticides and they must educate farmers 
about long term benefits and effectiveness  of using Bio-Pesticides in the fields so 
as to develop its acceptability towards farmers  besides ensuring availability of Bio 
Pesticides.  The Department has submitted in  this regard that the Central 
Insecticides Board and Registration Committee (CIB&RC) under the Department 
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare grants the registration/license for 
manufacturing, sale, and distribution of all types of pesticides/weedicides including 
biopesticides. The Committee therefore urge the Department to take the matter 
with the Department of Agriculture and Farmer Welfare to ensure ample availability 
of Bio-Pesticides across the country. The Committee may be apprised of the steps 
taken in this regard. The Committee recommend that Department should educate 
farmers about safe use of Bio pesticides through farmers awareness programmes. 
At the same time, they should also be encouraged to use bio-pesticides as a safer 
and eco-friendly option. 
 
2.12 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under:- 
 
 IPFT 
 
“The Department has taken note of the observations and recommendations of the 
Hon’ble Committee regarding the promotion and availability of bio-pesticides in the 

26 
 
country. Bio-pesticides are environmentally sustainable alternatives to chemical 
pesticides and play an important role in minimizing adverse impacts on soil health, 
biodiversity, environment, and human health. In this regard, the Department, 
through IPFT a nd other stakeholder engagements, has been actively promoting 
awareness on the safe and judicious use of pesticides, including bio -pesticides, 
among farmers. Several Farmers’ Awareness Programmes and workshops have 
been organized across various States to e ducate farmers on the long -term 
benefits, effectiveness, and eco-friendly nature of bio-pesticides and bio-botanical 
formulations. Further, the matter regarding enhancing the availability and 
accessibility of bio-pesticides is being taken up with the Department of Agriculture 
& Farmers Welfare and other concerned stakeholders. Since registration and 
licensing of bio -pesticides are regulated by the Central Insecticides Board & 
Registration Committee (CIB&RC), efforts are being made to facilitate interaction 
among industry, researchers, and regulatory agencies to promote wider adoption 
and commercialization of bio-pesticides. 
The Department, through IPFT, has undertaken the following measures for 
promotion of bio-pesticides and their formulations: 
1. Establishment of Biofoundry Facility:  A Biofoundry Facility is being 
established at IPFT for development of bio -pesticide formulations from plant and 
microbial sources, including their characterization, bio -evaluation, pilot -scale 
validation, and scale-up for faster technology transfer and industry adoption. 
2. Focus on Emerging and Sustainable Technologies: Emphasis is being 
given to development of bio -based pesticides, nano -formulations, advanced 
delivery systems, and environmentally sustainable pesticide formulations. 
3. Expansion of Testing and Validation Services: IPFT is strengthening its 
analytical, formulation testing, and validation capabilities for quality evaluation of 
bio-pesticides and other emerging agro-inputs such as biostimulants. 
4. Academic and Research Collaboration: Collaborations are being 
strengthened with leading academic institutions, including IIT Delhi and other 
institutes/universities, for advanced research and doctoral programmes in 
formulation science and related areas. 
5. Farmer Outreach and Capacity Building: IPFT regularly conducts 
Farmers’ Awareness Programmes across various States to promote safe and 
judicious use of pesticides and bio-pesticides, Integrated Pest Management (IPM), 
and Good Agricultural Practices (GAP). During the last three years, these 
programmes have benefited more than 13,000 farmers across the country. 
The Department will continue making efforts to undertake awareness generation, 
capacity building, stakeholder consultations, and technology development 
initiatives to encourage greater adoption of bio-pesticides as a safer, eco-friendly, 
and sustainable option for agriculture”. 
 
 

27 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 Approved and functional Centre of Excellence (CoEs) 
2.13  The Committee in their Twenty-Second Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that t he Scheme of CoEs seeks to provide grant -in-aid to 
Government educational and research institutions to undertake research to 
improve existing technology and promote the development of new applications. 
The Committee further note that the Standing Finance C ommittee, in its meeting 
held on October, 2021 had approved setting  up of 11 new CoEs. However, out of 
these 11 new CoEs, the Department had approved 02 CoEs in the year 2022  and 
05 CoEs in the year 2024. As such 04 CoEs are yet  to be approved and made 
functional. The Committee, therefore, recommend that remaining CoEs be 
approved and establish at the earliest. The Committee may be apprised about  the 
present status of 02 CoEs approved in the year 2022 and 05 CoEs approved in the 
year 2024”. 
 
2.14 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“Under the scheme for setting up of Centres of Excellence (CoEs). the Department 
has, so far, approved 18 CoEs which includes 02 CoEs in the year 2022   and 05 
CoEs in the year 2024. The Status of these 7 CoEs, upto 31.03.2026, is as given 
in table below: 
(Rs. in crore) 
 S.N
o. 
Title of CoE and 
Location 
Approv
al Year 
Total 
Proje
ct 
Cost 
DCPC 
Approv
ed 
Grant 
DCPC 
Grant 
utilize
d  
No. of 
Patents 
filed/grant
ed 
No. Technologies 
or Products 
Developed/transfe
rred 
No. of 
Resear
ch 
Papers 
No. of 
Studen
ts 
trained 
i. Sustainable & 
innovative 
Design and 
manufacturing of 
polymer-TOYS 
(SUNDAR - 
TOYS) at IIT, 
Guwahati 
2022 10.59 5.00 1.55 00 27/00 13 32  
ii. Design and 
Development for 
Value added 
Toys of Rubber 
and Allied 
2022 9.87 4.93 2.90 02/00 
  
05/01 00 7  

28 
 
Finished 
Products at 
Indian Rubber 
Materials 
Research 
Institute (IRMRI), 
Thane 
iii. Coal to Acetylene 
and Fine 
Chemicals at IIT 
(ISM), Dhanbad 
2024 5.61 2.61 0.17 00 00 00 3  
iv. Biodegradable 
Packaging 
Materials 
(BioPack) at IIT, 
Madras 
2024 9.91 4.95 1.50 00 
  
00 01 28  
v. Performance 
Chemicals and 
Sustainable 
Polymers for 
Industrial 
Applications at 
CSIR-NIIST, 
Thiruvananthapu
ram 
2024 15.52 5.00 1.36 02/00 
  
00 02 11  
vi. Speciality 
Chemicals at IIT, 
Kanpur 
2024 11.86 4.99 1.60 01/00 
  
00 07 18  
vii. Transparent and 
Biocompatible 
Metal-Polymer 
Composite 
Based X -ray, 
Gamma ray and 
Neutron Shields 
for Window and 
Personal 
Protecting 
Apparels” at 
CSIR-AMPRI, 
Bhopal 
2024 3.90    1.95 0.74 01/00 
  
00 00 3  
  
With regard to the recommendation of the Committee to approve and establish 

29 
 
new CoEs, it is submitted that the Department is presently focusing on the 
completion of the pending/ongoing CoEs and enhancement of the technology 
transfer.  Accordingly, a proposal for extension of the Scheme for Setting up of 
Centre of Excellence (CoE) by three years i.e. up to 31.03.2029 without additional 
financial outlay, to enable completion and release of balance funds / committed 
liabilities (of Rs.22.43 crore) to the pending CoEs, of the 18 Centers of Excellence 
(CoEs) approved, has been sent to D epartment of Expenditure for their 
approval/concurrence”.  
(Recommendation No. 15) 
Review of functioning of CoEs 
 
2.15  The Committee in their Twenty-Second Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: 
“As regards review of functioning of CoEs, the Department has submitted that the 
Project Monitoring Committee under the chairmanship of Deputy Secretary, 
DCPC, set up under the scheme, reviews the working of the CoE through online 
or physical visits. The Co Es are also reviewed by the Project Sanctioning 
Committee chaired by Secretary (DCPC), to consider release of the 2nd/3rd 
instalment of grant. The Department also reviews the progress of the CoEs 
through quarterly reports on details of patents filed/techn ologies/products 
developed. Further, the CoEs are regularly monitored by the Department through 
review meetings under the chairmanship of Secretary/Joint Secretary/Deputy 
Secretary. While appreciating the extant monitoring mechanism put in place, the 
Committee recommend that the review processes of CoEs must be intensified so 
that funds allocated to them are utilized in  a timely manner to achieve the noble 
objectives of these CoEs”. 
 
2.16 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The Department takes note of the recommendation of the Committee to intensify 
the review process of CoEs  to ensure funds allocated to them are utilized in  a 
timely manner to achieve the noble objectives of these CoEs”. 
 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
Promoting Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 
2.17  The Committee in their Twenty-Second Report (18 th Lok Sabha), had 
recommended as under: 
“With regard to FDI in Chemical Sector, th e Committee have been apprised that 
the Government has adopted a liberal Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) policy 
framework for the Chemicals and Petrochemicals sector. Currently, 100% FDI is 
permitted under the Automatic Route in the Chemicals and Petrochemicals sector 
for both manufacturing and trading activities. Government approval is required 

30 
 
only in cases involving investment from entities of countries sharing land borders 
with India. Therefore, the current FDI policy framework has contributed to 
sustained foreign investment inflows into the Chemicals and Petrochemicals 
sector.  However, a perusal of the actual data of FDI during the last five years 
reveals a dismal picture and does not match with the contention of the Department.  
The Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in the Chemicals and Petrochemicals sector 
in the financial year 2021-22 was Rs. 7202 crore and in the year 2022 -23 it rose 
to Rs. 14662 crore but fell to Rs. 6985 crore in the year 2023 -24 and in the year 
2024-25 it rose marginally to Rs. 8943 crore and finally got reduced to Rs. 4,598.19 
crore in the year 2025 -26 (Till September 2 025). However, the Committee note 
with satisfaction that the Department has taken initiatives to position India as a 
preferred global destination for investments in Chemicals and Petrochemicals to 
attract large-scale investments which includes (i) organizi ng major international 
investment promotion events such as India Chem to showcase India’s 
manufacturing capabilities and investment opportunities and (ii) implementing 
initiatives such as, namely the establishment of Petroleum, Chemicals and 
Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs) and Plastic Parks to attract 
investment in the sector etc. The Committee hope and trust that these initiatives 
would be implemented by the Department in letter and spirit for attracting higher 
FDI in future”. 
 
2.18 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“Over the past five financial years, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) equity inflows 
into the chemicals sector (excluding fertilizers) have demonstrated a sustained 
investor interest. The sector attracted Rs. 7,202.22 Crores in 2021 -22, which 
sharply escalated to a high of Rs. 14,662.04 Crores in 2022 -23. The reason for 
this increase is a single investment of Rs. 6,199.90 Crores by a company, M/s 
Sajjan India Limited, registered in Mumbai, Maharashtra (involved in the business 
of manufacturing organic and ino rganic chemicals) from the investment firm M/s 
Sona Company Pte Ltd. In Singapore. The company is into manufacturing of 
agrochemicals, fungicides, insecticides, nematicides, and herbicides and 
intermediates; Speciality chemicals – Pyridine Derivatives and Pharma 
intermediates having plants at Ankleshwar and Navi Mumbai. This specific 
transaction accounted for Rs. 6199.90 Crores approximately 42.28% of the total 
FDI equity inflow in the financial year 2022-23.  
In the current Financial Year, up to December, 2026, the sector has secured INR 
6,098.57 Crores in the current 2025-26 financial year (up to December), reflecting 
continued confidence in the industry ’s growth trajectory. The observation of the 
committee has been noted and is assured that the initiatives for promoting 
investment in the sector will continue to be implemented in the sector in the future 
as well”. 
 
 
 

31 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 5 ) 
Allotment of Plastic Parks 
4.1   The Committee made the following recommendation concerning over the slow pace 
of allotment of Plots in the 10 Plastic Parks across India: 
 
The Committee note that the scheme of Plastic Park was introduced way back in 
the year 2013 with the objective to promote chemical industry. However, after a 
lapse of about 13 years, the Committee note with concern that the ten Plastic 
Parks approved are s till at various stages of implementation.  Further, the 
Committee have been apprised that only 309 out of 919 plots available in Plastic 
Parks could be allotted so far.  Moreover, out of the 309 plots allotted only 51 plots 
are stated to be functional in t erms of the total number of plots, only 6% are 
currently functional. It is further noted that no plots have been allotted in the Plastic 
Parks located in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and Deogarh. The Committee expresses 
serious concern over the slow progress in the establishment and allotment of plots 
in the Plastic Parks. The Committee therefore recommend that the Department 
should work in close coordination with the respective State Governments to allot 
the remaining plots across all Plastic Parks in a time bou nd manner.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.  
 
4.2 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“As on date, 316 Plots and 15 Sheds have been allotted out of a total of 919 Plots 
and 19 Sheds, of which, 49 Plots and 15 Sheds are operational. 
  
With regard to infrastructure development, four Plastic Parks viz., Tamot, Madhya 
Pradesh; Bilaua, Madhya Pradesh; Jagatsinghpur, Odisha; and Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh, have achieved 100% completion of physical infrastructure (civil 
works), while the remaining parks viz., Tinsukia, Assam; Deoghar, Jharkhand; 
Sitarganj, Uttarkhand; Ganjimutt, Karnataka; and Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh are at 
advanced stages of completion and are expected to be completed during the 
current financial year. 
  
The status of three Plastic Parks viz., Karnataka, Tamil Nadu  and Jharkhand are 
as under: 

33 
 
I. Ganjimutt Plastic Park, Karnataka: The Park was approved in January 2022 
with completion date as January 2027.   The overall progress in physical 
infrastructure (Civil work) is 88%.   It is expected that most of the 
infrastructure creation would be completed by August 2026 and thereafter, 
the Park would get populated at the earliest. 
 
II. Tiruvallur Plastic Park, Tamil Nadu:  The project was due by September 
2022, but on an appeal by Mr. K. Saravanan, the NGT ordered status quo 
on 18.01.2022. TPIPL challenged this in the Supreme Court. As of now, 
hearings on multiple dates were not taken up.  After a new Chief Justice’s 
appointment on 24.11.2025, the SPV is preparing to request an expedited 
hearing. The matter remains sub judice. 
 
III. Deoghar Plastic Park, Jharkhand:    In respect of the Plastic Park at 
Deoghar, Jharkhand, the process of allotment of plots has been temporarily 
affected due to proposed revisions in the State Government’s land 
allotment policy. During a recent review meeti ng chaired by the Secretary 
(Chemicals & Petrochemicals), representatives of the State Government 
informed that the revised policy is under 33tilization33.   
 
  Despite the above, it is pertinent to mention that an anchor unit with a 
proposed investment of approximately Rs.300 crore has expressed interest in 
setting up operations in the Plastic Park. This is expected to act as a catalyst in 
attracting further industrial investment once the policy framework is 33tilizati. The 
Jharkhand Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation (JIIDCO), the nodal 
implementing agency, has assured that necessary infrastructure development will 
be completed at the earliest. 
  The Department is closely monitoring the progress of all Plastic Park projects 
through regular site visits, periodic review meetings at various levels, and 
continuous follow -up with State Governments and implementing agencies, 
including through D.O. letter s to Chief Secretaries and concerned authorities 
during April 2025, October, 2025 and April 2026.   
Further, Secretary (C&PC) reviewed the progress of all Plastic Parks during May, 
2026 in a meeting attended by the SPVs/key promoters of all Plastic Parks and 
the concerned Secretaries/Principal Secretaries (Industries) of the respective 
State Governments.  During the review, emphasis was laid on (i) expeditious 
completion of the remaining infrastructure works; and (ii) close monitoring of 
allotment and 33tilization33zation of plots, to ensure timely industrial activity in the 
Plastic Parks. 
     
Further, various State Governments and implementing agencies have undertaken 
several initiatives to promote allotment of plots and 33tilization33zation of the 
Plastic Parks. These include several promotional measures through promotional 
events, aggressive marketing and investor outreach efforts, such as participation 
in major plastic industry exhibitions 33tilizati by leading industry bodies, as well as 
the 33tilization33 of roadshows and regional industry conclaves to showcase 
investment opportunities. Continuous promotional activities, including regular 

34 
 
advertisements and stakeholder engagement, are also being carried out to attract 
prospective investors. 
Overall, the Department reiterates that sustained and coordinated efforts are being 
undertaken in close collaboration with State Governments and implementing 
agencies to resolve pending issues, expedite infrastructure completion, and 
ensure early 34tilization34zation and optimal 34tilization of the Plastic Parks”. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
Ensuring Transfer of optimal Formulations to Industry 
4.3 The Committee made the following recommendation to ensure transfer of optimal 
formulation to Industry by the IPFT: 
“The Committee note that the IPFT have been in existence for the last 36 years. 
The Committee note with concern that during this time period of 36 long years, 
IPFT could formulate only 86 formulations. Moreover, out of the 86 formulations, 
only 64 could be transferred to the industry. In this regard, the Committee note 
that the formulations development by the IPFT is undertaken after assessment, 
technical evaluation and consultation with industry and the formulations are 
developed based on their existing and  emerging need. The Committee are 
astonished to note the fact that even after developing the formation after assessing 
the need of the industry, IPFT is struggling to transfer its 22 formulations. In this 
regard, during oral evidence, the Committee have been informed that IPFT is now 
focusing on Bio pesticides which is a Research and Development activity. The 
Committee outrightly reject this contention of the IPFT and are of the view that the 
IPFT while focusing on Bio Pesticides should work equally towards  transfer of its 
formulation. IPFT has also submitted that after development of formulations, it has 
to undergo laboratory trial for its efficacy and safety purpose. The Committee are 
of the view that the IPFT must streamline its functioning and expedite its functions 
related to transfer of 22 remaining formulations. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Department as well as by the IPFT in this 
regard”.  
 
4.4 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The remaining 22 formulations could not be transferred due to various technical, 
regulatory, commercial, and market -related factors, evolving regulatory 
requirements, requirement of additional efficacy/safety validation data, 
commercial viability, and limited interest from industries for certain formulations. It 
is also pertinent to mention that formulation development and technology transfer 
involve multiple stages including laboratory development, stability studies, efficacy 

35 
 
evaluation, toxicity/safety assessment, pilot-scale validation, and compliance with 
regulatory requirements before successful commercialization. 
 
The observations of the Hon’ble Committee is  noted for greater emphasis for 
timely transfer and commercialization of technologies developed by IPFT. 
Accordingly, IPFT has initiated several measures to streamline and expedite the 
process of technology transfer of the remaining formulations. 
The following steps have been initiated by IPFT in this regard: 
1. Focused Industry Engagement:  IPFT has intensified interaction with 
agrochemical industries, MSMEs, startups, and stakeholders through Industry 
Interaction Meets, workshops, and targeted consultations to identify potential 
industry partners for pending formulations. 
2. Strengthening Validation and Scale -up Activities:  Efforts are being 
made to expedite efficacy studies, stability studies, pilot -scale validation, and 
generation of supporting technical data required for industry adoption and 
regulatory acceptance through biofoundry project sponsored by Department of 
Biotechnology, GoI under BioE3 policy, which is in progress at IPFT. 
3. Establishment of Biofoundry Facility: A dedicated Biofoundry Facility is 
being established at IPFT to facilitate faster development, validation, scale-up, and 
transfer of bio-pesticide and bio-botanical technologies to industry. 
4. Collaboration with Academic and Industrial Partners:  IPFT is 
strengthening collaborations with academic institutions, research organizations, 
and industry partners to improve translational research and commercialization 
outcomes. 
The Department and IPFT remain committed towards accelerating formulation 
transfer activities, strengthening industry partnerships, and promoting 
environmentally sustainable technologies for the benefit of the agricultural sector 
and society at large”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
Diversifying the role of IPFT/utilizing the full potential of IPFT 
4.5 The Committee made the following recommendation regarding  utilization of full 
potential of IPFT: 
 
 The Committee note that the Institute of Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) 
was established in the year 1991 and engaged in development of user and 
environment friendly new generation pesticide formulation technologies, their 
analysis, efficacy and ph ytotoxicity studies. The Committee further note that the 

36 
 
institute has three functional verticals, viz., Formulation Development, Analytical 
Characterization and Bioscience activities . And the ‘ Formulation Development’ 
vertical has pilot plant facilities that can scale up lab scale research to a 
commercial production with optimum budget and has the capacity to produce the 
formulations upto 100 kg per shift.  In this regard, the Committee were informed 
during oral evidence that the IPFT is a research and development institute and is 
not involved in the production and marketing of any formulations. Further, at IPFT 
the technologies of pesticide formulations are developed and transferred to 
different industries for commercialization activities only.  Intriguingly, though IPFT 
is a research and development institute a nd not involved in the production and 
marketing of any formulation, its Formulation Development Vertical shows 
production capacity to manufacture the formulation upto 100 kg per shift.  
Apparently, the production facility at IPFT is lying idle.  The Committee desire that 
they be apprised of concrete reasons in this regard.  Under these circumstances 
when the production facility already exist at IPFT, the Committee may recommend 
that it explore the full potential of the Formulation Development Vertical and 
consider the expansion of its activities from mere formulation development to 
actual production and its sale in the market.  
 
4.6 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
“IPFT was established as a specialized Research and Development (R&D) 
institute with the primary mandate of developing user-friendly, safe, effective, and 
environmentally sustainable pesticide formulation technologies and transferring 
such technologies to industry for commercialization. Accordingly, the pilot plant 
facility available under the Formulation Development Vertical was created 
primarily for research, process optimization, pilot-scale validation, demonstration, 
training, and technology transfer purposes, and not for regular commercial -scale 
manufacturing and marketing activities. 
The pilot-scale facility with scale-up capability up to 100 kg per shift is mainly 
utilized for: 
(i) scale-up studies of newly developed formulations, 
(ii) process standardization, 
(iii) generation of data for efficacy and stability studies, 
(iv) validation and demonstration batches for technology transfer, 
(v) training and skill development programmes, and 
(vi) supporting startups, MSMEs, and entrepreneurs for proof-of-concept and 
pilot production activities. 
The facility is therefore not lying idle; however, its utilization is aligned with the 
R&D mandate of the Institute rather than commercial production. The existing 
pilot-plant facility of the IPFT is under the refurbishment to align with the scale-up 
the biopesticides and their formulations from plant and microbial sources. Further, 
the IPFT has initiated measures to maximize the utilization of the pilot plant and 
formulation facilities through the following initiatives: 

37 
 
6. Strengthening pilot-scale production and validation activities for faster 
technology transfer to industries. 
7. Providing incubation and pilot production support to startups, MSMEs, and 
entrepreneurs working in the area of agrochemicals and bio-pesticides. 
8. Expanding collaborative projects with industry and academic institutions for 
formulation development and scale-up studies. 
9. Establishment of Biofoundry facility for development and pilot -scale 
production of bio -pesticide and bio -botanical formulations through plant and 
microbial sources. 
10. Exploring possibilities for limited production of demonstration and validation 
batches for government -supported programmes, farmer outreach activities, and 
field evaluations, as per applicable rules and policy provisions”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 Vacant Posts in IPFT 
4.7.    The Committee made the following recommendation regarding  filling of vacant 
posts in IPFT: 
 
The Committee note that IPFT had a total sanctioned strength of 40, out of which, 
13 posts have elapsed over a period of time and the working strength of the 
Institute at present is only 16, including 10 Scientific posts. Further, 10 posts are 
vacant for which recruitment process  is stated to be in progress. The Committee 
therefore, recommend that IPFT should fill up the vacant posts at the earliest to 
ensure that the functioning of the institute is not hampered due to shortage of 
officers/staff. The Commit tee also recommend that Department should also 
ensure timely completion of the recruitment process. 
4.8 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The observation of the Committee is highly encouraging with the note that the 
IPFT has been functioning with the limited regular manpower.  With regard to the 
recruitment process status for the 10 posts as pointed out by the Hon’ble 
Committee, it is to submit that, the recruitment process for 04 out of the 10 vacant 
posts has been completed and remaining 06 posts for which the recruitment 
process is in progress.  
In addition to regular manpower, the efforts has been made to optimize utilization 
of available resources, engage project staff and technical personnel for specific 
activities, and strengthen the Institute’s scientific and technical capabilities in 
emerging areas such as bio -pesticides, advanced formulations, analytical 

38 
 
characterization, and regulatory support services.  The Department remains 
committed to strengthening the manpower position of IPFT for effective discharge 
of its mandate and for supporting the growing research, development, and 
technology transfer activities of the Institute”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
Upgradation of CIPET as Central University 
4.9   The Committee made the following recommendation regarding upgradation of 
CIPET as Central University: 
 
The Committee note that the CIPET is a technical educational institution under the 
Department, engaged in skill development, technology support, as well as 
academic and research activities for the promotion of the petrochemical and allied 
industry in the country. Further, the CIPET has 48 Centr es across the country 
which includes 9 Institutes of Plastics Technology (IPTs), 32 Centres for Skilling 
and Technical Support (CSTS), 03 Schools for Advanced Research in Polymers 
(SARP) and 4 sub - centres. The Committee are of the view that a renewed vision 
of CIPET is required to cope with the modern day’s requirements of Research and 
Development with regard to the utility of plastics and polymers. The Committee are 
of the considered view that if CIPET is embossed with the status of Special ised 
Central University with due recognition by AICTE and UGC,  it has the potential of 
skilling youth by providing them with quality training and placement opportunities.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department should explore the feasibility 
and apprise the Committee accordingly. 
 
4.10 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“The Department noted the observations and recommendations of the Hon’ble 
Committee regarding the need for strengthening CIPET in view of the emerging 
requirements in the areas of plastics, polymers, petrochemicals, sustainability, 
advanced materials, recycling, and research & innovation. 
Established in 1968 at Chennai under the Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers, 
Government of India, CIPET has emerged as a premier national institution in the 
field of Plastics Engineering and Technology. Over the years, CIPET has 
expanded its presence acro ss the country through a network of 48 Centres 
comprising 32 Centres for Skilling & Technical Support (CSTS), 9 Institutes of 
Petrochemicals Technology (IPT), 3 Schools for Advanced Research in 
Petrochemicals (SARP), and 4 Sub-Centres. 

39 
 
CIPET presently offers Undergraduate, Postgraduate, Doctoral, Diploma, Post -
Diploma, Post-Graduate Diploma, and Skill Development programmes in the fields 
of plastics engineering, polymer science, manufacturing technology, and allied 
disciplines. While CIP ET functions as an autonomous institution for conducting 
Diploma/Post Diploma/Post Graduate Diploma programmes, its UG and PG 
programmes are presently affiliated with various State Technical Universities.  
As, CIPET has developed significant academic, infrastructural, technical, and 
research capabilities over the years and possesses the potential to evolve into an 
independent specialised higher educational institution. In this context, the proposal 
for upgradation of CIPET as a Central University is being examined keeping in 
view the following broad objectives: 
I. To develop CIPET as a multidisciplinary Higher Educational Institution in the 
specialised domain of petrochemicals, polymers, plastics engineering, advanced 
manufacturing, skilling, and vocational education.  
II.To restructure and modernise existing academic programmes in alignment with 
the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020, including adoption of credit -based 
systems, academic bank of credits, and credit transfer mechanisms.  
III.To enable uniform curriculum and academic standards across all CIPET centres 
in the country with enhanced industry alignment and improved placement 
opportunities for students.  
IV.To strengthen research, innovation, and technology development in emerging 
areas such as advanced polymer science, biodegradable and sustainable plastics, 
circular plastics economy, plastic waste management, and sustainable materials.  
V.To enhance India’s global academic and research footprint in the specialised 
domain of petrochemicals and polymer science through international 
collaborations and attraction of global faculty and researchers.  
The Department is also examining the proposal in the context of other specialised 
Central Universities established in focused sectors, such as Gati Shakti 
Vishwavidyalaya, Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University, and Dr. Rajendra 
Prasad Central Agricultural University. 
The matter is under consideration of the Department in consultation with CIPET 
and other stakeholders, and further action shall be taken as per extant policy and 
statutory provisions”. 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemicals Investment Regions (PCPIRs)  
 
4.11  The Committee made the following recommendation on establishing PCPIRs: 

40 
 
 
The Committee was informed that the Government of India notified the Petroleum, 
Chemical and Petrochemical Investment Region(s) (PCPIR) Policy, 2007 to attract 
investment and for generation of employment in the Petroleum, Chemical and 
Petrochemical Investment Region(s). The objective of PCPIR Policy 2007 was to 
promote the Chemical and Petrochemical sector in an integrated and environment 
friendly manner.  At present, three Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical 
Investment Regions (PCPIRs) are being implement ed in the States of Andhra 
Pradesh (Vishakhapatnam), Gujarat (Dahej) and Odisha (Paradeep) to promote 
investment and industrial development in these sectors.  It was further informed 
that till date, a total investment made in all three PCPIRs amounts to Rs. 3,49,192 
Crore. Despite this huge investment, there are no specific targets fixed for number 
of units, investments by the industry and employment in the PCPIR Policy. Further, 
the Department has submitted that so far it has not received any proposal from the 
State Governments for providing Viability Gap Funding under this Policy and ‘NIL’ 
budgetary allocation has been made and no expenditure has been incurred by the 
Department under the PCPIR Policy, 2007.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should seriously go into deeper introspection in 
coordination with the State Governments as well as investors/stakeholder involved 
and come out with a solution.   The Committee would like to be apprised on the 
steps taken by the Department in this regard. 
 
4.12  In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
Government of India has notified the Petroleum, Chemical and Petrochemical 
Investment Region(s) (PCPIR) Policy, 2007 to attract investment and for 
generation of employment in a cluster-based approach with common infrastructure 
and support services to provi de a competitive environment conducive for setting 
up businesses. The PCPIR Policy 2007 has provided a conducive and competitive 
environment for setting up businesses through creation of common infrastructure.  
 
As per the PCPIR Policy, the State Governments have been developing these 
PCPIRs at their end by providing various infrastructure facilities and basic utilities 
within these PCPIRs. Further, the Central Government has also been providing 
the funding support for development of these PCPIRs i n the three states through 
its various infrastructural Ministries such as Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, Ministry of Ports, Shipping, and Waterways, Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways. This funding support by the Centre has been pro vided by way of 
commissioning of various projects by these different central ministries in and 
around the PCPIR regions in the three states. 
 
Presently, the three PCPIRs have attracted total investment of Rs. 3,49,192 
Crores and 2,246 nos. of Chemical and petrochemical units have been set up in 
these, generating employment for 3,71,263 individuals. The recommendations of 
the committee have been duly noted. The department has been undertaking 

41 
 
stakeholder consultations with the concerned state governments, as well as other 
stakeholders from the industry. As a result of these deliberations, it has emerged 
that, in addition to the various infrastructure projects already undertaken in these 
PCPIR regions, several additional infrastructure projects are currently at different 
stages of execution in these regions. Details of all such infrastructure projects, 
including those already existing region -wise in the PCPIRs as well as the 
additional projects being initiated and currently in the pipeline, are provided in the 
Annexure-A. Consequently, as on date, the updated status of implementation and 
execution of PCPIR projects, along with details of investment, employment, and 
the number of chemical units region-wise, is as under: 
 
Indicator Gujarat Andhra Pradesh Odisha Total 
Location/ Region Dahej, 
Bharuch 
Vishakhapatnam– 
Kakinada Paradeep - 
Approval Feb, 2009 Feb, 2009 Dec, 2010 - 
MOA signed  Jan, 2010 Oct, 2009 Nov, 2011 - 
Total Area (Sq. 
kms.) 453.00 640.00 284.15 1377.15 
Anchor Tenant 
ONGC Petro 
Additions 
Limited (OPaL) 
- 
Indian Oil 
Corporation 
Ltd. (IOCL) 
- 
Investments 
made (Rs.  in 
Crore) 
1,37,163 68,148 1,43,881 3,49,192 
Employment 
generated (No.) 2,45,140 86,123 40,000 3,71,263 
No. of Chemical 
Units 2079 154 13 2246 
 
Further, as a result of these stakeholder consultations with the concerned state 
governments, as well as with industry stakeholders, the need for establishing 
dedicated compact chemical parks was felt, in contrast to the existing large PCPIR 
regions. Consequently, in the recent Union Budget announced by the Union 
Finance Minister on 1 February 2026, the following announcement was made: 
 
“To enhance domestic chemical production and reduce import dependency, we 
will launch a Scheme to support States in establishing 3 dedicated Chemical 
Parks, through challenge route, on a cluster-based plug-and-play model”. 
Subsequent to the announcement in the Union Budget of FY 2026 –27, the 
proposed scheme for establishment of Dedicated Chemical Parks is currently 
under formulation”.  
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.22 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 

42 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
Filing of Patents and Development technologies by CoEs 
4.13  The Committee made the following recommendation  on filling pf patents and 
development technologies development by CoEs: 
 
 The Committee have been apprised that so far, the 18 CoEs approved under the 
scheme could file 80 patents only and have developed 96 technologies/products, 
of which 35 have been transferred to the Industry. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the reasons for huge difference between the number of technologies 
developed and actual transferred to the industry. The Committee also recommend 
that appropriate initiatives may be taken to ensure that maximum number of 
technologies products may be transferred to the industry in near future. 
 
4.14 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
“In total, these 18 CoEs, so far, as of March 2026, have filed 83 patents (of which 
41 are granted) and have developed 96 technologies/products, out of which 38 
are transferred/delivered to Industry.  
 With regard to the reasons for difference between the number of technologies 
developed and actual transferred to the industry, it is submitted that the 
development of a technology or filing of a patent marks the successful completion 
of the R&D phase, how ever, commercializing that technology is a multi -stage 
process and is faced by the following challenges among others, that are:   
 
i. Extended Validation and Gestation Periods: Transitioning a technology from a lab- 
scale prototype (TRL-4) to a market-ready commercial product (TRL-8/9) requires 
extensive validation, scale-up trials, and regulatory certifications;  
ii.Validation & Compliance: Mandatory validation and safety testing are under 
progress and are inherently time-consuming  
iii.Financial Limitations of MSMEs and Start-ups: The primary adopters of niche CoE 
technologies are MSMEs and start-ups, however, these entities often face severe 
capital constraints. Procuring the technology through upfront licensing fees, 
followed by capita l expenditures to set up new manufacturing lines or procure 
advanced machinery, which is frequently beyond their immediate financial 
capacity and  
iv.Technologies require adaptation to specific industry use - cases, necessitating 
iterative engagement with stakeholders. 
  `Further, the Department, in November 2024 and December 2025, 
organised two editions of the Chemcon Innovation Conclave in collaboration with 
the Indian Chamber of Commerce (ICC) for the CoEs. The event, which brought 
together delegates from diverse sectors, including policymakers, industry leaders, 

43 
 
researchers, academics, and entrepreneurs, provided a platform to exchange 
knowledge, foster collaborations, and discuss the latest trends and challenges 
shaping the chemical and petrochemical industries. The event highlighted how 
collaborations between th e Centres of Excellence (CoEs) set up by the 
Department and the industry could accelerate the commercialization of research 
and foster innovative products, thereby enhancing the competitiveness of the 
Indian chemical and petrochemical industry. 
 With regard to initiatives/steps to ensure that technology transfer is maximised to 
the industry, it is mentioned that the Department regularly emphasises maximising 
the technology transfer during various interactions with CoEs, like review meetings 
and visits to the CoEs. Also, Joint Secretary (Petrochemicals) has written, in April 
2026, to the Head of the Institutions to strengthen the focus on technology transfer 
and to encourage researchers under CoE to actively engage with industry partners 
for effective commercialization of developed technologies. 
             Also, to enhance the collaboration between industry and academia in 
driving innovation and sustainable growth in the chemical and petrochemical 
sectors, the department has developed a dedicated platform, namely MITR 
Industry Academia Portal (h ttps://mitr.chemicals.gov.in/), which facilitates 
interactions, partnerships, and technology matchmaking between these 
stakeholders, including CoEs”. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.25 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
Farmers Training programs conducted by IPFT. 
4.15  The Committee made the following recommendation  on farmers training 
programs conducted by IPFT:- 
 
The Committee note that the IPFT had conducted 31 farmers training programmes 
during  the last three years. During the year 2023 -24, 2024-25 and 2025-26, the 
number of programmes conducted by IPFT is 20, 02 and 09 respectively.   The 
Committee note with co ncern that only 11 farmers training programmes were 
conducted by IPFT during the last two years whereas in the year 2023 -24, no. of 
progrmmes conducted by IPFT was 20. Moreover, the farmers training 
programmes were conducted in Assam, Meghalaya and Mizoram  only whereas 
rest of the north east states have been completely left out.  Further, during the 
years 2024 -25 and 2025 -26, ‘Nil’ no. of farmers training programmes were 
conducted in the North East States.  The Committee therefore recommend that 
the Department as well as IPFT should conduct training programmes across Pan 
India including the north east States. The Committee may be apprised of the action 
taken in the matter. 
 
4.16 In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Department of 

44 
 
Chemicals and Petrochemicals has stated as under: 
 
IPFT: 
IPFT has been actively conducting farmers’ awareness programmes on safe and 
judicious use of pesticides, biopesticides, nano -formulations, sustainable 
agricultural practices and related technologies. During the last three years, IPFT 
has conducted a total of 33 farmers’ awareness programmes across the country. 
The figure of 31 programmes appears to have been based on information available 
up to 8th February 2026, whereas two additional farmers’ awareness programmes 
were organized subsequently on 24th February 2026 at Bharatpur, Rajasthan and 
on 28th February 2026 at Banda, Uttar Pradesh. The observation of the Hon’ble 
committee for conducting such farmers awareness programs in other parts of the 
North-East states will be taken up with the coordination and su pport of the local 
authorities/groups. Department with IPFT shall make concerted efforts to enhance 
the frequency, geographical coverage for the farmers awareness programs during 
the coming years, including focused activities in the North Eastern Region.  
 
Chemical: 
It is submitted that the Department organizes Farmers Training Programmes 
under Chemical Promotion Development Scheme though through one of its PSUs 
HIL (India) Limited. They are organized on the issue of Safe and Judicious use of 
Pesticides in crops and creating awareness among farmers towards the adoption 
of Integrated Pest Management Practices to minimize pesticides residue in food 
grains, edible oils, fruits, and vegetables.  
 
In addition to the training programmes being organized through HIL, the 
Department also request IPFT to organize similar training programmes, even 
though IPFT is mainly dedicated for the purposes of research and development of 
pesticides and formulations.   
 
Accordingly, the Department has organized 177 training programs though HIL and 
IPFT, during last 3 FYs. 
 
S. No. Entity FTPs 
conducted 
in 2023-24 
FTPs 
conducted 
in 2024-25 
FTPs 
conducted 
in 2025-26 
1 HIL 25 62 58 
2 IPFT 20 02 10 
 Total 45 64 68 
 Grant Total 177 
 
Out of the above training programs conducted pan India by the Department, the 
number of training programs organized in the North East Region during the last 3 
FYs by both HIL and IPFT are as under : 
 
 

45 
 
S. 
No. 
Entity FTPs 
conducted in 
2023-24 
FTPs 
conducted in 
2024-25 
FTPs 
conducted in 
2025-26 
1 HIL 4 15 17 
2 IPFT 4 0 0 
 Total 8 15 17 
 Grant Total 40 
 
 From the above it may please be perused that for the FY 2024 -25 and FY 
2025-26, 15 and 17  training programs have been organized in the North East 
Region respectively. 
 Further, it is also submitted that as regards Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, 
Sikkim and Tripura, 1, 6 and 8 training programs organized have been organized 
in FY 2023-24, FY 2024-25 and FY 2025-26. 
 
COMMENTS OF THE COMMITTEE 
(Please see Para No. 1.28 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  

46 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
- Nil – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  AZAD KIRTI JHA 
03 August, 2026 Chairperson, 
12 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Chemicals and Fertilizers 
  

47 
 
          APPENDIX-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (2025-26) 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-sixth Sitting of the Committee 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 03rd August, 2026 from 1 500 hrs to 1 530 hrs  in 
Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
Shri Azad Kirti Jha – Chairperson 
     LOK SABHA MEMBERS 
2. Shri Brijmohan Agrawal 
3. Shri Ajay Bhatt 
4. Shri Robert Bruce C. 
5. Shri Bharatsinhji Shankarji Dabhi 
6. Smt. Kriti Devi Debbarman 
7. Shri Malvinder Singh Kang 
8. Shri Babu Singh Kushwaha 
9. Shri Praveen Patel 
10. Shri Sachithanantham R. 
11. Shri Eatala Rajender 
12. Shri Daggumalla Prasada Rao 
13. Shri Shivmangal Singh Tomar 
  
RAJYA SABHA MEMBERS 
 
14. Shri Naresh Bansal 
15. Shri Subhash Barala 
16. Shri Rwngwra Narzary 
17. Shri Arun Singh 
18. Shri Tejveer Singh 
19. Shri L. K. Sudhish 
SECRETARIAT  
1.   Smt. Maya Lingi  - Joint Secretary 
2.   Ms. Miranda Ingudam            - Director 
3. Shri  Kulvinder Singh  - Deputy Secretary  
4. Shri Abhishek Kumar  - Joint Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for consideration and adoption of the following seven draft Reports: 
i. XXX    XXX         XXX               XXX; 
ii. XXX    XXX         XXX               XXX; 
iii. XXX    XXX         XXX               XXX; 
iv. XXX    XXX         XXX               XXX;  
v. Thirty-second Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-second Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers 
on ‘Demands for Grants 2026-27’ (Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals); 
vi. XXX    XXX         XXX            XXX and;  

48 
 
vii. XXX    XXX         XXX             XXX. 
 
3. After some deliberations, the draft Reports were adopted by the Committee  
with slight amendments. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Reports and  
present/lay them in both the Houses of Parliament in the ongoing Monsoon Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
******* 
 
 
 
 
xxx- does not pertain to this report  

49 
 
APPENDIX II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY-SECOND REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON CHEMICALS AND 
FERTILIZERS (2025 -26) ON  ‘DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 2026 -27’ PERTAINING TO 
THE MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS (DEPARTMENT OF 
CHEMICALS AND PETROCHEMICALS) 
  
Total No. of Recommendations 17 
I. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
(Sl. Nos. 1, 2,3,4,6,7,13,15 and 16 )  
 
09 
Percentage of Total:  53% 
II. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not like to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
NIL 
 
00 
Percentage of Total:  0% 
III. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies given by 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which 
require reiteration:  
(Sl. Nos. 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14 and 17)  
 
 
08 
Percentage of Total: 47 %  
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the final replies of 
the Government are still awaited:  
NIL 
 
00 
Percentage of Total:  100%  
 
 
 
 
 
 