C.S.(H.A.)-67 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAmS 
THIRTY -NINTH REPORT 
ON 
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1997-98) OF THE MINISTRY OF 
LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Presented to the Rajya Sa_bha on the 2nd May, 1997) 
(Laid in the Lok Sabha on the 2nd May, 1997) 
867/RS F-1-A 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
May , 1997/Vaisakha , 1919 (Saka) 
... 
. t 

CONTENTS 
1. Cot-iPOSJTION OF THE CoMMITTEE ...................................................... . 
2. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................. .. 
3. REPORT ....................................................................................... . 
4. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF T!'fE COMMITTEE ...................... . 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
(iii) 
1-8 
9-14 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITIEE 
1. Shri Som Pal-Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Matang Sinh 
4. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
5. Shri Jitendra Prasada 
6. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
7. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
8. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
9. Shri An an tray Devshanker Dave 
10. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
•11. Shri Ramachandran Pmai 
12. Shri N. Rajendran 
13. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
14. Shri Raj Babbar 
15. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Sus~il Chandra Verma 
17. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
18. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
19. Shri Vinay Katiyar 
20. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
21. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
22. Shri Vijay Goel 
23. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
24. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
25. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
26. Kumari Mamata Banerjee 
27. Shri Man gat Ram Sharma 
28. Shri M.O .H. Farooq 
29. Prof. M. Kamson 
30. Shri Idris Ali 
31. Shri · Gopalbhai Kalan Tandel 
32. Shri Khelsai Singh 
••33. Shri Rajesh Pilot 
34. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
35. Shri Sharad Yadav 
36. Shri Taslimuddin 
37. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
38. Shri Sudhir Giri 
• ·Ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.t.f 21.4.97 consequent on expiration of his term of office as Member of 
Rajya Sabha. 
••Nominated w.e.f. the 8th October, 1996 vice Shri Tara Chand Baghora , M.P. 
(i) 
867/RS F-Z·A 

39. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan 
40. Shri N. Dennis 
41. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
42. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
43. Shri Kanshi Ram 
44. Dr. Jayaota Rongpi 
45. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrirnati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G . C. Mig] ani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason , Committee Officer 
(ii) 
867/ RS F-2-B 

INTRODUCfiON 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home 
Affairs, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its. behalf, do hereby 
present this Thirty-ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (1997-98) relating to the Ministry of 
Law and Justice. 
2. The Committee heard the concerned officers of the Ministry and considered the relevant 
documents placed before it at its meetings held on 27th March and 9th April, 1997. 
3. The Committee, while making its recommendations/observations, has mainly relied upon 
the following:-
(i) Presentations made by the concerned officers of the Ministry; 
(ii) Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry for 1997-98; 
(iii) Annual Report of the Ministry for the year 1996-97; 
(iv) Explanatory Note on tf:te Demands received from the Ministry; 
(v) Action Taken Notes or the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Thirty-fourth Report on the Demands for Grants (1996.97) of the Ministry; 
(vi) Written replies furnished by the Ministry on ~he Questionnaires sent to it by the 
Secretariat; and 
(vii) Written clarifications on the points/issues raised by the Members in the meetings 
of the Committee. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 23rd April, 
1997. 
New DELHI ; 
April 23, 1997 
(iii) 
SOM PAL, 
Chairman, 
Committee on Home Affairs. 

REPORT 
OVERVIEW 
1. The Ministry of Law and Justice comprises 
(i) Department of Legal Affairs, 
(ii) Legislative Department, and 
(iii) Department of Justice 
the following Departments:-
2. The main functions of the Department of Legal Affairs are:-
(i) To render advice to the various Ministries/Departments of the Government of 
India on legal matters. 
(ii) To carry out the conveyancing work of the Central Government; 
(iii) To attend the litigation work in the Supreme Court, High Courts and some of the 
subordinate courts; 
(iv) To handle the treaties and agreements with foreign countries in matters of Civil 
Law; 
(v) To authorise officers to execute contracts and assurances of property on behalf of 
the President under Article 299 (1) of the Constitution. 
(vi) To sanction grants-in-aids to certain institutions engaged in research in the field of 
law. 
3. The Department of Legal Affairs is further concerned with appointment of the -Law 
Officers, namely the Attorney-General of India, the Solicitor-Genera] of India and the Additional 
Solicitors-General of India, etc. It is also administratively incharge of the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Appellate Board. 
4. The Legal Affairs Department has a two-tier organisational set-up, namely, the main 
Secretariat at New Delhi and the Branch Secretariats at Mumbai, Calcutta, Madras and 
Bangalore. 
5. The Legislative Department is concerned mainly with the following matters:-
(i) Scrutiny of Notes for the Cabinet in relation to all legislative proposals from 
drafting and constitutional points of view; 
(ii) Drafting of all Government Bills including Constitution (Amendment) Bills before 
introduction in Parliament; translation of all such Bills into Hindi and forwarding 
both English and Hindi versions of the Bills to the Parliament Secretariat; drafting 
of non-official amendments and rendering of assistance to Administrative 
Ministries to decide on the acceptability or otherwise of non-official amendments; 
(iii) Rendering assistance to Parliament and Joint, Select or Standing Committees of 
Parliament at all stages through which a Bill passes before enactment. This 
includes scrutiny of and/or preparation of reports of such Committees, and Hindi 
Translations of such reports and minutes of dissent; · 
(iv) Drafting of Ordinances to be promulgated by the President. 
(v) Drafting of legislations to be enacted as President's Acts in respect of States under 
President's rule; 
(vi) Drafting of Regulations to be made by the President; 
(vii) Drafting of Constitution Orders, i.e., Orders required to be issued under the 
Constitution; 
(viii) Scrutiny of all statutory rules, orders and notifications and their translation into 
Hindi; . 
(ix) Scrutiny of State Legislation in the Concurrent field which requires assent of the 
President under article 254 of the Constitution; 
(x) Scrutiny of legislations to be enacted by Union Territory Legislatures; 
(xi) Election of ParliaJTlent, Legislatures of States and Union Territories and Offices of 
the President and Vice-President; 
1 
867 I RS F-3-A 
; 
{. 
.. 
' 

2 
(xii) Election Commission; Electoral Reforms; 
(xiii) Apportionment of expenditure on Election between the Centre and the States/ 
UTs with Legislatures; 
(xiv) Bringing out three Journals and reporting the cases of Supreme Court and selected 
cases of the High Courts in Hindi; 
(xv) Translation of Central Acts in the regional languages enumerated in the Eighth 
Schedule of the Constitution of India and publication of Authoritativ e Texts 
thereof. 
6. The Department of Justice deals with the constitutional organisation of the Supreme Court 
and the High Courts and the appointment of Judges thereto , conditions of their service and with 
the administration of judicial services in the Union Territories . Besides, it is the nodal 
Department in so far as the administration of Justice in States is concerned, although the actual 
responsibility of judicial administration below the High Court level rests with the concerned State 
Governments and High Courts. Though this department fonns a part of Ministry of Law and 
Justice it is under the administrative contro l of Ministry of Home Affairs. The Committee in its 
thirty-first Report had recommended that this state of affairs gave an anomalous picture which 
needed to be set right. The Committee in the said Report bad recommended that the 
Department of Justice should be placed under the Ministry of Law and Justice for all purposes 
thereby dispensing with the administrat ive control of the Ministry of Home Affairs. But so far no 
change bas been made in that set-up. 
7. Till 1992-93 the budget of the Department of Justice was salary oriented. From 1993-94, 
the Demands of the Department of Justice also include provision for the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme relating to infrastructural facilities for the judiciary and National Judicial Academy. From 
the financial year 1996-97 provision has also been made for the National Judicial Pay 
Commission. In the year 1997-98 Rs.0.55 crore are being allocated for the Commission as against 
Rs. 0.48 crore for the last year. 
BUDGET IN GENERAL 
8. The total Budgetary allocation made for the Ministry of Law and Justice for the year 
1997-98 is shown under three Demands namely Demand Numbers 59, 60 and 61. Demand No. 59 
which constitutes a major portion of the total allocation, relates to the Department of Legal 
Affairs, Legislative Department and Department of Justice. The Department of Company Affairs 
which till the last financial year formed part of the Ministry of Law and Justice, has since been 
attached with the Ministry of Finance. ' 
9. Demand Nos. 60 and 61 have been assignep to the Election Commission of India and the 
Supreme Court of India, respectively. The expentliture to be incurred on the Supreme Court of 
India is 'charge d'. 
DEMAND NO. 59-LAW AND JUSTICE 
10. The Budgetary provision under this Demand includes expenditures to be incurred on 
Secretariat-General Services of the Department of Legal Affairs, Legislative Department, 
Department of Justice , Conduct of elections, Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, National Legal 
Services Authority, National Judicial Academy, Infrastr uctural Facilities for the judiciary, etc. 
867/ RS F-3-B 

3 
11. The Budget Estimates (1997-98) under the Demand are given below:-
Revenue 
Capital 
Total 
Plan 
70.00 
70.00 
Non-Plan 
298.22 
298.22 
(Rs. in crores) 
Total 
368.22 
368.22 
12. A statement showing Budget Estimates 1996-97, Revised estimates 1996-97 and Budget 
Estimates 1997-98 under various heads is given below:-
(Rs. in crores) 
Major B.E. 1996-97 R.E. 1996-97 B.E. 1997-98 
H~ad Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan Plan Non-Plan 
1. Secretariat-General Servkt 
1.01 Departnunt of ugal 2052 6.19 6.21 6.85 
Affairs 
1.02 ugislativt Department 2052 2.20 2.20 2.53 
1.03 Department of Justice 2052 0.35 0.40 0.37 
1.04 Others 2052 2.77 2.77 3.14 
2. Elections 
2.01 Issue of Identity Cards to 2015 5.00 5.00 • 5.00 
Voters 
2.02 Elections 2015 465.00 265.00 260.00 
3. Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 2020 5.88 5.88 8.00 
4. Administration ot Justice 
4.01 National JudiclaJ Acadflny 2014 0.59 20.00 
4.02 Special Courts 3601 O.ol 0.01 O.ot 
4.03 lntemational Centre for 
Alternative Disputes 
Resolution (ICADR) 2014 2.30 1.30 2.50 
4.04 Other Exp. 2014 2.96 4.40 7.54 
5. Other Administrative Services 
5.01 Infrastructural facilities for 3601 49.41 0.01 49.41 0.01 50.00 0.01 
Judiciary 
5.02 Other Prog. 2070 1.94 1.94 2.26 
Grand Total : 50.00 494.61 49.41 295.12 70.00 298.22 
13. The Committee having considered all aspects makes recommendations/observations in 
respect of the following: 
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
National Legal Services Authority 
14. From the information provided by the Legal Affairs Department, the Committee notes 
that the main object of the National Legal Services Authority Act, 1987 (enforced w.e.f. 
9.11.1995) is to provide free and competent legal services to the weaker sections of the society on 
a uniform basis throughout the country. Under the Legal Services Authorities Act, free legal aid 
is admissible to every citizen whose income is less than Rs. 9000/per annum in cases before 
subordinate Courts and High Courts and Rs. 12,000/ in cases before the Supreme Court of India. 
The limitation as to income is however not applicable in case of persons belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, women, children, handicapped persons, etc. 

4 
A budgetary provision of Rs. 5 crores has been made for grants under this Act in the Budget 
Estimates for the year 1997-98 keeping in line with the recommendations made by the Committee 
in its 34th Report. 
15. The Committee was informed that the implementation of the provisions of Chapter ill of 
Legal Services Authorities Act, which deals with free legal aid to be poor bas been extended to 
sixteen States in the country. The Committee recommends that the implementation of the Chapter 
in rest of the States be carried out with utmost priority keeping in tune with the object of the Act. 
The Committee also observes that amount allocated for the scheme of free legal aid to the poor for 
the year 1997-98 is quite inadequate. 
16. The Committee also expresses its concern over the low rate of fee being paid to advocates 
taking up cases under the free legal aid scheme. The Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate 
that the rate of fee to advocates be suitably revised. It has been noted by the Committee that the 
recommendation to this effect has been forwarded to the State Legal Aid and Advice Boards by 
the Department. But the matter needs to be pursued with a positive attitude in order to attract 
talented advocates, thereby creating an ele!'flent of confidence in the minds of beneficiaries of this 
scheme. 
LOK ADALAT 
17. In a written reply to the point raised by the Committee, the Department of Legal Affairs 
has stated that since its inception in October-November, 1985, there have been 15,570 Lok 
Adalats held in different parts of the country settling 64,91,660 cases. The Committee is, 
however, constrained to observe that in spite of settling about 65 lakh cases by the Lok Adalats , 
there has not been any significant improvement in the pendency of cases in the courts. The 
Committee was informed that the Lok Adalats are being organised by the States from time to 
time. The Committee recommends that the Department should take more effective steps to 
popularise the Lok Adalats and persuade the States to hold Lok Adalats on regular basis. The 
Committee appreciates that steps have been taken for settlement of disputes of tribal 
communities through Lok Adalats and such Lok Adalats have been held in many States where 
there is concentration of tribal communities. The Committee has, However, noted that the 
concept of Lok Adalats has yet not taken shape in the States of Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland 
and the Union Territories of Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
and Lakshadweep. Where no Lok Adalats have been held so far , the Committee recommends 
that Government should make concerted efforts to organise Lok Adalats in these StatesiUT s 
also. The Committee has gathered that in cases involving Citizens vs. State coming up before the 
Lok Adalats, often the competent officers from the Government side, having powers to take 
decisions, are not present. This causes unnecessary delay in settlement of cases. The Committee 
recommends that Government should issue necessary instructions in this regard to ensur e 
presence of such officers on the spot. 
INCOME TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL (ITAT) 
18. The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal constituted under the Income-Tax Act deals with 
second appeals in all the matters relating to direct taxes and with appeals in revision against ord er 
of the Commissioners as well as orders of acquisition of properties under Chapter XX-A of the 
Income Tax Act. The ITAT is headed by the President who is assisted by one Senior Vice­
President and three Vice-Presidents . 
19. The following table shows the actual expenditure during the year 1995-96, BE for 
1996-97, RE for 1996-97 and BE for 1997-98 in respect of the ITAT. 
Actuals 
1995-96 
5.50 
BE 
1996-97 
5.88 
RE 
1996-97 
5.88 
(Rupees in crores) 
BE 
1997-98 
8.00 

5 
20. The Committee is pleased to note that 15 additional benches of the ITAT have been creat ed 
w.e.f. 1st April, 1997 on the basis of recommendation made by the Committee in its 34th Report. 
The Committee would like to impress upon the Government to make these benches functional at the 
earliest in order to lessen the pendency of cases in IT AT, which at the turn of this year was 2,98,750. 
The Committee would also like to reiterate that steps should be taken to ensure that the two Judicial 
Members of the ITAT join at the earliest. 
LAW COMMISSION 
21. The Law Commission of India is a non- statutory body constituted by the Government from 
time to time. The Commission was originally constituted in 1955 and is reconstituted every three 
years. The administrative control of the Law Commission vests with the Department of Legal 
Affairs. The terms of reference of the Law Commission are also determined by the Department of 
Legal Affairs. The Law Commission presents its reports on various subjects to the Government 
which are then processed by the Department of Legal Affairs for placing them on the Tables of 
Parliament. These reports are thereafter forwarded to the various Ministries/Departments of 
Government of India who are administratively concerned with their implementation. A total of Rs. 
95.29 lakhs Budgetary provision has been made for the expenses of Law Commission for the year 
1997-98. 
22. The Committee was informed that its recommendations in the 34th Report regarding 
revision of Code of Civil Procedure has been forwarded to the Law Commission. It is, however , not 
given to understand the course of action being taken by the Law Commission. The Committee is of 
the view that it would be appropriate to conduct a study before any Bill to propose comprehensive 
amendments in the O.P.C. is introduced in the Parliament. 
23. The Committee is constrained to note that the recommendations of the Law Commission 
made in its !44th Report and onwards are still under consideration of various Ministries/ 
Departments of the Government. The Committee recommends that the Department of Legal Affairs 
should impress upon the concerned Ministries/Departments to ensure that the Reports are given due 
importance and measures to suitably amend the relevant Acts are brought before the Parliament. The 
Committee feels that the matter should be discussed by holding inter-Ministerial meetings and a view 
evolved at the earliest. 
24. The Committee would like to reiterate that a study must be condu~ted on the customary 
practices and conventions prevalent in different parts of the country . It has been noted by the 
Committee that at times these customary practices and conventions are quicker and more effective in 
imparting justice. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should make efforts to 
codify these customary practices and conventions in order to give legal sanctity to them and create 
necessary institutional framework to put these into effect. This is of special significance in matters of 
dispute resolution as distinct from dispute adjudication. 
ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
25. The Committee has been informed that the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 has for 
the first time defined the law relating to conciliation and has paved the way for recognising these 
traditional and cultural approaches to dispute resolution. 
26. The Committee notes with dissatisfaction that the annual report and statement of accounts of 
the International Centre for Alternative Dispute Resolution, New Delhi (ICADR), a registered 
society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, has not been laid in the Parliament so far. The 
Committee urges upon the Government to ensure timely submission of annual report and statement 
of accounts of ICADR to the Parliament. 
GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS 
27. The Committee is of the opinion that in the wake of World Trade Organisation arrangement 
and the consequent likelihood of technical and scientific subjects coming up in dispute, the 
Government should take adequate steps to meet the new challenge thrown to the legal fraternity. 
The Committee recommends that a process and prog'ramme for training experts in technical subjects 
be initiated irnmedia tely. 
28. The Committee regrets to note that satisfactory action has not been initiated on it~ 
recommendation in the 34th Report regarding the performance of the Government lawyers. The 
Committee recommends that a scheme be evolved for monitoring the performance of Government 
lawyers so that they are made accountable for the cases entrusted to them. 

6 
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 
29. One of the responsibilities entrusted to the Legislative Department is to provide 
translated version of Acts in various languages. However, the Committee feels that there is a lot 
more to be achieved in this field. It is the considered view of the Committee that there is a 
serious lacun ae in the availability of various Acts in regional languages mentioned in the Eighth 
SchedUle of the Constitution. 
30. The Committee is of the opinion that a time-frame should be evolved for translation of 
Acts and the same must be adhered to strictly. The Committee notes with regret that over the 
last four years, the work relating to publication of authoritative texts of Central Acts in different 
regional languages has consistently gone down with only 16 Acts being authenticated in 1996-97. 
The Committee has been informed that Central Government spends a huge amount on account 
of reimbursement of translation charges (@Rs.l60/- per standard page) and printing charges to 
various States. Hence the Committee recommends that instead of simply holding the State 
Governments responsible for not submitting the translation of Central Acts, the Central 
Government should stress upon the concerned State Governments to expedite the work. 
31. The Committee desired to know details about the introduction of Photo Identity Cards. 
Committee was informed that as regards conduct of elections in August 1993, the Election 
Commission of India had introduced the scheme of Photo Identity Cards and it had directed that 
all the States, except the State of Jammu & Kashmir , would arrange for issue of Photo Identity 
Cards to all electors. The Commission initially fixed 30th November, 1994 as the deadline for the 
completion of the scheme which has had extended from time to time. However, the Commission 
stipulated in November, 1994 that it would not hold elections after 31st January, 1995, unless 
Photo Identity Cards were issued to all voters. At that time, general elections to State Assemblies 
were due in many States. Hence, certain private parties in the State of Bihar and Orissa filed writ 
petition in the Supreme Court challenging the stand taken by Election Commission. The Supreme 
Court vide its interim order dated 17.1.1995 directed the Election Commission not to withhold 
the elections of State Legislative Assemblies on the ground that the State Governments have not 
been able to complete the process of issuance of Photo Identity Cards by the deadline prescribed 
by the Election Commission. Hence, the issuance of Photo Identity Cards did not ramaio a pre­
condition for holding elections. However, the Committee has been informed that the Election 
Commission is of the view that the scheme of Photo Identity Cards for election needs to be 
continued and the issue of Identity Cards to all registered electors be completed as soon as 
possible. The Secretary of the Department during his deposition before the Committee stated 
that 48.98% work with regard to issue of Identity Cards to voters has been completed in the 
country. However, the Committee was of the view that when the Supreme Court had given such 
judgement regarding the Photo Identity Cards, it was incumbent on the part of the concerned 
department to examine the implications of the judgement and to suggest some measures &O as to 
make it compulsory to issue Photo Identity Cards to voters. The Committee took serious note of 
the fact that the concerned department did not take any initiative in this direction. The 
Committee is of the view th~t the multipurpose usage of the Identity Card creates a need for 
completion of the task of issuing the same to all adults in the country on a war footing. The 
importance of an Identity Card assumes significance specially in the border areas of the country 
from security point of view. Hence the Committee recommends that a time-frame should be 
evolved to complete the work relating to issuance of Photo Identity Cards. This· work should be 
completed by the year end in all the States. The Committee further recommends that it should be 
the responsibility of Government to ensure that defect-free Identity Cards are issued to all the 
citizens and if a card is not issued to any person, the officer concerned should be made 
accountable. The Committee recommends that an enactment, if necessary, should be brought to 
this effect. 
32. On a point raised by the Committee regarding the Sugar Export Promotion (Repeal) 
Ordinance, 1996, which repealed the Sugar Export Act, 1958, the Secretary of the Legislative 
Department · in his written reply informed the Committee that the Ministry of Food in 
consultation with the Legislative Department has decided that in case of an Ordinance repealing 
an existing Act , a replacement Bill is not necessary. Accordingly, the Sugar Export Promotion 
Act, 1958, has been repealed without getting the Bill to replace the Ordinance passed. The 
Committee expresses its disagreement with this view of the Ministry of Law and Justice. The 

7 
Committee expresses its serious concern over the manner in which an Act has been repealed by 
an Ordinance without taking the Parliament into confidence. Undoing of Acts passed by 
Parliament through Ordinances is not a healthy practice either morally or legally and goes against 
the spirit of the Constitution and democracy both. 
33. The Committee has observed that many of the subordinate legislations are at variance 
with the main Acts. The Committee, therefore, emphasises the need for a comprehensive review of 
aU subordinate legislation in the country. 
34. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that in certain cases the judgements 
passed by the different High Courts and the Supreme Court pointed out some anomalies in the 
law itself. The Committee expresses its displeasure that the Legislative Department did not make 
any effort to monitor such judgements. Moreover, the Department has not conducted any study 
on the judgements which pointed out infirmities and anomalies in various laws. The Committee 
recommends that Government should monitor all such judgements on a regular basis and ensure 
that timely corrective actions are taken. 
35. The Committee is constrained to note that there are so many vacancies in the Vidhi 
Sahitya Prakashan (VSP) due to which the publication is lagging behind. As a measure to bring 
out the publication in time, the Committee suggests that the Department should seriously consider 
preparation of Camara Ready Copy o~ the manuscript to be published in order to make the 
publication work of VSP more efficacious. Necessary inputs like installation of computer system 
and networking towards achieving the above objective in the VSP b€ "'lstl undertaken. The 
Committee further suggests th~t proper training sho••ld be jmparted to the £ for working on 
computers, alternatively, trained personnel be recruited to man the machines. The Committee 
recommends that Government should create an inhouse printing facility at least upto the stage of 
type-setting. 
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 
36. The Committee, in its 34th Report, had expressed its concern over the pendency of cases 
in the courts. The Committee stressed that some time-frame should be prescribed for the disposal 
of cases. While expressing concern over the pendency of cases, the Committee had observed that 
mere filling up all the vacancies of judges in Supreme Court and different High Courts would not 
solve the problem. Number of benches should be increased. The Committee had suggested that 
the Benches of High Courts could be set up according to the distance or the areas of the 
population they cover. The Committee had specifically referred to the State of Uttar Pradesh and 
stated that Seventy-five percent of the cases in the Allahabad High Court pertained to the 
Western part of Uttar Pradesh which accounted for one third of the State, population-wise and 
one fourth area-wise. The Committee had stressed that there was a long standing demand for 
setting up a Bench of Allahabad High Court in Western Uttar Pradesh. The Committee notes 
with concern that no concrete steps have so far been taken with regard to the pendency of cases 
and regarding setting-up of a bench of Allahabad High Court in Western Uttar Pradesh. The 
Committee recommends that a system should be evolved for creation of High Court Benches on the 
basis of the population of the States. · 
37. The Committee suggests that pendency of cases in the various courts should be reduced. 
The Committee has been informed that t\Je lower courts in the country function under the 
supervision of · the High Courts of various States. However, the cases in High Courts and 
Supreme Court are being monitored by the Central Government. The Committee has been given 
Lo understand that the Allahabad High Court alone contributes to about 30% of the total 
pendency of cases. While the Gujarat and Madras High Courts have the lowest pendency of 
cases. The Committee suggests that Government should make study on the reasons for such 
variance in the disposal of cases by different courts. One of the reasons for the pendency of cases is 
the vacancies on the benches which remain vacant for a long time. The Committee recommends 
that the process for f.tlling the vacancies of judges of Supreme Court and High Courts should 
commence at least six months before the date of vacancy so that the new incumbant joins as soon 
the vacancy occurs. The Committee is of the view that the strength of the judges in High Courts 
and Supreme Court be increased. The Committee is of the opinion that another causative factor 

8 
for such high pendency of cases in the courts is the traditional method of issuing summons. The 
process is age-old and needs to be reviewed in the context of the present day scenario. The moderu 
methods of communications wherein much faster and quicker modes of communication are 
available should be adopted. The Committee also recommends that specific limit for completion of 
each stage of the case has to be fiXed. 
38. The Committee is of the considered view that Government should study the feasibility to 
set up more tribunals to deal with more categories of cases. Efforts need to be taken towards 
setting up of tribunals related to education, companies, election disputes / petitions :<!tc. This will 
save valuable time of the courts and also lessen the burd en on the courts . 
39. The Committee has observed that in many cases, the case is adjourned without assigning 
any particular reason. In such instances the saying 'justice delayed is justice denied' hold s 
grounds. The Committee strongly recommends that some yardstick in this regard needs to be laid 
down. The Committee further recommends that proper reason should be assigned, in writing, for 
adjourning a case without proper pleading. 
CENTRALLY SPONSERED SCHEME FOR DEVELOPMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURAL 
FACILITIES FOR THE JUDICIARY 
40. A centrally sponsered scheme relating to development of infrastructural facilities for the 
judiciary is being implemented by the Department of Justice from the year 1993-94. The sche me 
has been formulated with a view to augment the sou rces of the State Government/Union 
Territory Administration. The schem e envisages construct ion of court buildings and residences of 
Judges/Judicial Officers covering High Courts and subordinate Courts. As per the present set up, 
the expenditure under the scheme is to be shared by the Central and State Governments on 50-50 
basis. 
41. ln the current financial year an amount of Rs. 50 crores has been allocat ed for this 
scheme. The Committee is of the view that the allocation for the purpose is quite on the lower 
side and this sphere of activity needs to be given more importance. The implementation of the 
scheme is definite to boost the morale of the functionaries. The Committee strongly recommends 
that the amount needs to be enhanced to the tune of Rs. 200 crores. The Committee urges the 
Government to impress upon the Planning Commission to enhance allocation for the scheme. The 
Committee is of the view that the enhancement of the allocation for this activity will also facilitate 
the setting up of additional Benches of High Courts in diffenent parts of the country. 
DEMAND NO. 60 - ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
42. The Election Commission of India and Electoral Reforms come under the purview of the 
Legislative Department of the Ministry. The Demands for Grants of the Election Commission do 
not form part of the composite Demand No. 59. Demand No. 60 has separately been assigned to 
Election Commission. The Expenditure of the Election Commission is 'Voted'. Budgetary 
allocation of a total of 5.83 crore rupees bas been made for the year 1997-98 as against 5.47 
crores allocated under the Revised Esti mat es for the year 1996-97. 
DEMAND NO. 61 - SUPREME COURT OF INDIA 
43. Demand No. 61 in the detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry has been assigned to 
the Supreme Court of India. The expenditure to be incurred on the Supreme Court of India is 
'Charged'. As regards the Committee's concern regarding pendency of cases, the Committee _has 
been informed that at present there are only four vacancies in the Supreme Court and the 
pendency position has improved to a great extent dur ing the recent past. The number of pending 
cases which was over one lakh on 1st December, 1995, has come down to 37,000. The total 
Budget Estimates of the Supreme Court of India under the Revenue are Rs. 16.11 crores as 
against Rs. 16.36 crores of Revised Estimates for the year 1996-97. 

RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITI'EE 
xxvn 
•TWENTY -SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met from 10.00 A.M: to 1.30 P.M. and again from 3.00 P.M. to 4.45 P.M. on 
Thursday, the 27th March, 1997, in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
4. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
5. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
7. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
8. Shri Vijay Goel 
9. Shri lshwar Dayal Swamy 
10. Shri Brij Mohan Ram 
11. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
12. Prof. M. Kamson 
13. Shri N. S. V. Chithan 
14. Shri N. Dennis 
15. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G. C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason. Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
Department of Legal affairs 
1. Dr. V.K. Agarwal, Secretary 
2. Shri D.P. Sharma, Joint Secretary (Admn.) 
3. Shri G.D. Chotmurada, Under Secretary (NALSA) 
4. Shri S.K. Naik, AS and FA (Law) 
5. Shri Hakam Singh, Dy. Secy. (Finance) 
6. Smt. Neelam S. Kumar, Controller of Accounts 
7. Shri J. N. Sharma, Dy. Registrar, Supreme Court of India 
Representatives of Leaislative Department 
1. Shri K. L. Mohanpuria, Secretary (LD) 
2. Dr. Raghbir Singh, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri S. K. Naik, AS & FA 
4. Shri P. L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary (A) 
· 5. Shri Prakash Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
6. Shri B. D. Chaubey, Editor, Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan 
•Minutes of First to Twenty·sixth meetings of the Committee relate to some other matten discussed by the Committee. 
9 

10 
7. Shri Sub as Pani, Dy. Election Commissioner 
8. Smt. Neelam S. Kumar, Controller of Ales 
9. Shri Hakam Singh, DS (F) 
Representatives of Department of Justice 
1. Shri C. N. S. Nair, Additional Secretary. 
2. Shri M. P. Singh, Joint Secretary. 
3. Shri Tejinder Singh Laschar, Director (HC&D). 
2. The Committee took up consideration of the Demands for Grants (1997-98) of the 
Ministry of Law and Justice and heard the Secretaries of the Department of Legal Affairs and 
Legislative Department, respectively on the subject. First of all, the Secretary, Department of 
Legal Affairs made a presentation detailing the mandate of his department and the nature of 
projected allocations for its different activities during 1997-98. He particularly dwelt on the 
vacancies in the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and working of the International Centre for 
Alternate Dispute Resolution. The members thereafter sought clarifications from him on various 
points relating to efficacy of the system of Lok Adalats, performance of Government lawyers, 
legal aid to the poor, steps taken to reduce pendency in Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and 
Foreign Exchange Regulation Appellate Board, controversy arising out of doing away with the 
Sugar Export Promotion Act, 1958 through the ordinance, namely, the Sugar Export Promotion 
(Repeal) Ordinance , 1996, implementation of.Law Commission recommendations and working of 
the Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies. The Secretary clarified some of tiTe 
points raised by the members and as regards others he was directed by the Committee to send 
written replies11otes. 
3. The Secretary, Legislative Department gave an overview of the functioning of his 
Department and the broad thurst of the proposed allocations. The Members raised various 
queries about the translation of Central Acts into regional languages, the issuance of Photo­
identity Cards to the electorate and implications of Supreme Court judgement pertaining thereto, 
mechanism in the Department to plug the lacunae in the existing laws, especially in the context of 
court pronouncements and the system of framing of rules under delegated legislation. The 
Committee took a serious view of the fact that the Secretary who was incharge of such an 
qnportant Department of the Government was not aware of the judgement of the Supreme Court 
on the Photo-identity Cards issue, and implications thereof. The Secretary of the Department 
clarified some of the aspects and as regards others he was directed to submit written replies. 
4 . • In the afternoon session the Committee heard the Add itional Secretary, Department of 
Justice on various aspects of allocations as proposed in the Demands for Grants of th( 
Department for the year 1997-98. In this context he particularly referred to the Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme for providing financial assistance for developing infrastructural facilities for 
judiciary and the National Judicial Academy for which budgetary provision of Rs. 50 crores and 
Rs. 20 crores , respectively has been made for the year 1997-98. The members, thereafter, sought 
clarifications from hjm on various points arising out of his presentation, particularly with regard 
to the heavy pendency of cases in courts in the country and the measures being taken by the 
Government to impart quicker justice to the people, vacancy position of judges in the Supreme 
Court and the High Courts, transfer policy in respect of judges in High Courts, constitution of 
additional benches of High Courts in different States and Nat ional Judicial Pay Commission. The 
Additional Secretary to the Department clarified some of the points raised by the members and 
as regards others he was asked to furnish written replies11otes. 
5. A verbatim record of the evidence was kept. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 
1st April , J 997. 

XXX 
"TmRTIETH MEETING 
The Committee met from 11.00 A.M. to 1.10 P.M. and again from 3.00 P.M. to 4.15 P.M. on 
Wednesday, the 9th April, 1997, in Room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
.. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
4. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
5. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
6. Shri Ram Nath Kovind 
7. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
8. Shri Ramachandran Pillai 
9. Shri Jala)udin Ansari 
10. Shri Raj Babbar 
11. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
LOK SABHA 
12. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
13. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
14. Shri Vijay Goel 
15. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
16. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
17. Shri M.O.H. Farooq 
18. Shri Idris Ali 
19. Shri Khelsai Singh 
20. Shri Badal Chowdhury 
21. Shri Sudhir Giri 
22. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
23. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh 
24. Shri Torno Riba 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason, Committee Officer 
• • 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
1. Dr. V .K. Agarwal, Secretary 
• 
•Minutes of Twenty·eigbth and Twe~ty·ninth.meetings of the Committee relate to some other matters discussed by the Committee. 
•• ••omitted portions relate to some other matters discussed by the Committee. 
11 

12 
2. Shri S.K. Naik, Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor (Law) 
3. Shri D .P. Sharma , Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor 
4. Shrimati Neelam S. Kumar, Controller of Accounts 
Legislative Department 
1. Shri K.L. Mohanpuria , Secretary (LD) 
2. Dr. Raghbir Singh, Additional Secretary 
3. Shri P.L. Sakarwal, Joint Secretary (A) 
4. Shri Prakash Chandra, JS & LC 
S. Shri B.D. Cbaubey, Editor, Vidhi Sahitya Prakasba~ 
6. Shri Hakam Singh, Deputy Secretary (Finance) 
7. Shrimati Neelam S. Kumar, Controller of Accounts 
Department or Justice 
1. Shri C.N.S. Nair , Additional Secretary 
2. Shri M.P. Singh, Joint Secretary . 
3. Shri Tejinder Singh Laschar, Director (HC&J) 
4. Shrimati Veena Brahma , Director (Justice) 
2. • • • 
3. In the afternoon Session, the Committee further beard the Secretaries of the Departm ent 
of Legal Affairs and Legislative Department and Additional Secretary , Department of Justice on 
the budgetary outlays of their respective Departments as proposed in the Demands for Grants 
· (1997-98) of the Ministry of Law and Justice in the context of the points raised by the members 
on the subject in the meeting of the Committee held on the 27th March, 1997. They gave replies 
to certain clarifications sought by the members and as regards others they were directed by the 
Committee to send written notes . 
. 4. · A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee than adjourned at 4.15 P.M. 
•• •Omitted ponions relate to some other matters discussed by the Committee. 

XXXII 
.THIRTY -SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 23rd April . 1997, in Room No. 63, First 
Floor, Parliament House , New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Som Pal - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Banarsi Das Gupta 
3. Shri Sudhir Ranjan Majumdar 
4. Dr. Jagannath Mishra 
5. Shri Ram Nath Kovmd 
6. Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave 
7. Shrimati Kamla Sinha 
8. Shri Jalaludin Ansari 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sushil Chandra Verma 
10. Shri Ram Nagina Mishra 
11. Shri Jagatvir Singh Orona 
12. Shri Satya Pal Jain 
13. Shri Rajabhau Thakre 
14. Shri Ishwar Dayal Swamy 
15. Shri Tara Chand Sahu 
16. Shri Mangat Ram Sharma 
17. Shri M.O.H . Farooq 
18. Shri ldris Ali 
19. Shri Khelsai Singh 
20. Shri Sudhir Giri 
21. Shri Kunwar Sarvraj Singh 
22. Shri Sbltrughan Prasad Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Jaswant Kaur, Director 
Shri G.C. Miglani , Under Secretary 
Shri S. Jason. Committee Officer 
2. The Committee first took up consideration of its draft Thirty-ninth Report on the Demands 
for Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Law and Justice and discussed various aspects of the 
recommendations as proposed therein. The Committee, in particular, took note of the 
recommendation in para 32 of the Report relating to the view taken by the Ministry of Law and 
Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) in respect of the Sugar Export Promotion (Repeal) 
Ordinance , 1996 which sought to repeal the Sugar Export Promotion Act, 1958. The Committee 
felt that the Committee's view that the repealing of an Act of Parliament by Government through 
• Minut~ of Thirty-first. meeting of the Committee relates to some other matter discussed by the Committee. 
•••omitted po~ relates to some other matter discussed by the Committee. 
13 

14 
an Ordinance without even the Ordinance being passed by Parliament, is in utter violation of 
constitutional norms, be reiterated in strong terms. The Committee after some discussion, 
adopted the Report with some amendments. 
3. • • • 
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to appropriately modify/amend the draft reports 
in the light of today's discussions. 
5. The Committee decided to present its Thirty-seventh, Thirty-eighth and Thirty-ninth 
Reports to both the Housesof Parliament on Friday, the 2nd May, 1997. The Committee 
authorised its Chairman and in his absence Dr. Jagannath Mishra, to present the Reports in 
Rajya Sabha and Shri Sushi! Chandra Verma and in his absence Shri Shatrughan Prasad Singh to 
lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 
29th April, 1997. 