 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA          151 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
THE ARMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 2 JUNE, 2011) 
(FORWARDED TO  THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 2 JUNE, 2011) 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 1 AUGUST, 2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 2 AUGUST, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
JUNE, 2011/JYAISHTHA, 1933 (SAKA) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-ha@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
C.S. (H.A.) – 293 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY FIRST REPORT 
ON 
THE ARMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 2 JUNE, 2011) 
(FORWARDED TO  THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 2 JUNE, 2011) 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 1 AUGUST, 2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 2 AUGUST, 2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
JUNE, 2011/JYAISHTHA, 1933 (SAKA) 
 

 
CONTENTS 
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE...................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ...................................................................................................................... (iii)-(i v)
3. R EPORT ....................................................................................................................... 1-37
 C HAPTER-I  
  B ACKGROUND ......................................................................................................... 1
 C HAPTER-II  
  A RMS, FIREARMS AND AMMUNITIONS .......................................................................... 2-11
 C HAPTER-III  
  E XAMINATION OF ARMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 ........................................................ 12-20
 C HAPTER-IV  
  R ESPONSE OF GOVERNMENT TO ISSUES RAISED BY 
 M EMBERS OF COMMITTEE  ....................................................................................... 21-29
 C HAPTER-V  
  P RESENTATION BY NON-OFFICIAL WINTNESSES .............................................................. 30-33
 C HAPTER-VI  
  O BSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................... 34-37
4. R ELEVANT MINUTES OF MEETINGS OF COMMITTEE ............................................................... 39-87
5. A NNEXURES .................................................................................................................. 89-113
(i) The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010; ........................................................................ 91-96
(ii) Arms and Ammunition Poli cy for Individuals; .......................................................... 97-103
(iii) Arms and Ammunition Manufacturing Policy ; .......................................................... 104-106
(iv) Advisory dated 31.03.2010 issued to all State Governments  
on 6th April, 2010 vide MHA communication No. V-11016/ 
16/2009 - Arms-IS-II Division/Arms Section; .......................................................... 107-111
(v) Notification of Ministry of Home Affairs dated 21st May,  
2010 publishing the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 2010. ............................................... 112-113
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS  
(Re-constituted w.e.f. 31st August, 2010) 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu           ––– Chairman 
 2. Shri Rishang Keishing  
 3. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy 
 4. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
 5. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal 
 6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee  
 *7. Shri Javed Akhtar 
 8. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 9. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
 10. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK  SABHA 
 11. Shri L.K. Advani 
 12. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 13. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
 14. Shri Ramen Deka 
 15. Shri L. Raja Gopal 
 16. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque  
 17. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 18. Shri Jitender Singh Malik (Sonepat) 
 19. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
 20. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
 21. Shri Nilesh N. Rane 
 22. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
 23. Adv. A. Sampath 
 24. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed 
 25. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
 26. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
 27. Shri Ravneet Singh 
 28. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay 
 29. Shri Harsh Vardhan 
 30. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure  
 31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
*  Shri Javed Akhtar nominated w.e.f. 21 September, 2010 vice Shri Tiruchi Siva, who has resigned from the Membership of the 
DRSC   on Home Affairs w.e.f. the 13th September, 2010. 

  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
  Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
  Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director  
  Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PREFACE 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, do hereby present this 
One Hundred and Fifty-First Report on the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 
2.  In pursuance of the rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, 
the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, referred* the Arms (Amendment) Bill 2010 (Annexure-I) as introduced 
in the Lok Sabha on 25th August, 2010 and pending therein, to the Committee on 1st September, 
2010, for examination and report within three months i.e. by 30th November, 2010. The Committee 
sought further extension of time thrice for presentation of the Report on the Bill, the last extension 
being upto 10th June, 2011. 
3.  Even before the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was referred to the Committee, it has had 
occasion to consider at length issues concerni ng New Arms and Ammunition Policy for Individuals 
and Arms and Ammunition Manufacturing Policy, notified by the Ministry of Home Affairs and the 
Advisory issued by that Ministry on 6th April, 2010 to all States/UTs implementing the said policy, as 
also the Ministry’s Gazette Notification No. GSR 453(E) dated 21st May, 2010, publishing the Arms 
(Amendment) Rule, 2010 in seven sittings held on 7th January, 9th February, 4th and 23rd March, 
22nd April, 28th May and 11th June 2010. The Committee considered the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 
2010 in nine sittings held on 1st & 23rd November, 20th & 28th December, 2010, 5th & 24th January, 
8th & 15th March, 2011. The Committee heard the official presentation of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs on 1st November, 2010 on the Bill and on the 23rd November, 2010 on the 
Arms Policy and Rules and the Advisory dated 6th April, 2010 issued by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs to all the States/UTs relating to ‘Grant of Arms Licenses for acquisition/possession of Arms”. 
As per practice, the Secretaries and senior officers of the Legislative Department and the Department 
of Legal Affairs were also present in those sittings to respond to the queries of the Members. 
3.1  The Committee heard some non-official witn esses representing the National Association for 
Gun Rights India (NAGRI) on the Bill, in its sitting held on 8th March, 2011. 
3.2   The Committee held internal discussion on the Bill in its sitting held on 15th March, 2011. 
3.3  The Committee in its sitting held on 25th April, 2011 considered and adopted this Report and 
authorized its Chairman to pres ent the same to the Chairman, Rajya Sabha before 10th June, 2011 
when the House would not be in Session. 
4.  The, Committee has made use of the following documents in preparing the Report:- 
(i)  The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010; 
(ii) Detailed background Note on the Bill as received from the Ministry of Home Affairs; 
(iii) The Arms Act, 1959; 
(iv) The Arms Rules, 1962; 
(v) Arms and Ammunition Policy for individuals; 
(vi) Arms and Ammunition Manufacturing Policy; 

(vii) Notification of Ministry of Home Affairs dated 21st May, 2010 regarding amendment of 
the Arms Rules; 
(viii)  Aide-Memoire on Arms and Ammunition Policy prepared by the Secretariat; and 
(ix) Advisory dated 31.3.2010 issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs to all State 
Governments on 6th April, 2010. 
5.  For facility of reference and convenience,  observations and recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
  M. VENKAIAH NAIDU  
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
25th April, 2011 Department-related Parliamentary 
  Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER- I 
Background 
1.0   The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 seeks to amend the procedure for grant of licence for the 
acquisition, transfer of arms and ammunition to make the same more specific. All matters pertaining 
to arms and ammunition such as acquisition; possession, manufacture, sale, import, export and 
transport are governed by the Arms Act, 1959 and the rules framed thereunder namely, the Arms, 
Rules 1962, both of which came into force on Ist October, 1962. The Arms Act, 1959 and Arms 
Rules, 1962 contain provisions for acquisition and possession of fire arms by individuals, and for 
manufacture, sale, transportation, import and export etc. of fire arms and ammunition. The Arms Act, 
1959 and rules made thereunder also make provisions for punishment for contravention of the 
provisions of the Act. 
1.1   The background note on the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010, as furnished by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, explains that under the existing provisions, it is compulsory to obtain, under section 3 
of the Arms Act, 1959, a license for acquisition and possession of fire arms and ammunition. Section 
13 of the Arms Act, 1959, inter-alia, lays down the procedure for grant of such licences which 
requires the licencing authority to call for the repo rt of the officer-in-charge of the nearest police 
station on the application for grant of such license. Such police officer is required to send the report 
within the prescribed time. After making such enquiry as the licensing authority may consider 
necessary and on receipt of report from the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station, the licencing 
authority may grant the licence or refuse to grant the same. However, the proviso to subsection (2A) 
of section 13 of the aforesaid Act empowers the licensing authority to grant an arms licence where the 
report of the police authorities has not been received within the prescribed time. 
1.2   The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 spells out the 
Government’s justification for making amendment in the existing provisions for grant of license for 
acquisition and possession of fire arms and ammunition, which is as under: 
“Proliferation of arms and ammunition, whether licenced or not, in the country disrupt 
the social order and development, vitiate the law and order situation, directly contributes 
towards lethality of violent acts, and needs to be curbed. It is, thus, imperative to ensure 
that arms licenses are issued to the bonafide persons by the licensing authority concerned 
after due verification of their antecedents by the police authority concerned.” 
1.3   According to the Government, in view of th e above mentioned reasons, it has become necessary 
to modify the procedure for grant of license for th e acquisition, transfer of arms and ammunition, and 
make the procedure more specific. 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER- II 
Arms, Firearms and Ammunitions 
2.0   The Committee has had occasion to discuss at length issues concerning the Arms and 
Ammunition Policy of the Government in its sittings  held on 7th January, 9th February, 4th and 23rd 
March, 22nd April, 28th May and 11th June 2010. The discussion in the Committee was triggered by 
a letter dated 16th December, 2009 written by a Member of the Committee to its Chairman, 
suggesting that in the changed security scenario, the production, procurement and possession of arms 
by public in self-defence should be liberalized. The Member drew the attention of the Committee 
towards the following para of the Statement of Objects and Reasons, when the Arms Bill 1959 was 
introduced in Parliament: 
“The Indian Arms Act, 1878, was intended to disarm the entire nation Even after 
independence, the law declaring “swords, da ggers, spears, spear-heads, bow and arrows” 
as “arms” has been allowed to continue unaltered on the statute book. The rigours of the 
Arms Act and rules thereunder continue to make it difficult for law abiding citizens to 
possess fire-arms for self-defen ce whereas terrorists, dacoit- gangs and other anti-social 
and anti-national elements are using not onl y civilian weapons but also bombs, hand-
grenades, bren-guns, sten-guns, .303 bore service rifles and revolvers of military type, for 
perpetrating heinous crimes against society and the State.” 
2.1   Having stated the above objective, the legislation and the rules framed there under gave vast 
arbitrary powers to licensing authorities making it virtually impossible for an ordinary law abiding 
Indian citizen to procure an arms licence. 
2.2   The Member further stated that it is very difficult in our country to procure and possess arms. 
The Government follows a policy of non-prolifer ation of arms, which was being pursued by our 
foreign rulers before 1947, for their own reasons and is not inclined to change the mindset. Changed 
circumstances necessitate a change in the policy to suit public interest. There should be a feeling of 
trust and faith between those governing and the governed. It is equally important that the Government 
of the day ensures the security of life and property of the public. He felt that law breakers, terrorists 
and unlawful outfits have access to all types of sophisticated weapons, while the law abiding citizens 
are woefully at the mercy of the inadequate, ill armed and sometimes unhelpful law enforcing 
agencies. 
2.3   The Members strongly felt that the people, exposed to risk, should be adequately equipped with 
weapons for their personal security. In the changed scenario, the production, procurement and 
possession of arms by public at large should be simplified and streamlined. The possession of 
Licenced Arms will not magnify the problems but would serve as a deterrent for the ghastly events. 
2.4   In that context the Members suggested that the Committee should hold detailed discussion on 
the ‘Arms Policy’ and submit a report on the subject to Parliament. Comments of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs were sought on the letter of the Member. The Ministry of Home Affairs vide their OM 
dated 6th January, 2010 furnished their comments. According to the Ministry, the law and order 
situation as prevailing in 1878 and as of now are vastly different. The social and political situations 
are also totally different and consequent to getting independence, the people of India are empowered 
to elect their leaders and do not require guns to get their grievances redressed. Therefore, in principle, 

there is no need for a law abiding citizen to arm himself as police and paramilitary forces are available 
to address any security concern. The Government in principle felt that free availability of arms would 
escalate violence in general in the society. The UN Programme of Action on this aspect endorses the 
above views. 
2.5   The Ministry of Home Affairs also submitted that it was aware of the need for review of policy 
from time to time. However, the principle of non proliferation of arms and ammunition remains a pre-
requisite for peaceful socio-economic development, democratic politics and Rule of Law. 
2.6   Commenting on the issue, the Ministry of Home Affairs opined that as per the State List of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India, “Police” and “Public Order” are the responsibilities of 
the State. However, whenever need arises, the Union Government helps the State Governments in 
providing the additional manpower in the form of Central para-military forces for ensuring public 
order. 
2.7   As per the report of the International Action Network on Small Arms (IANSA), UK, a thousand 
people die every day in the world by gunshot, and th ree times as many are severely injured. If the 
death, injury and disability resulting from small arms are categorized as a disease, it is to be viewed as 
an epidemic. As a man-made vector of injury, guns are manifestly bad for human health. Under the 
UN Programme of Action on Small Arms (POA), every country has committed itself to: 
z Establish a national agency to coordinate among all the government departments and 
organisations working on different aspects of the small arms issue. These include 
Customs, Justice, Defence, Security, Foreig n Affairs, Interior, H ealth, Police, Women, 
Human Rights, Youth, Environment etc. 
z Identify a specific person or office as a poi nt of contact for officials in other countries 
requesting or providing information on small arms. 
z Involve civil society organisations as partners  in stopping the proliferation and misuse of 
guns. 
z Harmonise national polices among states within - each region; strengthen regional and 
sub-regional agreements on controlling arms. 
z Support the implementation and enforcement of regional agreements and moratoria on 
small arms.  
z Make illicit gun production or possession a criminal offence under national law. 
z Establish adequate laws to prevent illegal manufacture and trafficking in diversion of guns 
to unauthorized recipients. 
z Seek out and prosecute illegal gun producers and traffickers. 
z Improve the enforcement of arms embargoes. 
z Mark all guns at the point of manufact ure to enable identification and tracing. 
z Keeping comprehensive and accurate records, for as long as possible, on the manufacture, 
holding and transfer of small arms. 

z Assess all applications for export in accordance with strict ‘national regulations’, 
consistent with States’ existing responsibilities under international law. 
z Require end - user certificates for exports and transit of small arms. 
z Notify the original supplier nation if guns are being re-exported. 
z Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of ex-combatants, including 
collection and destruction of their weapons. Destroy surplus, confiscated or collected 
weapons. 
z Meet regularly with other countries to report on progress. 
z Conduct public awareness campai gns on the small arms problem. 
z Increase the international exchange of information on this topic. 
2.8   Many United Nations resolutions, decisions, statements and reports have noted that excessive 
and destabilizing accumulations and transfers of small arms and light weapons are closely related to 
the increased incidents and intensity of conflicts and high levels of crime and violence. The illicit 
trafficking and circulation of small arms and light weapons throughout the world is not only a major 
source of insecurity but also impedes socio-economic development. 
2.9   Regarding access of weapons by law breakers, terrorists and unlawful elements and dependency 
of law abiding citizens on the inadequate, ill armed and sometimes unhelpful law enforcing agencies, 
the Ministry of Home Affairs stated that it is the Government which has to mobilize resources for 
para-military forces to counter terrorists and other criminals armed with sophisticated weapons. The 
Ministry further stated that the manpower in all the CPMFs is being increased, the vacant posts in 
CPMFs and State police forces are being filled up, training of the personnel of CPMFs and State 
police forces is being organised regularly and late st weapons and surveillance equipments to combat 
terrorism are being procured and deployed.  
2.10   Commenting on the point that there would have been lesser casualties on 26/11/2008 in 
Taj Hotel had some of those present had arms, the Ministry was of the view that in terrorist incidents 
the element of surprise lies with the terrorists. Based on these experiences, it is the endeavour of MHA 
to improve the functioning of and the coordina tion amongst the various security agencies, para-
military forces and the State police forces so that such instances do not recur or at least the damage 
done by such instances is minimized to the greatest extent possible. 
2.11   In their comments, the Ministry inter alia informed the Committee that it was in the 
process of reviewing the Arms Policy and has sought the comments of the general public and by 
inviting comments, the Government has conveyed its openness to any suggestion/amendments in the 
interest of civil society. 
2.12   In the sitting of the Committee held on 7th  January, 2010, the Member brought to the 
notice of the Committee that the Ministry of Home Affairs had put on its website a draft of a new 
Arms and Ammunition Policy, under the Arms Act, 1959 and has sought the comments of the general 
public till 6th January, 2010. The Member expr essed his concern on the proposed move of the 
Government, which according to him affected every Indian, and that the Standing Committee had not 
been taken into confidence. The Member wanted the Committee to convey its displeasure to the 

Ministry of Home Affairs over the fact that before putting the draft on the website, they had not 
briefed the Committee about their proposed move. He suggested that this subject (Arms Policy) 
should be discussed in the Committee and a report submitted to Parliament as the matter affected 
every countryman. He also inter alia suggested that the draft policy document in Hindi should also be 
put on the Ministry of Home Affair’s website along with the English version and the same widely 
circulated through the medium of  language newspapers. Members of the Committee associated 
themselves with the views of their colleague. 
2.13   In the said sitting of the Committee, the Members wanted to know from the Home 
Secretary the background which led the Ministry to review the existing Arms Policy and why the 
Standing Committee on Home Affairs was not informed of the proposed move of the Government. 
The Chair announced the unanimous view of the Committee that matters relating to ‘Arms, Fire Arms 
and Ammunition’ should be discussed in a separate sitting and till such time the Ministry should not 
finalize the new policy. 
2.14   The Home Secretary responded to the concerns raised in the Committee, in the following 
words:- 
“I will bring this to the notice of the Union Home Minister because the Draft Arms Policy, 
as approved by the Union Home Minister, has been put on the website of the Home 
Ministry. I agree that we should have brought it to the notice of the Standing Committee 
and also the Members of the Standing Committee which we shall do in future. I would 
also bring to his notice the suggestion that you have made that the Draft Arms Policy 
should not be finalized till the Standing Committee had a discussion”. 
2.15   The Committee observed that the proposals of the Ministry of Home Affairs should be 
placed before the Standing Committee first so that it may examine the matter and submit its 
recommendations and till such time it had not discussed the subject, the Ministry should keep 
everything connected with the formulation of the policy pending, as the day before was the last date 
for submitting comments on the draft policy and the Committee Members were not informed. It was 
further suggested that the draft policy should be put on the Ministry’s website in both the languages. 
Thereupon the Home Secretary told the Committee that  he would bring the matter to the notice of the 
Home Minister. 
2.16   Subsequent to that sitting of the Comm ittee, the Home Secretary sent a DO letter dated 
14th January, 20l0-to the Secretariat, intimating as under: 
“The Home Minister has directed that the Hindi version of the proposed Arms Policy be 
prepared and placed on the website of MHA and that two weeks time be given for the 
members of the public to give their comments and suggestions. Thereafter, the Ministry of 
Home Affairs would examine the comments and observations of the various stakeholders 
and take a final decision on the draft Arms Policy. I am pleased to inform you that the 
Hindi version of Arms Policy has been prepared and has been posted on the website of 
MHA on 14.1.2010. A copy of the draft Arms Policy in English and Hindi version is 
separately being sent to all the Members of the Standing Committee for their 
comments/suggestions, if any.” 

2.17   The Ministry of Home Affairs, vide their OM dated 18th January, 2010, forwarded copies 
of (i) Draft Arms and Ammunition Policy for Individuals and (ii) Draft Arms and Ammunition 
Manufacturing Policy, to the Secretariat for circulation amongst Members of the Standing Committee. 
2.18   In the next sitting of the Committee held on 9th February, 2010, the Chairman apprised 
the Members of the contents of the Home Secret ary’s letter of 14th January, 2010. Though the 
Committee appreciated the action of the Home Ministry in putting the Hindi version of the Draft Arms 
Policy on its website along with its English version and sending copies thereof (both versions) to all 
Members of the Committee for comments, it, however, pointed out that what it had decided in its 
sitting held on 7th January, 2010 was to hold a structured discussion on matters relating to ‘Arms, Fire 
Arms and Ammunitions’ in a separate sitting and th e Home Secretary was advised that till such time 
the Committee discussed the subject and formulated  its recommendations thereon, the Ministry of 
Home Affairs should not go ahead with the finalization of the policy. The Committee reiterated its 
earlier decision and directed the Secretariat to convey to the Ministry of Home Affairs that it should 
not finalise the Draft Policy until the Committ ee had discussed the aforementioned subject and 
formulated its recommendations. 
2.19   As per the direction of the Committee, its decision was communicated to the Home 
Secretary vide Secretariat’s letter dated 9th February, 2010. 
2.20   Meanwhile, the Home Minister met Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha and explained to him 
the matter concerning the Arms Policy. That meeting was followed by a letter dated 16th February, 
2010 which he wrote to Hon’ble Chairman, taking exception to the decision of the Committee on the 
ground that drafting and notifying a policy were the prerogative of the executive branch of the 
Government. The relevant extracts from the letter of the Home Minister are reproduced below:- 
“….. I submit that drafting and notifying a policy are matters that are the prerogative of 
the Executive Branch of the Government. Hence, I am unable to understand the ‘decision’ 
of the Standing Committee and its ‘direction’ to MHA as conveyed by the Joint Secretary, 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat. All comments/sugges tions received within the stipulated time 
will be considered before any policy is finaliz ed. We intend to notify the policy shortly. I 
request you to kindly advise the Chairman of the Standing Committee suitably”. 
2.21   Hon’ble Chairman referred the letter of the Home Minister to the Chairman of the 
Committee, along with a related matter, for appropriate consideration, who in turn placed the matter 
before the Committee in its sitting held on 4th March, 2010. The Committee considered in detail the 
letter of the Home Minister under reference. After some discussion, the Committee decided as 
follows: 
“The subject ‘Arms, Fire Arms and Ammunitions’ would be discussed by it during the 
examination of the Demands for Grants (2010- 11) of the Ministry of Home Affairs and 
that the Home Secretary would be asked to ma ke a brief presentation on that subject and 
also on the Draft Arms Policy. Ther eafter the Committee would formulate its 
recommendations on the subject”. 
2.22   The aforesaid decision of the Committee was duly placed before Hon’ble Chairman for 
his information. 

2.23   In the sitting of the Committee held on 23rd March, 2010, the representative of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs made a PowerPoint Presentation on the subject ‘Arms, Fire Arms and 
Ammunitions’. The Committee discussed the subject in the light of the presentation. The Chair 
suggested that the Bill amending the Arms Act should first be brought before Parliament and before 
doing so, the Draft Amendment Bill should be posted on the website of the Home Ministry for 
suggestions and comments of the general public. He suggested that after introduction in either House 
of Parliament, the Bill should be referred to the Standing Committee. The Chair also suggested that 
after the Arms Act had been amended, the Arms (Amendment) Rules should be notified and laid on 
the Table of the both the Houses, within a statutory period of thirty days, for Parliamentary approval. 
In that context the Chair advised the Government not to proceed with the announcement of the new 
policy and its implementation, unless Parliament had approved the amendments to the Act and the 
Rules, as in the event of Parliamentary approval not forthcoming, the new policy would become 
infructuous. 
2.24 The Home Secretary responded to the suggestions and observations of the Chair, in the following 
words:- 
“The Government received the suggestions. We  will take note of the suggestions which 
have been made by the Members. The Government will now finalise the rules and 
thereafter it would place these rules before bot h the Houses of Parliament. Thereafter, the 
Parliament will discuss these. It may accept it, modify it or reject it; and that would be the 
law of the land. So, there is no separate need of bringing it before the Standing Committee 
now. It will be laid on the Table of the Houses and each House will decide”. 
2.25   The Chairman of the Committee reacted to  the observations of the Home Secretary, as 
follows: 
“That is why I said, along with modification in the rules, you are proposing amendments 
in two sections of the Arms Act. Why? What is the hurry? This is my point. Why do you 
want to make the rules first and bring the amendment last? You can bring it together 
before the Parliament. When you are changing the two sections of the Arms Act, bring the 
Amendment Bill, put it on the website, take the suggestions and then bring it to the 
Parliament. When Parliament passes it, you can make rules and then laid on the Table of 
the House. There is no problem.  .... So, there are so many lacunae. That is why I said just 
give your reply in writing as to what exactly is in your mind, and if required, we will call 
you again” . 
2.26   In the sitting of the Committee dated 22nd April, 2010, the notification of the Arms Policy 
came up for brief mention. It was suggested by a Member that the facts relating to the notification of 
the Policy should first be ascertained from the Mini stry before further deli berations on the subject 
were held. A demand was made that the policy should be laid on the Table of both Houses of 
Parliament and referred to the Committee for detailed discussion. 
2.27   As per the direction of the Committee, th e Secretariat wrote a letter to the Ministry of 
Home Affairs enquiring about the factual position relating to the finalization and notification of the 
Arms and Ammunition Policy. The Ministry of Home Affairs vide their communication dated 23rd 
April, 2010 informed as under:- 

“(a) & (b) The arms and ammunition policy has been finalized on 5-04-2010 and put on the 
website of the Ministry www.mha.nic.in. The changes made are being implemented as under: 
(i) Amendment of Section 13 of the Arms Act, 1959 in respect of deletion of proviso to 
Section 13 (2A) and prescribing a period of 60 days as the “prescribed time” 
mentioned in Section 13 (2), for the police authorities to send their report, is being 
taken up through preparation of a Cabinet Note for obtaining Cabinet approval and 
introduction of a Bill in the Parliament. 
(ii) Introducing preparation of a database by the State Governments/DMs is being taken 
up by amendment of the Arms Rules, through Gazette Notification and laying the 
amended rules on the Tables of the House. 
(iii) Remaining changes through issuance of an advisory to all State Governments. 
(c)  A copy of an advisory dated 31-03-2010, issued to all the State Governments on 6-04-
2010, is enclosed. 
(d)  The draft Cabinet Note has been referred to the Ministry of La w for vetting before 
sending the same to Cabinet Secretariat for Cabinet approval. For amendment of the Arms 
Rules, the draft Notification has since been vetted by the Ministry of Law and the same is 
being sent to Government of India Press for publication in the Official Gazette, after 
getting Hindi Translation.” 
2.28  In the subsequent sitting of the Committee held on 28th May, 2010, the Chairman asked the 
Home Secretary to respond to some points relating to the Arms and Ammunition Policy. The major 
points are as follows: 
(i) Two policy documents - (i) Arms and Ammunition Manufacturing Policy and (ii) Arms 
and Ammunition Policy for Individuals - were finalized by the Ministry of Home Affairs 
on 5th April, 2010 and put on the Ministry’s website under the link ‘Circulars for Public’, 
disregarding the Committee’s advice. None of th e suggestions made in the meeting of the 
Committee held on 23rd March, 2010 were accepted by the Government. The advice 
given by the Committee to the Government to follow the standard procedure in giving 
effect to the changes in the existing policy, have also not been heeded. 
(ii) The policy as finalized was exactly identical to the draft put on the Ministry’s website. 
(iii) The two policy documents had been brought into force by the Home Ministry by issuing 
detailed advisories to the Secretaries (Home Departments) of all the States and UTs. 
(iv) According to the advisories, the instructions of the Government of India shall come into 
force with immediate effect. 
(v) Curiously enough, the Mini stry enforced the new policy documents by issuing executive 
instructions, without waiting for formal Parliamentary approval to the amendments to the 
Arms Act 1959 and the Arms Rules 1962. 
(vi) Various components of the policy documents could be brought into force only by 
amending the Arms Act and the Arms Rules. But the proposed amendment to the Act and 

the Rules did not cover several aspects of the policy which would mean that those would 
be enforced through executive orders. 
(vii) It is a well established parliamentary prac tice that Ministers make statements in the House 
in order to keep the House informed of matte rs of public importance or to apprise the 
House about Government policy in regard to a matter of topical interest, at the earliest 
opportunity1. 
(viii) In deciding what statements should be made first in the House, a distinction had to be 
drawn between matters of policy and news. In matters of policy, Government should first 
inform the House. But in the case of news, information can be given to the Press before 
informing the House.
2 
(ix) Policy statements should be made by Ministers on the floor of the House, when the House 
is in session before releasing them to Press or Public.3 
(x) Where a statement is made outside th e House even clarifying the policy already 
enunciated, the Minister should also make a statement about that in the House at the 
earliest opportunity.4 
(xi) The day the policy documents were finalized, the Parliament was in session but the 
Government, for reasons best known to it and in violation of established parliamentary 
practice, chose not to lay the policy statements even when the Budget Session of 
Parliament concluded on 7th May, 2010. 
2.29  The Home Secretary, however, skirted all the above points and responded merely by stating that 
the Arms Policy had been finalized by the Home Minister and as a result of the policy, certain 
advisories which were in modifications of the earlier advisories, had been communicated to the States. 
Some amendments in the Arms Rules had been proposed to be carried out, and he was not sure 
whether those amendments had been published in the Gazette or not. In any case, the Gazette 
notification publishing the amended Rules would be laid on the Table of both the Houses of 
Parliament when they reassemble for the next se ssion. He further informed  the Committee that for 
amendment to the Arms Act, a draft Cabinet Note was being prepared and after approval of the 
Cabinet, a Bill would be introduced in the Parliament during the next session. 
2.30   The Chairman then put a pointed question to the Home Secretary as to why the policy had 
not been laid on the Table of the House. The Home Secretary replied as follows: 
“It is upto the Home Minister. If he wishes that it is to be announced, he would lay it on 
the Table a/the Houses”. 
2.31   The Chairman wanted to know from the Home Secretary whether it had been the practice 
in the Government of India to issue advisories to the State Governments on a policy matter even 
before the required amendments to statute or statutory rules were approved by the Parliament/notified 
in the Gazette. The Home Secretary clarified as under: 
“Rules have been amended. What have been  communicated to the State Governments are 
the modifications to the earlier advisories  and not the earlier rules. Those earlier 
advisories have been amended and sent to the State Governments.” 

2.32  Thereupon, the Chairman observed that in order to amend the advisories which were 
inconsistent with the present rules, Government had to first amend the rules. He wondered how 
Advisory Notes could be sent to the State Governments without amending the Act and the Rules. The 
Home Secretary replied that he would clarify that aspect in the next sitting of the Committee. 
2.33  The Chairman then made the following observations: 
“Earlier advisories were already enforced. In order to amend the advisories, which are 
inconsistent with the present rules, you have to first amend the rules. How can advisory 
notes be given to the State Governments without amending the rules or without amending 
the Act?... Come prepared with all the details , including your (Home Ministry’s) stand on 
it. Your stand seems to be in contravention with the stand of the Parliamentary Committee 
and the previous rulings of the Speaker, Lok Sabha and the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, on 
umpteen number of occasions. ... I do not want to have any confrontation with the 
Government or the Ministry. But, at the same time Parliamentary practices and procedures 
have to be respected. The very purpose of forming this Ccmmittee is to convert this into a 
mini-Parliament, as and when Parliament is not in session. The Committee meets, 
discusses issues item-wise, and makes its recommendations. Then these recommendations 
go to the Government and then it moves forward. The ultimate decision rests with the 
Government. It is not the Standing Committee which runs the Government. The 
Government comes before Parliament. Government means majority. The Government has 
the majority and it will get it approved. But the process of discussion has to be exhausted. 
As far as this particular issue is concerned,  the hon. Members are of the opinion that the 
procedure has not been followed and there was no urgency involved in it. ... 
I would like you to come before the Committee and tell us what was the urgency and what 
were the compelling reasons to go through it and then issue advisory notes to the States 
even before publishing it in the gazette... After all, we are not expected to get it from your 
website or from the printing press of the Government. The Committee has got every right 
to ask for it”. 
2.34   With reference to the observations of the Chairman, the Home Secretary stated as follows: 
“Sir, we will provide you with full facts on the policy, advisories to the States, amendment 
in the rules, and the proposed amendments to the Act. We will prepare a detailed note on 
these and we will place it before the Standing Committee”. 
2.35   The Committee in its sitting held on 11th June 2010 took up further consideration of the 
issues relating to the finalization and implementation of the Arms and Ammunition Policy by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs. The Chairman pointedly told the Home Secretary that the papers sent by 
the Ministry on the subject had been perused and found to be unsatisfactory and evasive. He observed 
that the procedure adopted by the Ministry in finalizing and implementing the policy was just the 
opposite of what the Committee had advised it in successive sittings. The Chairman asked the Home 
Secretary to inform the Committee as to when th e Home Minister was going to lay the Policy 
Documents on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament and what were the compelling 
circumstances which prompted the Ministry to announce the Policy through its website when the 
Parliament was in session and to issue advisories/instructions to all the State Governments for 

implementing the Policy without waiting for Parliament’s approval to the amendments to the Arms 
Act 1959 and Arms Rules 1962. 
2.36   The Home Secretary stated that about layi ng of the Policy on the Table of both the Houses 
of Parliament, he would bring the views of the Committee to the notice of the Home Minister. On 
being pointed out that he made the same observation during the previous meeting of the Committee 
held on 28th May 2010, the Home Secretary repeated his statement. As to the reasons why the 
Government hurriedly finalized the policy and asked the State Governments to implement the same, 
the Home Secretary did not respond. The Chairman and some other Members raised a number of 
issues relating to the matter. They reminded the Ho me Secretary that there were several precedents 
wherein it had been held that the Houses of Parliament had the right to be informed first about the 
announcement of a new Policy Statement by the Government when Parliament was in session, before 
releasing it to the media and the public. The Home Secretary was again informed that it was a well-
established parliamentary practice that Ministers make  statements in the House in order to keep the 
House informed of matters of public importance or  to apprise the House about Government policy in 
regard to a matter of topical interest, at the ear liest opportunity. The Home  Secretary was once again 
told that there were several instances in both the Houses of Parliament wherein it had been ruled that 
Policy Statements should be made by Ministers on  the floor of the House when the House was in 
session, before releasing them to press or public. The Chairman then observed that in the light of the 
well-established parliamentary practice and the precede nts, the procedure followed by the Ministry of 
Home Affairs in the matter of finalisation and implementation of the Arms and Ammunition Policy, 
was confusing and disturbing and that it was a seri ous matter. The Home Secretary observed that he 
would bring the issues raised in the Committee, to  the notice of the Home Minister. The Chairman 
then directed the Home Secretary to report back to the Committee in the matter. 
2.37  Thereafter nothing was heard from the Home Ministry, nor were the Policy Documents laid on 
the Table of the Houses. 
2.38   However, the notification of the Minist ry of Home Affairs bearing No. G.S.R. 453(E), 
published in the Gazette of  India Extraordinary, Part-II, Section-3, sub-sect ion (i) dated 28th May, 
2010, was laid on the Table of both the Houses on 11th August, 2010. Subsequently, the Home 
Minister introduced the Arms (Amendment) Bill 2010 in the Lok Sabha on 25th August, 2010. 
Immediately after introduction of the Bill in that House, a demand was made by a Member to refer it 
to the Standing Committee. The Home Minister re adily agreed to the suggestion. Hon’ble Speaker 
observed that the Bill would be referred to the Standing Committee. The Arms (Amendment) Bill 
2010 was, accordingly, referred to the Committee for examination and repo rt thereon by 30th 
November, 2010. The Committee was granted extension of time thrice for presentation of report on 
the bill, the latest being upto 10th June, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER- III 
Examination of Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 
3.0   As per the assessment of the Ministry of Home Affairs, “social order and development is being 
disrupted by the proliferation of Arms and Ammunition, whether licensed or not in the country. The 
proliferation of arms and ammunition vitiates the law and order situation. Holding of sophisticated 
arms by the conflicting parties directly contributes towards lethality of violent act.” The Ministry, 
therefore, felt that in principle, proliferation of arms needs to be curbed. According to the Ministry, 
there is a compelling need to revi ew the provisions of Arms Act/Arms Rules with regard to grant of 
arms licenses for possession of arms and ammunition by individuals and manufacture of fire arms in 
the country. 
3.1   According to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010, ,the 
Bill seeks to curb the proliferation of arms and ammunition in the country. The Bill, under 
consideration, proposes to make amendment to the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959, as follows:–– 
(a) amend sub-section (2) of section 13 of the Arms Act, 1959 so as to specify in the Act 
itself the time limit of sixty days from the date of receipt of application for sending the 
aforesaid report by the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station and to record the 
reasons for failure to send the report within the specified time; 
(b) insert a proviso in sub-section (2) of section 13 of the Arms Act, 1959 so as to provide 
that the licensing authority may recommend to the concerned authorities to initiate 
punitive action under section 30A (proposed to be inserted in the Bill), against the officer-
in-charge of the concerned police station in  case the police officer fails to submit the 
report within the specified time or the licensing authority is of the opinion that the reasons 
for failure to submit report by the officer-in- charge of the nearest police station are not 
sufficient or convincing; 
(c) omit the proviso to sub-section (2A) of sec tion 13 of the Arms Act, 1959 so as to do away 
with the discretion of the licensing authority to issue the license without receipt of the 
report from the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station; 
3.2  Insert a new section 30A in the Arms Act, 1959 to provide for punitive action for failure to send 
the report or failure to give sufficient or convincing reasons for not sending the report within the time 
limit of sixty days proposed to be specified. 
3.3   During the course of presentation, made by the Joint Secretary, MHA, on 1st November 2010, 
the Committee was apprised of the background to the introduction of the Bill. The Committee was 
informed that the Arms Policy was reviewed in April, 2010. This revision envisaged amendment of 
Section 13 of the Arms Act, 1959 to make Police verification compulsory before grant of arms 
licences and prescribe a period of 60 days in which the police report must be sent by the police 
authorities. The highlights of the presentation are as follows: 
(i) It has been considered essential that arms licences are issued to bona fide persons with 
clear antecedents; 

(ii) It has been considered essential that the Police verification report is taken into 
consideration before grant of an arms license; 
(iii) The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 seeks to: prescribe a period of 60 days for Police to 
send their report; make provision for recording reasons by police in case of delay beyond 
60 days; to make provision for punitive action if the reasons are not sufficient and 
convincing; to remove discretionary powers to issue arms licence without police report. 
3.4   The Members of the Committee then sought  clarifications on the following points:- 
(i) The rationale for bringing in a new Arms and Ammunition Policy; 
(ii) State/UT -wise statistical information on arms licenses issued; 
(iii) State/UT -wise statistical information on crimes committed by using licensed arms and 
illegal arms; 
(iv) Remedy available to the individual app licant for arms license where mandatory police 
verification is not received by the concerned authorities within the stipulated period of 60 
days; 
(v) Implications of Advisories issued to the State Governments and amendment of the Arms 
Rules, 1962; 
(vi) Suggestions/recommendations received from State Governments/ UT Administrations on 
the Draft Arms Policy; 
(vii)  Decision of MHA on representations received from various quarters regarding issue of 
arms licenses; and 
(viii) Experience of different countries with regard to issue of arms licenses. 
3.5   The representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs could not give convincing explanation to the 
queries of the Members. The Committee, therefore, directed them to make another presentation on 
various aspects of the Bill, the Arms and Ammunition Policy and the Arms (Amendment) Rules 2010, 
before the Committee clarifying the above issues.  
3.6   The Committee, in its sitting held on 23rd November, 2010 further considered the Bill, 
whereupon, some Members pointed out that the Bi ll, which has been referred to the Committee for 
examination and report, sought to give effect  to only one component of the new Arms and 
Ammunition Policy. Members also pointed out that the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 2010, which was 
laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 10th August and in the Rajya Sabha on 11th August 2010, gave 
effect to another component of the said Policy, whereas the major elements of the Policy had already 
been brought into force by way of Advisories to the State Governments and UT Administrations. The 
Committee took note of the fact that while it was considering the Arms (Amendment) Bill 2010, it had 
no choice but to refer to the new policy documents, leading to a piquant situation wherein the 
Committee had to consider a National Policy which had neither been presented to Parliament nor 
referred to it under the provisions of Rule 270(d) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business 
in the Council of States. 

3.7   Under the rules, a Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee can consider a 
National Long Term Policy Document presented to the Houses, if referred to the Committee, by the 
Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be. An observation was made in that sitting that as the 
Committee went along the examination of the Bill, it had no choice but to refer to the Arms and 
Ammunition Policy which had not been officially referred to it. Likewise, the Chairman felt that the 
Committee would also need to consider the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 2010 which, under the Rules 
of Procedure, lay within the domain of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation. In that context, the 
Committee took note of the fact that despite its pointed queries to the Home Ministry on the need for 
laying the Arms and Ammunition Policy on the Table of both Houses, by the Home Minister, pursuant 
to well established Parliamentary Practice and Procedure, there had been no response from them and 
that the Policy documents were yet to be presented to Parliament. 
3.8   The Committee, therefore, decided to requ est Hon’ble Chairman, Ra jya Sabha to consider 
issuing suitable advice to the Home Minister to immediately present the New Arms and Ammunition 
Policy in both Houses of Parliament and, thereafter, refer the same to the Committee, under Rule 270 
(d), for consideration and report, along with the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Committee also 
decided to request Hon’ble Chairman to refer to it, as a special case, the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 
2010 which had been laid on the Table of both the Houses, so that it could examine the Arms 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 in a comprehensive manner. 
3.9  The above proposals were submitted before Hon’ble Chairman. In response thereto, the 
Chairman of the Committee received a letter dated 28th December, 2010 from the Secretary-General, 
Rajya Sabha conveying therein, the following decision:- 
“After careful consideration of the request, Hon’ble Chairman has approved the following 
course of action:–– 
(i) The Committee may seek copies of the pol icy documents from the Ministry of Home 
Affairs for the use of the Members; and 
(ii) The Committee may also consult the Arms (A mendment). Rules, 2010 for the purpose of 
examining the Bill under its consideration.” 
3.10   In the sitting held on 5th January, 2011, the Members were apprised by the Chairman of 
the Committee of the content of the above letter of Secretary-General, Rajya Sabha. 
3.11   In the meanwhile, in the sitting of th e Committee held on 28th December, 2010, the Home 
Secretary made another presentation on the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 clarifying the issues raised 
by Members in previous sittings. The Home Secretary made the following submissions: 
(A) Rationale for Amendment 
 Section 13(2) envisages police verification before grant of arms license within the 
prescribed time which does not define length of  prescribed time. Proviso to Section 13(2A) 
empowers licensing authority to gr ant license, if report is not received in the “prescribed time”. 
It came to notice that arms licenses were issued by some licensing authorities without police 
verification. The proposed amendment intends to weed out fake applications and fake addresses, 
to have a uniform period for police verification, and make provision for punitive action to 
ensure compliance. 

(B) Remedy if police report is not received within 60 days 
 Licensing authority may take up the matter with the police authorities to expedite report. 
Licensing authority, apart from suggesting punitive action against delinquent official, may 
ensure that report is made available and decision on the application taken in the next 60 days. 
(C) Suggested changes  
(i) In addition to transfer of license of ex isting licensee to his/her wife, husband, son or 
daughter, the transfer of license can further be considered to son-in-law, daughter-
in-law, brother and sister; 
(ii) A uniform scale to allow 50 cartridges to licensees under threat perception 
categories and a uniform scale to allow 30 cartridges to licensees under family 
heirloom, to whom licences are given on sentimental grounds. 
(iii) Regarding grant of PB license, the exis ting provision is for those persons who faced 
grave and imminent threat, which is now to be proposed to be changed to “those 
persons or their family members who face grave and imminent threat from terrorists 
because of their residence in areas where terrorists are most active and/or are held to 
be prime target of terrorists because of  their association w ith anti-terrorists 
programmes, etc. 
(iv) There are no norms for granting NPB licenses under existing provision. The 
Ministry now proposes to grant NPB licenses to those persons who may be facing 
grave and imminent threat to their lives. 
(v) Under existing provision, there are no  norms for reporting use of ammunition. 
Under the proposed provisions, the licens ee in order to draw ammunition will have 
“to report use of ammunition to draw next year’s quota of ammunition for which 
State Government is to prescribe reporting mechanism.” 
(vi) Under the earlier provision, State Governments were competent to allow All India 
Validity, which is proposed to be amended and now All India Validity can be 
allowed with the approval of Ministry of Home Affairs, by State Governments 
concerned by giving justification. Now the States can allow validity upto three 
adjoining States and also to consider All India requests at State level for sitting 
Union Ministers/MPs, personnel of Militar y, para-Military, O fficers of All India 
Services, sports persons. 
(vii) According to the earlier provision, Over seas Citizens of India (OCls) were not 
covered for grant of license. Now OCIs are covered for acquisition of weapon in 
capacity of legal heir under family heirloom policy only. 
(viii) Renewal of Arms licenses was to be done by DM after three years as per the earlier 
position which is now proposed to be allowed by DM after reverification of 
antecedents. 

(ix) Regarding replacement of weapons, ther e were no norms earlier. Now replacement 
of unserviceable/defective weapon is pe rmissible subject to a certificate from the 
authorized armourer. 
(x) Regarding storage/disposal of obsolete, confiscated weapons, norms already exists. 
However, annual audit has been prescribed. 
(xi) Earlier there was no provision for database while the same is proposed to be 
incorporated in the Arms Rules. 
(D) Response of State Governments  
 Before review of the Arms Policy, comments of State Government were invited. 
Twelve States/UTs responded. Six States/UTs viz. Maharashtra, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Chandigarh Police, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, J&K, A&N Islands did not favour 
liberalization of the f our States –– Sikkim, Karnataka,  Gujarat and Haryana favoured 
liberalization but in favour of private secur ity agencies/ sensitive establishments. Andhra 
Pradesh favoured liberalization with safeguards to avoid misuse and also expressed 
apprehension of transfer of weapons to anti- social elements. Chandigarh Administration 
favoured liberalization to fight terrorism. 
(E)  The average time taken by licensing au thority for grant of arms licence is three 
months approximately. The case of private security agencies is being considered 
separately under the Private Security Agencies (Regulation) Act, 2005 
(F) Regulations in other countries  
 In United States right to bear arms is enshrined in the Constitution. U.K. has 
stringent laws and self-defence alone is not considered a reason for owning firearms. 
Grant of arms licence is regulated in Canada, France and Israel. Among the European 
countries, Finland and Switzerland have least stringent laws. 
(G) Study by International agency  
 A 2007 study by International Action Network on Small Arms (IANSA), a U.K. 
based NGO reveals that out of 875 million guns world over, 74% are owned by 
civilians. About one thousand people die everyday by gun shots and three times as many 
are severely injured. A 2003 study in US indicates that keeping a gun at home increases 
the risk of homicide, suicide or accident by 41 %. 
3.12   The Committee in the sitting held on 28th December, 2010, pointed out the contradiction 
in the statements made in the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill and the presentation of the 
Home Secretary in so far as the need for revising  the licensing procedure for arms was concerned and 
the consequent issue of a new Arms Policy. A Member  highlighted the fact that only 1.8 per cent of 
the murders were committed with licenced weapons and more than 85 per cent of the murders were 
not committed by fire arms but with sharp edged/blunt weapons. He felt that the Bill was incomplete 
in as much as more sections of the Arms Act should have been amended, instead of amending only 
two sections thereof, to implement the policy. Yet another Member highlighted the contradiction. 
According to him, while the objective of the Bill wa s to curb proliferation of arms, the policy seemed 

to widen the availability of the arms. Several Members felt that the matter of establishing threat 
perception of an individual should not be entirely left to the bureaucracy. A Member also pointed out 
the danger of grant of licenses on caste and communal lines and other social cleavages. Another 
Member enquired about the real purpose of brin ging in the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and the 
deficiencies in the existing Act. He also enquired as to how the new provisions would help in cutting 
the red tape and expediting the process for issuing arms licenses in so far as the common man was 
concerned. 
3.13   The Committee took exception to the fact that the Arms Policy was yet to be tabled in the 
Parliament despite the presiding officers, directions and the precedents in that regard. The Committee 
reiterated that in matters of Policy, the Government must first inform the House before giving the 
information to the media. The Committee also note d that according to a ruling of the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha, policy statement should be made by Minister on the floor of the House when the House is in 
session before releasing it to press or public. 
3.14   In the sitting of the Committee held on 24th January, 2011, some Members suggested that 
it should hear non-official witnesses on the Bill. 
3.15   In the sitting held on 8th March, 2011, the Committee heard the representative of National 
Association for Gun Rights, India (NAGRI). The views of the Association are dealt in Chapter V. 
3.16   In its meeting held on 15th March, 2011, the Committee further discussed the Bill. 
Members expressed their views on Arms and Ammunition Policy and the Bill. The following views 
were expressed by the Members during the course of the meeting: 
(i) Paragraph 3 of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill is against the Statement 
of Objects and Reasons of the Arms Act, 1959, where the purpose was to make it easier 
for law abiding citizens to get license for arms and ammunition. 
(ii) The advisories dated 6th April 2010 had the effect of amending the Arms Act without 
actually doing so. The Ministry should bring out proper amendments to the Act and get 
them passed by Parliament rather than implementing policy changes by just issuing 
advisories. 
(iii) The advisories stipulate that in order to get a license there should be a verifiable threat 
perception to the life of the applicant. This gives immense discretionary power to the 
issuing authority and the implementation of relevant law becomes very subjective. 
(iv) For all practical purposes licensed weapons are not being misused. The general approach, 
therefore, should be that unless there is something against the person who applies for a 
license, he/she should be given licence. The condition of there being a threat to life before 
giving license is absolutely not required. 
3.17   The Committee also decided that the opinion of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
(Department of Legal Affairs) may be sought on the following question: 
“Whether the instructions issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs vide their 
communication No. V-I 1010116/2009- Arms dated 6.4.2010 to all State Governments 
and UTs tantamount to amending the various sections of the Arms Act, 1959, in particular 

Sections 9,13, and 14 thereof, without seeking parliamentary approval, by way of bringing 
suitable amendments to the Arms Act, 1959 through appropriate amendment Bill?” 
3.18   Meanwhile a Member of the Committee vide communication dated 22nd March, 2011 
made the following submission on the bill :- 
“The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 is under consideration of the Department related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Af fairs for nearly 9 months. It seeks to 
amend Section 13 (2)(a) of the Arms Act, 1959, so as to make police verification 
mandatory before issue of an Arms License . Through amendment in the Arms Rules, 
1962, a provision has also been made for compilation of Data Base of Licenses issued at 
the National Level. These are amendments to which no one can possibly have any 
objection, but I do feel that the Statement of Objects & Reasons of the Bill mentioning 
that “The proliferation of arms, whether licens ed or illegal, vitiates the ‘Law and Order’ 
situation” is an affront  to the law abiding citizen especi ally when Home Ministry has not 
undertaken any study in arriving at this conclusion. 
  In pursuance of the revised Ar ms Policy for Individuals, Minist ry of Home Affairs has issued 
instructions to the various State Governments/UTs on 6th April, 2010 in the matter of issue of licenses 
for possession of Arms. Some of these instructio ns mentioned below and having far-reaching impact, 
in the views of the Members of the Committee, infringed certain sections of  the Arms Act and are 
without proper Parliamentary approval. 
(i) Revision of norms for grant of non-prohibit ed license requiring a citizen to prove grave 
and imminent threat to life requires amendment of Sections 9 (Prohibition of acquisition 
or possession of fire arms); 13 (Grant of Licenses) & 14 (Refusal of Licenses); 
(ii) The Arms Rules, 1962 have been changed without proper procedure by changing the 
relevant authority for issuing All India Validity arms licenses which was previously the 
State Government and has now for all non-VIP cases been made the Ministry of Home 
Affairs. The Ministry of Home Affairs have introduced a new class system within the law 
by allowing State Governments to continue to issue All India Validity Arms License only 
for a select ruling elite which is discriminatory. 
  The issue of these instructions by the Ministry of Home Affairs have the effect of changing the 
law as it obtains on date and the law abiding citizens are finding it even more difficult to procure and 
posses a weapon. 
  As a prelude to the final recommendation of the Committee, I request your good-self to advise 
the Ministry of Home Affairs on behalf of the Committee to withdraw their instructions to various 
State Governments/UTs dated 6th April, 2010 on this subject particularly in relation to the points 
mentioned by me above. Thereafter comprehensive Bill incorporating guidelines which are citizen--
friendly may be brought before Parliament for its approval, after proper deliberations on these in 
various fora. 
3.19   Accordingly, the Ministry of Law & Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) was asked by 
the Rajya Sabha Secretariat vide its U.O Note dated 17th March, 2011 to offer their opinion on the 
aforesaid question (as stated in para 3.17 supra), for consideration of the Committee. 

3.20  Responding to the communication of the Rajya Sabha Secretariat, the Ministry of Law & Justice 
(Department of Legal Affairs) vide its Note FTS No. 796/LS/ll dated 30.03.2011 furnished the legal 
opinion which is reproduced below:- 
 “The issue posed for our consideration is whether the instructions issued by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs vide their communications No. V11016/16/2009- Arms dated 
6.4.2010 issued to all State Governments and UTs tantamount to amending the various 
sections of the Arms Act, 1959, in particul ar Sections 9,13, and 14 thereof, without 
seeking Parliamentary approval, by way of bringing suitable amendments to the Arms 
Act, 1959 through appropriate amendment Bill. 
 In the instructions issued by the MHA to all the States/Union Territories vide its 
letter dated 6.4.2010 it has been provided that the applications for grant of arms license 
for Prohibited Bore Weapons may be considered by the Central Government from certain 
categories of persons, which may include:- 
(a) those persons who face grave and imminent threat to their lives by mere reason of being 
residents of a geographical area (or areas) where terrorists are most active etc,; 
(b) those Government officials who by virtue of the office occupied by them and for the 
nature of duties performed have made themselves targets in the eyes of terrorists and are 
vulnerable to terrorist attack; 
(c) those MPs and MLAs including non-officials/private persons who by virtue of having 
been closely and/or actively associated with anti-terrorist programmes and policies of the 
Government or by mere reason of their holding views, political or otherwise, not to the 
liking of the terrorist, have rendered themselves open to attack by the terrorist; 
(d) the family members/kith and kin of those who by the very nature of their duties or 
performance or positions occupied in the Government or even otherwise for 
known/unknown reasons have been rendered vulnerable and have come to be regarded by 
the terrorists as fit targets for elimination. 
  It may be recalled that the Arms Act, 1959 defines the “prohibited arms” vide Section 2(i) of the 
said Act as under:- 
  (i) “prohibited arms” means 
(i) firearms so designed or adapted that, if pressure is applied to the trigger, missiles 
continue to be discharged until pressure is removed from the trigger or the magazine 
containing the missiles is empty, or 
(ii) weapons of any description designed or adapted for the discharge of any noxious 
liquid, gas or such other thing, and includes artillery, anti-aircraft and anti-tank 
firearms and such other arms as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify to be prohibited arms. 
  According to the Arms and Ammunitions Policy for Individuals, arms which are automatic or 
semi-automatic in nature fall in the category of Prohibited Bore (PB) arms and the remaining arms 
which are non-automatic or bolt action type are co vered under the category of Non-Prohibited Bore 

arms. Prior to 1987, licenses for acquisition and possession of Prohibited Bore and Non-prohibited 
Bore firearms were issued by the District Magistrate/State Govern ment concerned. But, from 1987, 
powers to issue licenses for prohibited bore arms were withdrawn from the State Governments/District 
Magistrates concerned and since then the licenses for PB weapons are being issued by the Central 
Government alone (MHA), while licenses for Non-Prohibited Bore weapons continue to be issued by 
the District Magistrate/State Government concerned. 
  The instructions issued vide letter dated 6.4.2010 in regard to the grant of arms license for 
Prohibited Bore Weapons and Non-Prohibited Bore Weapons impose an obligation on the State 
Government that such proposals for license or application should be forwarded to the MHA along 
with the recommendations of the DM concerned, State Government and Police verification. These 
instructions are guiding factor for consideration of the licensing authority. However by virtue of these 
instructions, it is provided that only a specific ca tegory of persons shall be considered for grant of 
license. Such a classification of persons seems to be a reasonable classification. 
  The instruction issued regarding grant of license under family heirloom policy does not 
contravene any provision of the Arms Act and the Rules framed thereunder. . 
  The instructions issued to  prescribe a uniform norm as to the acquisition of quantity of 
ammunition. There is no violation of any law. 
  There also appears to be no violation of any Ac t as to calling upon the licensee to report use of 
ammunition during the previous year before produce of ammunition in the current year. This is 
considered necessary so that the total quantity with a licensee shall not exceed the prescribed quantity 
at any time. 
  The area validity of the armed license is conferred on the State Government. Now it is proposed 
to empower the State to allow the ar ea validity up to a maximum of three adjoining States and also to 
consider the request at the State level for the sitting Union Minister/M.P.; personnel of military and 
para-military; officers of All India Services and officers with liability to serve anywhere in India and 
sportspersons. The leave verification by Police for re newal of license is a procedural aspect. Another 
instruction is for replacement of unserviceable or  defective weapon. The State Governments have 
been instructed for such replacement of production of a certificate from the licensee. The other 
instruction relates to the search/disposal of obsolete, obsolescent, confiscated, seized and recovered 
weapons and data base for licenses issued. Therefore, it appears that these ar e not in violation of any 
provision of the Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER- IV 
RESPONSE OF GOVERNMENT TO ISSUES RAISED 
BY MEMBERS OF COMMITTEE 
4.0   In the meeting of the Committee held on 28th May, 2010 certain observations were made by the 
Members pertaining to Arms and Ammunition Policy, and the comments/replies of Ministry thereon. 
The Committee’ s Secretariat forw arded a questionnaire on the subject to the Ministry of Home 
Affairs with the request to furnish replie s thereto. The Ministry of Home Affairs vide its 
communications dated 5.01.2011 and 25.01.2011 furnished the replies to the queries which are as 
under:- 
Issues raised 
4.1   Reasons for not circulating the Arms Policy to Members of the Standing Committee. 
Response of Government 
4.1.1 The Draft Arms Policy (English version) was put on the website of the Ministry on 21.12.2009 
for inviting comments of the general public. The Hindi version of the Draft Arms Policy was uploaded 
on the website on 14.01.2010 for comments of the stake holders by 29.01.2010. Copies of the Draft 
Arms Policy were sent to Standing Committee on 18.01.2010. The points raised by the Hon’ble 
Members of the Standing Committee in its meeting held on 23.03.2010 were answered by the Ministry 
on 07.04.2010. After considering the suggestions received from various sources, the revised Arms 
Policy was finalized and placed on the website of MHA on 6.4.2010. 
4.1.2  The details of the changes in the revised Arms Policy and the manner of implementation were 
intimated to Rajya Sabha Secretariat on 23.4.2010 along with a copy of the Advisory dated 6.4.2010 
for information of the Hon’ble Chairman and Hon’ble Members of the Committee. 
Issues raised 
4.2  Status of the proposed amendment of the Arms Act. 
Response of Government 
4.2.1 The changes made in the revised policy in clude (a) amendment of the Arms Act, 1959, (b) 
amendment of the Arms Rules, 1962 and (c) prescribing norms for grant of arms licenses etc, renewal, 
all India validity etc. 
4.2.2 In so far as the amendment of the Arms Act, 19 59 is concerned, it is stated that Section 13(2) of 
the Arms Act requires police verification of an applicant before grant of license by the Police 
Authorities within the prescribed time. However, proviso to Section 13(2A) of the Arms Act, 1959 
empowers the DM to grant the license if the police re port is not received within the prescribed time. 
As the prescribed time is not clarified in all the cases, it is considered essential to amend Section 13 of 
the Anus Act by stipulating a period of 60 days for the police authorities to send their report and to 
delete the proviso to Section 13(2A) so that, police verification report is taken into consideration 
before grant of arm licence in all the cases. 
Issues raised 

4.3   Status of amendment of the Arms Rules and reasons for not placing the same on the Table of the 
House. 
Response of Government 
4.3.1 At present, there is no provision requiring a licensing authority to maintain a comprehensive and 
complete database of all licences issued. It has been decided to maintain a database and to share the 
data with the Central Government which shall maintain a national database including data on PB 
weapons to be maintained Centrally by MHA. Accordingly, a provision has been made in the Arms 
Rules, 1962, requiring the licensing authorities/State Governments to maintain a database of all 
licenses issued by them, which may be shared with Central Government. The Arms Rules have been 
amended through issue of a Gazette Notification on 28th May, 2010. A copy of the amended Arms 
Rules published on 28th May, 2010 will be placed before the Parliament immediately at the 
commencement of the next Session. 
Issues raised 
4.4   Rationale of the advisory issued to States/UTs without amending the Arms Act/Rules. 
Response of Government 
4.4.1  An Advisory has been issued to the State Governments on 6th April, 2010, which contains 
instructions about the norms and procedure for grant of arms license, which is in conformity with the 
provisions of the Arms Act, 1959. However, in respect of the advice given to the State Governments 
to grant licences after receipt of police verification report in all the cases, for which an amendment to 
the Arms Act is pending, it is stated that the intention of the Central Government has been conveyed 
through the advisory, which is of the nature of guidance to the State Governments that Police 
verification should be insisted upon in all the cases as required under Section 13(2) of the Arms Act 
and that steps are being taken to delete the proviso to Section 13(2A). The policy guidelines advise the 
State Governments not to exercise the discretion available to them under the proviso to Section 
13(2A) of the Arms Act, 1959, even as steps are being taken to delete the same through legislation, 
with the approval of Parliament. The provisions in the Arms Act, 1959 still prevail and thus there is no 
contradiction between the provisions of the Act and the Rules notified and advisory issued by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs. 
Issues raised 
4.5   Whether the revised Arms Policy flout the existing provisions of the Arms Act/Rules?  
Response of Government 
4.5.1  None of the changes in the revised Arms Policy contravenes the provisions of Arms Act, 1959 
or the Arms Rules, 1962. 
Issue raised 
4.6   In the Advisory issued on 6th April, 2010 to all States and UTs, under the caption “Grant of 
Arms License for Non-prohibited Bore (NPB) Weapons” the police authorities have been advised to 
send police report within 45 days positively failing which the police officials concerned may be liable 
for action. 

4.6.1 But under clause 2 of the Arms (Amendment) Bill,  2010, it is proposed to amend sub-section (2) 
section 13 of the Arms Act, 1059 so as to specify in the Act itself the time limit of 60 days from the date 
of receipt of application, for grant of Arms Licence, for sending the report by the officer in-charge of 
the nearest police station. The Ministry may clarify the variance observed between the two statements. 
Response of Government 
4.6.2 The Advisory issued to the States/UTs on 6th April, 2010 had stipulated a time of 45 days for 
obtaining police verification report for grant of arms license. However, the time limit has been 
enhanced to 60 days in the Arms (Amendment) Bill , 2010 so as to give sufficient time to the police 
authorities. 
Issue raised 
4.7   In para 8(i) of the Arms and Ammunition Manufacturing Policy, it has been proposed to 
prescribe annual inspection by the DM concerned of all the manufacturing units falling in his 
jurisdiction and to send a report to Secretary (Home) of the State Government concerned, under 
intimation to MHA. However, this aspect is neither mentioned in the Advisory dated 6th April, 2010 
issued to States/UTs nor in the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 2010. The Ministry may explain the 
mechanism to implement this aspect of the policy. 
Response of the Government 
4.7.1 The above mentioned documents i.e., advisory issued for the Stat es/UTs as well as the Arms 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 pertain to the grant of licences for acquisition/possession of arms by 
individuals. 
Issue raised 
4.8   Para 7 of the “Arms and Ammunition Policy for Individuals” deals with grant of Arms Licenses 
for NPB weapons. It has been mentioned therein that neither Section I3 nor Rule 52 contains any 
matter that the licensing authority shall have regard to before granting a license. Hence, some State 
Governments are following liberal criteria for giving NPB licenses. It has, therefore, been decided by 
Government to prescribe certain norms through amendment to Arms Rules, 1962 for grant of Arms 
Licenses. However, it has been noticed that of the four norms mentioned in the policy document, none 
has been included in the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 2010. Only two of them have been included in the 
Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010, namely, the mandatory period of 60 days for sending the police report 
and obligation on the licensing authority to take into account the police report before granting arms 
licenses and that no license may be issued without police verification. The position may be explained. 
Response of Government 
4.8.1 There is a proposal to amend section 13(2) of the Arms Act, 1959 to prescribe a time limit of 60 
days for obtaining police verification report; to dele te the proviso to Section 13(2A) of the Arms Act 
and to prescribe punitive action by inserting Section 30A after Section 30 of the Act. The other norms 
in para 7 of the ‘Arms and Ammunition Policy fo r Individuals’ have been prescribed within the 
overall ambit of the Arms Act, 1959. 
Issue raised 

4.9   It is not known how the provision of the ‘Arms and Ammunition Policy for Individuals’ 
pertaining to grant of licenses to police personnel who are awarded weapons, would be enforced. 
Response of Government 
4.9.1  As per the extant guidelines issued by MHA, Police personnel may be awarded only Non-
prohibited Bore weapons and not Prohibited Bore weapons in a routine manner. The concerned Police 
personnel are required to obtain an arms license under Section 3 of the Arms Act, 1959 after fulfilling 
the relevant conditions under the provisions of the Act. 
Issue Raised 
4.10   Response of major States like UP, Bihar, MP, AP, Rajasthan, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Kerala, to the policy guidelines issued by MHA and the State which has 
issued maximum nos. of arms licenses. 
Response of Government 
4.10.1 Comments on the policy guidelines issued  by MHA have been recently received from three 
States, namely, NCT of Delhi, Madhya Pradesh and Punjab. These States are in agreement with most 
of the guidelines except with those relating to grant of NPB licences and of All India Validity (AIV) 
of arms licences. As regards NPB licences, they ha ve suggested that some more categories and some 
additional grounds other than threat perception may be included in the guidelines. As regards AIV, 
they have suggested that States should be give n the powers to grant AIV of NPB licences and some 
more categories of persons for the same may be included in the guidelines. Despite several written 
reminders and telephonic conversations with the concerned officers, the other States have not 
conveyed their comments on the policy. No State has provided data on number of arms licences in 
their State. . 
Issue raised 
4.11   In the context of the data on murders committed with licensed arms, it may be clarified 
whether they were committed in self-defence or for purpose of attacking. 
Response of Government 
4.11.1 The data on murders committed in self-defence or as a result of attack, is not maintained 
separately at the Centre. 
Issue raised 
4.12   Out of the cognizable offences of almost 20 lacs in 2007, how many licenced weapons 
were used in these murders? 
Response of Government 
4.12.1  As per available information, 5733407 numbe r of cognizable cases were registered in the year 
2007 under IPC and Special and Local Laws (SLL) . The number of murders committed with licenced 
weapons are 598 in the year 2007. The data on murders committed with weapons other than firearms 
is not maintained separately at the Centre. 
Issue raised 

4.13   Whether any country in the world has put a cap or quota on number of cartridges; 
mechanism to arrive at the figure of 50 cartridges or 30 cartridges; and reporting of the use of 
ammunitions. Whether the same would not lead to corruption because it rationale for presenting 
would be very difficult to prove as to where one has used the ammunition. 
Response of Government 
4.13.1  A licencee is expected to use his weapon in a responsible manner and be able to inform the 
time, place and reason for use of ammunition. Th e ceiling of 50 cartridges per annum and 30 
cartridges at a time have been continued from the past. As per available information; the ceiling on 
number of cartridges in some other countries is as below 
Sl.No. Name of the country Type of Weapon Ceiling on number 
  of cartridges  
1. Brazil Handgun 50 
  Rifled bore hunting firearms 50 
  Shotgun 200 
2. Egypt Any type 200 
3. Indonesia Any type 50 rounds per month 
4. Mexico Caliber 22 Upto 500 
  Rifle or arms needing ammunition Upto 1000 
  Sports 5 kg. gunpowder 
  Rifle cartridges 1000 pieces of each 
  of the constitutive elements  
  Other permitted arms cartridges 
elements 
100 bullets or 
constitutive  
  All other permitted arms Upto 200 cartridges 
5. Malaysia Any type 10 rounds per year 
 
Issue raised 
4.14  The efforts being made to reduce un-licenced weapons. 
Response of Government 
4.14.1 Government of India has initiated several measures/steps such as border fencing with 
concertina wires, deployment of infra-red sensors/thermal imaging devices (including night vision 
devices), underground sensors and trip wire m echanism to activate fence lights. Battle field 
surveillance radars have also been adopted all along the fenced portion to curb infiltration, smuggling 

of arms etc. along the LOC/International Border in  J&K. However, there are some ravine areas along 
the border, which cannot be fenced and these are used by terrorists for infiltration, exfiltration and 
smuggling of arms. Further, the State and UT Governments have been directed to identify areas where 
illicit manufacture, possession and use of illegal arms and ammunition are rampant, and to make 
sustained and continued efforts to disrupt such networks. 
4.14.2  As informed by licencing authority, Government of Delhi, in order to ensure that no licencee 
sells his weapons illegally, the weapon of the licencee  is checked and inspected at the time of renewal 
of arms licence. To ensure that the licensed ar ms dealers do not sell weapons to un-authorized 
persons, their stocks, registers and records are periodically checked to ensure fair transactions. 
4.14.3  To check illegal manufacture and proliferation of the arms (country made and fire arms) 
following checks are placed by licencing authority, Government of Delhi: 
(i) Intelligence is developed regarding illegal factories manufacturing country-made fire arms 
and action under law is taken against them. 
(ii) All the persons previously involved in ma nufacture of illegal fire arms are kept under 
surveillance. 
(iii) Intelligence is developed regarding criminals involved in commission of crimes with 
illegal fire arms. 
(iv) Those found possessing such illegal weapons are booked and prosecuted under the 
provision of the Arms Act. 
Issue raised 
4.15   Whether any efforts were made for imparting training to civilians for safe handling of 
weapons by Government of India. 
Response of Government 
4.15.1 The Government replied in the negative. 
Issue raised 
4.16  The efforts being made to train policemen to use weapons in a safe manner. 
Response of Government 
4.16.1 Law and Order is a State Subject. The Stat e Governments conduct in-service training for their 
personnel as per their requirements. The Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) 
arranges training of police personnel of the States and Central Police Organizations (CPOs) in the 
course on “weapons and tactics” being organized by Training Centre and School, BSF, Hazaribagh. 
Issue raised 
4.17  Details of the police to people ratio in other countries. 
Response of Government 

4.17.1 The police to people ratio as per the report of BPR&D titled ‘Data on Police Organisations in 
India’ is 134.28 police personnel per lakh citizens ( i.e., 1 : 769). As per available information the 
police/public ratio in some other countries is: 
Sl.No. Name of the Country Ratio of Police /Public 
1. Indonesia 1 : 489 
2. Brazil 1 : 475 (ranging from 1 : 122) to 
  1 : 822 in different States) 
3. Egypt 1 : 333 
4. Mexico 1 : 208 (1 : 111 in Mexico City) 
5. Malaysia 1 : 5000 
 
Issue raised 
4.18  The bonafides of International Action Network on Small Arms (IANSA) and the persons 
financing its activities and their alleged linkages with surrendered ULFA activists. 
Response of Government 
4.18.1  As per available information, the International Action Network on Small Arms (IANSA) is an 
NGO having an affiliation of several organizations  including women’s groups, faith groups, public 
health agencies, research institutes, human rights  campaigners, aid agencies, victim support groups, 
lawyers and people whose work and lives are affected by the proliferation of guns and who have taken 
up this issue. The main aim of the NGO is reportedly to reduce small arms violence by promoting a 
global legally binding arms trade treaty, raising awareness among policymakers, public and media 
about the impact of small arms on human security, promoting the work of NGO’s in the prevention of 
small arms etc. As per available information, th e work of the NGO has been supported/funded by the 
Governments of the UK, Netherlands, Norway, Swed en, Switzerland and Canada, as well as the Ford, 
Crompton, Rockefeller and Samuel Rubin Foundatio ns, Ploughshares Fund and Christian Aid. There 
are no reports of the NGO having any links with ULFA. 
Issue raised 
4.19   The introduction of the Bill appeared to be against the backdrop when many citizens were 
being provided security by the State itself. 
Response of Government 
4.19.1 The objects of Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 is to reduce proliferation of arms and armaments 
(whether licenced or not) and to ensure that arms licences are issued to the bonafide persons by the 
concerned licencing authority after due verification of their antecedents by the police. 
Issue raised 

4.20 The weapons which are allowed to be used by the Private Security Agencies (PSAs) in guarding 
individual citizens under the PSAs (Regulation) Act, 2005. 
Response of Government 
4.20.1 The Private Security Agencies (Regulation) Act, 2005 doesn’t make any provision for the arms 
licences. As per guidelines, Non-Prohibited Bore would be best suited for private security agencies. 
Issues raised 
4.21   Details of rules regarding grant of weapons to Overseas Citizens of India (OCIs) and at 
what stage he or she will be given a weapon; what would happen to the weapon if he or she goes back 
overseas; how his/her passport or visa would be connected with his licence so that he/she is not able 
to leave the country without surrendering the weapon. 
Response of the Government 
4.21.1  An OCI may acquire the weapon in his capacity of a legal heir under the extant heirloom 
category. Grant of arms license to OCIs will be subject to the condition that they shall abide by the 
Arms Act and the Rules and ensure safe custody of  the weapon(s) while leaving India and deposit the 
same in a police station or with all approved arms dealer. 
Issues raised 
4.22  Under heirloom policy, whether the grandson would be granted the licence of the grandfather. 
Response of Government 
4.22.1 Grandchildren are included in the family heir for issuing PB arms licence through family 
heirloom basis. 
Issues raised 
4.23  Reasons for not laying the policy changes on the Table of Houses of Parliament. 
Response of the Government 
4.23.1 Drafting and notifying a poli cy are matters that are the prerog ative of the executive Branch of 
the Government. The notification regarding the change in the Arms Rules, 1962 incorporating 
provision of a data base of Arms Licences has been laid on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament 
in August, 2010. 
Issues raised 
4.24   Whether any Committee had done the ground work and suggested for the amendment in 
the Arms Act? 
Response of Government 
4.24.1 The Government replied in the negative. 
Issue raised 

4.25  Whether any study group was instituted or any survey conducted to study the ground situation 
regarding threat perception to citizens in rural areas, small towns and urban areas? 
Response of Government 
4.25.1 The Government replied in the negative. 
Issue raised 
4.26  Whether the Government provide guns to SPOs and the policy in the matter? 
Response of Government 
4.26.1 SPOs are appointed by most State Governments for intelligence gathering and they also act as 
guide to the police forces. The giving of arms to SPOs is decided by the State Government depending 
on the ground situation. 
Issue raised 
4.27   Kinds of crimes and murders in the country. 
Response of the Government 
4.27.1  As per data compiled by National Crime Records Bureau, crimes have been categorized as 
violent crimes, crimes against women, economic cr imes, property crimes, crime against SC, crime 
against ST and crime against children; according to the motives behind the crime. Murder is one of the 
violent crimes as per this categorization. 
Issue raised 
4.28  The number of dalits and tribals who have been killed. 
Response of Government 
4.28.1  As per the latest data compiled and published by National Crime Records Bureau, 33615 cases 
of crimes have been reported against the Schedu led Castes and 5582 cases of crimes have been 
reported against the Scheduled Tribes during the year 2008. The figures of murders of Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes are not maintained at the Centre. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-V 
PRESENTATION BY THE NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES 
5.0   The Committee received a request from an NGO, named the National Association for Gun 
Rights India (NAGRI) for making a presentation on  the Arms and Ammunition Policy and the Arms 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010. The request of the NGO wa s acceded to and the representatives of that 
organization appeared before the Committee on 8th March, 2011 for the purpose. 
5.1   The representatives of NAGRI made the foll owing points while pleading for a liberal arms 
licensing regime for law abiding citizens: 
z The Arms Act, 1959 has been amended from time to time but in a proper way. However, 
the recent Arms Rules have been brought in  clandestinely. The Home Ministry should 
have brought this issue before the Standing Committee on Home Affairs, or before the 
Parliament and there could have been a general debate on the whole issue. 
z After enactment of this rule, All India Licences are to be approved directly by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs and those licences are being renewed only for three States. 
z Section 9 of Arms Act deals with people who are prohibited from owning firearms. 
Section 13 deals with the issuance of arms licences and section 14 deals with refusal of 
grant of a licence. By making it compulsory to prove ‘grave and imminent threat’, in 
effect, all three sections of the Act have been amended without amending the law. 
z There are already provisions in the Act that  if someone misuses his licenced firearm, his 
licence can be suspended or cancelled. There is also a provision in the Act that if there is 
any doubt or any other contingency, the licenci ng authority can call the licence holder to 
produce his arms for inspection. Then, why a license needs to be renewed every three 
years? 
z The law recognizes a citizen’s right to self-defence. But those who have licensed arms are 
afraid to use them, because if a person shoots someone while defending his life, property, 
the property of his neighbour or his own family, then he is liable to go to jail for his act in 
self-defence as the police will register a case of ‘attempt to murder’ or ‘murder’ against 
him under IPC. Therefore, the penal law needs to be amended suitably so that a person 
who uses his licenced firearm in self-defence, is not charged with murder. 
z Professional shooters of India are unable to get their arms licences renewed and this 
highly legitimate and honourable sport is being affected by these new rules, even though 
the Home Ministry has given specific directi ons that these rules are not applicable to 
renowned shooters of India. 
5.2   A representative of NAGRI then made a presentation before the Comm ittee on the subject. The 
highlights of the presentation are as follows: 
z The Ministry has issued a directive dated 06.04.2010 (addressed to all State/UT Home 
Deptts.) for ‘strict compliance’ for implementing its new Arms and Ammunition Policy. 
This directive has in effect changed the law without parliamentary approval. It has eroded 
the civil rights of more than a billion Indian  citizens. Even one year on, the Ministry has 

not even tabled the new Policy before the Houses. While the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 
seeks only to make a minor change, the real motive behind moving this amendment is to 
mislead the Parliament and surreptitiously obtain Parliament’s approval to the new policy. 
The Bill is an eyewash because real changes have already been made via Arms and 
Ammunition Policy. 
z Even during the pre-2010 a period, hangover from the days of the British Raj continued as 
the system was stacked against citizens as applicants were forced to prove “need” for arms 
licences. 
z Allahabad High Court has observed that only respectable and peace loving persons require 
licence for firearms. The Court has also observed that unnecessary rejection of 
applications for grant of fi rearm licence breeds a tendency to keep unlicenced arms. The 
new Arms and Ammunition Policy negates the ‘Objects & Reasons’ of the Arms Act, 
1959. 
z The observation in the Policy and the Amendment Bill, namely “The proliferation of 
arms, whether licenced or illegal, vitiates the law and order situation” is an affront to all 
law-abiding citizens by equating them with criminals and anti-social elements. The 
Ministry has so far offered no evidence to back up their claim that licenced arms are a law 
and order problem. In response to a question the Home Ministry has admitted that no 
study was conducted prior to initiating these amendments to the law. 
z According to NCRB data of 2007, in 99.99% of total crimes and 98.21 % of total murders, 
licensed arms were not used. 
z Persons having arms licences face problems during renewal of their licences every three 
years. After enactment of the proposed Bill , it would become more cumbersome as the 
licensing authority would renew license only after receipt of mandatory police 
verification. Even Punjab and Harayana High Court has observed that the law should be 
such as may repose confidence in the citizens th at they are presumed to be responsible in 
using licensed arms to defend themselves and one such measure would be to amend the 
Alms Act and Arms Rules suitably to prescribe that the arms licences are requited to be 
renewed after every ten years. 
z The Ministry has now directed that licences on ly be issued to applicants who face a grave 
and imminent threat to their lives. This threat perception is now to be separately verified 
by the police. How many ordinary citizens can prove such a threat perception? This may 
encourage corrupt practices and force many ap plicants to use dubious methods to prove 
this threat. 
z Additional provisions have been introduced through the Ministry’s Arms and Ammunition 
Policy, which will lead to increased harassment of citizens and directly promote corrupt 
practices e.g. the new requirement to repor t use of and prove how/where/when every 
single round of ammunition was used, is both impractical and a needless burden on 
licence holders. 

5.3   In the light of the presentation made, the representatives of NAGRI stated that the citizens’ 
rights were being eroded and the Ministry of Home Affairs was taking the citizens and the Parliament 
for granted. They requested the Committee to take a stand in favour of rights of the citizens and help 
empower law-abiding citizens as envisaged in the Arms Act, 1959 and allow citizens to have a fair 
chance against criminals and anti-social elements. 
5.4  The representatives of NAGRI vide e-mail dated 10.03.2011 made following general 
suggestions for amendment in the Arms Act, 1959 to make the Act citizen friendly. 
(i) Insertion to the Preamble to Arms Act, 1959- “Whereas it is essential to ensure that the 
citizens of the country have easy access to fir earms for training and ordinary civilian use 
on permit, unless their antecedents or propensities do not disentitle them from owning 
them and to create a class of people whose services can be requisitioned by the state in 
national emergencies; it is hereby enacted as follows:” 
(ii) In Section 2, sub-section (1), clause (e) the words “but shall exclude all parts other than 
the receiver” may be added after clause (e)(iv). 
(iii) Sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), of Section 3,  introduced through Act No. 25 of 1983 to be 
revoked. Sub-section (1) of Section 3 to be re -numbered as Section 3 of the aforesaid Act. 
In Section 3, so renumbered, the words, “Every license granted under this Section shall be 
valid throughout the territory of the Union of India”, may be added. 
(iv) In Section 11 the following words may be added: “However, a person having a valid arms 
license can bring in one firearms of the class and description that he is entitled to acquire, 
for his own personal use, in the manner prescribed in proviso (a) to sub-section (1) of 
Section 10, regardless of any such notification, through ports that shall be notified by the 
Central Government” 
(v) In Section 13, sub-section (3) (b) the word s “is satisfied that the person by whom the 
license is required has a good enough reason for obtaining the same” may be substituted 
by “finds that the person by whom the license is required is not debarred from obtaining 
one by any provision of the act.” 
(vi) In Section 14, sub-section (1)(b)(i)(3) and (1)(b)(ii) may be deleted and sub-section (1) (c) 
may be added which may read as under:- 
“Where the licensing authority deems that the person seeking a license is unfit under 
any provision of the Act from acquiring one”. 
(vii) In Section 14, sub-section (3) the words “ unless in any case the lice nsing authority is of 
the opinion that it will not be in public interest to furnish such information” may be 
deleted. 
(viii) In Section 15, sub-section (1), the words “A license under Section 3 shall, unless revoked 
earlier, continue in force for a period of thr ee years from the date on which it is granted” 
may be substituted by the following words “A license under Section 3 shall, unless 
revoked, continue in force for the lifetime of the person”. 
(ix) In the proviso to Section 16, the words “However the licensing authority shall not 
prescribe any limit on the ammunition that can be purchased or held by the person seeking 

a license unless it is in a disturbed area, so classified by the Central Government through a 
notification in the official gazette” may be added. 
(x) In Section 41, clause (c) be added that may read, as under:- 
“Any such exemption or revocation of such an exemption, shall be laid before each 
House of the Parliament in the manner prescribed in Section 44, sub-section (3) for 
seeking the approval to Rules made under this Act.” 
(xi) Condition No. 4 A in Form III for grant of a license (Arms Rules, 1962), that reads, “ A 
licensee having an arms license valid throughout India, who carries the licensed weapon 
or weapons to any place outside the State wher e he normally resides, shall, within forty 
eight hours of his arrival at such place, intimat e in writing to the officer-in-charge of the 
police station or the Superintendent of Police having jurisdiction over that place, the fact 
of his arrival at that place and the particulars of any such weapon”, may be deleted. 
5.5   The representative of the NAGRI opined that  the corresponding rules in the Arms Rules, 1962 
may also be amended within three months to ensure that the relevant rules are in consonance with the 
amended provisions of the Arms Act, 1959. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER- VI 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
6.1 The Committee would like to place on record the fact that it consid ered the subject “Arms, 
Fire Arms and Ammunitions”, allocated to the Mi nistry of Home Affairs, under the 
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rule s, 1961 (Entry No. 41) in seven sittings, even 
before the reference of the Arms (Amendment) B ill, 2010 to it. The Committee took up the 
subject for detailed discussion keeping in view the vastly chan ged security, law and order and 
social scenarios in the country. 
6.2  As mentioned in the preceding chapters, th e Government posted the drafts of the Revised 
“Arms and Ammunition Policy for Individuals” and the “Arms and Ammunition 
Manufacturing Policy” on the website of Minist ry of Home Affairs on 21st December, 2009, 
inviting comments from the general public by 6th January, 2010. 
6.3  The Committee wanted to know from the rep resentatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
the background which prompted the Ministry to  review the existing Arms Policy. In this 
context, the Committee d ecided to examine the subject “Arm s, Fire Arms and Ammunitions” 
and felt that till such time the Committee had formulated its recommendations and observations 
on the subject, the Ministry should not fi nalize the new policy. The Committee repeatedly 
advised the Government not to proceed with  the announcement of the new policy and its 
implementation, unless Parliament had approved the amendments to the Arms Act,1959 and the 
Arms Rules,1962, because in the event of Par liamentary approval not forthcoming, the new 
policy would become infructuous.  In the sitting of the Committ ee dated 22nd April, 2010, when 
the notification of the new Arms Policy came  up for brief mention, the Committee reiterated 
that the Policy should be laid on  the Table of both Houses of Pa rliament and desired that it be 
referred to the Committee for detailed considerati on. The Committee is constrained to note that 
instead of responding to the suggestions and advice of the Committee, the Ministry of Home 
Affairs went ahead with the finalization of th e revised Arms and Ammunition Policy on 5th 
April, 2010 and put the same on its website. 
6.4 The Committee feels that the notice give n for the general public to comprehend and 
comment upon such a policy of vital national importance is short. The draft Revised Arms and 
Ammunition Policy should have been given wide publicity in the national and regional dailies, 
viz. newspapers/weekly, fortnightl y, monthly magazines, along wi th adequate publicity through 
the electronic media as well and a debate generate d to collect the views of the public at large. 
The Committee also wishes to point out that this policy was put on the website in Hindi after the 
intervention of the Standing  Committee. The Committee observes that such documents of 
national importance should have  been posted on the website bo th in English and Hindi as per 
the official language policy of the country. 
6.5  The Committee observes that two policy documents - (i) Arms and Ammunition 
Manufacturing Policy and (ii) Arms and Ammuniti on Policy for Individuals - were finalized by 
the Ministry of Home Affairs on 5th April, 2010 and put on the Ministry’s website under the 
link ‘Circulars for Public’ disregarding the Co mmittee’s advice. None of the suggestions made 
by the Committee, except putting the Hindi versio n of the draft policy on the net, forwarding 

policy papers to the Members a nd extending deadline for submission of views/comments, was 
accepted by the Government. The advice given by the Committee to the Government to follow 
the standard procedure in giving effect to the ch anges in the existing policy, was also not heeded 
to. The policy as finalized was exactly identical to the draft put on the website inviting comments 
from the public and the Home Minister preferred no t to lay copies of the policy documents in 
Parliament. The two policy documents have been  brought into force by the Home Ministry by 
issuing detailed directives in the garb of advisories to the Secret aries (Home Departments) of all 
the States and UTs. Curiously enough, the Mini stry has enforced the new policy documents by 
issuing executive instructions to be complied with strictly , without waiting for formal 
parliamentary approval to the amendments to the Arms Act, 1959 and the Arms Rules, 1962. 
6.6  The Committee fails to understand as to why the Government had not felt it necessary to 
seek formal parliamentary approval before enforcing various new features of the Policy, which 
included inter-alia amendments to the Arms Act and the Arms Rules even ‘before introducing 
the amendment Bill and laying the amendment to  the Rules. The Government may argue that 
the revised policy and the instructions issued thereunder do not materially change the provisions 
of the Arms Act, 1959 and the Arms Rules, 196 2, but the Ministry of Home Affairs should 
appreciate the fact that the change s that have been made in the policy and the advisories issued 
are consequential to the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959 and the Arms Rules, 1962 and this has 
been done without getting the changes therein a pproved by the Parliament. This is against the 
basic democratic principle of ex ecutive’s accountability to the le gislature as per the scheme of 
the Constitution. 
6.7 It is a well established parliamentary practice that Ministers make statements in the House 
in order to keep the House informed of matters of public impo rtance or to apprise the House 
about Government policy in regard to a matter of  topical interest at the earliest opportunity5. In 
deciding what statements should be made first in the House, a distinction is to be drawn between 
matters of policy and news. In matters of policy, Government should first inform the House. But 
in the case of news, information can be given to Press before informing the House
6. 
6.8  The Committee wishes to reiterate that Poli cy statements should be  made by Ministers on 
the floor of the House, when the House is in session before releasing them to Press or Public 7. 
Where a statement is made outside the House even clarifying the policy already enunciated, the 
Minister should also make a st atement about that in the Hous e at the earliest opportunity 8. The 
day the policy docume nts were finalized i.e. 5th April, 2010 Parliament was in Session but the 
Government, for reasons best known to it and in violation of established parliamentary practice, 
and convention, chose not to lay the policy statements even when th e Budget Session of 
Parliament concluded on 7th M ay, 2010. In the view of the Committee, the new Arms and 
Ammunition Policy which has already been  implemented - mostly through executive 
instructions and partly through proposed amen dment of the Act and the Rules, yet to be 
approved by Parliament, amounts to exerci se of power by the executive beyond the 
constitutional mandate. This act of the Ministry of Home Affairs has taken the Parliament and 
the Committee for granted. 
6.9  When the Committee asked the Home Secretar y to apprise its Members as to when the 
Home Minister was going to lay the policy docu ments on the Table of both the Houses of 

Parliament and what were the compelling circumstances which prompted the Ministry to 
announce the Policy through its website wh en Parliament was in Session and issue 
advisories/instructions to all the State Governments for implementing the Policy, without 
waiting for Parliament’s approval to the proposed amendments to the Arms Act, 1959 and Arms 
Rules, 1962, the Home Secretary merely repeate d that he would bring the views of the 
Committee about laying of the Policy on the Table of  both Houses of Parliament, to the notice of 
the Home Minister. The Home Secretary did no t respond to the pointed query as to why the 
Government hurriedly finalized the policy and asked the State Governments to implement the 
same. He chose to state in his usual refrain that  he would bring the matter to the notice of the 
Home Minister. Thereafter, nothing was heard from the Home Ministry, nor were the Policy 
Documents laid on the Table of the Houses, ex cept the fact that the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 
2010 were laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2010 and in the Rajya Sabha on 
11th August, 2010. Subsequently, the Arms (Amendm ent) Bill, 2010 was introduced in the Lok 
Sabha on 25th August, 2010. In this context the Committee recalls an observation made by the 
Home Secretary before it and whic h has been quoted in para 2.30 of Chapter- II of this Report 
that it is upto to the Home Minister to decide on laying the Policy on the Tables of the two 
Houses of Parliament and he wishes the policy to be announced, then he would lay it on the 
Table of Houses. The Committee deprecates this a ttitude of the Ministry of Home Affairs in 
general and the Home Minister in particular in ignoring a six decade old parliamentary practice 
and convention of first laying  policy documents in Parliament  and then making them public. 
This obduracy on the part of th e executive has set a bad precede nt in the functioning of our 
parliamentary democracy and the sooner such a tr end is reversed, the better it would be for the 
healthy and harmonious functioning of the two arms of the State. 
6.10  Having made the above observations, the Committee is not able to comprehend as to why 
the Ministry proceeded with the finalization of the policy in a tearing hurry, knowing fully well 
that the Committee was seized of the subject a nd was in the process of  making suggestions/ 
observations in the matter. The Committee strongly disapproves the attitude of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs in ignoring the ad vice given by it to the Minist ry; in repeatedly making evasive 
statements before it by the Home  Secretary; and in justifying the wrong procedure adopted in 
announcing and implementing the policy. 
6.11  The Committee observes that the replies dated 5th and 25th January, 2011, given by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs are el usive and do not dispel the doubts in the minds of Members of 
the Committee, such as the urgency shown in the implementation the policy. The Committee 
observes that the argument of Ministry of Home Affairs that they have only issued an advisory 
to the State Governments on 6th April, 2010 whic h contains instructions about the procedural 
aspects of grant of arms licences, does not hold  water. Though the Ministry contend that the 
advisories issued to the Stat e Governments. and Union Territories, are merely guidelines, 
actually these are specific inst ructions on the subject for stri ct compliance by the concerned 
authorities. 
6.12  The Committee is of the considered view  that the major comp onents of the policy 
document can be brought into fo rce only by amending the Arms  Act and the Arms Rules, but 
the proposed amendments to the Act and the Rule s, do not cover all asp ects of the new policy. 
The Committee observes that while the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 which was referred to the 

Committee, under Rule 270(b) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council 
of States, for examination and report, sought to give effect to only on e component of the new 
Policy, the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 2010 give eff ect to another componen t of the said Policy, 
whereas the major elements of the Policy had already been brought into force by way of 
directions to the State Governments and UT Administrations. 
6.13  Be that as it may, the Committee is more than convinced that the course adopted by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs in formulating,  finalizing and enforcing the New Arms and 
Ammunition Policy, is ab initio faulty, inasmuch as the steps ch osen by the Ministry were in 
breach of parliamentary proprieties and conventions. The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and 
the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 2010 are conseq uential to the New Policy. As the Policy 
Documents have not been laid on the Table of the two Houses of Parliament, which consequently 
cannot be referred to this Committee by the Presid ing Officer, it has taken a conscious decision 
not to proceed with clause-by- clause consideration of the B ill which would have been a 
piecemeal exercise in isolation and therefore not desirable. 
6.14  Keeping in view the wide ranging implic ations of the New Policy on the law abiding 
citizens and its enforcement, mostly through executive fiat, the Committee recommends to the 
Ministry of Home Affairs that they should put on hold the whole exercise of implementation of 
the Policy, immediately withdraw the so called Advisories dated 6.4.2010 issued to States/UTs; 
put the subject in the public domain for wider consultations with the people and their 
representatives at various levels; take on board all the views and suggestions, including the ones 
incorporated in this report with a view to making the policy citizen-friendly and thereafter 
notify a Revised Policy and then lay the same on the Table of both Houses of Parliament. 
Subsequently, the Ministry should bring a comprehensive Bill to amend the principal legislation 
and lay the amendments to the Rules after due examination, precedent to the implementation of 
the Policy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5  Parliamentary Procedure, Law, Privileges Practice & Precedents by Dr. Subhash C. Kashyap op. cit. 
6 L.S. Deb., dt. 3 12.1971 op. cit. 
7  H.P Deb.,dt.1.9.1953 op. cit. LS. Deb dated 22.12.67 op. cit. 
8 L.S. Deb., dt. 18.3.1970 op. cit. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, 7 January, 2010 in Main Committee Room, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia ––    In the Chair 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy  
 3. Shri Rishang Keishing 
 4. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
 5. Shri Tariq Anwar 
  LOK SABHA 
 6. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
 7. Shri Raman Deka 
 8. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 9. Shri A. Sampath 
 10. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed 
 11. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh  
 12. Shri Ravneet Singh 
 13. Shri Harsh Vardhan 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
  Shri D .K. Mishra, Joint Director 
  Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
  Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary 
 2. Shri A.E. Ahmad, Secretary (BM) 
 3. Shri U.K. Bansal, Special Secretary (IS) 
 4. Shri Sada Kant, Joint Secretary 
 5. Shri Asim Khurana, Joint Secretary 
 6. Shri Naveen Verma, Joint Secretary 
 7. Shri K. Skanda n, Joint Secretary 
 8. Shri Suresh Kumar, Joint Secretary 
 9. Shri L.K. Tewari, Director  

 10. Shrimati R. Jaya, Director 
 11. Shrimati Anju Sharma, Director  
 12. Shri J.L. Chugh, Director 
  Representatives of Intelligence Bureau 
 1. Shri Rajiv Mathur, Director 
 2. Shri R.N. Ravi, Additional Director 
 3. Shri Arvind Deep, Joint Director 
 4. Shri Avinash Manani, Joint Director 
  Representatives of CPFs 
 1. Shri Raman Srivastava, DG, BSF 
 2. Shri Rajan Medhekar, Special DG, BSF 
 3. Shri Alexender Daniel, Addl. DG (Ops.), BSF  
 4. Shri Vikram Srivastava, DG, ITBP 
 5. Shri S.S. Harti, DIG (Ops.), ITBP 
 6. Lt. Gen. K.S. Yadava, DG, Assam Rifles 
 7. Col. A.S. Harge, Additional DIG, Assam Rifles  
 8. Shri M.V. Krishna Rao, DG, SSB 
2.0   In the absence of the Chairman of the Co mmittee, Shri S.S. Ahluwalia was chosen by the 
Committee to act as its Chairman for the meeting. 
3.0  The Chair welcomed the Members and wished them a happy and prosperous New Year. The 
Chair then informed the Members that the da y’s meeting had been convened to consider 
Memorandum No. 1/2010 regarding action taken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the One Hundred and Forty Second Report of the 
Committee on Implementation of Central Scheme of Modernisation of Prison Administration and to 
hear presentation of Home Secretary on ‘infiltration across the Borders’. 
Arms, Fire Arms and Ammunition 
4.0   At this point, Shri Naveen Jindal, with the permission of the Chair, brought to the notice of the 
Committee that on 21st December, 2009 the Ministry of Home Affairs had put on its website a draft of 
a new Arms and Ammunition Policy, under the Arms Act 1959 and had sought the comments of 
general public till 6th January, 2010. Shri Jindal expressed his concern on the proposed move of the 
Government, which according to him affected ever y Indian, without taking the Standing Committee 
on Home Affairs into confidence. Shri Jindal want ed the Committee to convey its displeasure to the 
Ministry of Home Affairs over the fact that before putting the draft on the website, they had not 
briefed the Committee about their proposed move. He suggested that the subject ‘Arms Policy’ should 
be discussed in the Committee so that it can give its recommendations as the matter affected every 
countryman. He also pointed out to the Committee th at the Ministry of Home Affairs had placed the 
draft policy on the internet in English version only and that the Hindi version thereof should have been 
put along with the English version and that the draft should be widely circulated through medium of 
language newspapers. Members associated themselves with views of Shri Jindal. 

Memorandum No. 1/2010 regarding ATN on One Hundred and Forty Second Report 
5.0   The Committee then took up Memorandum No. 1/2010 on the Action Taken Notes furnished by 
the Ministry of Home Affairs on the One Hundred and Forty Second Report of the Committee. The 
Committee noted that the Ministry had simply forwarded the Committee’s recommendations to the 
respective State Governments and there was no follow-up on the implementation of the 
recommendations by the State Governments. The Committee further noted that seven months had 
elapsed since the recommendations were forwarded to the State Governments and no updates were 
available on the action taken by the latter. The Committee accordingly decided that the Ministry may 
be asked to submit revised ATNs after obtaining inputs from State Governments and if necessary by 
holding meetings with the concerned authorities. The Committee directed the Secretariat to inform the 
Ministry of Home Affairs to take necessary action in the matter. 
(Witnesses were then called in) 
Arms, Fire Arms and Ammunition 
6.0  The Chair then welcomed the Home Secretary and other officials. The Chair while referring to 
the comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the communication dated 16th December, 2009 sent 
by Shri Naveen Jindal, wanted to know from the Home Secretary the background which led the 
Ministry to review the existing Arms Policy and why the Standing Committee on Home Affairs was 
not informed of the proposed move of the Government. The Chair observed that it was the unanimous 
view of the Committee that matters relating to ‘Arms, Fire Arms and Ammunition’ should be 
discussed in a separate sitting and till such time the new policy should not be finalized. 
6.1  The Home Secretary responded to the con cerns raised in the Committee. He assured the 
Committee that he would bring the matter to the notice  of the Home Minister, as the draft policy, as 
approved by him, had been put on the website of the Home Ministry. He agreed that the Ministry 
should have brought it to the notice of the Standing Committee which the Ministry would do in future. 
He also assured that he would bring to the notice of the Home Minister the suggestion made by the 
Standing Committee that the draft Arms Policy should not be finalized till the Standing Committee 
had held a discussion thereon. 
6.2  The Chair observed that the proposals of the Ministry of Home Affairs should be placed before 
the Standing Committee first so that it may examine the matter and submit it recommendations. The 
Chair also reiterated that till such time the Co mmittee has not discussed the subject, the Ministry 
should keep everything connected with the formulation of the Policy pending as the day before was 
the last date for submitting comments on the draft and the Committee Members were not informed. 
The Chair further suggested that as the Ministry of  Home Affairs (Department of Official Language) 
was the nodal agency for Raj Bhasha , the draft should be put on website in both the languages. 
Thereupon, the Home Secretary said that he wo uld bring the matter to the notice of the Home 
Minister. 
Discussion on ‘Infiltration Across Borders’ 
7.0   The Chair then asked the Home Secretary to commence the presentation on ‘Infiltration Across 
the Borders’. The. Secretary (Border Management), with the  permission of the Committee, made a 
Power Point Presentation on the subject. The presentation focused on the following broad areas: 

z Adoption of multi-pronged approach to cont ain cross border illegal activities including 
infiltration. 
z Fencing and Floodlighting on Indo-Pakistan Border. 
z Indo-Bangladesh Border Roads. 
z Management of Indo-Nepal and Indo-Bhutan borders. 
z Management of Indo-China Border. 
7.1   The Chair and Members made observations and sought clarifications on the following issues: 
z What is the magnitude of illegal immigrants living in the country? 
z What are the comments of the Ministry of Home Affairs on the recent statement of Army 
Chief that infiltration is on the rise in Jammu and Kashmir? 
z There is lack of administrative resolve and political will to detect and deport illegal 
foreign elements in the country. 
z Which are the portions of our land borders that are still to be fenced? 
z Roads on the Chinese side are much better than that those on the Indian side.  
z The onslaught of illegal immigration in the districts of Assam which border Bangladesh 
has completely changed the demographic profile of the State. 
7.2   The Home Secretary and other representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Director, 
IB clarified the issues raised by the Chair and the Members. The Chair then asked the Home Secretary 
to send written replies to those queries which were not answered orally. 
8.0  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9.0  The Committee then adjourned at 4.55 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 9 February, 2010 in Room No. 139, First Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  ––– Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
 3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
 4. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK SABHA  
 5. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 6. Shri Ramen Deka 
 7. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque 
 8. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 9. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
 10. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure  
 11. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
  SECRETARIAT 
   Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
   Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
   Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
   Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
2.0   The Chairman welcomed the Members of th e Committee to the meeting and apprised them of 
the agenda for the day. 
Discussion on ‘Infiltration across the Borders’ 
3.0   The Chairman, in the first instance, inform ed the Members that the Home Secretary was not 
able to attend the meeting, due to other pressing official engagements and the Secretary, Border 
Management would be available for giving clarifications during further discussion on ‘Infiltration 
across the Borders’. After some discussion, Members fe lt that there were certain issues which needed 
to be clarified by the Home Secretary. The Committ ee, therefore, deferred further discussion on the 
subject. 
Discussion on Arms, Fire Arms and Ammunitions 
4.0  The Chairman then apprised the Members of the contents of letter dated 14th January, 2010 
received from the Home Secretary in connection with the Draft Arms Policy, which had been put on 

the website of the Ministry of Home Affairs for comments of the public. Though the Committee 
appreciated the action of the Home Ministry in putting the Hindi version of the Draft Arms Policy on 
its website along with its English version and sending copies thereof (both versions) to all Members of 
the Committee for comments, it, however, pointed out that what it had decided in its sitting held on 7 
January, 2010 was to hold a structured discussion on ‘Arms, Fire Arms and Ammunitions’ in a 
separate sitting and the Home Secretary was advised that till such time the Committee discussed the 
subject and formulated its recommendations thereon,  the Ministry of Home Affairs should not go 
ahead with the finalization of the policy. The Committee reiterated its earlier decision and directed the 
Secretariat to convey to the Ministry of Home Affa irs that it should not finalise the Draft Policy until 
the Committee had discussed the aforementioned subject and formulated its recommendations. 
5.0  * * * 
5.1  * * * 
5.2  * * * 
6.0  * * * 
6.1  * * * 
6.2  * * * 
6.3  * * * 
6.4  * * * 
6.5  * * * 
6.6  * * * 
7.0  Some Members then raised the issue relating to implementation of the package announced for 
rehabilitation of victims of the 1984 riots that took place in the aftermath of the assassination of Smt. 
Indira Gandhi. After some discussion, the Committee decided that the Ministry of Home Affairs may 
be asked to send a status note, State-wise, on the implementation of the package. 
8.0  The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 5.00 P.M. on Thursday, 4th March, 2010 in Room No. 63, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  ––– Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
 3. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
 4. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK SABHA  
 5. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 6. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
 7. Shri Ramen Deka 
 8. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 9. Shri L. Rajagopal 
 10. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
 11. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed 
 12. Shri Ravneet Singh 
 13. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay 
 14. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure  
 15. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
  Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
  Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
2.0  The Chairman apprised Members that the purpo se of calling this sitting of the  Committee was 
two-fold. Firstly, to discuss a letter dated 16th February, 2010 which the Home Minister had written to 
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in  the context of certain decisi ons taken by the Committee with 
regard to the Draft Arms Policy which Government intended notify shortly. Secondly, to decide about 
the time table of sittings of the Committee to examine the Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the 
Ministries of Home Affairs and Development of North-Eastern Region.  
Letter dated 16th February, 2010 of Home Minister regarding Draft Arms Policy 
4.0   The Chairman then informed Members that Hon’ble Chairman had forwarded to him a letter 
dated 16th February, 2010 written by the Home Minister to Hon’ble Chairman regarding the Draft 
Arms Policy, in the context of certain decisions taken by the Committee directing the Government not 

to proceed with the finalization of the policy till the Committee had discussed the subject and made its 
recommendations. The Chairman of the Committee read  out the contents of the letter of the Home 
Minister whose essence was that drafting and notifyi ng a policy were the pr erogative of the executive 
branch of the Government and hence he (Home Minister) was unable to understand the decision of the 
Standing Committee and the direction given to the Ministry of Home Affairs, as conveyed by the 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat. The Home Minister in his letter conveyed the intention of the Government to 
notify the policy shortly after co nsidering all comments/suggestions  received within the stipulated 
time. The Home Minister accordingly requested Hon’ ble Chairman to advise the Chairman of the 
Standing Committee suitably. 
4.1   The Chairman of the Committee then read out for the benefit of the Members the list of subjects 
allocated to the Ministry of Home Affairs under the Government of India (Allocation of Business) 
Rules 1961 (as amended from time to time) which the Committee was entitled under the rules to 
discuss. The Chairman further info rmed the Committee that one item, viz., ‘Matters relating to Arms, 
Fire Arms and Ammunition’ stood allocated to the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Draft Arms 
Policy came within the purview of the said subject. The Chairman then observed that it would not be 
desirable for the Committee to enter into a confrontation with the Government or debate on the 
intention of the Government to notify a new policy. In that context he suggested that when the 
Committee would discuss the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Home Affairs, during the 
forthcoming recess of Parliament, it could also briefly discuss the subject ‘Arms, Fire Arms and 
Ammunition’ and make suitable recommendations to Parliament thereon. He further suggested that 
the Home Secretary may be asked to make a brief pr esentation on the said subject and also on the 
Draft Arms Policy, so as to facilitate a discussi on thereon along with discussion on the Demands for 
Grants of the Ministry. 
News-item in ‘The Sunday Guardian’ dated February 21, 2010 
5.0   The Chairman thereafter brought to the notice of the Members a news-item under the caption 
‘Jindal wants to produce sports rifles’ which appeared in The Sunday Guardian, New Delhi dated 21st 
February, 2010 which had been brought to his notice by the Secretariat as per instructions of office of 
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha. Th e Chairman informed Members that the news-item related to the 
reported proposal of a company allegedly owned by Shri Naveen Jindal, Member of Lok Sabha and a 
Member of the Standing Committee, to manufacture sporting weapons and ammunition for 
Sportspersons for which the company had reporte dly moved the concerned authorities in the 
Government of India for grant of an industrial lic ence. The Chairman further informed Members that 
the news-item had inter alia  contended that the alleged move of Shri Naveen Jindal to obtain the 
licence from the Ministry of Home Affairs while being a Member of the Standing Committee on 
Home Affairs, had sparked off a controversy as it involved a conflict of interest. 
5.1   The Chairman while referring  to the provisions of Rule 294( 1) of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in the Council of States (Rajya Sabha) which imposed an obligation on a 
Member who has a personal or a sp ecific pecuniary interest (direct or indirect) in a matter being 
considered by the Council or a Committee thereof, he shall declare the nature of such interest 
notwithstanding any registration of his interests in the Register of Members Interests, and shall not 
participate in any debate taking place in the Council or its Committees before making such 
declaration. He thus requested Shri Naveen Jindal to explain his point of view for the sake of record. 

5.2   Shri Naveen Jindal explained his stand on the subject and clarified his position with regard to 
the charge of conflict of interest as reported in a newspaper cited by the Chairman of the Committee. 
The pith and substance of his explanations/clarifications are as follows:- 
z The Arms Policy affects all the citizens of the country. The present Arms Policy is already 
very strict. Law abiding citizens face a lot of difficulties in procuring an arms licence. 
z The draft policy put on the website came as a big surprise. The Government intends to 
make the Arms Policy more stringent. In public interest, the Committee Members want to 
discuss the draft policy and give their views and recommendations to the Government. It 
was up to the Government whether to accept those or not. 
z He has been a shooter of the National Shooting Team for the last ten years. He is also an 
industrialist. 
z As an entrepreneur it was his dream to produce top quality sporting weapons and 
ammunition for sportspersons as the same is not available in the country. 
z He joined politics in 2004. In the year 2002  a company with which he was associated had 
applied for licence which had not been granted so far. In 2003 he resigned from the 
directorship of the company. 
z There is no conflict of interest in his raising the subject in the Committee. He, along with 
other Members, only wants to highlight the concerns of the citizens of the country. 
z There is no urgent need for Government to notify this policy. What is the point in 
discussing the policy after it has been notified? 
z The Committee should discuss the subject allo cated to the Ministry of Home Affairs 
under the Allocation of Business Rules. 
5.3   At this stage the Chairman of the Committ ee observed that there were two ways in which the 
Committee could discuss a matter. One, which is presented and referred to the Committee and the 
second, when the Committee gets an opportunity to discuss a variety of subjects during the 
examination of the Demands for Grants. 
5.4   A Member of the Committee (who had been  the Chairman of the Standing Committee on 
Environment and Forests) informed the Committ ee that the Standing Committee over which he 
presided, suo motu  took up examination of a draft notification issued by the Government and 
presented a report ther eon. According to him the Committee can suo motu  take up the subject and 
discuss it. He also opined that the Committee may not be in a position to prevent the Government 
from notifying the draft policy, but it can certainly discuss and submit a report to the Parliament. 
5.5   Another Member of the Committee took exceptio n to the objection of the Home Minister over 
the decision of the Committee and observed that it amounted to preventing him as a Member of the 
Standing Committee from perfo rming his duty that is to discuss the Draft Arms Policy in which he 
had no vested interest. The Member stated that th e Draft Arms Policy was intended to change the 
Arms Act, 1959 and the Arms Rules, 1962 which can be done only by bring in an amendment bill in 
Parliament and not merely by action of an administrative nature. When the Government wanted to 
bring a new policy in a new scenario, the relevant Act has to be amended by introducing an 

amendment bill. He also took exception to the impugned news-item which according to him had been 
published at the behest of some vested interests with a view to preventing him from performing his 
duty as a Member of the Standing Committee on Home Affairs. While concluding his observations, 
the Member stated that the Committee should discuss the subject and that the Home Ministry should 
be informed about it. That Member also contended that if the Ministry of Home Affairs could put up 
the draft policy on its website for eliciting public opinion, then why the Standing Committee of 
Parliament on Home Affairs could not be given an opportunity to discuss the subject and offer its 
recommendations. 
5.6   Other Members were of the view that the G overnment should not proceed in the matter without 
consulting the Committee and that the subject should be discussed by it. They were also of the view 
that the Standing Committee’s role was advisory in nature and ultimately it was for the executive to 
accept its recommendations or not and in that context there should be no restriction on it to discuss the 
subject-matter. 
Decisions Taken by Committee 
5.7   The Chairman, winding up the deliberations in the Committee, announced the following 
decisions taken by it: 
z With reference to the news-item alleging conflict of interest concerning Shri Naveen 
Jindal, the Member, on being provided an opportunity to explain his case, had done so and 
the Committee was convinced with the same. Therefore, that issue was treated as closed. 
z Regarding the letter of the Home Minister addressed to Hon’ble Chairman, the Committee 
decided that the subject ‘Arms, Fire Arms and Ammunition’ would be discussed by it 
during the examination of the Demands for Gr ants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs and that the Home Secretary would be asked to make a brief presentation on that 
subject and also on the Draft Arms Policy. Thereafter the Committee will formulate its 
recommendations on the subject. 
6.0  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.  
7.0  The Committee then adjourned at 5.40 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 23 March, 2010 in Main Committee Room, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia ––    In the Chair 
 2. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy  
 3. Shri Brijesh Pathak 
 4. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 5. Shri D. Raja  
  LOK SABHA  
 6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 7. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
 8. Shri Ramen Deka 
 9. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque 
 10. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 11. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel  
 12. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel  
 13. Shri L. Rajagopal 
 14. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
 15. Shri A. Sampath 
 16. Shri Harsh Vardhan 
 17. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
  Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
  WITNESSES 
  Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary  
 2. Shri A.E. Ahmad, Secretary (BM) 
 3. Shri U.K. Bansal, Special Secretary (IS) 
 4.  Shri D.R.S. Chaudhary, Additional Secretary 
 5. Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, A dditional Secretary and FA (Home) 
 6. Shri A.K. Goyal, Joint Secretary 
 7. Shri A.K. Yadav, Joint Secretary 

 8. Smt. B. Bhamathi, Joint Secretary 
 9. Shri D. Diptivilasa, Joint Secretary 
 10. Shri O. Ravi, Joint Secretary 
 11. Shri Dharmender Sharma, Joint Secretary 
 12. Shri K.C. Jain, Joint Secretary 
 13. Shri K. Skanda n, Joint Secretary 
 14. Shri L.D. Jha, Joint Secretary 
 15. Dr. Kashmir Singh, Joint Secretary 
 16. Shri R.C. Chandramauli, RGI and CCI 
 17. Shri Naveen Verma, Joint Secretary 
 18. Shri N.S. Kalsi, Joint Secretary 
 19. Shri D.K. Kotia, Joint Secretary 
 20. Shri R.P. Na th, Joint Secretary 
 21. Shri Sadakant, Joint Secretary 
 22. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Joint Secretary 
 23. Shri S. Suresh Kumar, Joint Secretary 
 24. Dr. Sanjeev Mishra, CCA (Home) 
 25. Shri Sandeep Sark ar, Director (Finance) 
 26. Ms. S. Chowdhury, Deputy Secretary 
  Representatives of National Disaster Management Authority 
 1. Shri A. B. Prasad, Secretary 
 2. Shri Mukur Goel, IG, NDRF & CD  
 3. Shri R.K. Singh, DIG, NDRF 
  Representatives of Delhi Police 
 1. Shri YK. Dadwal, Commissioner of Police 
 2. Shri Neeraj Kumar, Special Commissioner 
 3. Shri S.K. Tyagi, FA 
  Representatives of Department of Official Language, Ministry of Home Affairs 
 1. Shri B.S. Parsheera, Secretary 
 2. Shri D.K. Pandey, Joint Secretary 
  Representatives of UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
 1. Shri Satyagopal, Administrator 
 2. Shri A.K. Singh, Collector 
 3. Shri P .K. Gupta, Development Commissioner 
  Representatives of  CPFs 
 1. Shri Raman Srivastava, DG, BSF 
 2. Shri Arunabha Dutta, FA, BSF 

 3. Shri N.R. Das, DG, CISF 
 4. Shri R.D. Sharma, Assi stant Director, Accounts, CISF 
 5. Shri Vikram Srivastava, DG, CRPF 
 6. Shri J.C. Dabas, ADG (Hq), CRPF 
 7. Shri N.P.S. Aulakh, DG, NSG 
 8. Shri T.S. Kripanidhi, FA, NSG 
 9. Shri M.V. Krishna Rao, DG, SSB 
 10. Shri Aditya Mishra, DIG, SSB 
 11. Shri R.K. Bhatia, DG, ITBP (Holding Addl. Charge of DG, NDRF and Civil Defence) 
 21. Shri N.K. Mishra, IFA, ITBP 
 23. Maj. Gen. J.P. Nehra, Additional DG, Assam Rifles 
 24. Col. S. Pendharkar, Colonel, Assam Rifles 
  Representatives of National Crime Records Bureau 
 1. Shri Rajeev Mathur, Director General  
 2. Shri P.R.K. Naidu, IG 
 3. Smt. B. Radhika, DIG 
  Representatives of Intelligence Bureau 
 1. Shri Arvind Deep, Joint Director 
 2. Shri R.A. Chandrasekhar, Deputy Director 
  Representatives of BPR & D 
  Shri Prasun Mukherjee, Director General 
2.0  In the absence of the Chairman, Shri S.S. Ahluwalia was voted to the Chair. 
2.1   The chair welcomed the Members and officials. He also informed them about the agenda for the 
day. He then ascertained facts regarding the incident of bomb scare in a Kingfisher flight, blowing up 
of rail track in Lal Garh area in West Bengal by Maoists and reported beefing up of security in Media 
offices in Mumbai, from the Director, IB. Queries were also raised regarding security at Airports in 
the country, by various Members. 
2.2     Director, IB responded to the queries. 
3.0  * * * 
3.1  * * * 
3.2  * * * 
3.3  * * * 
4.0  * * * 
5.0  * * * 
6.0  * * * 

7.0  * * * 
8.0  * * * 
8.1  * * * 
8.2  * * * 
9.0  * * * 
9.1  * * * 
10.  * * * 
11.  * * * 
12.0  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.  
13.0  The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XX 
TWENTIETH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 09.30 A.M. on Thursday, 22 April 2010 in Room No. 63, First Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi.  
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  ––– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
 3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee  
 4. Shri Brijesh Pathak 
 5. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
 6. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK  SABHA 
 7. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 8. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
 9. Shri Ramen Deka 
 10. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque 
 11. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 12. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
 13. Shri L. Rajagopal 
 14. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
 15. Shri A. Sampath 
 16. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed 
 17. Shri Ravneet Singh 
 18. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure  
 19. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
 20. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
   Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
   Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
   Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
   Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
2.0   The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Members to the meeting and informed them 
about the agenda for the day. He observed that the copies of the Draft 144th Report of the Committee 
on the Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Home Affairs had been received by the 
Members only in the morning and they did not have sufficient time to go through the same. In that 
context he explained that there was urgency in presentation of the Report to the Rajya Sabha and 

laying the same in the Lok Sabha before Guillotine was applied in the Lok Sabha on 27th April, 2010. 
He, therefore, suggested that Members could go thro ugh the draft report and if some changes were to 
be made, a meeting of the Committee could be held in the evening of 26th April, 2010 for adopting 
the same. 
3.0   At this stage the Chairman informed Members about the notification of the new Arms Policy. In 
that context he recapitulated that the Committee ha d already discussed the subject and made certain 
suggestions to the Ministry of Home Affairs for incorporating the same in the policy document. The 
Committee felt that the policy should be presented to Parliament first and then referred to the 
Committee so that a structured discussion could take place thereon. The Committee therefore decided 
to take up the Arms Policy separately and presen t a report thereon. It accordingly decided that the 
Chapter on Arms Policy may be taken out of the Draft Report. 
4.0  The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 144th Report. Members suggested a few 
amendments thereto. The Chairman directed the S ecretariat to incorporate those amendments in the 
draft and circulate the revised draft report amongst the Members. At this stage a Member pointed out 
that the Ministry of Home Affairs was yet to fu rnish responses to number of issues raised by the 
Committee. The Chairman asked the Secretariat to remind the Ministry of Home Affairs to expedite 
their responses so that those could be incorporated in the draft report. 
5.0  The Committee then decided to meet at 4.00 
P.M. on 26th April for further consideration and 
adoption of the draft report. The Chairman observed  that if some Members wish to make suggestions 
for incorporation in the draft report, they may do so in writing to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
6.0   A verbatim record of the proceeding of the meeting was kept.  
7.0   The Committee then adjourned at 10.15 A.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XXIV 
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, 28 May 2010, in Main Committee Room, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New-Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  ––– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy  
 3. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
 4. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK SABHA 
 5. Shri Ramen Deka 
 6. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque  
 7. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 8. Shri Jitender Singh Malik  
 9. Shri A. Sampath 
 10. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed 
 11. Shri Harsh Vardhan 
 12. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
  Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
  Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
  Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary 
 2. Smt. Anita Chaudhary, Special Secretary 
 3. Shri K.C. Jain, Joint Secretary 
 4. Shri Shashi Bhushan, Consultant 
 5. Shri J.L. Chugh, Director 
 6. Shri S.K. Gupta, Director 
  Representatives of Department of Lega l Affairs. Ministry of Law and Justice 
 1. Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary 
 2. Shri R.L. Koli, Additional Secretary 
  Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice 

 1. Shri V.K. Bhasin, Secretary 
 2. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary 
 3. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Council 
 4. Shri K. Sreemannarayana, Assistant Legislative Council 
ACCIDENT OF GYANESHWARI EXPRESS 
2.0  * * * 
3.0  * * * 
ARMS AND AMMUNITION POLICY 
4.0   The Chairman then mentioned that a Member of the Committee wanted to raise certain points 
regarding the Arms and Ammunition Policy which had been engaging the attention of the Committee 
for quite some time, and he had permitted him to do so. 
4.1   He then called the Member to place his viewpoints. The Member made a request to the 
Chairman that his submissions on the subject may not be recorded. The Chairman agreed to the 
request and directed that his observation may not form part of the verbatim record of the proceedings 
of the sitting. The Member, thereafter, made his submissions on the subject. 
[At this stage the witnesses were called in again] 
4.2   The Chairman informed the Home Secretary and other Officers that the following points 
relating to the Arms and Ammunition Policy had been raised in today’s sitting and he would like the 
Home Secretary to respond to those: 
(i)  Two policy documents - (i) Arms and Ammunition Manufacturing Policy and (ii) Arms 
and Ammunition Policy for Individuals - were finalized by the Ministry of Home Affairs 
on 5th April, 2010 and put on the Ministry’s website under the link ‘Circulars for Public’, 
disregarding the Committee’s advice. None of th e suggestions made in the meeting of the 
Committee held on 23 March, 2010 were accept ed by the Government. The advice given 
by the Committee to the Government to follow the standard procedure in giving effect to 
the changes in the existing policy, have also not been heeded. 
(ii)  The policy as finalized was exactly identi cal to the draft put on the Ministry’s website 
inviting comments from the public. 
(iii)  The two policy documents had been brought into force by the Home Ministry by issuing 
detailed advisories to the Secretaries (Home Departments) of all the States and UTs. 
(iv)  According to the advisories, the instructions of the Government of India shall come into 
force with immediate effect. 
(v)  Curiously enough, the Mini stry enforced the new policy documents by issuing executive 
instructions, without waiting for formal Parliamentary approval to the amendments to the 
Arms Act, 1959 and the Arms Rules 1962. 
(vi)  The Arms (Amendment) Rules 2010 were sent to the Government of India Press for 
printing in the Gazette of India which woul d come into force on the date of their 

publication in the official gazette. It was learnt that the amendment rules had not yet been 
published in the gazette. 
(vii) The Draft Cabinet Note for amending th e Arms (Amendment) Ac t was referred to the 
Ministry of Law for vetting before sending the same to the Cabinet Secretariat for Cabinet 
approval. It was learnt that the Draft Cabinet Note was still with the Ministry of Law. 
(viii)  Various components of the policy documents could be brought into force only by 
amending the Arms Act and the Arms Rules. But the proposed amendment to the Act and 
the Rules did not cover the various aspects of the policy which would mean that those 
would be enforced through executive orders. 
(ix)  It is a well established parliamentary practice that Ministers make statements in the House 
in order to keep the House informed of matte rs of public importance or to apprise the 
House about Government policy in regard to a matter of topical interest, at the earliest 
opportunity. (Parliamentary Pr ocedure: Law, Privileges, Practice & Precedents by Dr. 
Subhash C. Kashyap, 2nd Edition 2006, page 540, Universal Law Publishing Co., New 
Delhi) 
(x)  In deciding what statements should be made first in the House, a distinction had to be 
drawn between matters of policy and news. In matters of policy, Govt. should first inform 
the House. But in the case of news, information can be given to Press before informing the 
House. [LS Deb., 3.12.1971, cc. 204-09, 325-28] 
(xi)  Policy statements should be made by Ministers on the floor of the House, when the House 
is in session before releasing them to Pre ss or Public. [HP Deb. (II), 1.9.1953, cc. 1865-
66; LS Deb., 22.12.1967, c.9285; 28.8.1973, cc. 245-47] 
(xii)  Where a statement is made outside the House even clarif ying the policy already 
enunciated, the Minister should also make a statement about that in the House at the 
earliest opportunity. [LS Deb., 18.3.1970, c.229] 
(xiii) The day the policy documents were finalized, the Parliament was in session but the 
Government, for reasons best known to it and in violation of established parliamentary 
practice, chose not to lay the policy statements even when the Budget Session of 
Parliament concluded on 7th May, 2010. 
4.3   The Home Secretary responded by stating that he did not have notice that the Arms Policy 
would be discussed in this sitting. However, he told the Committee that the Arms Policy had been 
finalized by the Home Minister and as a result of the policy, certain advisories which were in 
modifications of the earlier advisories, had been communicated to the States. Some amendments in the 
Arms Rules had been proposed to be carried out, and he was not sure whether those amendments had 
been published in the Gazette or not. In any cas e, the Gazette notificati on publishing the Amended 
Rules would be laid on the Table of the both the Houses of Parliament when they reassemble for the 
next session. He further informed the Committee that  for amendment to the Arms Act, a draft Cabinet 
Note was being prepared and after approval of the Cabinet, a Bill would be introduced in the 
Parliament during the next session. 

4.4   The Chairman then put a pointed question to the Home Secretary as to why the policy had not 
been laid on the Table of the House. The Home S ecretary replied that if the Home Minister wished 
that the policy was to be placed before the Parliament, then he would lay it on the Table of both 
Houses of Parliament. 
4.5   The Chairman wanted to know from the Home Secretary whether it had been the practice in the 
Government of India to issue advisories to the St ate Governments on a policy matter even before the 
required amendments to statute or statutory rules were approved by the Parliament/notified in the 
Gazette. 
4.6   The Home Secretary clarified that what had been communicated to the State Governments were 
modifications to the earlier Advisory and not the ea rlier rules. Thereupon, the Chairman observed that 
in order to amend the Advisories which were inconsistent with the present rules, Government had to 
first amend the rules. He wondered how Advisory Notes could be sent to the State Governments 
without amending the Act and the Rules. The Home Secretary replied that he would clarify that aspect 
in the next sitting of the Committee. 
4.7   The Chairman thereupon, directed the Home Secretary to come prepared before the Committee 
in the next sitting and explain to it the reasons which compelled the Government to issue Advisories to 
the State Governments even before publishing th e Amendment Rules in the Gazette and without 
obtaining Parliamentary approval to the amendment in the Act and the Rules. He also directed the 
Home Secretary to explain to the Committee wh y the established Parliamentary Practice and 
Procedure with regard to laying of policy documents on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament 
first, had not been followed in the present case. 
5.0  * * * 
5.1  * * * 
6.0  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
7.0  The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
XXV 
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, 11 June 2010 in Main Committee Room, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  ––– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia  
 3. Shri Tariq Anwar  
 4. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK  SABHA 
 5. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 6. Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
 7. Shri Ramen Deka 
 8. Shri Mohd. Asrarul Haque 
 9. Shri Jitender Singh Malik 
 10. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel  
 11. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel  
 12. Shri Nilesh Narayan.Rane 
 13. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
 14. Shri A. Sampath 
 15. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed 
 16. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh  
 17. Shri Ravneet Singh 
 18. Shrimati Seema Upadhyay 
 19. Shri Harsh Vardhan 
 20. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
   Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
   Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
   Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
   Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
  Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary  
 2. Shrimati Anita Chaudhary, Special Secretary  
 3. Shri U.K. Bansal, Special Secretary 

 4. Shri K.C. Jain, Joint Secretary 
 5. Shri D. Diptivilasa, Joint Secretary 
 6. Shri J.L. Chugh, Director 
 7. Shri S.K. Malhotra, Deputy Secretary 
 8. Shri Shashi Bhushan, Consultant 
  Representatives of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice 
 1. Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary 
 2. Shri R.L. Koli, Additional Secretary 
  Representatives of Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice 
 1. Shri V.K. Bhasin, Secretary 
 2. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Additional Secretary 
2.0   The Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and apprised them of the 
agenda for the day. 
3.0  * * * 
4.0  * * * 
5.0  * * * 
Arms and Ammunition Policy 
6.0   The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the issues relating to the finalization and 
implementation of the Arms and Ammunition Policy by the Ministry of Home Affairs. The Chairman 
told the Home Secretary that the papers sent by the Ministry on the subject had been perused and 
found to be unsatisfactory and evasive. He observe d that the procedure adopted by the Ministry in 
finalizing and implementing the policy was just the opposite of what the Committee had advised it in 
successive sittings. The Chairman asked the Home Secretary to inform the Committee as to when the 
Home Minister was going to lay the Policy Document on the Table of both the Houses of Parliament 
and what were the compelling circumstances whic h prompted the Ministry to announce the Policy 
through its website when the Parliament was in session and to issue advisories/instructions to all the 
State Governments for implementing the Policy without waiting for Parliament’s approval to the 
amendments to the Arms Act, 1959 and Arms Rules 1962. 
6.1   The Home Secretary stated that about laying of the Policy on the Table of both the Houses of 
Parliament, he would bring the views of the Committee to the notice of the Home Minister. On being 
pointed out that he made the same observation during the previous meeting of the Committee held on 
28 May 2010, the Home Secretary repeated his statement. As to the reasons why the Government 
hurriedly finalized the policy and asked the State Governments to implement the same, the Home 
Secretary did not respond. 
6.2   The Chairman and some other Members raised a number of issues relating to the matter. They 
reminded the Home Secretary that there were severa l precedents wherein it had been held that the 
Houses of Parliament had the right to be informed first about the announcement of a new Policy 
Statement by the Government when Parliament was in session, before releasing it to the media and the 

public. The Home Secretary was further apprised th at it was a well-established parliamentary practice 
that Ministers make statements in the House in order to keep the House informed of matters of public 
importance or to apprise the House about Government policy in regard to a matter of topical interest, 
at the earliest opportunity. The Home Secretary was told that there we re several instances in both the 
Houses of Parliament wherein it had been ruled that Policy statements should be made by Ministers on 
the floor of the House when the House was in session before releasing them to press or public. The 
Chairman then observed that in the light of the well-established parliamentary practice and the 
precedents, the procedure followed by the Ministry of Home Affairs in the matter of finalisation and 
implementation of the Arms and Ammunition Policy, was confusing and disturbing and that it was a 
serious matter. 
6.3  The Home Secretary observed that he would br ing the issues raised in the Committee to the 
notice of the Home Minister. 
6.4   The Chairman then directed the Home Secret ary to report back to the Committee in the matter. 
7.0  * * *  
8.0  * * * 
9.0  * * * 
10.0  The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V 
FIFTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, 1 November 2010, in Main Committee Room, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  ––– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy 
 3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
 4. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal  
 5. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 6. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK SABHA 
 7.  Shri L.K. Advani 
 8.  Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque 
 9.  Shri Naveen Jindal 
 10.  Adv. A. Sampath 
 11.  Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
 12.  Shrimati Seema Upadhyay 
 13.  Shri Harsh Vardhan 
 14.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
  Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
  Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES  
  Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary 
 2. Shri U.K. Bansal, Special Secretary 
 3. Shrimati Rashmi Goel, Joint Secretary 
 4. Shri S. K. Malhotra, Director 
 5. Shri Sandeep Goel, Additional Commissioner of Police (Licensing) 
2.0   At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and 
apprised them that the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010, had been referred to the Committee on 1st 
September, 2010, for examination and report on or before 30th November, 2010. 

2.1   The Chairman then informed the Members th at today’s meeting had been called to hear the 
presentation of the Home Secretary on the Bill.  
2.2   The Chairman recapitulated that the Committee had examined the subject “Arms, Fire Arms and 
Ammunition” in a series of meetings and the present Bill was an outcome of the new Arms Policy 
announced by the Government. He  informed Members that an Aide-Memoire on the subject had been 
prepared by the Rajya Sabha Secretariat and circ ulated amongst the Members of the Committee, to 
facilitate consideration of the Bill. 
[At this stage the witnesses were called in] 
3.0   The Chairman welcomed the Home Secretar y and other senior officers of the Ministry and 
asked him to make a presentation on the Bill. 
3.1   The Joint Secretary, MHA made the presentati on. Elaborating on the background of the Bill, she 
stated that the Arms Policy was reviewed in April, 2010. This revision envisaged amendment of 
Section 13 of the Arms Act, 1959, to make Police verification compulsory before grant of arms 
licences and prescribe a period of 60 days in which the police report must be sent by the police 
authorities. The highlights of the presentation were as follows: 
(i) It has been considered essential that arms licences are issued to bonafide persons with 
clear antecedents; 
(ii) It has been considered essential that the police verification report is taken into 
consideration before grant of an arms license; 
(iii) The Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 seeks to prescribe a period of 60 days for Police to 
send their report, make provision for recording reasons by police in case of delay beyond 
60 days, to make provision for punitive action if the reasons are not sufficient and 
convincing to delete discretionary powers to issue arms licence without police report. 
4.0   The Chairman and Members of the Committee then expressed their views on various aspects of 
the Bill, the Arms Policy and the Arms (Amendment) Rules. The Committee asked the Home 
Secretary to make another presentation on the subject before the Committee clarifying those issues. 
5.0   The Committee then decided to meet again on 9th November, 2010 to have interaction with an 
Indonesian Parliamentary Delegation. 
6.0   A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
7.0  The Committee then adjourned at 11.35 
A.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VI 
SIXTH  MEETING 
  The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, 23 November 2010 in Committee Room ‘A’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  ––– Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2. Dr. N. Janardhana Reddy  
 3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee  
 4. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 5. Shri. D. Raja 
  LOK SABHA 
 6.  Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 7.  Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
 8.  Shri Ramen Deka 
 9.  Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque 
 10.  Shri Naveen Jindal 
 11.  Adv. A. Sampath 
 12.  Shri Hamdullah Sayeed 
 13.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
  Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
  Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
2.0  The Chairman welcomed Members to the meeting of the Committee. 
3.0  * * * 
Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 
4.0   The Committee, further considered the Arms  (Amendment) Bill, 2010, which was referred to 
the Committee on 1st September, 2010, for examination and report, on or before 30th November, 
2010. The Chairman recapitulated that in its  last sitting held on 1st November, 2010, the 
representatives of the Ministry of Home Affair s made a presentation on th e Bill whereupon Members 
of the Committee expressed their views on variou s aspects of the Bill, the Arms and Ammunition 
Policy and the Arms (Amendment) Rules 2010. The Chairman recalled that the Committee, in that 
sitting, had decided that the Home Secretary would make another presentation on the subject before it, 
clarifying the following issues:- 
z The rationale for bringing in a new Arms and Ammunition Policy;  

z State/UT-wise statistical information on Arms Licenses issued; 
z State/UT-wise statistical information on crimes committed by using licensed arms and 
illegal arms; 
z Remedy available to the individual applicant for Arms License where mandatory police 
verification is not received by the concerned authorities within the stipulated period of 60 
days; 
z Implications of advisories issued to the State Governments and amendment of the Arms 
Rules, 1962; 
z Suggestions/recommendations received from State Governments/UT Administrations on 
the Draft Arms Policy; 
z Decision of MHA on representations received from various quarters regarding issue of 
Arms Licenses; 
z Experience of different countries with regard to issue of Arms Licenses. 
4.1   Thereafter, some Members pointed out that the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 which was 
referred to the Committee, under Rule 270(b) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
the Council of States, for examination and report sought to give effect to only one component of the 
new Arms and Ammunition Policy. Those Members also pointed out that the Arms (Amendment) 
Rules, 2010 which was laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 10th August and in the Rajya Sabha on 
11th August 2010, gave effect to another component of the said Policy, whereas the major elements of 
the Policy had already been brought into force by way of Advisories to the State Governments and UT 
Administrations. The Committee took note of the fact that while it was considering the Arms 
(Amendment) Bill 2010, it had no choice but to refer to the new policy document, leading to a piquant 
situation wherein the Committee had to consider a National Policy Document which had neither been 
presented to Parliament nor referred to it under th e provisions of Rule 270(d) of the Rules of 
Procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council of States. 
4.2   At this stage the Chairman clarified that under the Rules, a Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee can consider a Policy Document  presented to the Houses, if referred to the 
Committee by the Chairman or the Speaker, as th e case may be. He observed that as the Committee 
went along the examination of the Bill, it would be considering the Arms and Ammunition Policy 
which had not been officially referred to it. Likewise, the Chairman felt that the Committee would 
also need to consider the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 2010 which, under the Rules of Procedure, lay 
within the domain of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation. 
4.3   In that context, the Committee took note of the fact that despite its pointed queries to the Home 
Ministry on the need for presenting the Arms and Ammunition Policy on the Table of both Houses, by 
the Home Minister, pursuant to well established Pa rliamentary Practice and Procedure, there had been 
no response from them and that the policy was yet to be presented to Parliament. The Committee, 
therefore, decided that it may request Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to consider issuing suitable 
advice to the Home Minister to immediately pres ent the New Arms and Ammunition Policy in both 
Houses of Parliament and thereafter, refer the same to the Committee, under Rule 270 (d), for 
consideration and report, along with the Arms (A mendment) Bill, 2010. The Committee also decided 

to request Hon’ble Chairman to refer to it, as a special case, the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 2010 
which was laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10 August and Rajya Sabha on 11 August, 2010, so that 
it could examine the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 in a comprehensive manner. 
4.5   The Committee, further felt that since some outstanding issues relating to the Bill require 
appropriate consideration including obtaining suitable directions from Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha, it would not be possible to complete the remaining stages of consideration of the Arms 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 by the stipulated date i.e 30th November, 2010. The Committee, after some 
discussion unanimously decided to seek extension of time upto the last week of Part I of the Budget 
Session, 2011 for presentation of the report on the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 
5.   The Committee, accordingly, authorized its Chairman to approach Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha for the following:- 
(a) Issuing suitable advice to the Home Mini ster to present the New Arms and Ammunition 
Policy in both Houses of Parliament and thereafter, refer the same to the Committee on 
Home Affairs, alongwith the Arms (Amendment) Rules 2010, to facilitate a 
comprehensive examination of the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010; and 
(b)  Granting extension of time to the Committee upto the last week of Part I of the Budget 
Session 2011 for presentation of the Report on the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 
6.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.40 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 20 December, 2010 in Main Committee Room, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  ––– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee  
 3. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 4. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK  SABHA 
 5. Shri L.K. Advani 
 6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 7. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque  
 8. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 9. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
 10. Adv. A. Sampath 
 11. Shri Hamdullah Sayeed 
 12. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
 13. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
 14. Shri Ravneet Singh 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
  Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
  Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
  Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES 
  Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 1. Shri M. Gopal Reddy, Joint Secretary (UT) 
 2. Dr. A.K. Saxena, Director 
  Representatives of New Delhi Municipal Council 
 1. Shri Parimal Rai, Chairman 
 2. Shri Santosh D. Vaidya, Secretary  
 3. Shri P.C. Chaturvedi, Legal Advisor 
  Representatives of Ministrv of Law and Justice 

  Legislative Department 
 1. Dr. G.N. Raju, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor 
 2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel  
 3. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
 4. Shri K.B. Kumar, A ssistant Legislative Counsel 
  Department of Legal Affairs 
 1. Shri R. Ragupathi, Additional Secretary 
 2. Shri Dinesh Bhardwaj, Director 
  Representatives of Residents’ Welfare Associations 
 1. Shri A.P. Singh, President, Golf  Links Resident Welfare Association 
 2. Shri Jitender Kapoor, Vice President, Federation of Golf Link, Jor Bagh, Malcha Marg and 
Babar Road Resident Welfare Associations. 
 3. Shri A. Armugham, Vice-President, F,G,&H Block, Resident Welfare Association, Sarojini 
Nagar 
 4. Shri Sunil Kumar Bhadauria, Secretary, F,G,&H  Block, Resident Welfare Association, Sarojini 
Nagar 
 5. Shri K. Dinakar Raj, Executive Member, F,G,&H Block, Resident Welfare Association, Sarojini 
Nagar 
  Member of New Delhi Municipal Council  
  Shri Karan Singh Tanwar, MLA, Delhi Legislative Assembly 
2.0   The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and informed them of 
the agenda for the day. 
Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 
3.0   The Chairman recapitulated that the Committee in its meeting held on 23rd November, 2010, 
had authorized him to approach Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the following: 
(a) Issue of suitable advice to the Home Minister to present the New Arms and Ammunition 
Policy in both Houses of Parliament and thereafter, refer the same to the Committee on 
Home Affairs, alongwith the Arms (Amendment) Rules 2010, to facilitate a 
comprehensive examination of the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010; and 
(b) Grant of extension of time to the Committee up to the last week of Part I of the Budget 
Session 2011 for presentation of the Report on the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 
3.1   The Chairman informed the Committee that Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha had granted 
extension of time upto 31st January, 2011 only for the presentation of the report on the Bill. The 
chairman also informed the Committee that the remaining proposals were under consideration of 
Hon’ble Chairman. 
4.0  * * * 

4.1  * * * 
4.2  * * * 
  [At this stage the witnesses were called in] 
5.0  * * * 
5.1  * * * 
6.0  * * * 
7.0  * * * 
8.0  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.  
9.0    The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday, 28 December, 2010 in Main Committee Room, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia ––    In the Chair 
 2.  Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal 
 3.  Shri Javed Akhtar 
 4.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
 5.  Shri D. Raja 
  LOK  SABHA  
 6.  Shri L.K. Advani 
 7.  Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 8.  Shri Ramen Deka 
 9.  Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque 
 10.  Shri Naveen Jindal 
 11.  Shri Jitender Singh Malik 
 12.  Adv. A. Sampath 
 13.  Shri Hamdullah Sayeed 
 14.  Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh 
 15.  Shri Ravneet Singh 
 16.  Shri Harsh Vardhan 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
  Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
  Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
  WITNESSES 
  Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary 
 2. Shri U.K. Bansal, Secretary (IS) 
 3. Shrimati Rashmi Goel, Joint Secretary 
 4. Shri S. K. Malhotra, Deputy Secretary 
 5. Shri Sandeep Goel, Additional Commissioner, Delhi Police 
  Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice  

  Department of Legal Affairs  
 1. Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary 
 2. Shri R.L. Koli, Additional Secretary 
  Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice  
  Legislative Department  
 1. Shri S.R. Dhaleta, Joint Secretary 
 2. Dr. Rita Vashist, Additional Legislative Counsel 
2.  In the absence of the Chairman, Shri S. S. Ahluwalia was voted to the Chair. The Chair told 
Members that despite repeated pointed queries of the Committee to the Home Secretary on the non-
laying of the Arms and Ammunition Policy on th e Table of both Houses by the Home Minister, 
pursuant to well established parliamentary practice and procedure, there had been no response. He 
informed the Members that the Committee had request ed Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha to consider 
issuing suitable advice to the Horne Minister to  immediately present the New Arms and Ammunition 
Policy in both Houses of Parliament and, thereafter, refer the same to the Committee, for 
consideration and report, along with the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 which already stood referred 
to it. He further stated that the Committee also requested Hon’ble Chairman to refer to it, as a special 
case, the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 2010, which was laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 10 
August and in the Rajya Sabha on 11 August, 2010, so that it could examine the Arms (Amendment) 
Bill, 2010 in a comprehensive manner. 
[At this stage the witnesses were called in] 
3.  The Chair welcomed the Home Secretary and other officers. The Home Secretary was asked to 
make a presentation on the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 a clarifying issues raised by Members in 
the previous sittings. 
4.0   The Home Secretary informed the Committee that due to technical reasons the power-point 
presentation could not be made. However, hard copies of the presentation had been made available to 
all Members. 
4.1   The Home Secretary thereafter made oral submissions based on the power-point presentation 
prepared for the meeting. 
5.0   The Chair pointed out the contradiction in th e statements made in the Statement of Objects and 
Reasons of the Bill and the presentation of the Home  Secretary in so far as the need for revising the 
licensing procedure for arms was concerned and the consequent issue of a New Arms Policy. 
5.1   A Member highlighted the fact that only 1.8 per cent of the murders were committed with 
licenced weapons and more than 85 per cent of the murders were not committed by fire arms but with 
sharp edged weapons. He felt that the Bill was incomplete in as much as more sections of the Arms 
Act should have been amended, instead of amending only two sections thereof, to implement the 
policy. 
5.2   Another Member enquired about the purpose of bringing in the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 
and the deficiencies in the existing Act. He also en quired as to how the new provisions would help in 

cutting the red tape and expediting the process for issuing arms licenses in so far as the common man 
was concerned. 
5.3   Yet another Member highlighted the contradiction between the Statement of Objects and 
Reasons of the Bill and the new policy. Accordingly to him, while the objective of the Bill was to curb 
proliferation of arms, the policy seemed to widen the availability of the arms. Several Members raised 
the point that the onus of establishing threat perception of an individual should not be entirely left to 
the bureaucracy. A Member also pointed towards the danger of grant of licenses on caste and 
communal lines and other social cleavages. 
6.  The Chair once again took exception to the fact that the Arms Policy was yet to be tabled in the 
Parliament despite the presiding officers directions and the precedents in that regard. He reiterated that 
in matters of Policy, the Government must first inform the House before giving the information to the 
media. He pointed out that according to a direction of the Speaker, Lok Sabha policy statement 
should be made by Minister on the floor of the House when the House is in session before releasing it 
to press or public. He took serious note of the cavalier attitude of the Minister in not informing the 
House about the New Policy. 
7.  Thereafter more queries were made by the Members which were responded to by the Home 
Secretary. 
8.   The Committee asked the Home Secretary to respond to the issues raised by Members, in 
writing. 
9.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10.  The Committee then adjourned at 12.55
 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

IX 
NINTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Wednesday, 5th January 2011 in Main Committee 
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
  RAJYA SABHA  
 1. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia ––    In the Chair 
 2.  Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal 
 3.  Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
 4.  Shri Javed Akhtar 
 5.  Shri Tariq Anwar 
 6.  Dr. V. Maitreyan 
 7.  Shri D. Raja 
  LOK  SABHA 
 8.  Shri L.K. Advani 
 9.  Dr. Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar 
 10.  Shri Ramen Deka 
 11.  Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque  
 12.  Adv. A. Sampath 
 13.  Shri Ravneet Singh 
 14.  Shrimati Seema Upadhyay 
 15.  Shri Harsh Vardhan 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
  Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
  WITNESSES  
   Representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs 
 1. Shri Gopal K. Pillai, Home Secretary 
 2. Smt. B. Bhamathi, Additional Secretary (UT)  
 3. Dr. A.K. Saxena, Director 
  Representatives of New Delhi Municipal Council 
 1. Shri Parimal Rai, Chairman 
 2. Shri Santosh D. Vaidya, Secretary  
 3. Shri P.C. Chaturvedi, Legal Advisor  
 4. Shri S.P. Sanw al, Director (GA) 

  Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice  
  Legislative Department  
 l. Shri V.K. Bhasin, Secretary 
 2. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Se cretary and Legislative Counsel  
 3. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel 
 4. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
  Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice  
  Department of Legal Affairs  
 l. Shri D.R. Meena, Law Secretary 
 2. Shri R.L. Koli, Additional Secretary 
 3. Shri D. Bhardwaj, Additional Legal Advisor 
2.  In the absence of the Chairman, Shri S. S. Ahluwalia was voted to the Chair. 
3.   The Chair welcomed the Members to the first sitting of the Committee in the New Year and 
wished them a Happy and Prosperous 2011. He then apprised them of the agenda for the day. 
4.  * * * 
4.1  * * * 
Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 
5.   The Chair then recapitulated that the Committee in its sitting held on 23rd November, 2010, had 
authorized its Chairman to approach Hon’ble Chairman for his approval to the following proposed 
course of action: 
(i) Issue of suitable advice to the Home Minister to present the new Arms and Ammunition 
Policy in both the Houses of Parliament and thereafter, refer the same to the Committee 
along with the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 2010, to facilitate a comprehensive 
examination of the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 by it; and 
(ii) Grant extension of time to the Committee up  to the last week of Part I of the Budget 
Session of 2011 for presentation of the report on the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 
5.1   The Chair then apprised the Committee that  Hon’ble Chairman had granted extension of time 
upto 31st January, 2011 only for presentation of the Report on the Bill. The Chair informed that the 
Chairman of the Committee had received a letter  dated the 28th December, 2010 from the Secretary-
General, Rajya Sabha on the other issue, conveying therein as under:- 
 “After careful consideration of the request,  Hon’ble Chairman has approved the following 
course of action:- 
(iii) The Committee may seek copies of the policy documents from the Ministry of Home 
Affairs for the use of the Members; 
(iv) The Committee may also consult the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 2010 for the purposes of 
examining the Bill under its consideration. 
6.  * * * 

7.  * * * 
8.  * * * 
9.  * * * 
10.  * * * 
11.  * * * 
12.  * * * 
13.  * * * 
14.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.  
15.  The Committee then adjourned at 12.56 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 24th January, 2011 in Main Committee Room, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  ––– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
 3. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee  
 4. Shri Tariq Anwar 
 5. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK  SABHA 
 6.  Shri L. K. Advani 
 7.  Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 8.  Shri Ramen Deka 
 9.  Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque  
 10.  Shri Naveen Jindal 
 11.  Adv. A. Sampath 
 12.  Shri Hamdullah Sayeed 
 13.  Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
 14.  Shri Harsh Vardhan 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
  Shri D. K. Mishra, Joint Director 
  Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director  
  Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
Obituary Reference 
2.   The Chairman made a reference to the passi ng away of legendary voca list Bharat Ratna Pandit 
Bhimsen Joshi. 
2.1   The Committee observed a minute’s silence, all Members standing, as a mark of respect to the 
departed. 
3.  * * * 
3.1  * * * 
3.2  * * * 

3.3  * * * 
3.4  * * * 
3.5  * * * 
Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 
4.0  The Chairman recalled that Hon’ble Chairman had granted extension to the Committee upto 
31st January, 2011 for presenting the report on the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Chairman 
observed that the Committee had been pre-occupied with the NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010 for the 
last two months and could consider the Arms (Amendment) Bill only in four sittings. Besides, the 
Ministry of Home Affairs had in certain respects not satisfactorily responded to the issues raised by 
the Members of the Committee and in other matters, did not respond at all. Moreover, the written 
comments of the Ministry on the issues raised by the Members in its meeting held on 28th December, 
2010 had just been received. 
4.1   Some Members were of the view that the Committee should hear non-official witnesses on the 
Bill and in view thereof the Committee needed at least three to four sittings to complete the remaining 
stages of examination of the Bill. The Committee, then, observed that after finalizing the report on the 
NDMC (Amendment) Bill, 2010 the Demands for Grants (2011-12) pertaining to the related 
Ministries/Departments would have to be examined by it in a strict time-frame and consequently it 
would be in a position to resume consideration of the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 only after 
completing the examination of the Demands for Grants (2011-12). 
4.2   The Committee accordingly, felt that it would be necessary to seek another extension of time, 
upto the first day of last week of Part II of Budget Session 2011, for presenting its report on the Arms 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010. 
5.   The Committee, thereafter, authorized its Chairman to approach Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha for seeking further extension of time on the two Bills, as per the resolution of the Committee 
mentioned in paras 3.5 and 4.2 of this minutes. 
6.  * * * 
6.1  * * * 
7.  * * * 
8.  * * * 
9.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10.   The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M. to meet again at 12.00 N OON on Wednesday, the 
2nd February, 2011 to hear the presentation of  the Home Secretary on the Enemy Property 
(Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 2010 and hold discussion thereon. 
 
 
 
 

XV  
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 8th March 2011 in Committee Room ‘B’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  ––– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2. Shri Javed Akhtar  
 3. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK  SABHA 
 4.  Shri L.K. Advani 
 5.  Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 6.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
 7.  Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque 
 8.  Shri Naveen Jindal 
 9.  Adv. A. Sampath 
 10.  Shri Ravneet Singh 
 11.  Shri Harsh Vardhan 
 12.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
  SECRETARIAT 
   Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
   Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
   Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
   Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
   Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
WITNESSES 
National Association for Gun Rights India 
 1. Shri Rao Inderjit Singh, MP (Lok Sabha) 
 2. Shri Rahul Rai 
 3. Shri Ashish Kumar Mishra 
 4. Shri Abhijeet Singh and others 
2.   The Chairman apprised the Members that th e meeting of the Committee had been called to hear 
the representatives of the National Association of Gun Rights India (NAGRI) on the Arms and 
Ammunition Policy and the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 
Extension of Time on Two Bills 

3.   The Chairman stated that two Bills, namely, the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 and the Enemy 
Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 2010 were under consideration of the Committee. 
3.1   The Chairman recalled that the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was referred to the Committee on 
1st September, 2010 for examination and report within three months, which was further extended upto 
18th April, 2011. He also recalled that the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Second Bill, 
2010 was referred to the Committee on 30th December, 2010, for examination, with the direction to 
report by 15th February, 2011, which had further been extended upto 6th April, 2011. 
3.2  * * * 
3.3  * * * 
3.4  * * * 
3.5   The Committee unanimously endorsed the proposal of its Chairman and decided that Hon’ble 
Chairman may be requested to grant another extension of time to it in respect of the two Bills, as per 
the following Table: 
 Name of the Bill Extension sought upto  
(1) Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 10th June, 2011   
(2) The Enemy Property (Amendment Last week of the Monsoon Session   
 and Validation) Second Bill, 2010 of Parliament, 2011    
3.6   The Committee accordingly authorized its Chairman to approach Hon’ble Chairman for the 
purpose. 
Oral Evidence on Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 
4.   The Chairman informed Members that he had received a request from an NGO, named the 
National Association for Gun Rights India (NAGRI) for making a presentation on the Arms and 
Ammunition Policy and the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010. He had granted that request and the 
representatives of that organization were present for the purpose. He informed Members that they 
would screen a short-film on the subject followed by a power point presentation. 
[On the arrival of witnesses] 
4.1   The Chairman thereafter welcomed the repr esentatives of NAGRI and asked them to screen the 
short film first and then make a presentation. 
[Shri L. Raja Gopal in the Chair] 
5.   A short film titled “Guns For Peace” was sc reened for the Members of the Committee. The 
representatives of NAGRI made the following points while urging for a liberal arms licensing regime 
for law abiding citizens: 
z The Arms Act, 1959 has been amended from time to time but in a proper way. However, 
the recent Arms Rules have been brought in  clandestinely. The Home Ministry should 
have brought this issue before the Standing Committee on Home Affairs, or before the 
Parliament and there could have been a general debate on the whole issue. 
z After enactment of this rule, All India Licen ces are now to be approved directly by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs and those licences are being renewed only for three States. 

z Section 9 of Arms Act deals with people who are prohibited from owning firearms. 
Section 13 deals with the issuance of arms licences and section 14 deals with refusal of 
grant of a licence. By making it compulsory to prove ‘grave and imminent threat’, in 
effect, all three sections of the Act have been amended without amending the law. 
z There are already provisions in the Act that if someone misuses his licenced firearm, his 
licence can be suspended or cancelled. There is also a provision in the Act that if there is 
any doubt or any other contingency, the licenci ng authority can call the licence holder to 
produce his arms for inspection. Then, why does a license needs to be renewed every 
three years? 
z The Law recognizes a citizen’s right to se lf-defence. However, when a person uses a 
licensed firearm in self-defense, the Police register a case u/s 307 of IPC which is ‘attempt 
to murder’. Even those who have licensed anns are afraid to use them to defend their 
home and family, because the police will file  a case u/s 307. If a person shoots someone 
while defending his life, property, the property of his neighbour or his own family, then he 
is liable to go to jail for his act in self-defence as the police will register a case of murder 
against him. Therefore, the penal law needs to be amended suitably so that a person who 
uses his licenced firearm in self-defence, is not charged with murder. 
z Professional shooters of India are unable to get their arms licences renewed even though 
the Home Ministry has given specific directi ons that these rules are not applicable to 
renowned shooters of India. The National Rifle Association of India is extremely 
distressed that even this highly legitimate and honourable sport is being affected by these 
new rules. 
6.   A representative of NAGRI then made a presentation before the Comm ittee on the subject. The 
highlights of the presentation are as follows: 
z The Ministry has issued a directive dated 06.04.2010 (addressed to all State/UT Home 
Deptts.) for ‘strict compliance’ for implementing its new Arms and Ammunition Policy. 
This directive has in effect changed the law without parliamentary approval. It has eroded 
the civil rights of more than a billion Indian  citizens. Even one year on, the Ministry has 
not even tabled the new Policy before the Houses. While the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 
seeks only to make a minor change, the real motive behind moving this amendment is to 
mislead the Parliament and surreptitiously obtain Parliament’s approval to the new policy. 
The Bill is an eyewash because real changes have already been made via Arms and 
Ammunition Policy. 
z Even during the pre-2010 period, hangover from the days of the British Raj continued as 
system was stacked against citizens as applicants were forced to prove “need” for arms 
licences. 
z Allahabad High Court has observed that only respectable and peace loving persons require 
licence for firearms. The Court has also observed that unnecessary rejection of 
applications for grant of fi rearm licence breeds a tendency to keep unlicenced arms. The 
new Arms and Ammunition Policy negates the ‘Objects and Reasons’ of the Arms Act, 
1959. 

z The observation in the Policy and the Amendment Bill, namely “The proliferation of 
arms, whether licenced or illegal, vitiates the law and order situation” is an affront to all 
law-abiding citizens by equating them with criminals and anti-social elements. The 
Ministry has so far offered no evidence to back up their claim that licenced arms are a law 
and order problem. In response to a question, the Home Ministry has admitted that no 
study was conducted prior to initiating these amendments to the law. 
z According to NCRB data of 2007,  in 99.99% of total crimes and 98.21 % of total murders, 
licensed arms were not used. 
z Persons having arms licences face problems during renewal of their licences every three 
years. After enactment of the proposed Bill , it would become more cumbersome as the 
licensing authority would renew license only after receipt of mandatory police 
verification. Even Punjab and Haryana High Court has observed that the law should be 
such as may repose confidence in the citizens th at they are presumed to be responsible in 
using licensed arms to defend themselves and one such measure would be to amend the 
Arms Act and Arms Rules suitably to prescribe that the arms licences are required to be 
renewed after every 10 years. 
z The Ministry has now directed that licences only  be issued to applicants who face a grave 
and imminent threat to their lives. This threat perception is now to be separately verified 
by the police. How many ordinary citizens can prove such a threat perception? This may 
encourage corrupt practices and force many ap plicants to use dubious methods to prove 
this threat. 
z Additional provisions have been introduced through the Ministry’s Arms and Ammunition 
Policy, which will lead to increased harassment of citizens and directly promote corrupt 
practices e.g. the new requirement to report use of  and prove how/where/when every 
single round of ammunition was used, is both impractical and a needless burden on 
licence holders. 
6.1   In the light of the presentation made, the representatives of NAGRI stated that the citizens’ 
rights were being eroded and the Ministry of Home Affairs was taking the citizens and the Parliament 
for granted. They requested the Committee to take a stand in favour of rights of the citizens and help 
empower law-abiding citizens as envisaged in the Arms Act 1959 and allow citizens to have a fair 
chance against criminals and anti-social elements. 
6.2   The Chair and Members of the Committee then  raised various issues and queries which were 
replied by the representatives of NAGRI. 
7.  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
8.  The Committee then adjourned at 5.21 p.m. 
 
 
 
 

XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 15th March, 2011 in Main Committee Room, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  ––– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shri Rishang Keishing  
 3. Shri Javed Akhtar 
 4. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK  SABHA 
 5. Shri L.K. Advani 
 6. Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 7. Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque  
 8. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 9. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
 10. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
 11. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
 12. Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
  SECRETARIAT 
   Shri Tapan Chatterjee, Joint Secretary 
   Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
   Shri D.K. Mishra, Joint Director 
   Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
   Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
2.   At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and apprised 
them about the agenda for the day. He mentioned that Hon’ble Chairman had granted extension of 
time to the Committee upto 18th April, 2011 for presentation of report on the Arms (Amendment) 
Bill, 2010. He recapitulated that the Committee had devoted fourteen sittings, commencing from 
January, 2010 to consider the Arms Policy and matters related thereto. He reminded Members that the 
Committee in its sitting held on 8th March, 2011 heard the representatives of National Association for 
Gun Rights, India (NAGRI) and sought further extension of time from the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya 
Sabha upto 10 June, 2011 for presentation of its report on the Bill due to re-scheduling of the Budget 
Session of Parliament, on account of forthcoming elections in four States and the UT of Puddicherry. 
3.   He then invited the Members to express their views on the subject so as to facilitate the 
Committee Secretariat to draft the report based on the views arrived in the Committee. 
4.  * * * 

5.0   The following views were expressed by the Members on the subject matter of the day’s agenda: 
(i) Paragraph 3 of the Statement of Objects a nd Reasons of the Bill is in contrast to the 
objects and reasons of the Arms Act 1959 wher e the thrust is to streamline the procedure 
facilitate grant of licenses to law abiding citizens for arms and ammunition. 
(ii) The advisory dated 6th April 2010 tantamounts to amending the Arms Act, 1959 without 
actually amending the Act. The Ministry should move required amendments to the Act 
and get them approved by Parliament rather than making policy changes by issuing 
advisories. 
(iii) The advisory stipulates that in order to get a license there should be a verifiable threat 
perception to the life of the applicant. This gives immense discretionary power to the 
issuing authority and the implementation of relevant law becomes very subjective. 
(iv) For all practical purposes licensed weapons are not being misused. The general approach, 
therefore, should be that, unless there is something against the person who applies for a 
license, it should it be issued to him/her. The condition of there being a threat to life, 
before giving license, is absolutely not required. 
(v) Most of the crimes are committed by using unlicensed arms and the new policy will lead 
to proliferation of unlicensed arms 
7.  The Committee thereafter directed the Secretariat that the opinion of the Ministry of Law and 
Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) may be sought on the following question: 
“Whether the instructions issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs vide their communication No.  
V-11010/16/2009-Arms dated 6.4.2010 to all State Governments and UTs tantamount to 
amending the various sections of the Arms Act, 1959, in particular Sections, 9, 13 and 14 
thereof, without seeking parliamentary approval, by way of bringing suitable amendments to the 
Arms Act, 1959 through appropriate amendment Bill?” 
8.   The Chairman then asked the Members to come  fully prepared for the next meeting after which 
the process of drafting the Report would commence. He requested the Members to give their opinion 
in writing, if they feel so. 
9.0  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10.0  The Committee then adjourned at 4.10 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the 25th April 2011 in Room No. 63, First Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS  PRESENT 
 1. Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu  ––– Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shri Rishang Keishing 
 3. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
 4. Shri Naresh Chandra Agrawal 
 5. Dr. V. Maitreyan 
 6. Shri D. Raja 
  LOK  SABHA 
 7.  Shri L.K. Advani 
 8.  Dr. Rattan Singh Ajnala 
 9.  Shri Raman Deka 
 10.  Shri L. Raja Gopal 
 11.  Shri Mohd. Maulana Asrarul Haque 
 12.  Shri Naveen Jindal 
 13.  Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
 14.  Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
 15.  Shri Bishnu Pada Ray 
 16.  Adv. A. Sampath 
 17.  Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
 18.  Shri Ravneet Singh 
 19.  Shri Harsh Vardhan 
 20.  Shri Bhausaheb Rajaram Wakchaure 
 21.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Director 
  Shri Bhupendra Bhaskar, Assistant Director 
  Shri Sanjeev Khokhar, Committee Officer 
Obituary Reference 
2.0   At the outset, the Chairman made a reference to the passing away of Sri Sathya Sai Baba, world 
renowned spiritual leader and philanthropist revered by millions of followers as a living God on 24th 
April, 2011.  

2.1   The Committee then observed silence, all Members standing, as a mark of respect to the 
departed soul. 
3.0  * * * 
Draft 151st Report on Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 
4.0  The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 151st report of the Committee on the 
Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010. The Chairman recapitulated that there is a difference of approach 
between the Government and the Committee. He added that the Government didn’t give adequate and 
due respect to the views of the Committee and in such a scenario, it was not possible to take up clause-
by-clause consideration of the Bill. He further added that the Committee should convey its displeasure 
in this regard to the Government. 
4.1   Thereafter, the Committee discussed in detail the draft 151st Report and adopted the same with 
some changes. The Committee decided to lay the Evidence tendered before it, alongwith the Report. 
The Committee also decided to present 149th and 150th Reports, which were earlier adopted by it, 
along with the 151st Report. Since, the 151st Report had to be presented before 10th June, 2011, being 
the last date for presenting the same and since the House would not be in Session till then, the 
Committee decided to present the above mentioned three Reports to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha 
during the current inter-session period. The Committee authorized its Chairman to do the needful. 
5.0  A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
6.0  The Committee then adjourned at 12.50 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Bill No. 102 of 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 of 1959. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Insertion of new 
section 30A. 
 
Punitive action for 
failure to furnish 
report under section 
13.
 
THE ARMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Arms Act, 1959. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: 
1. This Act may be called the Arms (Amendment) Act, 2010. 
2. In section 13 of the Arms Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as 
the principal Act), 
 ( a)  in sub-section ( 2),– 
(i)  for the words “within the prescribed time”, the words “within 
sixty days from the date of receipt of application by him and in 
case such officer fails to do so, he shall record the reasons 
therefore and intimate the same to the licensing authority:” shall 
be substituted; 
(ii)  the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: –– 
 “Provided that in case the licensing authority is of the opinion 
that the reasons for such failure are not sufficient or convincing, 
he may recommend to the concerned authorities to initiate 
punitive action, under section 30A, against the officer in charge of 
the concerned police station for such failure to send the report 
within the time specified under this sub-section .”; 
 ( b)  in sub-section ( 2A), the proviso shall be omitted. 
3.  After section 30 of the principal Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:–– 
 “30A. In case a police officer,– 
 ( a) fails to send the report under section 13 and the reasons 
for such failure given by such officer are not sufficient or 
convincing; or 
 ( b) has failed to give reasons for failure to send the report 
under section 13, such failure to send the report or failure to give 
reasons shall be dereliction of dut y by such police officer and he 
shall be proceeded against and punished for dereliction of his duty 
under the service rules applicable to him.”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Short title. 
 
Amendment of section 13. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
  The Arms Act, 1959 and rules made thereunder regulates the acquisition, transfer of arms and 
ammunition and punishment for contravention of the provisions of the Act. 
2.   Under the existing provisions, it is compulsory to obtain under section 3 of the Arms Act, 1959 
a licence for acquisition and possession of firearms and ammunition. Section 13 of the Arms Act, 
1959, inter alia , lays down the procedure for grant of such  licences which requires the licensing 
authority to call for the report of the officer incharge of the nearest police station on the application for 
grant of such licence. Such  police officer is required to send his report within the prescribed time. 
After making such enquiry as the licensing authorit y may consider necessary and on receipt of report 
from the officer incharge of the nearest police station, the licensing authority may grant the licence or 
refuse to grant the same. However, the proviso to sub-section ( 2A) of section 1 3 of the aforesaid Act 
empowers the licensing authority to  grant an arms licence where the report of the police authorities 
has not been received within the prescribed time. 
3.   Proliferation of arms and ammunition, whether licensed or not, in the country disrupt the social 
order and development, vitiate the law and order situation, directly contributes towards lethality of 
violent acts, and needs to be curbed. It is, this, imperative to ensure that arms licences are issued to the 
bona fide persons by the licensing authority concerned after due verification of their antecedents by 
the police authority concerned. 
4.   In view of the foregoing paragraph, it has become necessary to make the procedure for grant of 
licence for the acquisition, transfer of arms and ammunition more specific. The provisions of the Arms 
(Amendment) Bill, 2010 proposes to – 
(a)  amend sub-section ( 2) of section 1 3 of the Arms Act, 1959 so as to specify in the Act 
itself the time limit of sixty days from the date of receipt of application for sending the 
aforesaid report by the officer incharge of the nearest police station and to record the 
reasons for failure to send the report within the specified time; 
(b)  insert a proviso sub-section ( 2) of section 13 of the Arms Act, 1959 so as to provide that 
the licensing authority may recommend to the concerned authorities to initiate punitive 
action under section 30A (proposed to be inserted in the Bill), against the officer in charge 
of the concerned police station in case the police officer fails to submit the report within 
the specified time or the licensing authority is of the opinion that the reasons for failure to 
submit report by the officer incharge of the nearest police station are not sufficient or 
convincing; 
(c)  omit the proviso to sub-section ( 2A) of section 13 of the Arms Act, 1959 so as to do away 
with the discretion of the licensing authority to issue the licence without receipt of the 
report from the officer incharge of the nearest police station; 
(d)  insert a new section 30A in the Arms Act, 19 59 to provide for punitive action for failure 
to send the report or failure to give sufficient or convincing reasons for not sending the 
report within the time limit of sixty days proposed to be specified. 
5.   The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
New Delhi; 
The 5th August, 2010.   P. CHIDAMBARAM 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grant of licences. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FORM THE ARMS ACT, 1959 
(54 OF 1959) 
* * * * * 
CHAPTER III 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO LICENCES 
13.  (1) * * * * 
 ( 2) On receipt of an application, the licensing authority shall call for the 
report of the officer in charge of the nearest police station on that application, 
and such officer shall send his report within the prescribed time. 
 ( 2A) The licensing authority, after such inquiry, if any, as it may 
consider necessary, and after consid ering the report received under sub-
section (2), shall, subject to the other provisions of this Chapter, by order in 
writing either grant the licence or refuse to grant the same: 
 Provided that where the officer in charge of the nearest police station 
does not send his report on the application within the prescribed time, the 
licensing authority may, if it deems fit, make such order, after the expiry of 
the prescribed time, without further waiting for that report. 
* * * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
LOK  SABHA 
–––––––– 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Arms Act, 1959. 
 
–––––––– 
(Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of House Affairs) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
LOK SABHA 
–––––– 
CORRIGENDUM 
to 
THE ARMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010 
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha] 
 
1.  Page 3, in line I of para No. 4(b), 
   for “insert a proviso sub-section” 
   read “insert a proviso in sub-section” 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
August 19, 2010 
Shravana 28, 1932 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ARMS AND AMMUNITION POLICY FOR INDIVIDUALS 
  All matters pertaining to Arms and Ammunition such as acquisition, possession, manufacture, 
sale, import, export and transport are governed by the Arms Act, 1959 and the rules framed thereunder 
namely. The Arms Rules 1962, both of which came into force on 1st October, 1962. The Arms Act, 
1959 and Arms Rules, 1962 contain provisions for acquisition and possession of firearms by 
individuals, and for manufacture, sale, transporta tion, import and export etc. of firearms and 
ammunition. 
2.   The Arms Act defines “prohibited arms”. Arms which are automatic or semi automatic in nature 
fall in the category of Prohibited Bore (PB) arms and the remaining arms which are non automatic or 
bolt action type are covered under the category of Non-Prohibited Bore (NPB) arms. Prior to 1987, 
licenses for acquisition and possession of Prohibited Bore (PB) and Non-Prohibited Bore (NPB) 
firearms were issued by the District Magistrate/ State Government concerned. But, from 1987, powers 
to issue licenses for prohibited bore (PB) arms were withdrawn from the State Government/District 
Magistrate concerned and since then the licences for PB weapons are being issued by the Central 
Government alone (MHA), while licenses for Non-Prohibited Bore weapons (NPB) continue to be 
issued by the District Magistrate/State Government concerned. 
3.   Proliferation of arms and ammunition in the country disrupt the social order and development. 
The proliferation of arms, whether licensed or illegal,  vitiates the ‘Law and Order’ situation. Holding 
of sophisticated arms by the conflicting parties directly contributes towards lethality of violent acts. 
Therefore, in principle, proliferation of arms needs to  be curbed. In this context, there is a compelling 
need to review the provisions of Arms Act/Arms Rules with regard to grant of arms licences for 
possession of arms and ammunition by individuals and manufacture of fire arms in the country. 
4.   Acquisition and Possession of Firearms by individuals: Under Section 3 (1) of the Arms Act, 
1959 no person can acquire or possess or carry any firearms or ammunition unless he holds in this 
behalf a license Issued in accordance with the provisions of the Arms Act and the rules made 
thereunder. Section 3(2) permits a person to acquir e, have in his possession or carry at any time not 
more than three firearms. Section 9 of the Arms Ac t, 1959 prohibits the following category of persons 
to acquire, have in their possession or carry any firearms or ammunition: –– 
(a)  who have not completed the age of twenty-one years; 
(b) who have been sentenced on conviction of any offence involving violence or moral 
turpitude to imprisonment for any term at any time during a period of five years after the 
expiration of the sentence; 
(c) who have been ordered to execute a bond for keeping peace or for good behavior, at any 
time during the term of the bond [under chapter VIII of the Cr.P.C, 1973]. 
  There will be no change in the aforesaid provisions of the Arms, Act, 1959. 
5.   Police verification before grant of arms licences -  Section 13 (2) of the Arms Act stipulates 
that on receipt of an application for grant of an arms licence, the licensing authority shall call for the 
report of the officer in charge of the nearest police station within the prescribed time, Section 13 (2A) 
also requires the licensing authority to call for an  inquiry, as it may consider necessary, to seek 
additional information to verify the bonafides of the applicant. There is also a proviso under Section 

13 (2A) which reads that “provided that where the officer in charge of the nearest police station does 
not send his report on the application within the prescribed time, the licensing authority may, if it 
deems fit, make such order, after the expiry of the prescribed time, without further waiting for that 
report”. Thus, the proviso under Section 13(2A) of Arms Act empowers the licensing authority not to 
wait for the police report, if the same is not received within the prescribed time. Since it is considered 
very essential that police verification report is taken into consideration before giving arms licence to 
anyone, it has been decided to delete the proviso to Section 13 (2A). Steps will be taken to delete the 
said proviso. It has also been decided that it will be incumbent on the part of Police Authorities to 
send the verification report to the Licensing authority within a period of 60 days. Thus, the Licensing 
Authority shall wait until the expiry of the prescribed time for the police verification report to be 
received. If the police report is not received within  the prescribed period of 60 days, the Licensing 
Authority will remind the police authorities of their obligation and demand a report forthwith, but 
issue arms licence only on receipt of the police report. 
6.   Grant of Arms licences for PB weapons - Applications for grant of arms license for PB 
weapons from citizens of India facing grave and immi nent threat to their lives are considered by 
Central Government. It has been decided that applications for grant of arms license for PB weapons 
may be considered from the following category of persons alone:–– 
(i) Those persons who face grave and imminent th reat to their lives by mere reason of being 
residents of a geographical area (or areas) wher e terrorists are most active and/or are held 
to be prime ‘targets’ in the eyes of terrorists and/ or are known to be inimical to the aim’s 
and objects of the terrorists and as such face danger to their lives. 
(ii) Those Government officials who by virtue of the office occupied by them and/or the 
nature of duties performed by them and/or in due discharge of their official duty have 
made themselves targets in the eyes of terrorists and are prone to terrorist attack. 
(iii) Those MPs and MLAs including non-offici als/private persons who by virtue of having 
been closely and/or actively associated with anti-terrorist programmes and policies of the 
Government or by mere reason of their holding views, political or otherwise not to the 
liking of the terrorists, have rendered themselves open to attack by the terrorists. 
(iv) The family members/kith and kin of those who by the very nature of their duties or 
performance (past or present) or positions occupied in the Government (past or present) or 
even otherwise for known/unknown reasons have been rendered vulnerable and have 
come to be regarded by the terrorists as fit targets for elimination. 
7.   Grant of Arms licences for NPB weapons -  Applications for grant of arms license for NPB 
weapons are dealt with by State Government/DM con cerned. Arms Licences are granted by them on 
the basis of the report of the po lice authorities. Neither Section 13 nor Rule 52 contains any matter 
that the licensing authority shall have regard to before granting a licence. Hence, some State 
Governments are following liberal criteria for givi ng NPB licences. It has been decided to prescribe 
the following norms through amendment to Arms Rules, 1962, for grant of arms licences:- 
a) Applications will be cons idered from persons, who may face or perceive grave and 
imminent threat to their lives, for which the licensing authority will obtain an assessment 
af the threat angle through police authorities. 

b)  The “prescribed time” under Section 13(2) of the Arms Act, 1959 shall be not less than 60 
days, within which the police authorities will be required to send their report about (i) the 
antecedents of the applicant, (ii) assessment of the threat, (iii) capability of the applicant 
to handle arms, and (iv) any other information which the police authority might consider 
relevant for the grant or refusal of licence. 
c)  The lisensing authority may call for any in formation/documents such as voter ID card, 
ration card or any other document which it may consider necessary to verify the bonafides 
of the applicant and to ensure that the applicant resides within its jurisdiction. 
d)  The licensing authority shall be obliged to take into account the report of police 
authorities called for under Section 13(2) before granting arms licences and no arms 
licence may be issued without police verification. 
8.  In addition to the above, the DM will report the grant of licences to the State Governments on 
quarterly basis and same will be monitored by the State Governments at the level of the Home 
Secretary. The State Government shall also send a re port to Ministry of Home Affairs on annual basis 
showing grant of licences for NPB weapons, district-wise with the area validity. 
9.  Grant of Arms licences under family Heirloom -  Transfer of PB/NPB weapons of an existing 
licensee to his/her legal heir is allowed, if the li cencee had held the weapon for a period of 25 years or 
more or the licensee has attained the age of 70 years or more. Applications for transfer of PB and NPB 
weapons are considered, respectively, by MHA and State Government/DM, subject to the condition 
that the legal heir should be eligible to get the license under the Arms Act and should be capable of 
handling the weapon. At present, the applications for transfer of licence in favour of son/ 
daughter/wife/husband, as per wish of the licensee during his life time, are considered under the scope 
of “legal heir” in family heirloom cases. After the d eath of the licensee, transf er of weapon in favour 
of son/daughter/wife/ husband is also considered subject to no objection from other legal heirs. In 
some cases, requests have been received from licensees to allow transfer of weapon in favour of son-
in-law, daughter-in-law, brother, sister, or other relation such as nephew etc. on the ground that 
son/daughter is settled abroad and/or not willing/not in a position to acquire the weapon or the 
licensee does not have any son/daughter of his own. It has accordingly been decided to widen the 
scope of “legal heir” to include son-in-law, daughte r-in-law, brother and sister of the licensee on the 
merits of each case, in addition to son, daughter, wife and husband, to whom the licensee will be free 
to transfer his weapon as per his wish during his life  time. After the death of the licensee, the transfer 
of weapon may also be allowed in favour of son-in -Iaw/ daughter-in-Iaw/ brother/sister on merits 
subject to “No objection Certificate” from other legal heirs. 
10. Grant of arms licence to defence allottees -  At present, defence officers are allotted weapons 
which they can keep without arms li cense, under the Defence Services Rules, till they are in service. 
After they cease to be members of the defence servi ce, they require an arms license to continue to 
keep the weapon. Arms licences under the defen ce allottee policy are granted to those defence 
personnel who were allotted such weapons by the defence organization prior to June, 1982 only. 
Matter has been taken up with Ministry of Defence to allow grant of licences to those defence 
personnel who have been allotted weapons by the defence authorities, after June, 1982 and a decision 
will be taken on receipt of recommendation from the Ministry of Defence. 

11. Grant of arms licence to Overseas Citize ns of India under threat perception policy -  
Requests have been received from OCls to grant arms licenses for possession of weapons in India. 
However, it has been decided not to grant arms licenses to OCls. 
12.  Grant of arms licence to Overseas Citizens  of India (OCIs) under family heirloom 
category - Requests have been received from OCls to grant arms licenses for possession of weapons 
held in the family. Existing instructions for family heirloom category does not cover the case of OCls. 
Considering the sentimental value attached to the weapon held in the family of the licensee, it has 
been decided to cover the Overseas Citizens of India (OCls) under the family heirloom category 
already in vogue for Indian citizens. An OCI may acquire the weapon of his father or relation to whom 
the OCI is the legal heir, subject to the same conditions applicable under family heirloom category. 
Grant. of arms licences to OCls will also be subject to the condition that they will abide by the 
provisions of Arms Act/Arms Rules and ensure safe custody of the weapon while leaving India and 
deposit the same in a police station or with an arms dealer, as per rules. 
13. Grant of licence to Police personnel who are awarded weapons: - There was no provision for 
granting licences to the police and para military  force personnel who are awarded weapons by the 
State Government/Police organizations in recognition of their outstanding performance during training 
or during passing out parade etc. A provision will be made for grant of licences to such police and 
para-military forces personnel. Modalities for making applications and the norms to be followed have 
been communicated to all the State Governments on 28.05.09. It has also been decided that, 
henceforth, the State Governments and Police organizations may allow NPB weapons and PB 
weapons may be allowed only for compelling reasons. 
14. Quantity of ammunition permitted under various categories -  At present, a holder of a PB 
arms licence is allowed to purchase 50 cartridges of ammunition per annum subject to the condition 
that not more than 30 cartridges can be purchased at a time. In respect of NPB weapons, the State 
Governments are following different norms and are allowing different quantities of ammunition. It has 
been decided to prescribe a uniform norm and allo w 50 cartridges of the appropriate bore per annum 
in respect of PB and NPB weapons held by licensees. However, In respect of PB and NPB weapons 
allowed under the family heirloom policy, the quantity of ammunition will be restricted to 30 
cartridges per annum since, ordinarily, there is no threat to the legal heir and the weapon is transferred 
to him on sentimental grounds. A higher quantity of ammunition will be allowable on merits In 
exceptional cases for good and sufficient reasons to be given by the licensee, with the approval of 
Secretary (Home Department) of the State concerne d. It has also been decided that each State 
Government may prescribe reporting on use of amm unition by the licensee and devise reporting 
mechanism unde which each licensee may keep a record of the use of ammunition with him such as (i) 
date of use, (ii) place, (iii) number of bullets fired and (iv) purpose. The licensee may report use of 
ammunition during the previous year before purch ase of ammunition in the current year to the 
authority concerned as per procedure to be prescrib ed by the State Government. Thus, the quantity of 
ammunition in a year shall be limited to the use of the ammunition in the previous year so that the 
total quantity with a licensee shall not exceed the prescribed quantity at any time. For example, if a 
licensee under the threat perception category had not used any ammunition in the previous year 
against the quota of 50 cartridges, no fresh quota for the current year will be admissible. The State 
Governments may issue appropriate instructions to the licensees and all the ar ms dealers in the State 
in this regard. A report on the use of ammunition by licensees may be sent by each DM to the State 

Government concerned on a quarterly basis and a consolidated report may be sent by the State 
Government to MHA on an annual basis. 
15. Area Validity of arms licences - in respect of Prohibited Bore (PB) weapons, extension of area 
validity from one State to more than one State or  all-India basis is considered by the Central 
Government on merits, In respect of NPB weapons, instructions have been issued to the State 
Governments to consider requests for allowing All India Validity (AIV) judiciously based on the 
recommendations of the DM concerned depending upon the genuineness of the request local factors 
and the law and order situation. It has been decided to advise the State Governments to allow area 
validity upto a maximum of three adjoining States and also to consider AIV requests at State level for 
(i) Sitting Union Ministers/MPs, (ii) Personnel of Military, Para-Military, (iii) Officers of All-India 
Services and (iv) Officers with liability to serve anywhere in India. AIV ma y be allowed for 3 years 
after which it shall be reconsidered by the State Go vernment based on need and the area validity can 
be either reduced or allowed to continue for another three years. Request from above categories of 
applicants may be approved  at the level of Secretary (Home) of the State concerned. In the cases of 
applicants not covered by the abov e categories the State Government shall seek prior concurrence of 
MHA with full justification in deserving cases. All India Validity may be allowed for three years in 
such cases and shall be re-considered after 3 years by the State Government with prior concurrence of 
MHA. The State Government may send data of All-India validity on quarterly basis to MHA. 
16.  Renewal of Arms licences -  Arms licences for PB and NPB weapons will be granted by the 
licensing authority concerned with initial validity of three years. PB as well as NPB licences will be 
renewed after every 3 years by the State Governme nt/DM. Renewal of licence by an authority other 
than the authority who granted it is permissible under Rule 54 of the Arms Rules, 1962. It has been 
decided that, at the time of renewal, re-verification of antecedents will be done by the DM through 
police authorities (i) in cases where DM/Licensing Authority have any doubt, (ii) in other cases after 
six years i.e. every alternate cycle, when the licence come s up for renewal, and (iii) in all those cases 
where the licence has been issued by another li censing authority. In the last mentioned case, 
verification of the issue of licence from the issuing authority may also be stipulated along with police 
verification, before allowing renewal. Police authorities will be allowed a period of 60 days to send 
their report. 
17. Sale of ordinary weapons:- Section 5 (1) of the Arms Act, 1959 stipulates that no person shall 
sell, transfer, expose or offer for sa le or transfer or have in his pos session for sale, transfer any fire-
arm unless he holds in this behalf a licence issued in accordance with the provisions of the Arms Act. 
Section 5 (2) further stipulates that notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-Section (1), a person 
may, without holding a licence in this behalf, sell or transfer any arms or ammunition which he 
lawfully possesses for his own private use to another person who is entitled by virtue of this Act, or 
any other law for the time being in force to have, or is not prohibited by this Act or such other law 
from having, in his possession such arms or ammunition. The proviso below Section 5 (2) provides 
that no firearm or ammunition in respect of which a licence is required under section 3 and no arms in 
respect of which a licence is required under section 4 shall be sold or transferred by any person unless 
(a) he has informed in writing the district magistrate having jurisdiction or the officer in charge of the 
nearest police station of his intention to sell or tr ansfer such firearms, ammunition or other arms and 
the name and address of the person to whom he inte nds to sell or transfer such firearms, ammunition 
or the other arms, and (b) a period of not less than forty-five days has expired after the giving such 

information. Thus the Arms Act provides for sale/transfer of weapons by giving a 45 days’ notice 
mentioned above and there will be no change in this regard. 
18. Sale of imported weapons:- Instructions have already been issued to permit an importer of 
weapon to sell the imported weapon (both PB and NPB) to a licence holder only after ten years from 
the date of acquisition of such weapon, or after he/she attains sixty years of age, whichever is later, 
subject to the condition that such importer will be barred from acquiring any weapon in India during 
his/her (importer’s) life time. The importer / seller may be asked to submit a duly sworn affidavit to 
this effect to the licensing authority. Cases in wh ich there is a clause in the arms licence that the 
importer will not sell his weapon during his life time will also be covered and sale of imported 
weapons will be allowed subject to the above condition and there will be no change in this regard. 
19. Sale of imported sports we apons by sports persons:- As per existing instructions, renowned 
shooters are allowed to sell their imported weapon( s) after five years from the date of its/their 
acquisition to promising/upcoming shooters only, subject to the conditions that before allowing 
disposal of weapons by the renowned shooters, the condition of the weapons may be assessed by a 3-
member Committee under the Chairmanship of the Ex ecutive Director (Teams),  Sports Authority of 
India, with a representative each from NRAI and th e national coach of shooting as other members. 
Disposal will be allowed only on the recommendation of this Committee and while disposing of such 
weapons, it would be ensured that they are sold to other upcoming shooters only subject to production 
of certificate to this effect from the State Associ ation concerned. However, the shooters who maintain 
their status of “renowned shooter” for three year s consistently are allowed to sell their imported 
weapons after three years from the date of acquisitio n. A promising shooter is one who has finished 
among the first three in the preceding State level championships. After disposal, intimation to this 
effect will be given by the renowned shooter to the NRAI, the Sports Authority of India and the 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and there will be no change in this regard. 
20.  Replacement of unserviceable/defective weapons: Section 5 of the Arms Act contains a 
provision for sale/transfer of a weapon by giving a notice to the licensing authority or the nearest 
police station by the licensee and permission for sale/transfer can be given by the licensing authority 
after elapse of a period of not less than 45 days. Accordingly, for replacement of an 
unserviceable/defective weapon, a notice to dispose of the weapon by the licensee may be given by 
producing a certificate of non-serviceability of the weapon/beyond economical repair from an 
authorized armourer/competent au thority. In the case of a licensee whose arms licence contains a 
prohibitive clause for sale of weapon during the lif e time of the licensee (normally in the case of 
imported weapon), such cases will be considered for replacement by the licensing authority in 
consultation with the Department of Customs/Department of Revenue, on production of non-
serviceability/beyond economical repair certific ate from the competent authority. The new weapon 
will be endorsed on the licence after the old weapon has been surrendered/ disposed of as per 
instructions of the licensing authority. 
21.  Storage/disposal of obsolete , obsolescent, confiscated, seized and recovered weapons-  
Instructions are in place for storage and disposal of  absolete/obsolescent confiscated, seized/recovered 
prohibited bore weapons as well as non prohibited bore weapons separately. Prohibited Bore weapons 
which are serviceable can be allotted to Army/Central Para Military Forces/State Police by MHA 

(Provisioning Division). Serviceable Non-Prohibited Bore weapons can be allotted to eligible persons 
having arms licences subject to the conditions and procedure laid down in that behalf. Unserviceable 
weapons shall be destroyed or disposed of as per the procedure laid down. It has been decided to 
prescribe annual audit of the obsolete, obsolescent, confiscated, seized and recovered weapons. 
22. Request for liberalizing grant of arms licences :- Requests have been received for liberalizing 
grant of arms licences in favour of (i) companies/pr ivate establishment for security of their property; 
(ii) security companies and agencies for s ecurity personnel employed by them; and (iii) 
professionals/businessmen/industrialists/tax payers for self protection. Arms Rules already provide for 
grant of licences to a company for protection of its premises or property. A proposal to allow private 
security agencies registered under the Private Secu rity Agencies (Regulations) Act, 2005 to possess 
arms is under consideration. Decision to grant arms licences to such private security agencies fulfilling 
certain criteria, to enable them to carry certain nu mber of weapons of prescribed description in order 
to carry out their duties for security, will be announced in due course. Grant of licences to 
professionals/businessmen/industrialists/tax payers for self protection will however be governed by 
the provisions applicable to grant of licences for PB as well as NPB weapons to individuals and no 
special dispensation is contemplated. 
23. Grant of arms licences to sports persons -  There is a provision for keeping upto 10 weapons 
by sports persons depending on the number of events in which they are taking part, subject to certain 
conditions. It has been decided to continue with the existing provisions. 
24. Import of arms & ammunition - Import of fire-arms is under restricted list of import issued by 
DGFT, which allows import in deserving cases. It has been decided to continue with the existing 
policy on imports. 
25.  Data base for licences issued -  At present there is no provision in the Arms Act/Arms Rule 
requiring a licensing authority to maintain a comprehensive and complete database of all licences 
issued. it has been decided to include a provision obliging the licensing authority to maintain a 
database and to share the data with the Central Government which shall maintain a national database, 
Accordingly, a provision for database will be made by amending the Arms Rules. National database 
including data on PB weapons may be maintained centrally by MHA. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ARMS AND AMMUNITION MANUFACTURING POLICY 
 The Arms Act, 1959 came into force on 01.10.1962. Arms Rules 1962 also came into force with 
effect from 01.10.1962. Prior to the enactment of th e Arms Act/Rules, it came to the notice of the 
Government of India that small arms and ammunition were being manufactured by private parties in 
some places. Pending a final decision, instructions were issued by the then Ministry of States on 
25.03.1952 conveying no objection to the continuance of manufacturing of arms and ammunition by 
private parties who were duly licenced and were already doing this work subject to the following 
conditions: 
(a)  Revolvers, pistols and rifled weapons or any ammunition to be used in such weapons are 
not manufactured; 
(b)  The strictest security precautions are obse rved so as to prevent any diversion of the 
products of such factories to unauthorized hands; and 
(c)  Details of licences already issued by the State Governments for manufacture of arms and 
ammunition are furnished to MHA. 
2.  Pursuant to the Industrial Policy Resolution of 30.04.1956, the Government of India vide 
instructions issued on 08.03.1957, decided that there was no objection to the continuance of 
manufacturing of arms and ammunition by the existing units in the private sector who are already 
licensed for such manufacture subject to the following conditions: 
(i) Revolvers, pistols and rifled weapons and any ammunition used in such weapons are not 
manufactured; 
(ii) The strictest security pre cautions are observed so as to  prevent any diversion of the 
products of such factories to unauthorized hands; 
(iii) The operations of such units should be strictly restricted to the items already 
manufactured by them; 
(iv) No expansion of the activities through widening the range of the products and/or 
increasing the capacity of the items already produced be allowed without prior sanction of 
Government of India; 
(v) The weapons manufactured should be proof tested according to the regulations prescribed; 
and 
(vi) No fresh licences for manufacture of arms and ammunition are to be granted. 
3.  As per the Notification issued on 13.7.1962 manufacture of air guns/air rifles and air pistols 
which satisfy the test, namely, that the projectile s discharged from such we apons do not perforate a 
target of 12 inches square formed by deal wood bo ard of even grains free from knots planed on both 
sides and thickness of ½ inch and one inch for air pistols and air guns/rifles, respectively, are exempt 
from the purview of Arms Act, subject to the conditions laid down in the said Notification. 
4.  Pursuant to requests from existing licensed manufacturers to permit enhancement of gun 
manufacturing quota, either on the ground of economic viability, production capacity, quality of guns 
produced or their original licensed quota was at some point of time reduced or re-fixed at a lower 

level, a comprehensive review was done. The requirement of maintenance of law and order, internal 
security, the existing capacity of  the private manufacturers, the prod uction capacity of the ordnance 
factories to manufacture arms for civil use and the av ailability of firearms through imports were taken 
into account. The Government of India decided in public interest that, as a matter of policy, no request 
for enhancement or restoration or re-fixation or revision of manufacturing quota for manufacturing of 
arms will be considered by the Government of India on any ground whatsoever Accordingly, 
instructions were issued on 11.12.1985. 
5. Pursuant to the receipt of a number of applications from existing arms and ammunition 
manufacturers for fresh manufacturing licences, diversification of product range, enhancement of 
manufacturing quota and restoration of certain items which were deleted earlier from the licences, the 
Government of India reviewed the manufacturing policy and took the following decisions on 
01.10.1991 which were subsequently withdrawn on 5/10/95:- 
(i) Henceforth, Muzzle Loading (ML) guns manufacturers may be allowed to manufacture 
Breach Loading (BL) guns within the ex isting licenced capacity as per the 
recommendations of the State Government. 
(ii) The existing blank fire cartridges manuf acturers may be allowed to manufacture live 
cartridges upto 20% of their existing quota within the overall limit. 
(iii) 20% increase over the existing quota in the matter of manufacture of arms and 
ammunition of the permissible type may be allowed subject to the recommendations of 
the State Government. 
6.  At present, there are 95 firms licensed by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India 
for the manufacture of guns (single barrel/double barrel) and 25 firms manufacturing cartridges (either 
blank cartridges or live cartridges or both) upto the quota permitted in their licences. Although the 
quota of some firms was enhanced in the past as a result of Court judgements or otherwise, the 
instructions issued on 11/12/85 were reiterated on 16.4.1998, not to allow enhancement of quota on 
any ground whatsoever, continue to be in force at present 
7. The Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) obtained a decision from the 
Cabinet during 2001 - 2002 to allow manufacture of arms and ammunition in the private sector with 
nil or upto 26% FDI, and issued Industrial licences  to three firms. Some requests have also been 
received to allow manufacture of sports weapons. 
8. The current security scenario and law and order situation in the country, especially in J&K, 
North-Eastern States and left extremists dominated areas, require the Government to ensure total non-
proliferation of arms and ammunition. However, considering the requirements for advanced weapons 
by the defence sector, Central Para-Mitiiary Forces, technological up-gradations of the arms and 
ammunition industry, it has been decided that:- 
a) Manufacture of arms in the private sector may be allowed on limited basis subject to 
Industrial license to be issued by DIPP. 
b) Applications from units in the large scale s ector which are capable of producing advanced 
weapons and investing more than Rs. 50 crore may, with or without FDI upto 26% be 

considered by DIPP, as the item, ‘arms and ammunition’ is under compulsory licensing. 
In no case will any fresh licence be issued to any cottage or small scale sector units.  
c) Arms and ammunition may be primarily supplied to Central Para Military Forces, 
Defence and State Governments on tendering basis or exported. Automatic and semi-
automatic weapons and all other prohibited Bere weapons will not be allowed to be sold 
in local market through arms dealers and the same will necessarily have to be supplied to 
Defence, Central Para Milita ry forces and State Governments on tendering basis or 
exported. 
d) Sports weapons and NPB weapons may be suppli ed to registered arms dealers for sale to 
licence holders only. 
e) No enhancement in manufacturing quota of existing firms may be allowed. 
f) Applications for manufacture of arms and ammunition may be considered by DIPP as per 
procedure in consultation with MHA. Appl ications for manufactur e of sports weapons 
may be considered in consultation with Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, who may 
like to consult Sports Authority of India, Na tional Rifle Association of India etc., as 
deemed fit. 
g) DIPP may impose such other conditions as may be deemed fit by them. 
h) In cases in which industrial licences have already been issued by DIPP without 
concurrence of MHA. MHA may agree to re newal of the industrial licences by DIPP 
subject to strict conditions that will be imposed  at the time of renewal to enable the three 
firms to take effective steps in accordance with the new policy. 
j) The Arms Rules, 1962 empowers every Ma gistrate and police officer not below the rank 
of an inspector to enter and inspect  th e premises of an arms and ammunition 
manufacturer to examine the stock and accounts  of receipt and disposal of arms and 
ammunitions. It is proposed to prescribe annual inspection by the DM concerned of all the 
manufacturing units falling in his jurisdiction and to send a report to Secretary (Home) of 
the State Government concerned under intimation to MHA. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

No. V-11016/16/2009-Arms 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
IS-II Division/Arms Section 
_____________ 
9th Floor, Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market, 
New Delhi dated the 31st March, 2010 
To 
Secretary (Home Department) 
All States/UTs    06 April 2010 
  Subject: Grant of Arms Licences for acquisition/possession of arms.  
Sir, 
 The undersigned is directed to say that provisions relating to grant of arms licences have been 
reviewed with a view to curb proliferation of arms in the country and, in supersession of all existing 
instructions, the following decisions have been taken:- 
i) Grant of Arms Licence for Prohibited Bore (PB) weapons 
The arms licences for acquisition of PB weapons are considered by the Central 
Government in the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). It has been decided that henceforth 
applications for grant of PB weapon may be considered from the following category of 
persons:- 
a)  Those persons who face grave and imminent  threat to their lives by mere reason of 
being residents of a geographical area (o r areas) where terrorists are most active 
and/or are held to be prime ‘targets’ in the eyes of terrorists and/ or are known to be 
inimical to the aims and objects of the terrorists and as such face danger to their 
lives. 
b)  Those Government officials who by virtue of the office occupied by them and/or the 
nature of duties performed by them and/or in due discharge of their official duty 
have made themselves targets in tile eyes of terrorists and are vulnerable to terrorist 
attack. 
c)  Those MPs and MLAs including non-officials/private persons who by virtue of 
having been closely and/or actively associated with anti-terrorist programmes and 
policies of the Government or by mere reason of their holding views, political or 
otherwise, not to the liking of the terrorists, have rendered themselves open to attack 
by the terrorists. 
d)  The family members/kith and kin of those who by the very nature of their duties or 
performance (past or present) or positions occupied in the Government (past or 
present) or even otherwise for known/unknown reasons have been rendered 
vulnerable and have come to be regarded by the terrorists as fit targets for 
elimination. 

 Accordingly, it is requested that applications for grant of PB weapons from the 
above categories of persons may be forwarded to MHA (Arms Secton) along with 
recommendations of the OM concerned, recommendations of the State Govt. and 
police verification. 
 ii) Grant of Arms Licence for Non-Prohibited Bore (NPB) weapons  
The arms licences for acquisition of NPB weapons are consider ed by the State 
Government/DM concerned. At present there are no norms for grant of NPB weapons and 
some State Governments may be issuing arms licences liberally. It has been decided that: 
a)  Applications for grant of NPB arms licences may be considered from persons who 
may face or perceive grave and imminent threat to their lives, for which the 
licensing authority will obtain an assessment of the threat faced by the persons from 
the police authorities. 
b)   No licence may be granted without police verification, which will include report on 
i) antecedents of the applicant ii) assessm ent of the threat, iii) capability of the 
applicant to handle arms, and iv) any other information which the police authority 
might consider relevant for the grant or refusal of licence. Steps are being taken to 
delete the provision to Sec. 13(2A) of the Arms Act, 1959. 
c)  The police authorities may be advised to send the police report within 45 days 
positively falling which the police officials concerned may be liable for action.  
d)  The licensing authority may call for any information/documents such as voter ID 
card, ration card or any other document which it may consider necessary to verify 
the bonafides of the applicant and to ensure that the applicant resides within its 
jurisdiction. 
e)  The licensing authority shall be obliged to take into account the report of police 
authorities called for under Section 13 (2) before granting arms licenses and no arms 
licence may be issued without police verification. 
 iii) Grant of Licences und er family heirloom policy 
Attention is invited to the instructions contained in MHA’s letter No. V-11 019/23/95-
Arms dated 28-02-1995 regarding grant of licences to the legal heir of the existing 
licensee, after the death of the licensee or the licensee has attained the age of 70 years or 
had held the weapon for 25 years or more. Normally, the scope of legal heirs is extended 
to husband, wife, son and daughter. It has been decided to extend the scope of legal heir 
ship to the son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother and sister of the existing licensee. 
Accordingly, the applications for transfer of weapons from the said categories of relatives 
of the licensee may also be considered subject to other conditions stipulated in the said 
letter. 
iv) Quantity of ammunition  
At present the holder of a PB arms licence is allowed to purchase 50 cartridges of 
ammunition of the appropriate bore per annum subject to the condition that not more than 

30 cartridges can be purchased at a time. In respect of NPB weapons, the State 
Governments are following different norms and allowing different quantities of 
ammunition. It has been decided to prescribe a uniform norm and allow 50 cartridges of 
the appropriate bore per annum in respect of PB and NPB weapons held by a licensee. 
However, in respect of PB and NPB weapons allowed under the family heirloom policy, 
the quantity of ammunition will be restricted to 30 cartridges per annum since, ordinarily, 
there is no threat to the legal heir and the weapon is transferred to him on sentimental 
grounds. A higher quantity of ammunition will be allowable on merits in exceptional 
cases, for good and sufficient reasons to be given by the licensee, with the approval of 
Secretary (Home Department) of the State concerned.
 
 (v) Reporting use of ammunition  
It has also been decided that every State Government may prescribe reporting on use of 
ammunition by the licensee and devise a reporting mechanism under which each licensee 
may keep a record of the use of ammunition with him such as (i) date of use, (ii) place, 
(iii) number of bullets fired, and (iv) purpose. The licensee shall report use of ammunition 
during the previous year before purchase of ammunition in the current year to the 
authority concerned as per procedure to be pr escribed by the State Government. Thus, the 
quantity of ammunition in a year shall be limited to the use of the ammunition in the 
previous year so that the total quantity w ith a licensee shall not exceed the prescribed 
quantity at any time. For example, if a licen see under the threat perception category had 
not used any ammunition in the previous year against the quota of 50 cartridges, no fresh 
quota for the current year will be admissible. The State Governments may issue 
appropriate instructions to the licensees and all the arms dealers in the State in this regard. 
A report on the use of ammunition by licensees may be sent by each DM to the State 
Government concerned on a quarterly basis and a consolidated report may be sent by the 
State Government to MHA on an annual basis. 
 (vi) Grant of arms licence to Overseas Citizens of India (OCI)  
The existing instructions for the category of family heirloom do not cover the Overseas 
Citizens of India (OCls). Requests have been received from OCIs to grant arms licenses 
for possession of weapons held in the family. The issue has been examined and it has been 
decided to cover the OCls under the family heirloom category already in vogue for Indian 
citizens. An OCI may acquire the weapon in his capacity of a legal heir under the extant 
heirloom category. Grant of arms license to OCIs will be subject to the condition that they 
shall abide by the Arms Act/Rules and ensure safe custody of the weapon(s) while leaving 
India and deposit the same in a police station or with an approved arms dealer. 
 (vii) Area validity of arms licence  
At present, powers have been delegated to the State Government for allowing all India 
validity of NPB licences at their level. It has been decided that the State Governments 
may allow area validity up to a maximum of three adjoining States and also to consider 
AIV requests at State level for (i) sitting Union Ministers/MPs, (ii) Personnel of Military, 
Para Military, (iii) officers of All-India Serv ices and (iv) officers with liability to serve 

anywhere in India, and (v) Sports persons. AIV may be allowed for 3 years, after which it 
shall be reconsidered by the State Government  based on need and the area validity can be 
either reduced or allowed to continue for another three years.  Request from above 
categories of applicants may be approved at the level of Secretary (Home) of the State 
concerned. In the cases of applicants no t covered by the above categories, the State 
Government shall seek prior concurrence of MHA with full justification in deserving 
cases. All India Validity may be allowed for three years in such cases and shall be re-
considered after three years by the State G overnment with prior concurrence of MHA. 
The State Government may send data of All-India validity on quarterly basis to MHA. 
 (viii)  Renewal of arms licences  
it has been decided that at the time of renewal, re-verification of antecedents may be done 
by the DM through police authorities (i) in cases where DM/Licensing Authority have any 
doubt, (ii) in other cases after six years i.e. every alternate cycle,  when the licence comes 
up for renewal and  (iii) in all these cases where the licence has been issued by another 
licensing authority. In the last mentioned case, verification of the issue of licence from the 
issuing authority may also be stipulated along with police verification, before allowing 
renewal. Police authorities will be allowed a period of 60 days to send their report. It is 
also requested that the State Govt. may check the feasibility of advising all DMs to initiate 
the, process of seeking police re-verification six months in advance, as the full record of a 
licensee is available with the DMs. 
 (ix) Replacement of unserviceable/ defective weapons  
Replacement of a weapon which has become uns erviceable or rendered defective may be 
allowed on the basis of a certificate of non-serviceability of the weapon/ beyond 
economical repair from an authorized armour er/ competent authority subject to giving a 
notice of not less than 43 days. In the case  of a licensee whose arms licence contains a 
prohibitive clause for sale of weapon during the life time of the licensee (normally in the 
case of imported weapon), the case will be considered for replacement by the licensing 
authority in consultation with the Departmentof Customs/Department of Revenue, on production 
of non-serviceability/beyond economical repair certificate from the competent authority. 
The new weapon will be endorsed on the licence after the old weapon has been 
surrendered/ disposed of as per instructions of the licensing authority. 
(x) Storage/disposal of obsolete, obsolescent, confiscated, seized and recovered weapons  
Instructions are in place for storage and disposal of obsolete/obsolescent, confiscated, 
seized/recovered prohibited bore weapons as well as non prohibited bore weapons 
separately. Prohibited Bore weapons which are serviceable can be allotted to 
Army/Central Para Military Forces/State Police by MHA (Provisioning Division). 
Serviceable Non-Prohibited Bore weapons can be allotted to eligible persons having arms 
licences subject to the conditions  and procedure laid down in  that behalf. Unserviceable 
weapons shall be destroyed or disposed of as per the procedure laid down. It has been 
decided to prescribe annual audit of the obsolete, obsolescent, confiscated, seized and 
recovered weapons. 

 (xi) Data base for licences issued  
At present there is no provision requir ing a licensing authority to maintain a 
comprehensive and complete database of all licences issued. it has been decided to 
maintain a database as may be specified and to share the data with the Central 
Government which shall maintain a national database. National database including data on 
PB weapons may be maintained centrally by MHA. Accordingly, instructions may be 
issued to all DMs to maintain a comprehensive and complete data base of all licences 
issued by them, which may be shared with Central Govt. 
 The above instructions would come into fo rce with immediate effect and should be 
complied with strictly. 
 This issues with the approval of competent authority. 
 
 
 
      Yours faithfully, 
      S d . / -  
      ( D .  D i p t i v i l a s a )   
      Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
THE GAZETTE OF INDIA 
EXTRAORDINARY 
PART II-Section 3 -Sub-section (1) 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 
NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, MAY 28, 2010/JYAISTHA 7, 1932 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 21st May, 2010 
 G.S.R. 453(E).-In exercise of the powers confe rred by Sections 5, 9, 10, 11,12, 13, 16, 17, 18, 
21, 41 and 44 of the Arms Act (54 of 1959), the Central Government hereby makes the following 
rules further to amend the Arms Rules, 1962, namely : 
1. (1)  These rules may be called the Arms (Amendment) Rules, 2010. 
 (2)  They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette. 
2. In the Arms Rules, 1962 –– 
(a)  for the rule 4, the following rule shall be substituted, namely:- 
“4 licensing authority and forms of licences. - (1) Licences under Chapter II of the Act 
may be granted or renewed for such purposes, by such authorities, in such forms and to be 
valid for such period and in such areas as are specified in Schedule II, subject to such 
conditions as are specified in that Schedule and in the license. 
 Provided that the licences granted or renewed by a licensing authority may be 
signed by such officer subordinate to that authority as may be specially empowered in this 
behalf by the State Government. 
(2)  Every such license granted by the District Magistrate under Section 13 shall be 
recorded in Form XXIII and a copy of it shall be forwarded to the concerned State 
Government by the licensing authority at the end of each. quarter i.e. March, June, 
September and December each year. 
(3)  The State Government shall, on the basis of the reports received  under sub-rule (2), 
consolidate all the data concerning licences issued under Section 13 and send the 
same to the Government of India in Ministry of Home Affairs which shall create a 
suitable data base.” 

 (b)   In Schedule III, after Form XXII, th e following form shall be inserted namely:- 
“Form XXIII 
[See rule 4(2)] 
Details of Licenses granted by District Magistrate under Section  
13 of the Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959). 
Name, Category Description Category Description Purpose Period Remarks 
description of arms (weight in of (weight in for for  
and  Kg, make, ammunition Kg, make, which which  
address of  number  number acquired license  
the  etc.)  etc.)  is valid  
licensee.        
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)    (8) 
 
 
Name (in capital)/Signature of 
 The licensing Authority 
 Designation : 
 Place : 
                        OR 
Signature of the Officer especially 
empowered 
 To sign the license under Rule 4 
 Designation: 
Place: 
 
The .......................... of 20                    (SEAL)  
      [F. No. V-11026/16/2009-Arms] 
      D. DIPTIVILASA, Jt. Secy. 
 
Note - The principal rules were published in the Gazette of india, Vide number G.S.R. 987 dated the 
13th July, 1962 and were last amended vide G.S.R. 99 dated 14th May, 1998 (w.e.f. 23rd May,1998) 
 
 